Ei

DEPARTMENT OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS •• CANBERRAFOR THE PRESSPR  10419th October, 1967.UNITED NATIONS DAYThe Acting Minister for External Affairs, Senator Gorton, issuedthe following statement today concerning the anniversary of United NationsDay on 24th October:."As in previous years, the 24th October will, be devoted throughoutthe, world to the celebration of the anniversary of the founding of theUnited Nations Organization.  The Secretary-General of the United Nationshas expressed the desire that the opportunity be taken to convey to thepeoples of the world the aims and achievements of the United Nations and togain their support for its work.An important element in Australian foreign policy has always beensupport for the purposes and principles of the United Nations.  The Ministerfor Eternal Affairs is at present in New York leading the Australian delegationto the United Nations General Assembly.  During the course of the Assembly'sGeneral Debate he expressed the continued adherence of the Australian Governmentto the United Nations Charter, and its intention to do all in its power touphold the principles of the Charter.In the past, Australia has always been conscious of the need tofurther the aims of the United Nations, especially in the field of assistanceto the developing nations - a field in which Australia itself is playing anincreasing part.  Mr Hasluck pointed out in his General Assembly speech thatduring the United Nations Development Decade (1960-1970) Australia has made aconcerted effort to assist developing countries.  In 1960-61 Australia wasmaking an annual aid allocation, apart from her efforts in Papua/New Guinea,of $US 22 million.  In the current financial year this figure will be US 57 million or two and a half times as much.To 30th June 1967, Australia had provided a total of $US 100 millionto United Nations programmes for the economic and social advancement ofdeveloping countries.  The main programmes are the United Nations DevelopmentProgramme, the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees,the United Nations High Commission for Refugees, the United Nations Children'sFund and the World Food Programme.Australia has, of course, been active in other fields of UnitedNations endeavour.  We have this year been elected to a Vice-Presidency ofthe General Assembly which entitles us to a place on the General Committeeand thus to an important role in the conduct of the General Assembly session.Australia was also one of the first signatories to the Outer SpaceTreaty, which has recently come into effect and which we have now ratified.2/...

-2-

This Treaty was concluded under the auspices of the United Nations and Australia actively participated in discussions leading to its completion.

Australia of course realises that there are shortcomings in the United Nations although this is perhaps inevitable in an organization dealing with so many complex and often intractable problems.  It is to be regretted that in regard to some of the more important issues facing it, the United Nations has-been unable to secure lasting solutions.  The Australian

Government believes however that the general support which the United Nations continues to enjoy from its member countries, which now number 122 as compared to the original 51, offers hope that the course of peace and mutual understanding can be advanced through that body.  The Australian Government hopes that all members will adhere to and promote the aims and ideals of the Charter in ways which will further improve the conduct of international relations.

The Australian Government believes that the importance of the United Nations in today's world is recognised, and that Australian citizens support the Organization in its political, humanitarian and economic endeavours.  The Government hopes that United Nations Day will be celebrated

in appropriate ways throughout Australia.  It would be a suitable mark of recognition, for example, if United Nations flags could be flown on the 24th October, 1967."

2 4 QCc 996`7

CANBERRA

