FROM THE MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION

PRESS ST, i=j-'0P] T BY Ti-E1, JW IST FOR EThlIRA TI ON,

pp

The Minister for Immigration, Mr. Snedden, today wa rmly

welcomed the opportunities for more migrant family visits provided

by the introduction of concessio n fares by sea from Britain for

parents of assisted British migrants.

"4 visit is an excellent tonic for a migrant family and. for the parents,"Mr. Snedden said.

"This complements the special air charter flight

announced last October. . Migrants parents now have the choice

of sea or air 'travel, " he said.

Mr. Snedden was commenting on the announcement that

from today, all shipping lines with regular services between

Australia and Britain would introduce a special return fare of . st .310 for migrants' parents.

This basic return fare is irres'> cct i ve of the

accommodation occupied and the time of the year the journeys arc

made. Travel is from Southampton to f emantle, Adelaide, Melbourne or Sydney, via The Cape.

When a passage is booked via -ttl^.e Panama, there is an additional charge o f a r1 .,stg. i 3 for each crossing of the Tasman Sear

Parents will be allowed to stay in Australia for up to six months from tue date of :_Ariva] at the cisemoaration port.

'The reduction in fares brings family visits within the

;cope of many more migrants' parents wishing to have a long stay with their children and grandchildren, but for ;-aho y  normial fares

were a little beyond their means, " Mr Sneddcn said.

"Ai family visit often is the perfect antidote for

homesickness, something whic: every migrant feels to some degree at some stage of settling into a new countr y .

rrIn addition, when i'o i grants ' p arents return home, they will be able to talk about their exoeri ences of Australia.

/2..

2.

"From their personal knowledge and experience,

they may encourage potential migrants to join us. Some parents

may return again to settle in Australia," Mr. Snedden said.

Department of immigration, CANBERRA . A.C.T.

1 -August 1968

