News Release I

34/68

FROM THE MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION

PRESS STAT 72  T BY Tie, IC T ISTE R PGR I MMI IQN ,

THE HON. B. i^^. ^SNL-DD^ ^..L ``ra^!. C I'=. P.

Commonwealth and State Ministers for immigration today

held useful discussions on future immigration. activities affect-ing the welfare of settlers, and Australia's ability to attract

potential settlers, the Minister for I mmigration, Mr. Snedden,

said today.

Mr. Snedden said that Ministers emphasised the importance

of housing in attracting and holding migrants, particularly in view

of improved living standards in source countries.

The nub of the problem was the shortage of low-rental

houses. The agreed objective was a situation in which all migrants

could expect to move into orthodox housing, either on a rental or

purchase basis, within a reasonable period after arrival.

There was an acimwwledged need for a thorough review of

the question of recognition of overseas professional qualifica-tions. The essential element was that equivalent overseas qualifications be assessed.

There was no intention of undermining standards at of overcrowding the professions.

But we had to be able to select professionally-qualified people, according to our needs, from the widest sources rather than

those available only from a limited number of countries.

While this problem was not unique to Australia, its

solution would enable Australia to attract highly-qualified professional people who were now not available to us.

The Department of Immigration, the Department of Education

and Science and the State Education Departments were currently

reviewing all aspects of migrant education, including the problems

and needs of migrant children.

..../2

Discussions on other topics included.

Employer recruitment of migrant workers in Britain

and Europe to help employers overcome labour short-ages which they could not meet from local sources.

The general need for increased interpreting services to be provided for hospitals.

The important role of local government in con-ferring citizenship and encouraging migrants to

become Australian citizens.

Department of Immigration, CM` BERRA.

8 August 1968

