The Liberal Party of Australia FEDERAL SECRETARIAT

STATEMENT BY THE HON. A.S. PEACOCK, MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS

In recent days the Labor Party has attempted to distort the  statements made by Mr. Fraser and myself in relation.to our  attitudes towards the total Middle East situation. In order  to clarify our position for Australian citizens whose ethnic ' origins lie in the Middle East let me state once again the

following position:

Firstly, we firmly uphold the right of the State of Israel to  exist in peace. We believe that it is imperative that secure and  permangit boundaries be established between Israel and the neighbour­ ing Arab States. Any attempts to hinder a peaceful solution through  terrorist activities by any organisation will continue to be  condemned by a Liberal National Country.Party Government.

However, our Government recognises with equal sincerity the right  of the Palestinian people to have a permanent and lasing homeland  and will give the strongest support to any peaceful initiatives  by the United Nations, the United States or any other country  that would result in a settlement.

We regret that some sections of the PLO hold strongly to a  philosophy directed towards the destruction of Israel and look  forward to a time when the more moderate elements within this  organisation prevail in the international forum. The Coalition  Government is particularly conscious of the internal suffering ·

and tragic events which have overcome democracy in Lebanon. We  hope that the situation in Lebanon which has come partly from  extremist influences and partly as a result of a great strain  placed upon that country by the influx and temporary settlement  of so many Palestinian refugees will be resolved as soon as  possible. The Coalition recognised the great contribution made  to the development of Australia by Lebanese migrants and  descendants over the last 125 years. The Government is being  constantly appraised of the situation in Lebanon and stands ready  to assist in any humane action if such be requested.

0 O 0

