PRESS STATEMENT

18 April 1975 .

.TRIBUTE. TO RAAF

The Prime Minister today paid tribute to the humanitarian  contribution made by the C-130 aircraft of the Royal Australian  Air Force which have been operating in South-East Asia since  30 March. He did this on the occasion of the return to

Australia of three aircraft which require servicing.

The Prime Minister recalled that the aircraft had  originally been sent to South-East Asia to fulfil an urgent  task in the uplifting of refugees at Da N a n g . Australia had  been the first country to respond to this request for humanitarian

assistance by providing an airlift capacity : subsequently the  Royal N e w  Zealand Air Force had also provided aircraft. .

Since their arrival the C-130 aircraft have been  engaged in relief tasks, most of them connected with the  movement of United Nations supplies. They have also played  a role in the uplift of South Vietnamese orphans for adoption

in Australia.

The Prime Minister said that he regretted that there  had been some misleading reports that the aircraft had been  under-employed. In fact, their crews and all those associated  with the carrying of relief supplies had been working under  very great pressure, in arduous conditions. For example,

about half a million pounds of medical and relief supplies  had been transported from Bangkok to Saigon and much of these  had had to be loaded by hand by RAAF c r e w s .

The Prime Minister recalled that he had already referred  in Parliament to tributes paid to the RAAF performances. He said that he had asked the Chief of the Air Staff to

convey his personal appreciation to all those who had been  involved.

2 .. .

2.

The Prime Minister said that there had been  discussions.  this week v/ith the Secretary-General of the  United Nati o n s , Mr. Waldheim, and the coordinator of  relief assistance for Indo China, Sir Robert Jackson,  about the future role which RAAF planes might play in  assisting United Nations agencies in their humanitarian  tasks in Indo C h i n a . As a result RAAF Hercules were to

be assigned .to the United Nations to play a bridging role  in the transport of relief supplies until United Nations  agencies were able to make satisfactory arrangements for  the chartering of aircraft to meet their needs. .

The Prime Minister said he was particularly pleased  that Australian Government aircraft would be able to play  this essential humanitarian role in the service of the  United Nations in transporting relief supplies contributed  by the Australian and many other Governments. -

Canberra, A.C.T.

