Broadcast 3HA  3YB 15 Hay-  19 May Embargoed until 7.00 p.m.

Jj. A U S T R A L I A , zL< -

PRIME MINISTER

FOR PRESS 15 MAY 1977

ELECTORATE TALK  ______ y______

Good evening ladies and gentlemen.  This past week has been an  important week for Australia. It has been a week where Australians  have focused on two separate but fundamentally important issues.

The issue with the most immediate impact - and the one that has  taken the newspaper headlines - has been the strike by the air  traffic controllers. The Government made a stand that I believe  was supported by millions of Australians. We made a conscious

decision to put the interests of this community before the self  interest of a small and elite group.  We made responsible decisions.  We made decisions in the national interest.

I am pleased that the air controllers have finally agreed to go  back to work, so their case can be heard by the highest arbitral  tribunal in the land. The Government will support the decision of  this tribunal. I hope the men will be unequivocal in the support  of the umpire's decision.

The other issue of fundamental and basic importance to the good  government of our country is the referendum proposals to reform  our constitution. It has not made dramatic headlines - but in  many ways this is understandable because the issues before the

people are not dramatic issues. They are simply aimed at tidying  up the constitution to meet the needs of Australia at this moment.

This past week I have visited Melbourne, Sydney, Brisbane, Hobart,  Launceston, Adelaide and Perth, explaining the benefits of the  four proposals. I have been greatly encouraged by the response  so far. I have no doubt that all four proposals will pass in

every state. I am confident that they will receive overwhelming  support.

Some people have suggested that either or each of Queensland,  Tasmania and Western Australia would reject the proposal that the  Senate and the House of Representatives elections be held at the  same time. I am convinced that the basic logic and common sense  behind this proposal will make sure it is passed in these three

states, as well as in New South Wales, Victoria and South Australia.  I believe our arguments - arguments put by every member of the  House of Representatives and the great majority of Senators - are  getting through to those people who want to decide the merit of

each proposal with an open mind.

/Our arguments

2

\

Our arguments are being accepted - and they are being accepted .   because of their fairness, logic and plain Australian common sense. I believe that men and wom^n are applying what I call the 1  common  sense test'  to each question. Is it common sense to allow people

in the A.C.T. and Northern Territory to be counted in any referendum  vote? Is it common sense for judges'^ίοχ retire at 70 years of age? Is it common sense to hold elections^ fojr the House of Representatives  and Senate on the same day? (Is^ itN^ammon sense to replace a Senator  with a Senator from the same pair-ty? ^ S u r e l y  the answer in each case

is a clear 'yes'. \  v/L- _  ,

/  n \  " /

It is significant that since \we began on the 'yes' campaign, support  for each of the four questions has steadily risen. This support  will continue as the argument^.^continue to be put before the  community. So f a r ,  I and other Ph|*liamentarians putting our case

have spent many hours on radio^ and/television programmes talking  directly to men and women who have shown a real concern for  constitutional reform. Their concern and their wish for reform  in this important area has been demonstrated by the seriousness of  their questioning. This concern is most heartening and refreshing  because constitutional reform is essential if we want to maintain

the real role of our democratic institutions.

If by some chance these proposals are rejected by the community, I believe the future of our constitutional conventions will be  in jeopardy. These proposals were overwhelmingly supported by  all political parties - at all levels of Government - at the last  constitutional convention. Those proposals are the same proposals  as we are now putting to Australians.  It is for that reason that I

am a little disappointed in the attitude of a couple of Premiers to  the simultaneous election proposal. Thexe was no dissent on this  proposal at the convention. In f act, statements of support were  issued.

This coming week, following a Cabinet meeting in Melbourne that  will attend to normal Government business, we will continue to  put our views plainly and directly. I have no doubt that Australians  will see our arguments for what they are - and that is plain common

sense.

