- 7 ?

P R I M E  M I N I S T E R

FOR PRESS 7 MAY 1978

ELECTORATE TALK

The Government's decision to continue with the mining and export  of uranium for peaceful purposes - announced last year - was  taken only after months of exhaustive examination.

Because of our vast uranium reserves, we made it clear that as  a nation we had special responsibilities. We had responsibilities  to protect the environment and the interests of the Aboriginal  people in Northern Australia, and we also had an international  responsibility.

The Government has stressed that there was no way we would not  maintain our firm stand in meeting in full each of these obligations.  Australians, and the world community, know that.

Some events in recent days have again focussed attention on  Australia's position in these three critical areas. I want to  re-iterate, and make the point stronger than ever, that our  promises and our commitment on these questions remain absolute.

Nuclear proliferation - the spread of a capacity to manufacture .   or acquire nuclear weapons - is something that concerns people  throughout the world.

Australia, as a nation, has the capacity to strengthen the inter­ national regime of controls and incentives preventing countries '   from acquiring nuclear weapons. We can and are doing this by  setting an example through our own acceptance of the Non-Proliferation  Treaty and the I.A.E.A. safeguards on nuclear activities.

The stringent safeguards policy I announced last year demonstrates  the Government's concern and sets conditions for the supply of our  own uranium to other countries as firm and stringent as those · adopted by any nuclear supplier country. '  .

I have made the point on a number of occasions: those requirements will not be reduced or weakened. This will allow Australia's  uranium help meet the world's energy needs, and strengthen the  non-proliferation regime.

.  .  ,/2

2.

As a uranium exporter we will exert considerable influence in  international nuclear forums concerned with non-proliferation. My Government is very aware of the obligations this places upon  us. We will not compromise our safeguards policy for commercial

advantage. Equally, those safeguards will be applied without  discrimination.

We must be sure that the world's needs for nuclear energy are  met without encouraging the destabilising force of nuclear  weapons proliferation.

The Government is actively negotiating safeguard agreements  with other countries and working on international initiatives,  such as the International Nuclear Fuel Cycle Evaluation, which  is a major new world endeavour to find ways to meet national

needs for energy, consistent with non-proliferation.

The Government has also committed Australia to active participation  in current negotiations on on a new international convention on  physical security in the nuclear field. Australia has accepted  the rules on nuclear exports developed by the Nuclear Suppliers  Group which brings together the world's major nuclear supplier  countries.

Initiatives such as these are complementary. Above all, they  are designed to support the major international objective of a  safer and more stable world.

Within Australia, our commitment to full environmental protection  remains firm. Legislation recently introduced into the Federal  Parliament sets out to make sure that the nuclear industry in  Australia is regulated to give the utmost protection to people

and the environment. We seek a uniform code of protection in  all States and Territories following consultation with them.

The Government has already announced that a supervising scientist  will oversee all research programs connected with the protection  of the Alligators River Region in the Northern Territory. This  scientist, directly responsible to the Government, will also

advise on the specific environmental requirements for the Ranger  project, and any uranium project in the Region.

On top of that, the Government will set up a Research Institute  to help develop programs necessary for protection of the Region's  environment. These programs will be co-ordinated by a committee  that will not only represent the mining companies and various  governments, but also the Northern Land Council representing the  Aboriginal people of the Region.

Of course, the Aboriginal people are vitally involved in any  decisions taken in relation to the mining of uranium. Almost  all the known uranium prospects in the Northern Territory are on  land which is or is likely soon to be Aboriginal land.

.. ./3

3.

I have already assured the Aboriginal people that no mining  interests will be granted in Stage 2 of the Region tin til  Aboriginal land claims are dealt with.

In the case of Ranger, the Government, having regard to the  recommendations of the Ranger Uranium Environmental Inquiry,  decided the project should go ahead.

The Government has accepted the recommendations of that Inquiry  that special programs be developed to minimise the social impact  of uranium mining on the 800 or so Aboriginals who live in the  Region.

Many Aboriginals have expressed a wish to return to some of  their traditional land to live. The Government supports this  wish.

Our commitments to the Aboriginal people, to the environment,  and our international responsibilities to help make a safer  world are being met. '

Our promise has been met with performance.

----oOo----

