From the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, the Hon. M.J.R. MacKellar, M.P.

19 October 1978 96/78

CONFERENCE OF COMMONWEALTH AND STATE MINISTERS  FOR IMMIGRATION AND ETHNIC AFFAIRS

The formula for future Commonwealth/State co-operation

for wide-ranging new initiatives to benefit migrants and

refugees will be discussed at a conference of Commonwealth

and State Ministers for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs in

Adelaide tomorrow (Friday).

Major discussion will centre on migrant and refugee

settlement programs recommended in the Galbally Report.

The conference will be chaired by the Federal Minister

for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, the Hon. M.J.R. MacKellar.

Among items to be considered will be:

.  Recent migration and settlement experience;

. Co-ordination and consultation in ethnic affairs;

. Latest developments from the National Accreditation

Authority for Translators and Interpreters (NAATI);

. A review of latest Australian demographic trends.

Mr MacKellar said that the Conference would involve

an historic event. For the first time the New Zealand

Minister would attend. The New Zealand Minister will be

the Hon. T.G. Gill, QBE, DSO, M P , Minister of Immigration

and Miinister of Health.

.. . / 2 .

Air Commodore Gill's presence reflects the close

co-operation, interest and involvement between New

Zealand and Australia in matters affecting immigration,

ethnic affairs and population policy," Mr MacKellar said.

Conferences of Commonwealth and State Ministers for

Immigration and Ethnic Affairs are held twice a year.

Each Minister in turn acts as host. The host for the

Adelaide meeting will be the Premier of South Australia,

Treasurer and Minister. Of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs,

the Hon. D.A. Dunstan, QC, MP, who will be accompanied

by the Hon. J.C. Bannon, Minister of Community Development

and Minister Assisting the Premier in Ethnic Affairs matters.

Others attending the conference will be:

. Mr G. Paciullo, MLA, Parliamentary Secretary to the

Premier, representing the Premier of New South Wales

, The Hon. W. Jona, MLA, Victorian Minister of Immigration

and Ethnic Affairs and Assistant Minister of Health

. The Hon. N. Lee, MLA, .Queensland Minister for Industry and

Administrative Services

. The Hon. R.J. O'Connor, MLA, Western Australian Minister

for Labour and Industry, Consumer Affairs, Immigration,

Fisheries and Wildlife, and Conservation and the Environment

. The Hon. B.K. Miller, M L C , Tasmanian Minister for

Consumer and Ethnic Affairs, representing the Premier

of Tasmania, the Hon. D.A. Lowe

. The Hon. J.M. Robertson, MLA, Minister for Community

Development, Northern Territory.

