NQ D A T E

Statement by the Acting Minister for Foreign Affairs,  the Rt Hon. Ian:Sinclair, M.P. ;  ’  m EI :  ^ '  25 July 1979

COMMONWEALTH HEADS OF GOVERNMENT MEETING - LUSAKA, 1979

The Acting Minister for Foreign Affairs said today  that the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting, which will  be held in the capital of Zambia,  Lusaka,  from 1 to 8 August  1979, occurred at a crucial juncture in world affairs. The  Australian delegation will be led by the Prime Minister and  will include the Foreign Minister, Mr Peacock, and the Minister

for Special Trade Representations, Mr Garland.

The international community was beset by pressing  economic, political and humanitarian problems,  many of which  had their origins in the era of colonisation. The gap between  the industrialised and newly independent states continued to  grow, outstanding colonial problems like Namibia and Zimbabwe

still awaited solution, and nations1  readjustments to changed  circumstances had resulted in the displacement and suffering  of large numbers of innocent people. ihe Commonwealth,  itself  largely a product of decolonisation, was therefore especially  well placed to understand and help find answers to the major  questions of the day.

The Acting Minister said that Commonwealth Heads of  Government Meetings,  which are held every two years,  were  unique occasions on which the leaders of a large cross-section  of the world's nations assembled to review informally contempÂ­

orary developments and issues. The Australian Government  attached particular value to these regular consultations as a  means not only of becoming acquainted with the perceptions and  policies of a wide varietyÂ·of states but of injecting into the

global debate Australia's own views on matters o f :special  interest and concern. At a time when the interdependence of  nations was becoming even more marked and the need for  international understanding and co-operation more insistent,  it was vital for Australia to make its contribution to the  harmonisation of intergovernmental relations and help prevent

tension and conflict between peoples.

Amongst the issues of greatest concern to the  Government and people of Australia, and to the international  community,  was the state of the world economy. The serious  problems it faced were not new but the degree to which they  had come together and inter-reacted at this time threatened  the well-being and progress of all nations. The energy  crisis, inflation, the sombre prospect of slowing economic  growth in +he major industrialised countries,  renewed threats

2. i

i

of protectionism, balance of payments and exchange rate  problems, the questions before UNCTAD and the NIEO were  all issues that the meeting at Lusaka would address. The  Prime Minister, who had been asked to introduce the item

on the international economic situation, was concerned to  see that discussion at Lusaka included the need for  recognition of economic interdependence. The Australian  Delegation would also be paying close attention to the

refugee problem, which had critical implications for the  security and economic interests of all countries.

Occupying a central place in the discussions at  Lusaka would be the situation in Southern Africa. The  location of the Meeting in one of the Front Line States  would focus attention on the urgent problems of the region,  particularly the need to find an acceptable settlement of

the Rhodesian issue and also ways of bringing Namibia to  independence.

The Australian Government considered that though  the elections were a step in the right direction, they did  not go far enough towards giving Zimbabwe genuine majority  rule. In particular the constitution contains entrenched  provisions for the white minority, and amendment of these

deficiencies would be necessary before the objectives of  black Zimbabweans, African and Commonwealth opinion and that  of the international community at large could be met. Without further progress towards Africanisation in Zimbabwe

and endorsement by African and Commonwealth states of an  eventual solution, there could be no end to the present  political, military and humanitarian crisis in Zimbabwe.  Nevertheless, while the Australian Government subscribed to

the need for greater participation by the majority in Zimbabwe's  government,  it could not condone the use of force to achieve  this aim. It continued to believe that only peaceful means  would produce a just and lasting settlement, and that to this

end the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting in Lusaka  could make a significant contribution.

The Acting Foreign Minister said that the Australian  Government would approach these and other important issues  at Lusaka in a positive and constructive spirit. Over the  years the Commonwealth had developed strong bond^ of friendship  and understanding between its members and had demonstrated on  manyj occasions its capacity to work amicably towards agreed  positions and actions. Australia welcomed the opportunity to

continue its dialogue in Lusaka with its fellow members of  the Commonwealth, including the participants in CHOGRM, and  pledged to help make the Meeting productive and successful.

