M39 5 June 1979

EMBARGOED UNTIL 8 p=m.  TUESDAY 5 JUNE________

FOREIGN MINISTER'S VISIT TO CHINAS BANQUET SPEECH

The following is the text of the speech by the  Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr Andrew Peacock, at a  welcoming banquet in Peking on 5 June hosted by the  Chinese Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr Huang Hua.

I am very pleased to be back in China at your  Excellency's kind invitation.

In the three' years that have elapsed since  my last visit, our two governments have worked energetically  to develop our relationship across a broad spectrum.

There has been close and frequent contact

. at head of government level;

. through other high-level visits; '

. and between you and me at international  conferences.

A Science and Technology Co-operation Agreement  between our two governments to be initialled during my  visit will provide a further stimulus to exchanges, and  will contribute to development in both our countries.

There has been a remarkable· increase in commerce  between our two countries following the signing of the trade  agreement in 1973. This development suggests a significant  long term mutual trading interest. It is incumbent upon  us to further that interest. '

There is a challenge of creating awareness amongst  the Australian people of the culture, traditions and values  of an important neighbour and partner. The Australian  Government has therefore established an Australia-China Council  with the specific goal of enlarging contact between our

cultures. I hope felso that the Council will be able to  play a useful role in improving Chinese understanding of the  traditions and values on which the Australian people seek  to develop their country and their relations with the people  of Asia.

. . ./2

2 .

The growth of common interest between Australia and  China is taking place against a global and regional background  remarkable for both its increased complexity and for its  susceptibility to rapid and far-reaching change.

In our discussions I have found a shared perception and  concern about growing global instability. Instability is dangerous.  It is infectious. It particularly affects key strategic countries  in Africa,  in the Middle East, and in our own region.

In South East Asia a peaceful solution of the present  problems of Indo-China must be a high priority of all concerned  states. Australia has welcomed the initiation of talks between  China and Vietnam, and would support moves leading to a reduction

of tension and the maintenance of peace in the region.

We hope that the people of Kampuchea, who have suffered  for a decade, will be able to achieve peace in their own land,   to be free of foreign interference and to maintain their separate  national identity and independence within a stable,  peaceful and  prospering region.

The Indo-China refugee problem has imposed a new,  intolerable and growing burden on the countries of the region,   and the actions of governments which are encouraging this flow  inevitably discredits them.

We have to acknowledge realistically the difficulties  which face us. However, we must equally recognise and applaud  developments which are working in favour of stability. For  example,  in our own regions

. The Sino-Japanese Treaty of Peace and Friendship  and the normalisation of relations between China  and the United States of America have opened up  prospects for enhanced peace and stability

in the north Asian area.

. The growing cohesion of the Association of South  East Asian Nations constitutes a growing force for  regional resilience and prosperity.

I was also pleased to note in our discussions today  a shared appreciation that stability can no longer be measured  solely in political and strategic terms. Strategic, political,  social and economic factors are now increasingly related. Political  stability is a necessary pre-requisite for the unimpeded economic  development of the region. Equally,  political harmony between  nations is in great part premised upon fair dealing in the market  place. In the world trading environment it is very important that

trends towards protectionism be arrested and reversed so that  the developing countries have opportunities to expand and diversify  their exports.

. . ./3

3.

*

Australia i® especially aware of these factors:

. both because they affect so directly our  friends and neighbours in the Asia/Pacific  region;

. and becauseodfoour own position as a major  exporter of commodities and an importer of  capital. .

For these reasons Australia has a distinctive  position in the counsels of the developed countries - a  position which I shall be putting again next week in Paris  at the meeting of the Council of Ministers of the OECD.

Our role in this grouping of the major industrial countries  reflects our regional relationships -including our very  important and growing relationship with China.

The friendship between our two countries is bearing  fruit in terms of growing commerce and co-operation in tangible  ways. But it is also enhancing our understanding of world  trends and regional developments. The friendly talks we are  having this week will contribute to both these ends. So too  will our further meetings. I hope that next year one of

these will be in Australia.

