PRESS RELEASE

FROM: DR MOSS CASS, MP , SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND ETHNIC  AFFAIRS. .

!/(p

MEETING OF LABOR MINISTERS AND SHADOW MINISTERS FOR IMMIGRATION AND  ETHNIC AFFAIRS,  (lb- A)cv KiVl) '

"New criteria for selecting prospective immigrants intending to

settle in Australia were discussed at the meeting in Adelaide. The

following proposals for new selection procedures were adopted for

recommendation to the Federal Parliamentary Labor Party.

- NUMAS should be abolished and replaced by new criteria in which:

(1) Family Reunion would have absolute precedence. Under 1  family

reunion1  spouses, fiancees, unmarried children, or other

dependent family members would be granted automatic entry

to Australia, without maintenance guarantees when sponsored

by a person who has resided in Australia for a period of at

least one year.

Independent brothers and sisters or other independent

.  family members will also be admitted at a rate defined

yearly by the Minister, depending on economic and other

.  conditions. >

(2) Refugees

Bearing in mind the housing, employment, and other special

assistance needed, the Federal Government, in consultation

with the State Governments will determine the optimum number

of refugees that might be settled in Australia when such

-  emergencies arise. .

Then, in consultation with the United Nations High Commission

for Refugees, Australia would take its fair share of the

refugees without discrimination on grounds of sex, politics,

colour, race, creed or place of origin. 1

(3) Independent Applicants

For broad occupational areas, where the Department

of Employment has established as not capable of being

filled from within Australia, and which are vital for

Australia as a nation, annual quotas for each occupation

would be set. The numbers would be calculated by the

Department of Employment central office.

For all other occupations, and/or persons, the Employer

would have to submit a special claim. Such applications

would be checked by the Department of Employment to ensure

that no resident person can fill that job. Once validated,

theEmployer would be allowed to recruit the specific person

(or advertise) and the Department of Immigration officials

overseas would be advised of the vacancy in question.

These procedures will apply to both permanent and temporary

workers. '

,  There will be no target number of independent immigrants.

Dr Cass said that the meeting agreed to recommend to the Federal

Parliamentary Labor party that an "Assisted Passage" programme should

be instituted but it should be "means tested" and not favour citizens

of any particular country. At the discretion of the Minister,

assistance might be given also to persons who do not meet the "means

test" requirements in the form of an interest-free loan repayable

within a 3-year period. ,

Dr Cass said that in order to eliminate legal discrimination against

immigrants from "non-Commonwealth" countries, the meeting called

on the Federal and State Governments to re-examine all Federal and

State Acts andnto consider substituting"Permanent Australian resident

wherever the "British subject" requirement appears.

The meeting also discussed the provisions of the Human Rights Bill .

presently in front of Parliament and called on the Federal Government

3.

¥

to strengthen the legislative powers of the Commission.

It also emphasised the need to retain the Commission for Community

Relations as an independent statutory body.

"Delegates at the meeting have reaffirmed their support for Ethnic

Communities Councils, and for the funding of the Federation of

Ethnic Communities Council", Dr Cass said.

Canberra  13 December 1979

