CHRISTMAS MESSAGE

(By the Deputy Prime Minister and Leader of the  National Country Party, the Rt Hon J.D. Anthony, M.P.)

2 ? ^  .  '

All Australians welcome the opportunity Christmas offers  for family and friends to celebrate and worship together. It is  easy, however, to forget that although Christmas is a time for  strengthening and renewing family ties, it is also a reminder  of the ties which bind all mankind.

The world faces many difficulties. There are political  and economic crises,  the threat of conflict, the reality of  large-scale human misery. In Australia there is the reality of  unemployment, poverty and the plight of the Aboriginal people.

Despite our problems, we are still a fortunate people,  leading a kind of life which is simply out of the reach of  most people of the world. I hope Australians recognise that o their good fortune also means responsibility.

.  As a nation, this is a responsibility we can exercise in many ways. We must provide the world with food and fibre,  with energy and industrial raw materials, and play our part in  international forums. As a nation, and more importantly as

individuals, we must aid the poor and hungry of the world, and .   especially the people of Timor and the refugees of Southeast .   Asia, in whatever ways we can. Beyond that, I believe the  responsibility we bear because of our good fortune is one we  must remember and consider in all our actions.

The world faces tension and danger,  particularly in  the Middle East and Africa. As we prepare to celebrate  Christmas, we must all hope fervently that reason and sense  will prevail and tensions ease, that people of goodwill will

be able to understand the dangers, and that compromises and  solutions will be found.

I believe that this can be done, that Australia will  weather the current storms well, and that in the 1980s we . will be even better placed to aid the less fortunate of the  world. I and my family offer our warm wishes for Christmas to

all Australians.

Murwi1lumbah, 23rd December 1979.

