.  MacKellar, M.P.

70 6 May 1979

AUSTRALIAN MINISTER VOICES CONCERN ABOUT THE  INDO-CHINESE SITUATION

"Australia is concerned about the recent rapid

escallation of the movement o f .Indo-Chinese refugees

into South-East Asia", Australia's Minister for Immigration

and Ethnic Affairs, the Hon. M.J.R. MacKellar, said on

Mr MacKellar talked with President Marcos, Foreign

Minister Romulo and Labor Minister Ople, following his

attendance at the meeting of Governors of the Asian

Development Bank.  "Both President Marcos and his Foreign

Minister developed the theme of an island transit centre,"

Mr MacKellar said. "This was yet another indication of

the problem posed to the ASEAN region by the continuing

outflow of refugees." -

"At the Asian Development Bank Meeting it was

significant that the representative of Hong Kong devoted

virtually his entire speech to the refugee problem and

the impact it was haying on Hong Kong.

"There has been a tremendous increase in the number

of refugees arriving last month in Malaysia, Indonesia

and Thailand," Mr MacKellar said.

"Australia recognises the tremendous problems that

this situation is imposing on countires of first asylum

in the region. This is not a problem for the region alone

but must involve the international community who have a

clear responsibility to develop durable solutions. L.

leaving Manila today.

2 .

"This sharp deterioration in the situation makes

it even more important for concerned Governments to try

to reach agreement on any initiatives which wi,ll provide

relief from what are now heavily overcrowded camps in

several countries.

"We believe that the concept of an island processing

centre is one such initiative that deserves careful

consideration. In our search for durable solutions we

cannot ignore new approaches.

"Australia remains concerned however that any

proposals we adopt should not ignore the overall objective

of finding long-term solutions which will produce

permanent resettlement and indeed stability in Vietnam,

rather than transit facilities for refugees.

"We recognise that refugees must be granted first

asylum if they are to be processed in a controlled

orderly fashion which will enable their best interests,

and those of all Government's involved,to be served."

