4 January 1978

From the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs,  the Hon. M.J.R. MacKellar, M.P.

'  3/79

,  REFUGEES FROM VIETNAM

The Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, the Hon. M.J.R.  MacKellar, said today that circumstances indicated that officials in  Vietnam were engaged in the export of ethnic Chinese and ethnic  Vietnamese at a price. .

A system for boat departures appeared to have been developed  under an organisation set up last June and responsible to the Government.

It was alleged that authorised departures now took one of two  lines. One required the departees to arrange their own vessels, and  the other involved departure on larger vessels scheduled from Ho Chi  .Minh City port, on vessels flying some flag of convenience and obscure

ownership. To get onto either boat, the fee appeared to be about  $ US 2700 for ethnic Chinese and $ US 4000 for ethnic Vietnamese, the  money apparently being paid into State revenue.

Mr MacKellar said it seemed that countries in the region are  highly suspicious of the present large-scale movement, appearing to  ^ believe that this could not happen without the active, positive support  of a government agency.

Information suggested that in addition to the freighters lying  off Manila and Hong Kong, a third vessel with Panamanian registration .   had been due to leave Ho Chi Minh City on Christmas Eve with about  3000 on board. ^

There was a further suggestion that yet another vessel, loading  between 2500 and 3000 passengers, was scheduled to set off for Darwin.

Mr Mackellar said that the Australian Government, despite its  strong record of humanitarian response, could in no circumstances deal  with the owners or masters of any such ship arriving in Australian waters  except to re-provision at cost to the company concerned. It would deny

any passengers on such ships entry into Australia. Such a journey  would be pointless and fruitless. It was only fair to issue this warning  now to people who might otherwise expose themselves to financial loss

and hardship. -

Australia was prepared to work.through well-established inter­ national forms for the immigration of people into Australia and for  the resettlement of refugees. It would not give support or encouragement  to schemes organised by unscrupulous merchants in human cargoes whose

aim was financial gain. ^

