UN General Assembly meeting on Afghanistan 11 January 1980 —  The Minister for Foreign Affairs, i  the Hon. Andrew Peacock, said today that he had  instructed the Australian Permanent Representative i

in New York, Mr David Anderson, to address the  special emergency session of the General Assembly  which had been called to consider the situation in  Afghanistan.

Mr Peacock recalled that an overwhelming maÂ­ jority of the membership of the Security Council had  voted in favour of a draft resolution which, inter alia,  called for the withdrawal of foreign troops from

Afghanistan, but that the Soviet Union had used its  veto power to thwart this resolution. On 9 January the  Security Council passed a new resolution referring the  matter to the General Assembly under procedures

which allow the General Assembly to discuss threats  to international peace and security when the Security  Council has been frustrated from doing so by the  action of one of its permanent members.

Mr Peacock noted that a larger number of counÂ­ tries, including many from the non-aligned moveÂ­ ment, had also participated in this latest General |  Assembly debate. He said that the Soviet Union i  should be left in no doubt that it stood condemned in '

the eyes of the international community for the action ;  it was taking in Afghanistan. The text of the Aus- ;  tralian statement in the General Assembly was as :

follows: j

Mr President, this is an historic meeting of the General j  Assembly. Since the passage of Resolution 377 (V) in i  1950 the ‘uniting for peace’ procedures have been used j  sparingly, the most recent occasion being in 197! in reÂ­ lation to the situation in the India-Pakistan sub-continent.

We are thus meeting under carefully conserved proÂ­ cedures in the face of a situation of clear and present I  danger to international stability and security. It is worth j

recalling that in the debate prior to the adoption of Resol- ;  ution 377 (V) a number of speakers rightly pointed to the |  historical perspective of the failure of the League of ;  Nations in the face of aggression in Asia, Africa and ,  Europe and the scourge of world war which then ensued

from these tragically unchecked actions. Our organisation  must, on this occasion, ensure that all responsible  members respond effectively to the common challenge i  that confronts us alt. i

Previous speakers both in this debate and in the SecurÂ­ ity Council have examined at length the course and  character of the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan. The  chronology of events is clear, including the significant and  ominous fact that the invasion was launched three days ;

before a request for Soviet military assistance was made  by the present authorities in Kabul. It is now patently clear  that that request was not made by the late President Amin  or his Government. Attempts by the Soviet Union and its j  allies to justify or rationalise the invasion have been  exposed and rebutted conclusively by many previous  speakers.

One of the most telling indictments of the Soviet action  was the statement made on 4 January by Ambassador  Abdul Tabibi, a one-time Minister of Justice of AfghanisÂ­ tan who resigned his post as Deputy Permanent RepresenÂ­ tative of Afghanistan to the United Nations in protest, as

he put-it: 'Against the violation of the sovereignty and  independence of my country by our neighbour, the Soviet  Union’. Ambassador Tibibi recalled that Afghanistan was  the first country to recognise the Bolshevik revolution and  that thereafter it maintained uninterrupted friendly reÂ­ lations with the Soviet Union. ‘It is indeed shockine and 1   unbelievable to our people’. Ambassador Tibibi said, "to  see the answer to all these warm and cordial relations a  massive intervention hv Soviet armed forces against our  Islamic and freedom loving people’.

The Soviet action also appears deeply ironic when we  recall the statements made in this very hall by Soviet repÂ­ resentatives who have pledged support for the territorial  integrity, sovereignty and political independence of other  states, and for the principle of non-interference in the

affairs of other states, and who have spoken out against  hegemonism. Mr President, the Australian Fame Minister and  Foreign Minister have condemned the invasion of  Afghanistan as totally without justification, as a violation

of the United Nations Charter and indeed of everything  the United Nations stands for, and as a mode of behaviour  which would make normal relationships between nations  totally impossible. The Australian Government has acÂ­ cordingly taken a number of decisions in the context of its

bilateral relations with the Soviet Union which are deÂ­ signed to demonstrate its deep concern and to register the  strongest possible opposition to the Soviet Union’s

actions. In the Assembly. Australia joins the overwhelming maÂ­ jority of delegations in calling for the immediate and unÂ­ conditional withdrawal of foreign forces from AfghanisÂ­

tan and the restoration of conditions in which the Afghan  people can choose their own Government freely and withÂ­ out external interference of any kind. We call upon the  Soviet Union to heed the expressions of concern that have

been voiced here by so many delegations. No one can misÂ­ take the urgency of this call. No one can mistake the fact  that the smaller and non-aligned countries among us view  with alarm the implications for their own peace and securÂ­ ity of the brutal action taken by one of the great powers, a

permanent member of the Security Council, against  Afghanistan. *" But, Mr President, it is not just the survival of Afgahnis-  tan and other small nations— vital as these arc-that is at  stake. The whole system of international relationships is at  issue also, and the prospect for effective co-operation beÂ­ tween countries of different social systems in the great  tasks of arms control, international economic co-operation  and development, that face us in the new decade. The  heightening of international tensions likewise carries imÂ­

plications for continuing co-operation in the scientific,  technological, cultural and sporting fields. My GovernÂ­ ment has noted statements by the Soviet Union and others  to the effect that Soviet forces will not remain in AfghanisÂ­ tan any longer than is necessary. While in our view their  presence was at no time necessary or justifiable, we cal! on  the Soviet Union to honour these assurances and to exÂ­ pedite the withdrawal of its forces without further delay,  so that the world community may return as soon as possÂ­ ible to the paths and patterns of international co-operation  and broader understanding.

From what I have said. Mr President, it will be clear  that my delegation will support the draft resolution in  document A/ES-6/L.1 co-sponsored by twenty-one non-  aligned and Third World delegations. We join those delÂ­ egations in deeply deploring the recent Soviet armed inÂ­

tervention. We support their appeal for full respect for the  sovereignty, territorial integrity, political independence  and non-aligned character of Afghanistan. We join their

call for the immediate, unconditional and total withÂ­ drawal of foreign troops, the Australian Government is  likewise concerned by the hardships being su fiered by sevÂ­ eral hundreds of thousands of Afghan refugees, and we  support the appeals made in the draft for relief assistance  for the refugees, and for action to establish the necessary I  conditions in which they may eventually return to their i  homes. My delegation, Mr President, will vote accordingly  in favour of the draft resolution n A/ES-6/L. 1. ~

