From the Minister for Immigration  and Ethnic Affairs.

The H on I an M a c p h e e  M.P. .  '

:  ;  .  E m b a r g o  11,00a. m.  C.S.T.

. 16  May 1980

|  49/80

|  .  TELEPHONE INTERPRETER SERVICE FURTHER EXTENDED

1

"Whyalla has joined the Telephone Interpreter Service network

which already covers all capital cities as well as some

,  -  country areas such as Albury-Wodonga, Wollongong and Shepparton,

j  the Federal Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"

1 ' '  · '

j Mr Ian Macphee, said today.

!

i I

3

I

Î¯

j 3

I

i

I

The Minister was officially opening the Whyalla Service at

a ceremony at the Westlands Motor Inn. Guests at the

opening included civic leaders, representatives of the

local ethnic communities and local welfare groups.

"It is appropriate that Whyalla should be among the areas

to which TIS is now being extended in view of the

significant role which the Whyalla community is playing in the

settlement of Indo-Chinese refugees under the community

Refugee Settlement Scheme. Sixteeh refugee families are

being cared for and supported by families in the area."

The Minister indicated that the service was at the same

time being extended to Newcastle and Geelong.

"For the cost of a local call, Whyalla, Newcastle and

Geelong callers will be linked through an automatic

telephone switching device with the nearest State TIS

Office", Mr Macphee said.

He urged migrants to use the Service and for Australians

who had friends who couldn't speak English to give them

the TIS number in each centre. They are :

WHYALLA - 453033

. . / 2 NEWCASTLE 262912

GEELONG 97095

"Australia-wide TIS has handled close to 700,000 calls

since its first centres in Sydney and Melbourne opened

six years ago", Mr Macphee said.

"Since adopting the recommendations of the Galbally Report

on Post Arrival Services and Programs for Migrants, the

Federal Government has committed itself to a massive

expansion of this invaluable community service", Mr Macphee

said.

He was particularly pleased that modern technology had

enabled people in the less-populated regional or country

centres to have access to the TIS service.

"The Service is a reminder that the problems of newcomers

in non-metropolitan areas may be different in kind but are

no different in degree from the problems of migrants elsewhere

Mr Macphee said that while the Service could be seen as one

for migrants it was in fact a service for the whole community.

TIS was used frequently by English-speaking Australians

wanting to communicate with non-English speaking clients.

Inquiries: Peter Windsor, Canberra (062) 642184 or

Maurice Dunlevy, Adelaide (08) 513178

