EMBARGO: 5:00 pm

\ G Z

PRIME MINISTER

FOR MEDIA ,  SUNDAY, 11 OCTOBER, 1981

ELECTORATE TALK

We live in a troubled and uncertain world, in which it sometimes  seems that stability and a clear sense of direction are almost  the exception rather than the rule.

The assassination of President Sadat is not only a tragedy for  his country and for stability in the Middle East, but it also  serves to remind us of the damage that is caused when  unreasonableness and division are allowed to take first place in

human affairs.  .  .  -

In 1977, after 30 years of continual warfare in the Middle East,  President Sadat made his historic and courageous visit to Â· -

Jerusalem to address the Knesset, and thus opened the path to '   negotiation in the quest for peace.  And then in. 1979, the x

Egyptian/Israeli peace treaty was signed. I said &t the time -V "X' that the world hoped that work on a comprehensive Middle East ~  settlement would proceed in the aftermath of that treaty. ^ _

But now, while it is obviously too early to assess the full v‘-   consequences that will flow from President Sadat's assassination,  the world clearly has to cope with the aftermath of a tragedy.

Not everyone, as we know, agreed with what President Sadat was  doing, although everyone must surely respect him for his courage  and his objectives of peace and stability and certainly no  benefits will, follow from what has taken place. Â·

The assassination of President Sadat is. not an isolated incident.  There have been at least five other assassinations and attempted  assassinations of world leaders during this y e a r . It is never easy  to learn lessons or draw conclusions from this kind of madness

and terror. Some say that the world has lost its way and certainly  there are many people in the world who are disturbingly uncertain  about where sthe course of progress really lies. But by the same  token, there are other people who are so fanatical in their own  convictions and aspirations that they lack a sense of balance.

In a troubled world, we surely need, a sense of our own direction 'Â» -   and objectives as a nation, and we need above all to be realistic.  We need to be willing to face up to problems, and confront issues  head on. There is a need for firmness, together with an open

and frank approach.  '

*  Â·  */2

2

The civilised discussion of major human issues requires more  support than ever before. That is why the value of meetings  such as the Commonwealth Heads of Government in Melbourne  cannot be over-estimated. The Commonwealth i s ,Â·as President  Kaunda of Zambia said in Melbourne, a civilised association Â· Â·  Â· of nations. Around the conference table and. in private  discussions,, more than a quarter of the world's leaders proposed

and -considered ways of making-the world a better, place to live in.

The Commonwealth has, over the years, and particularly .in relation :   to Zimbabwe and Namibia, displayed vision and courage in  seeking practical means for the settlement of international  conflicts. At the Melbourne meeting, difficult 'and contentious

issues were tackled and firm specific statements resulted.

There was a real commitment to build on the good will that exists  within the Commonwealth, in order to bring practical proposals .  -   to the dialogue about issues of poverty and development and  to other problems as well. .

I am proud that such a successful conference was held in  Australia, and our visitors so enjoyed the friendliness which. .   they encountered here that they have become ambassadors for  Australia. .

The Commonwealth leaders, with their determined practicality, Â·   their refusal to be distracted from, the central themes, and ,

their willingness to discuss issues openly with each other, .   have set an example for others to follow in the vision and '

sincerity of- their leadership. .  .  '

_  —  000--------

i

