J J -ψ. M IN IS T E R  FOR  M IN IS T E R  FOR

FOREIGN AFFAIRS RS

No.

M3 7

Date

9 April 1981

AUSTRALIA .. * ►

NEWS RELEASE THE HON. TONY STREET, M.P.

MO

ASEAN-AUSTRALIA FORUM

The Minister for Foreign Affairs,  the

Hon Tony Street,  MP, today announced that the Sixth

ASEAN-Australia Forum would be held in Canberra on

14 and 15 April 1980. Mr Street said that the Forum

was the most senior official-level meeting held between

Australia and the Association of South East Asian Nations.

Mr Street said that Australia and ASEAN established

a formal "dialogue", and held the first Forum meeting,

in 1974. This was the first such relationship ASEAN had

developed with another country. In the same year, an

ASEAN-Australia Economic Cooperation Program (AAECP) was

initiated. Its projects, chosen and administered by the  ASEAN countries themselves,  with funds and support provided

from Australia, now covered a wide range of activities

including food technology, education,  population, trade  and investment.

The Sixth Forum would review these AAECP activities,

and consider the possibility of new projects. Cooperation  ,  in the trade and investment field would also be reviewed

as well as the progress made in expanding private sector

cooperation between Australia and ASEAN. Proposals for

possible cooperation between ASEAN and Australia in the

non-conventional energy field would be considered.

Mr Street said the Australian delegation to the

two-day meeting would be led by Mr A.R. Parsons,  Deputy

Secretary in the Department of Foreign Affairs,  and would

comprise senior officials from other Government Departments.

BACKGROUND

ASEAN-AUSTRALIA FORUM

The ASEAN-Australia Forum is the principal body for

the conduct of relations at an official level between Australia

and ASEAN. (ASEAN, a regional grouping established in 1967,

brings together Indonesia,  Malaysia, the Philippines, Singapore

and Thailand for cooperation and consultation on a wide range

of issues, including economic,  social and cultural matters.)

Australia and ASEAN established a formal "dialogue"  in 1974. Successive Forum meetings have been held in Bangkok,

Canberra, Solo, Canberra and Jakarta. The meetings are now

held on an annual basis, alternating between Canberra and

ASEAN venues.

The ASEAN delegation to this year's Forum includes

senior officials from the ASEAN national secretariats in each

country. The Secretary-General of the central ASEAN Secretariat

will also attend. The Forum will be opened by the Minister for

Foreign Affairs, the Hon Tony Street MP. A joint press statement

will be issued at the close of the Forum.

Ministers addressing Forum meetings in 1978 and 1980

have drawn attention to the impact of the situation in

Kampuchea on regional prospects for peace and stability, and

have referred to other international political and economic

problems which affect the region, including the serious

international humanitarian problem posed by Indochinese refugees.

At the Forum, developments in Australia-ASEAN relations

in the year since the last Forum are reviewed, and the annual

report of the ASEAN-Australia Consultative Meeting (AACM) is

considered. (The AACM is a consultative body formed in 1978

which provides a bridging function between Forum meetings. It

consists of senior Government officials and representatives of  the ASEAN missions in Canberra.) The AACM's report includes  accounts of the activities of two special working groups,  on

development assistance and on trade.

- 2-

4

The progress of projects under the ASEAN-Australian

Economic Co-operation Program (AAECP) is also reviewed.

Proposals for expansion and extension of existing projects are

considered and new project proposals canvassed. Projects

under the AAECP include a protein project, a food handling

project, a project for the management and utilisation of food

waste materials, an education project, a population project,

a study for an ASEAN animal quarantine station, and a program

of trade and investment development. New areas of activity

are expected to include an energy cooperation program.

Talks at the Forum will also cover a review of

ASEAN-Australia cooperation on trade matters and the trade  and investment development program under the AAECP.

