64/81

FROM THE COMMONWEALTH MINISTER FOR HEALTH  THE HON. M. J. R. MACKELLAR

11

GRANTS FOR HEALTH SERVICES RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT

Grants for research into disease prevention and into

promotion of better health were announced today by the Minister

for Health, the Hon. Michael MacKellar.

He said $139 391 was being made available for seven

health services research and development projects, four of

which were aimed at preventing the development of medical problems.

Healthy behaviour was the individual responsibility of

all citizens, and research could help by establishing ways to

healthier lifestyles, and then publicising the results, the

Minister said.

The projects would have a wide application, and included

studies on the control of hypertension through better diet rather

than drugs, the long-term effects of physical training on female

heart disease risk factors, the effectiveness of home economics

studies on adolescent eating habits, and the effect of social

support in reducing subsequent medical problems for stroke victims.

Details of the grants awarded are:

Community mental health treatment program,

v Dr J. Hoult, Health Commission of N.S.W.

The impact of pneumococcal vaccine on respiratory

infection in childhood, Dr R. Douglas, University

of Adelaide

Secondary prevention in stroke: a trial of the

effectiveness of a social worker support service

- Dr L. Christie, University of Melbourne

Community hypertension control by a simple diet,

Dr K. Doust, Capital Territory Health Commission

$8 310

$70 664

$27 269

$15 563

. . / 2 .

Long-term effects of physical training on heart disease

risk factors in previously sedentary females -

Ms A. Davidson, Institute for Fitness Research and

Training, S.A.

Role of home economics classes in nutrition education

- Ms M. Miller and Mr B. Margetts, W.A. Institute of

Technology .

■  '

Survey of manpower and training requirements in

rehabilitation medicine, Dr R. Oakeshott, Australian

College of Rehabilitation Medicine

CANBERRA: 9 July 1981

