ty . MINISTER FOR

* FOREIGN AFFAIRS

i t l  A U S T R A L I A  ,.u-

* · » » » > ^ < « « ^

NEWS RELEASE

No. Date I | THE HON. TONY STREET, M.P.

6 February 1981

EMBARGOED UNTIL 3PM  6 FEBRUARY 1981

JOINT PRESS STATEMENT

issued by

THE AUSTRALIAN MINISTER. FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS

THE HON. TONY STREET, MP,

and

THE FOREIGN MINISTER OF THAILAND

HIS EXCELLENCY AIR CHIEF MARSHAL SIDDHI SAVETSILA

Melbourne

6 February 1981

L

The Foreign Minister of Thailand, His Excellency  Air Chiefs Marshal Siddhi Savetsila,  accompanied by his wife,  Khunying Thida, and by senior officials,  is paying an official  visit to Australia at the invitation of the Australian Govern­ ment from 4 to 8 February 1981.. Air Chief Marshal. Siddhi had

discussions in Melbourne with the Australian Prime Minister,  the Right Hon. Malcolm Fraser,  and with the Minister for  Foreign Affairs, the Hon. Tony Street. He also called on  the Minister for Industrial Relations, the Hon.  Andrew Peacock,

the Minister for Health, the Hon.  Michael MacKellar, and the  Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, the Hon. Ian  Macphee.

The two Foreign Ministers took advantage of the  meeting to review regional developments. They viewed with  deep concern the threat to regional stability posed by the  continued Vietnamese occupation of Kampuchea.  They reaffirmed

the urgent need to find a durable solution to the Kampuchean  conflict through a political settlement on the basis of  United Nations General Assembly resolutions 34/22 and 35/6  calling, inter alia,  for total withdrawal of all foreign

forces from Kampuchea, non-interference in the internal  affairs of Kampuchea and respect for the sovereignty and  territorial integrity of Kampuchea and the right of the  Kampuchean people to self determination.  They agreed that  Vietnam's insistence that the situation in Kampuchea was

"irreversible" was the major stumbling block in the pursuit  of these objectives. ____

Air Chief Marshal Siddhi noted .that Mr Street  had reaffirmed Australia's support for international measures  to alleviate the suffering of Khmer civilians affected by the  conflict in Kampuchea as a result of the Vietnamese aggression  against that country. The two Ministers agreed that appropriate  priority in the international relief efforts be given to those  displaced Khmer civilians in Thailand and along the Thai/  Kampuchean border.  They reaffirmed their strong belief that

it is the inalienable right of the Kampuchean people to return  safely to their homeland. They emphasised that lasting and  effective solutions to the humanitarian problem can only be  achieved through-a just political settlement of the Kampuchean  conflict.

Air Chief Marshal Siddhi noted that Australia was  one of the first countries which recognised the plight of many  Thais living along the Thai/Kampuchean border whose liveli­ hood had been adversely affected by the influx of the  Kampuchean displaced persons. He expressed his deep appreciation

to the Australian Government for their timely and valuable  assistance given to these affected Thais.  Mr Street said  that Australia would consider providing further assistance to  these people.

Air Chief Marshal Siddhi also expressed appreciation  for Australia's contribution to relieving the burden on ASEAN  countries of Indo-Chinese refugees and displaced persons by  providing resettlment and financial support. As Thailand was

the most affected country, he hoped that Australia would continue  to accept higher numbers of refugees for resettlement from  Thailand. Mr Street said that in the past six months Australia  had increased the number of such refugees it had accepted. He expected this increased rate of acceptance to be maintained.

2 .

*,

Mr Street emphasised the importance which the   Australian Government attached to the security of Thailand   from external threat and to the maintenance of Thailand's   territorial integrity for the preservation of peace and

stability in South East Asia. Australia had recently   increased substantially the level of its bilateral defence   cooperation program with Thailand. In this connection Air   Chief Marshal Siddhi expressed his Government's deep

appreciation. .

The Ministers affirmed the importance of security   and stability in the wider region. They agreed that the   continued armed occupation of Afghanistan by the Soviet Union   and the Soviet Union's support for Vietnam's military occu­ pation of Kampuchea posed a grave threat to global peace and

security.

The Foreign Ministers discussed the activities of   other major powers in the region.  They stressed the import­ ance of a continuing United States interest and hoped that   the new United States administration would attach priority

to its relations with South East Asia. In this regard, they   warmly welcomed President Reagan's assurance on 2 February   of continued support for the allies and friends of the United   States,  including Thailand and Australia, in the Asia-Pacific

region.

The two Ministers warmly welcomed the importance   which Japan is attaching to the active development of its   relations with the members of ASEAN. They believed that   Japan had a constructive role to play in the Asia-Pacific

region, both politically and economically, and that this   would contribute to peace, stability and mutual prosperity.

The Foreign Ministers noted with satisfaction   recent statements of China's wish to improve its relations   with the members of ASEAN, and to play a. constructive role   in promoting peace and stability in the region.

The Foreign Ministers welcomed the constructive   role which ASEAN was playing, especially in the promotion   of the economic and social development of the region.  Mr Street reaffirmed the importance which.Australia attached

to its relations with ASEAN. He looked forward to continuing   and developing contacts at the highest level and expressed   the hope that a further opportunity for detailed consultations   on regional issues would occur at the time of the ASEAN   Foreign Ministers' Meeting to be held late in June 1981.  Air Chief Marshal Siddhi said that he shared the Minister's

views, especially on the need for close and continuing   consultation, and looked forward to the opportunity for   further discussions with him at the ASEAN Foreign Ministers'   Meeting.

The two Foreign Ministers expressed their satisfaction   with the close and friendly relations that had long been   maintained between Australia and Thailand. They noted that   these relations now encompassed many areas of cooperation

between their two Governments including especially political   consultations, trade and investment, development, cooperation,   energy, narcotics suppression and defence assistance.

3 .

The two Ministers noted with satisfaction that the   volume Of trade between the two countries had been steadily   increasing.  Problems arising in the trade relationship were   under continuing scrutiny in the machinery established under

the Thailand/Australia Trade Agreement.  Regular meetings of   the Joint Trade Committee,  which had been set up under the   Trade Agreement signed in October 1979, were aimed at   closely monitoring the trade between the two countries to

ensure its most harmonious development.

Mr Street and Air Chief Marshal Siddhi agreed that   Thailand's expanding free market economy provided good   prospects for investment.  Mr Street accepted with pleasure   advice by Air Chief Marshal Siddhi that existing Australian

joint ventures in Thailand were successful and well regarded   for their contribution to Thailand's industrial development   and to the strengthening of its economy. The two Ministers   also agreed that the quickening pace of industrialisation,  mining and the exploitation of natural gas would provide

further opportunities for Australia's participation.

Air Chief Marshal Siddhi expressed his appreciation   for the assistance which Australia had extended to Thailand   to help it implement its development program. He explained   the objectives of the Fifth Five Year National Economic and   Social Development Plan which was due to come into operation

iri 1982. He said that the plan would place priority on rural   poverty, agriculture, energy and natural resources.

Mr Street noted that Australia's development   assistance so far had been consistent with these priorities   and said that the Australian Government would continue, to   take them into account in the formulation of new programs. He mentioned particularly Australia's cooperation with   current studies into the development of lignite mining in   Thailand.  The two Ministers noted that Australia was well   placed to provide technical assistance in exploring for an   developing Thailand's lignite deposits and, because of   Australia's technology, experience and coal resources,  to

assist in the development of coal-based industry and power   generation.

The Foreign Ministers welcomed the increase in  non-governmental contacts between Australia and Thailand,  especially in the commercial and cultural areas.  A steady   increase in the number of Australians visiting Thailand   as well as Thai students studying in Australia had contributed

to the development of personal contacts which had enhanced   mutual understanding.

Air Chief Marshal Siddhi extended an invitation for   Mr Street to pay another visit to Thailand at a mutually   convenient time. Mr Street accepted the invitation with   pleasure.

The Foreign Ministers expressed their confidence   that relations between Australia and Thailand would be further   .developed to the benefit of both countries and the region as   a whole.

4 .

\

Air Chief Marshal Siddhi expressed his appreciation   for the warm reception and hospitality extended to him and   the members of his party on the occasion of their visit to   Australia.

i

