THE HON. IAN MACPHEE,  M.P. .

blftl 21 January 1981

PRAHRAN MIGRANT RESOURCE CENTRE .

The Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs,  .

Mr Ian Macphee,  today announced that an interim committee

of management had been appointed to establish a migrant  resource centre in Prahran.

The members of the Committee,  who will be working  in a voluntary capacity, are:- '

Hon.  Frank Crean, Chairman,  Mr J. Lemos,  Mr U. Okutgen,   Mr J. Steiner,  Mrs I. Cepek, Mr R. Sercombe,  Mrs M. Diaz, Mrs I. Barakat,  Mr W. Manallack and Mr C .  Papadopoulos.

Councillor B .  Theophilos will represent the Prahran City Council

and Ms L. Taylor the Victorian Government.  The Commonwealth  Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs will be represented  by Mrs H. Friedmann.

Mr Macphee said that the committee members had wide  experience in welfare work,  multicultural issues and community

involvement.  Together,  they had the experience and expertise  necessary to develop and implement programs which would meet  the needs for services of migrants in the area.

The migrant resource centre was being established in  premises which were being made available on a rent-free basis  by the Prahran City Council.

The Commonwealth and State Governments were each  contributing to operating costs. This close co-operation among

the three arms of Government will result in improved  co-ordination of services for migrants. .

2 .

Mr Macphee said that the centre's aim is to promote

self-help activities in the community in the interest of .

migrant welfare and settlement. More specifically, the centre  would provide an information,  advice and referral service to  assist migrants to gain access to existing community services

and resources and would also provide facilities and help to  community groups to conduct meetings and a range of other  activities.

"The task of helping migrants settle is not just one

for Governments," he said. "Migrant,  refugee and community

groups,  schools ,  the churches,  unions,  employers,  the

professions and commerce all have a part to play".

The interim committee will be paying special  attention to the problems of disadvantaged groups of migrants.  Programs will be developed to provide help to young children,

the aged,  the handicapped and women.

Contacts:  Anna Marsden-Stewart,  Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs 062 64 2726 or Anne Simson,  Minister1

Office 062 73 3446.

