Media  B  P pIpqqp  * 3 Resources JL U U J . w C l O V j TALKS WITH MALAYSIAN MINISTERS

(Statement by the Australian Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for  Trade and Resources, the Rt.  Hon. J.D. Anthony, CH, MP)

My five-day visit to Malaysia and my talks with the Prime  Minister, Datuk Seri Dr Mahathir Bin Mohamad, Deputy Prime Minister  Datuk Musa Hitam, and Senior Ministers have enabled me to make personal  contact with the new leaders of this important and rapidly developing

neighbour of ours, and to see at first hand its enormous progress and  potential.

The visit and my talks with Malaysia’s leaders have  demonstrated to me the vision of the Malaysian Government for the  development of Malaysia and the greater prosperity of its people, as  well as the Government's determination to make that a vision a reality.

I have been able, in turn,  to communicate to Datuk Seri Dr Mahathir and  his Ministers Australia's willingness to contribute to that developÂ­ ment both economically and in other areas.

The relationship between Malaysia and Australia is long-  established, and has strengthened and widened despite occasional  strains. My visit to Malaysia, part of a continuing process of  Ministerial exchanges between our two countries, has contributed to the

consolidation of this relationship and has been marked by the willingness  of both the Australian and Malaysian Governments to work together to  solve problems and to further initiatives which benefit both our  countries.

As well as meeting the Prime Minister and the Deputy Prime  Minister, I also held talks with the Minister for Primary Industries,   Datuk Paul Leong, the Minister for Trade and Industry, Tengku  Rithauddeen, the Minister for Foreign Affairs, Tan Sri Ghazali Shafie,

and the Minister for Energy, Communications and Posts, Datuk Leo Moggie. I also had the opportunity to make informal contact with several  Malaysian business and commercial leaders.

In a time of depressed prices for many of its major exports,   particularly commodities, Malaysia has turned in a performance in  economic growth and the control of inflation that is the envy of  most other countries in the world, and at the same time has, under

the fourth Malaysia Plan, embarked on an accelerated program of infraÂ­ structure development. In addition, the Malaysian economy will receive  an enormous stimulus with the beginning in 1983 of exports to Japan of LNG which will eventually reach the scale projected for Australia’s

North-West Shelf field. *  .

A

2 .

For Australia, Malaysia's economic progress offers  the opportunity for the further deepening of our close economic  ties. Australia has been a major supplier of foodstuffs and  raw materials for the Malaysian economy, with exports worth

$A442.4 million ($Mal.l083 million) in 1980-81, and a  significant importer of Malaysian products, with imports for  the same period totalling $A.186.7 million ($Mal.457 million).

From my talks over the last four days I am convinced  that Australia, for its part, is well placed to see a further  rapid expansion of its trade with Malaysia.

Malaysia has been our largest market for live  cattle, and with rising living standards and foreshadowed  changes in Government policy, the market for Halal-slaughtered  frozen meat is likely to show strong growth. The Malaysian  Government is planning two sponge iron plants with an eventual

output of 600,000 tonnes a year each, and I would expect the  iron ore required - a total of two million tonnes a year -  to be sourced in large part from Australia. Equally, for  power generation and cement production, plans are well  underway which offer prospects for Australia to export

several million tonnes of steaming coal yearly in the near  future. A vigorous infrastructure program covering roads,  railways, ports and airports offers Australian consultants and  contractors, several of whom are already established in  Malaysia, a first class opportunity to assist in the

development of this vital economy.

Already, over 100 Australian companies have  invested in Malaysia, and this number can only grow as  more Australian businesses become aware of the benefits of  operating in this country.

I must point out, however, that these opportunities  put a serious and important obligation on Australia to  understand and to help further, where feasible, the very  legitimate aspirations of Malaysia as a developing country

in South East Asia, and as an international trader. The  implementation from 1 January of Australia's new policy  on protection for the textile, clothing and footwear industry  will, I believe, overcome a number of problems previously  faced by Malaysia and other exporters of these products  seeking a greater share of the Australian market.

On a per capita basis, Australia is one of the  world's largest importers of textile, clothing and  footwear products from developing countries, and with the  growth factors built into our new policies, there seems

no reason why Malaysia cannot gain a full share of the  rising imports that the policy is designed to facilitate.  Equally, Malaysian investment in commercial development and  in certain mining ventures, including the Ashton Diamond

Joint Venture, appears certain to confer considerable  benefits on both our countries. The Australian Government's  continued support of Malaysia's tin smelting industry is an  example of Australia's support for such Malaysian ventures.

. . . /3

3 .

As a major world commodity trader, Malaysia has  particular interest in tin, rubber and palm oil, with both tin  and rubber facing problems caused by the inability of producers  to be assured of stable and reasonable prices for their products.

In regard to tin, I have undertaken that Australia will make  representations at the highest level in selected Western capitals  so that Governments of major consumer countries understand the  importance,  to a number of key developing countries in Asia  and in South America,  of an effective working 6th International  Tin Agreement.

Australia and Malaysia will continue to consult closely  on this issue, as Malaysia itself presses,its case, both with  other tin producers and major tin-consuming countries.

Although the economic relationship between Malaysia  and Australia is important, it is of course only part of the  extensive relationship in a number of areas that exists between  the two countries. My discussions ranged over the political  problems of the region, with particular emphasis on Indochina;   the role of Malaysia in seeking a solution to the conflict  between Iran and Iraq;  defence co-operation, including the  Australian presence at Butterworth;  and the refugee problem which

has such significance to first-refuge nations such as Malaysia. On this latter point,  I was able to assure Malaysian Ministers  that it was not the intention of the Australian Government to  reduce its intake of genuine refugees from Indochina.

My talks also covered the question of places for  Malaysian students in Australian secondary and tertiary  institutions.  I was able to assure Ministers that we had been  able to increase numbers of such students significantly in

recent years, and there was no intention on the part of the  Australian Government of any reduction in available places. I  also undertook to examine ways in which Australia could provide  further assistance in the training of English and vocational

school teachers.

The relationship between our two countries is strong,   diverse and destined to grow in importance. The Australian  Government is fully aware of the importance to this region of  Malaysia and looks forward with confidence to the benefits which  will accrue to all members of the region as Malaysia attains

its goals.

Kuala Lumpur  23 March 1982

