SOCIAL SECURITY AND THE BUDGET 1981-82

There are few changes in social security expenditure planned for the  1981-82 financial year.

Senator Chaney's statement that the Government is maintaining a  steady course is correct. His claim to be assisting those in  greatest need is quite false, and is particularly evident in the  treatment of families.

The estimated expenditure by the Department of Social Security is  $9,865 million.  The expenditure on social security and welfare is  estimated to be $11,357 million, or 27.8% of total budget outlays.

Spending on pensions,  benefits and allowances accounts for  92% of the Department of Social Security budget, with administration  adding almost 4%. This leaves just over 4% for other programs of  grants and services.

Pensions

The new pension rates for the aged,  invalid, widowed, supporting  parents and sick, special and unemployed beneficiaries with children  will be $69.70 (single) and $116.20 for a married couple per week.   This is strictly in line with indexation.  The following points

should be noted:-(1) Senator Chaney has stated that the pension has risen 70% in 6 years. However, under the Labor Government it .   rose 94% in 3 years.

(2) As the 1 November rise is based on the CPI figure of the  previous June and the 1 May rise on the previous December,  there is a severe lag in adjustment, borne by the  pensioners and beneficiaries. The Government will save  about $90 million in this financial year at the  pensioners' expense.  It was reckoned that last year the delay cost each single pensioner $103 a year, and  each pensioner couple $172 a year.

(3) The pension freeze imposed on the over-70 free of  means test pension in 1978 means that those pensioners  who do not now pass the means test will receive $18.25  a week less than other pensioners. The estimated

saving to the Government of re-imposing a means test  on the over-70s is an estimated $160 million a year,   though some of that would be returned in taxation.

(4) Because there has been no alteration to the tax scales and the tax threshold, single pensioners who receive  maximum pension will this year pay even more tax. They will pay $155.37 this year.

Tightening of legislation to prevent income avoidance for pension purposes

In 1976 when the Government deleted the assets component of the means  test for pensioners, Senator Guilfoyle said it would be "of great  assistance to persons reliant on pensions", and quoted Professor  Henderson's Poverty Report in support.

I said at the time, referring to Professor Henderson's recommendations:-

- 2-

"The report recognises that to preserve some  -justice in the situation some recognition of the  position of capital gains on assets would have to  be made. The Government has ignored this

recommendation because of the high concern that  conservative governments traditionally place on the  position of property in our community. I suggest  that the Government, in doing so, has changed the

anomalies and injustices which exist under the  present means test for another set of anomalies and  injustices. This selective filching from  Professor Henderson's report or from any report I  believe is dangerous".

The Government is finally moving,  five years later, to prevent the  circumventing of the incomes test for pension and fringe benefits,  though it may have as little success as the Treasurer has had with

tax dodgers. While there are undoubtedly some wealthy pensioners  who have engaged in income-dodging,  the vast majority have modest  means and simply want to arrange their affairs so they can have a  pensioner health card.  The importance to them of secure medical

and hospital care cannot be over-estimated.  Until the Government  gives pensioners universal health care as a right and access to  related fringe benefits,pensioners will inevitably take advice  from financial institutions which encourage them to invest with

them.  i

Supplementary Assistance

Supplementary (rent) assistance is to have its first increase under  the Fraser Government.

The rate of supplementary assistance can increase by $3 to $8 a week  for pensioners paying rent in the private rental market. It will  only be paid if rent is more than $10 a week, with 50Î¦ for each  $1 rent payable to a maximum rate of $8 if the rent is $26 a week  or more.

The. income test for supplementary assistance will be changed so that  the amount received will reduce by a withdrawal rate of 50% of the  pensioner's assessable income.

Pensioners in State or Territory housing will not be eligible because  they are considered to be already in receipt of a Government subsidy.  However, pensioners at present in Government housing will continue to  receive supplementary assistance. ,

This means that in the same public housing there will be one group of  pensioners who receive supplementary assistance and another group who  do not. ;

Unemployment Benefits

In this Budget, unemployment beneficiaries with dependants will, as  usual, receive the same rate as pensioners, that is $116.20 for a  married couple. However, unlike pensioners they will pay tax on  their spouse allowance and additional pension for children. The  means test on their earnings is tougher than that for pensioners  and they get fewer benefits.

- 3-

The single unemployed person over 18 years of age without  dependants, had a rise in this Budget of $4.65 a week, to  $58.10. This still leaves the single unemployed $11.60 a week  or $603.20 a year worse off.

Unemployed Persons under 18 years

The under-18 unemployment beneficiary is still left with a mere  $36 a week, unchanged since April 1975, and now $37 a week below  the poverty line. It is a miserably inadequate amount,  particularly  for those living away from home and the young from the country. There are only 53,000 of these young beneficiaries, and though most  live at home, teenagers find it increasingly difficult to seek work  on the dwindling dole.

Spouse of striking worker or one who has failed the work test no  longer able to claim unemployment benefit

The Government is amending the Act to stop unemployment benefit  being paid to the spouse of a person engaged in an industrial dispute.  This is a further tightening of the restrictive amendments of 1979. To use Social Services legislation in this way, to penalise the  wives and children of people involved in industrial action,  is a  disgrace. ;

Some will qualify for special benefit on hardship grounds, but special  benefit is on a very strict means test, is not easily given, and  there are generally delays in assessing eligibility.

Taking the same action on the spouse of someone alleged to have  failed the work test is another form of oppression of the unemployed.

Both are harsh political decisions which should have no place in  the administration of an Act introduced to help people in times  of trouble and need.

Family Allowances

The Prime Minister, during the election campaign, promised that  increased oil revenues would be used to help Australian families.  -It now appears that they are to go only to large families. Low  income and pensioner families in poverty will get nothing if they  ,  -have only one or two children.

, .

'  The Government's major advisory body, the National Consultative  Council on Social Welfare, has regularly advocated indexing family  allowances. In its most recent report it states:-"There is a considerable amount of evidence which

shows that families with children are disadvantaged  by recent changes in taxation structures and the level  of family allowances. The Council regards this  situation,  and especially that of lower income families  with children, as serious and requiring redress as a  matter of urgency. The Minister for Social Security is

urged, as a matter of urgency, to press for an increase  in family allowance to restore it to the 1976 real  value and, thereafter,  for family allowance to be  indexed according to the CPI."

. . 4 . .

- 4-

The Government's family allowance rises benefit only parents with  three or more children, that is, only a quarter of Australian  families.

The one and a half million families with only one or two children  have been totally ignored in this Budget, as in every one of the  last five.

Only 21% of pensioner and unemployed families are eligible for  the increased family allowances. There is no interest in the  deteriorating standard of living of the 163,000 or 79% of  pensioner and unemployed families with one or two children.

Family allowances which the Prime Minister claimed in 1976 was the 'single most important reform in the Australian welfare system' are now the most hollow of the Fraser Government's gestures.

If family allowances had been indexed after their introduction,  families with -get an extra $9.30 a month  " $22.37 "

" $25.07 "

" $27.77 "

" $30.82 "

above the increases promised in four months time.

Moreover, if family allowances had not been allowed to erode in  value the Government would be spending another $580 million next  year instead of their estimated $124 million.

The money the Government is saving is a direct take from one and  a half million families, irrespective of the number of their  children.

The unmistakeable impression is rewarding large families and  punishing small ones.

OTHER ALLOWANCES;

Allowances for Pensioner's Children:  (379,782) Their allowance has not been raised, and only a minority will benefit from family  allowances for larger families.

Handicapped Childrens Allowance:  (25,371) This Labor initiative has not been increased this year.

Orphan's Pension:  (4,016) The amount remains unchanged though some  refugee children will now qualify if the whereabouts of their parents  are unknown.

All of these allowances have been reduced in value because payments  have not been increased this year.

1 child would 2 children 3 children 4 children

5 children

AGED PERSONS HOUSING

The promised $225 million 3-year housing for the aged is looking  fairly sick.

This program is $110 million less in real terms than its predecessor,  which began as a. 3-year program and tapered off to a 5-year one with

- 5-

no additional money being spent.

Last year $45.8 million was spent -nearly $7 million less than  the allocation. This year $58 million is allocated. Even if it  is spent, it leaves over $120 million to be spent in the last  year.  As the Government has never yet spent more than $60 million  a year, it would be astonishing if that target were reached in  two years, let alone one.

Labor, in its last year, spent $71 million - more than twice as  much in real terms as the Government is allocating in 1981-82.

Personal Care Subsidy

The personal care subsidy, paid towards facilities for the frail  aged in hostels, remained at $15 a week from December 1974 until  the Fraser Government was forced to raise it to $20 a week in  December 1980, following protests from the Voluntary Care  Association, that it had been left out of last year's Budget.

The Joint Working Party on Hostel Accommodation recommended 18  months ago that the subsidy should be $28.50 a week. As that  amount in real terms is now $32.50 a week, hostels are losing the  equivalent of $12.50 a week for each resident because the  Government has not increased the amount.

HOME CARE SERVICES

1.Senior Citizens Centres:  The allocation of $4 million has remained the same for five years, so there has been a drop of  almost 60% in real terms.

2. Welfare Officers:  In 1978 the Fraser Government reduced the  Commonwealth subsidy from 2:1 to 1:1, so that the States and local  government have had to double their input. There is an increase in  this Budget which could allow for subsidy for 12 more officers.

3. Home Care:  The subsidy for these services was also reduced from 2:1 to 1:1 in 1978. The allocation for 1981-82 will allow for more  services if it is matched by the States and local government.

4. Delivered Meals:  The subsidy for meals on wheels was raised after 6 years in 1980. It has not been increased in this Budget, so  that local councils and voluntary organisations are being forced to  accept more of the costs.

ASSISTANCE TO THE HANDICAPPED

The Government is attempting to gain credit for providing substantial  support for the handicapped.

Most of the expenditure it claims to have increased comes from the  amounts paid to invalid pensioners, an area in which the Government's  record is a disgrace.  Thousands of invalid pensions have been  cancelled or refused because the Government tried to cut down the  numbers and prevent ill and disabled people from receiving them.

There has been virtually no change in the other programs and  allowances which have been added in to swell the total claimed  by the Government.

Spending under the Handicapped Persons Assistance Act is not  keeping up with inflation in spite of the need which in  increasingly more apparent in IYDP.

The 1981-82 allocation of $57.33 million is about $2 million short in  real terms though there is an enormous backlog of approvals.

Additional amounts for small additional programs amount to less  than $1 million.

The incentive allowance for persons receiving sheltered employment  allowance is to be increased by $3 a week, and is welcomed for there  has been no increase in this for 6 years. There are just over  8,000 people in workshops about to receive the incentive payment.

It will cost only $1.4 million in a full year.

HOMELESS PERSONS ASSISTANCE

Last year, for the first time, the Government went over its target.  In the previous five years it had spent only $10 million of  $22 million allocated. It spent $7 million last year in order  to complete two large promised projects in Brisbane. This  year the allocation is $6.3 million.

CRISIS ACCOMMODATION

$2 million has been allocated for this, but so far neither the  Department of Social Security nor the States know what it means  or how to administer the payment.

CHILDREN'S SERVICES

This program has gone to $80 million.- an increase overall. $33 million, the same amount as last year,has been allocated  to pre-schools and $47 million for the Children's Services program.  This is an overall increase of just over $6 million on what was

spent last year. However,  the real increase is only around  $4 million (10%) as there was some capital returned to the  Federal Government which accounted for over $2 million. There  is likely to be little money, if any, for new programs as most,  if not all, is committed to recurrent costs.

The 1981-82 allocation is $20 million in real terms below the  spending in 1975-76..

COMMONWEALTH EMPLOYEES COMPENSATION

This remains the only non-indexed workers'  compensation payment in  Australia. In this Budget it has been increased to $114 a week,  representing 81% of the minimum wage, though it had traditionally

represented 84%. The Commonwealth has proved it is the meanest  of all employers by its delays and low payments.

COMMUNITY WELFARE AGENCIES

The Emergency Relief program announced by the Prime Minister in  the 1977 election has been abolished without any announcement by  the Minister for Social Security.

- 7-

The 1978 Report on Emergency Relief compiled jointly by the  Department of Social Security and ACOSS estimated $11 million  as a conservative figure for the value of emergency relief  provided by welfare agencies. That report, and both reports of  the National Consultative Council on Social Welfare have  taken the view that the major responsibility for emergency  relief should be taken by the Commonwealth Government,  more  particularly because voluntary agencies deal primarily with  Commonwealth pensioners and beneficiaries in trouble because of

the inadequacy of, and delays in,social security payments.

The reversion of this $500,000 to grants-in-aid to community  welfare agencies on a 'once only'  basis to help them out of  financial problems is to be greatly deplored. It is a complete  abdication of the Commonwealth's obligation to provide income

security to people in need.

VETERANS' AFFAIRS

Merchant Seamen get Service Pension

The efforts of merchant seamen's organisations have been partially  rewarded with the announcement that Australian merchant mariners  who served in a theatre-of-war during World War II will be  eligible for the service pension from 4 February 1982.

This pension is similar to the age pension and it will be available  to merchant mariner veterans who have turned 60 or become  permanently unemployable at any age. It involves certain fringe  benefits, including pensioner health benefits, but is subject to a  means test. The pension will not be available for allied merchant  mariners.

Repatriation Benefits for Sinai Force

Senator Messner's statement that repatriation benefits will be  extended to members of peace-keeping, observation and monitoring  forces representing Australia under United Nations or other  "recognised international arrangements",  is the first real

indication that Australia will be participating in the United  States sponsored Sinai peacekeeping force.

There has been no sustained lobby from a variety of ex-service  organisations for such benefits, so it is reasonable to assume  that the Government realises that such organisations would  demand some 'insurance1  for their future members.

It is typical of the Fraser Government that a tacit admission  of proposed participation should be made by a junior Minister in  the Senate, rather than by the appropriate Minister for Foreign  Affairs or Defence in the House of Representatives.

The repatriation benefits will be available from 1 November 1981,  which must now be regarded as Day One of Australia's next  international assignment.

- H -

Disability Pensions for Papua New Guineans

In a hurried attempt to buy off Papua New Guinea before the  Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting, the Government has  decided to pay disability pensions to former members of the  Royal Papua Constabulary and the New Guinea Police Force who

served under the control of ANGAU from December 1941 to  December 1945.

Although these police were not members of the forces, they were  subject to army discipline and control and benefits will be  paid under the same conditions as those applying to indigenous  members of the Australian forces in the Pacific War.

Given the somewhat lower life expectancy rates in Papua New  Guinea than Australia, this rush of generosity has to be viewed  with some cynicism on the eve of CHOGM.

Funeral Benefit up *  1

A new maximum of $400 funeral benefit, payable in respect of the  deaths of entitled veterans and some dependants, is clearly an  improvement on the $300 limit which has applied for the last  two years. It still lags far behind and is probably currently

worth about half of the cost of an average funeral.

HEALTH

The only reference to health in the Budget speech notes:  '

"The Government has already announced important  changes to health services in 1981-82".

Outlays are:-(1) $2,872.1 million (a decrease of $777.9 million -21%) on 1980-81;and

(ii) Under "Payments to or for the States", a further  $1,150.6 million under hospital cost sharing  agreement previously included under health.

Total health spending is thus $4,022.7 million (an increase of Commonwealth outlays of $373 million (10.2%) over 1980-81),

Despite the fact that:­

.  most families are being compelled to pay from $2 to $11 a week extra for the health insurance charges;

.  State governments have been compelled to impose means  test on their public hospitals; and

.  There are increased charges for standard ward  accommodation (now $80-$85 a day) for medical  services (mostly $40 a day) and for outpatients  (mostly $15 a service), Commonwealth expenditure on health has increased by 10.2%.

- 9-

If the delayed revenue impact of the rebate ($600 million which will  not appear until the 1982-83 Budget) is included health costs  would rise by some $973 million or 27% over 1980-81.

HEALTH INSURANCE

The Budget allocation for medical benefits is $820 million, a rise of $137.1 million (20%) over 1980-Î²1.

This rise is made up of:­

. $43 million for. balance of November 1980 increase in schedule fees;

. $46 million for changes and growth in pensioner health benefits;

.  $9 million for the increase in number and rate of benefit from 75% to 85% for those classified as  disadvantaged;

.  $11 million for the net increase resulting from the change to the new 30% Commonwealth medical  benefit for insured persons; and

. $28 million for anticipated rise in schedule fees.

PHARMACEUTICAL CHARGES

Increases in pharmacists1  remuneration and in payments to  pharmaceutical manufacturers will be partly offset by a rise  of 45C in the patient contribution from $2.75 to $3.20 per  prescription.

(i) Since 1975 the patient contribution has risen  from $1.50 to $3.20, a rise of 113%, almost  twice the rate of inflation from 1975-81.

(ii) Despite the fact that the calculation of  'disadvantaged' income levels is closely related  to pensioner fringe benefit levels, health care  card holders (the disadvantaged) will not, like  pensioners with Pensioner Health Benefit cards,  be entitled to free pharmaceutical prescriptions.

COMMUNITY HEALTH ,

This has been almost entirely absorbed in the block grants to the  States. The component of general revenue grants to the States for  community health represents only a 10% increase over the  Commonwealth contribution for 1980-81. It is up to the States how

they spend this amount, and the prospects for community health in some  States appear bleak. '  .

NURSING HOMES j

Nursing home costs have risen following the Commonwealth's decision to  assume responsibility for all nursing home benefits, increases in the  benefit, and increases in bed days. Nursing home benefits (private  nursing homes) have increased from $278 million to $387 million (39%).  Nursing home assistance (deficit-funded nursing homes) has increased

from $104 million to $155 million (49%) .

