Tax,  Medical and Social Security Fraud  Take a Family with Two Children..  Invalid Pensioners De Facto - Social Security and Tax  Resign - said Malcolm Fraser

Senator Don Grimes Shadow Minister for Social Security  and Veterans' Affairs .

Parliament House  Canberra.  A.C.T. 2600

Phone: (062) 72 6157

SOCIAL SECURITY BULLETIN

SEPTEMBER.1982

(003) 31 5714

TAX, MEDICAL AND SOCIAL SECURITY FRAUD

The tax evasion and medical fraud scandals are a staggering  indictment of government incompetence. In comparison with  the treatment of alleged social security fraud they give  stunning evidence of the Fraser Government's double standards. The message, sadly accepted by some public servants, has been  to go easy on the corrupt and powerful while attacking the weak.

Tax .

In 1978 the Commissioner for Taxation advised the Treasurer  of widespread tax evasion by hundreds of companies promoting  bottom-of-the-harbour schemes. He told the Treasurer that  prosecutions should be launched under existing legislation. No prosecutions were launched. Over the next two years the  Treasurer considered new draft legislation which he rejected  because it put the onus of proof on shoddy company promoters

and vendors.

It is estimated that over $7 billion has been lost in tax evasion  and tax avoidance each year to Government revenue because of  inaction by the Treasurer and the Attorney-General. No  prosecutions have taken place. No money has been recovered. No passports have been impounded.

Medical ·  ,

In 1978 a Medibank officer gave the Department of Health an  estimate that over $100 million was being milked from revenue ,   that year as a result of fraud and over-servicing by greedy  doctors - a figure endorsed by the A.M.A.

The original Medibank which was capable of detecting frauds  was dismantled by the Fraser Government in 1976 and it was  1981 before another fraud and overfservicing detection system  was set up. .

In the six years between 1975 and 1981 there were only 51 doctors  prosecuted, of whom 43 (84%) were convicted. Only four doctors  were imprisoned. In only 30% of the cases was restitution ordered

In those six years a total of $166,116 was recouped from the  convicted doctors, representing the total of fines and  reparations ($37,000) - an average of approximately $3,200  for each doctor prosecuted over the period.

The figure of $100 million defrauded represents 7% of the  medical benefits bill.

Some idea of the magnitude of medifraud can be obtained by  comparing the $100 million with the estimated Australia-wide  loss through burglaries of $73 million worth of goods each year.

Investigation of doctors suspected of over-servicing and fraud  is leisurely. The doctor may be 1  counselled1  by a medical  practitioner in the Department of Health. The matter may be  referred to a Medical Services Committee of Inquiry which may  conduct an inquiry. It may make recommendations to the Minister  who may decide that further action is required. .

2.

The doctor under review may then request the Minister to send  it to the Medical Services Review Tribunal or for a judicial  review - where costs are paid by the Commonwealth.

Neither Ralph Hunt nor Michael MacKellar in their years as  Minister for Health took the problem of doctor fraud seriously  enough to prod the Department of Health into action. The  Crown Solicitor's Office has stated that they did nothing

because Health did not raise the adequacy of existing legislation.

Since 1976 there has probably been a loss to revenue of more  than half a billion dollars by medifraud which the Government  lost the ability to detect,  even if it had had the will, when  it scrapped the Medibank computer system.

Social security .

(a) Prosecutions*

In 1978-9 the total overpayments for all persons prosecuted for  social security offences was approximately $1.5 million. They had received an average of $1,200 in overpayments.

Most of the 1,386 defendants were males and most of them were  married or had families. 10% tif them were prosecuted for  over-payments of less than $140.

Very few were represented by private lawyers. Most pleaded guilty.  94% were convicted.

The Deputy Crown Solicitor's Office in Perth, which first  mishandled and then lost a vital test case on tax evasion  which cost Australia hundreds of millions of dollars, continued  to prosecute social security beneficiaries - who in Western

Australia had been overpaid an average of $778.

In Western Australia the average prison sentence for social  security offenders was the longest in Australia - almost  six months. .

In Western Australia a man was imprisoned for an overpayment .   of $148. .

In Western Australia two men were each imprisoned for more  than 260 days for social security offences.

(b) Conspiracy

In 1978 the Commonwealth Police, armed with files from Social  Security, arrested 178 pensioners of Greek origin in pre-dawn  raids on charges of using false medical certificates to gain  invalid pensions. Their pensions were stopped, their bankbooks  and passports were impounded. Four years later they were declared  innocent.

* The material in this section and much in the medifraud section  was taken from the Australian Law Reform Commission Research Paper  No. 9 'Social Security Prosecutions'.

3.

The onus was entirely on the pensioners to find new doctors,   submit new applications and prove their eligibility for invalid  pensions. The pensioners in the corrimital hearings did not have  their passports returned for four years, during which time

family death and breakdown had occurred. .

At the same time more than 500 pensioners with no charges against  them had pensions and benefits stopped only because they had  visited doctors accused - not guilty, nerely accused - of  conspiracy. Senator Guilfoyle, then Minister for Social Security,  had no delicacy about the onus of proof being put on ill and  non English-speaking pensioners instead of the Government.

Nearly 800 persons were treated as criminals though they had  committed no fraud. The Department of Social Security never  tried to recover the money allegedly defrauded - because it  knew those pensions had been properly paid!

Conclusions

There is an extraordinary contrast between the treatment given  to persons involved in tax fraud, medical fraud and social  security fraud.

1. The McCabe-Lafranchi Report and the Costigan Report reveal  a reluctance to use existing laws to prosecute blatant tax  evaders, and a deplorable sluggishness in introducing  improved legislation to stop the drain of $7 billion a year  through tax rorts. All fraudulent company promoters and directors  will hold on to their money and reputations until the Fraser

Government is willing to tackle corporate criminals, including  prominent Liberal Party members, and end the present state of  affairs in which it is optional for the rich to pay tax.

2. The medical profession is being handled gently and indolently.  The $100 million a year which is being taken from consolidated  revenue by approximately 9% of practising doctors is not being  eagerly pursued by the Government, nor are the doctors. Most prosecutions are in respect of one or two claims though

the doctors are seldom taken to court unless the offences go  back several years.

"Given that the penalty imposed rarely, if ever, reflects  the extent of suspected fraud, the doctor is not discouraged  from abuse of the system. Indeed, his experience in court  will only have acquainted him with the deficiencies of. the

enforcement procedures; with the probable consequence that  he will only become more devious and clever in his future  abuse of the system. Such doctors are literally in the  position of 'laughing all the way to the bank1  for they know

that even if they are caught again, the gains far exceed  any penalties."

Legal Problems and Possible Solutions Associated with  Prosecutions Related to the Health Insurance Act.

Discussion Paper, Commonwealth Attorney-General1s Department,  Department of Health, 1981.

4.

3. The alleged social security offender receives very  different treatment.

The Department of Social Security can cancel pensions and  benefits overnight without giving reasons, without hearing  the pensioner's side of the story or investigating the  financial resources or circumstances of the person whose only

income they have stopped.

It demands the money allegedly overpaid and hands matters over  for prosecution. Most of the offenders are poor and poorly  educated and plead guilty.

The Fraser Government is obsessed with social security fraud.  Senator Guilfoyle's first press statement as Minister, was  headed 'Move to Stop Dole Cheats'. The rampage against  Greek-born invalid pensioners was called 'The Day the  Commonwealth Police Won Its Spurs'.

The Australian Law Reform Commission has suggested that the  question of cost-effectiveness in social security prosecutions  warrants further scrutiny.

The cost-effectiveness of nailing tax and medifraud cheats  is undeniable. What has been missing from this Government is  the determination to stamp them out.

TAKE A FAMILY WITH TWO CHILDREN...

On 17 August the Treasurer sought to put across the Budget  as a 'family budget'. He spoke in glowing terms of how a  family with one breadwinner earning $300 a week, a dependent  spouse, two children and a $25,000 mortgage, would benefit  by around $17 a week.

Some journalists were sufficiently affected by the Treasurer's  example to refer to them as the 'average family', so it became  time to look more closely at this so-called 'average family'.

The number of Australian families is 3,736,900.

The number of single income families with two children is  estimated at 320,000.

The number of such families living on $300 a week is  estimated at 50,000.

The number of those families with a mortgage (of any size)  is estimated at 30,000.

So the percentage of Australian families designated by the  Treasurer as receiving $17 a week from the Budget is about  0.8% - hardly the average family.

Nevertheless we wish that 0.8% well with their $17 a week and  trust they will spare a thought for the other 99.2% of  Australian families who may have done less well from Mr Howard's  juggling tricks.

5.

INVALID PENSIONERS

Numbers down - and down

The guidelines for granting invalid pensions which were tightened  after the infamous Lanigan memorandum 1  Control of Invalid Pensions'  resulted in an actual drop in the numbers on invalid pension  during 1980-81 of 7,256, at the time all other social security  payments were rising. .

If invalid pensions had continued what Lanigan called 1  normal  growth' there would have been another 13,753 on pension. This  makes a total of around 21,000 people knocked back when they would  reasonably have expected to be receiving invalid pensions.

In the year just ended the guidelines were 'relaxed', but the  numbers have dropped another 5,032. If we take the 'normal  growth'  pattern, there would have been 42,130 more people on invalid  pension if the tough guidelines had not applied.

There is obviously something very wrong.

The Director of Medical Services of the Department of Social  Security, Dr Shepherd, has blamed the doctors employed by the  Health Department for being unsympathetic and 'totally unrealistic  and harsh' towards pension applicants in their interpretation  of pension eligibility guidelines.

The ACOSS phone-in was given many instances of two-minute or  inappropriate medical examinations which resulted in pension  cancellation.

After two years of confusion and injustice it is clear that  the administration in the Departments of Health and Social  Security as it affects the medical and social assessment of  invalid pension claimants needs a thorough review, preferably  an external one. .

It will be a high priority when Labor comes to Government.

Where do they go?

Though no figures are kept of the movement of rejected invalid  pension applicants to other benefits, the following should be noted

(a) the number of sickness beneficiaries has risen by 36% in  those two years. There has been an increase of 6,280  sickness beneficiaries on long term sickness benefits  (over six months);

(b) The number of unemployment benefits has risen by 90,000 in those two years. The number of long-term beneficiaries  (over six months) has risen by 40,000 in that time.

Senator Chaney has stated on several occasions that people who  lose out on invalid pensions can receive other social security  payments. But sickness and unemployment beneficiaries cost the  Government far less because the income tests, allowable earnings,

and payments are at a lower rate for the single unemployed. Fringe benefits and supplementary assistance are paid to invalid  pensioners, but not to the unemployed.

6.

DE FACTO - SOCIAL SECURITY AND TAX

On 21 September Senator Martin (Lib) asked Senator Chaney if  there could be a policy of consistency between the income tax  provisions and social security provisions as they relate to  de facto marriages.  (Where a woman is living in a de facto

relationship with a man his income is taken into account, but  because they are not married she does not qualify for a  dependent spouse rebate.

Senator Chaney defended the present de facto rules as they  apply in social security. Then, in unfortunate terms, he  defended the anomaly under tax laws:

I think different considerations arise under tax law  where one might say that the additional privileges which  are afforded might properly be given to those who undertake  the legal responsibilities of marriage."

This indicates that Senator Chaney believes couples in a  de facto situation might properly be refused the dependent  spouse rebate. This is despite the fact that there is  already more legal protection for a married couple than for  a de facto couple. His moralistic approach contrasts with  the recent ruling of the New South Wales Full Supreme Court  which found that de facto relationships were not immoral.

RESIGN - SAID MALCOLM FRASER

When he was Opposition spokesman on Labor, Malcolm Fraser  called on the Minister for Labor to resign because  unemployment had reached 190,000 (November 1974). He also  held the Prime Minister responsible.

Now that unemployment has more than doubled that figure -  459,000 in August 1982 - we ask why the Prime Minister does  not hold himself responsible and step down from Government.

In those days Malcolm Fraser thought that as unemployment  rose, so too should unemployment benefits be increased.

"This proposal rests on the principle that as it becomes  harder to get work so too should compensation for those  out of work be increased." (August 1974)

Once he became Prime Minister Malcolm Fraser cut the value  of unemployment benefits, taxed their children's allowances  and excluded them from benefits given to pensioners.

No Prime Minister has made such a hypocritical reversal of  an allegedly principled stance.

