Minister for  Social Security

FC 82/34

MINISTER ADDRESSES WORLD ASSEMBLY ON THE AGEING I

The Minister Assisting the Minister for Social Security, the

Hon Ian Wilson M P , is currently in Vienna heading a delegation

from Australia which is attending the World Assembly on the

Ageing.

On Thursday 29 July, Mr Wilson addressed the Assembly. A copy

of his address is attached.

Journalists who would like to obtain additional briefing from

Mr Wilson on the World Assembly on the Ageing should make

contact with his Senior Private Secretary, Mr Lee Eckerman,.

Telephone 72 6538.

CANBERRA 5 AUGUST 1982

GENERAL DEBATE STATEMENT BY THE LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN

DELEGATION THE HON IAN WILSON, MP. - THURSDAY 29 JULY 1982

Madam President, Distinguished delegates, ladies and gentlemen.

As leader of the Australian delegation to this World Assembly on

Ageing, may I thank the United Nations for the invitation to

Australia to participate in this important meeting and congratulate

the Secretariat and the Inter-Governmental Advisory Committee for

the magnificent work that has been done in preparation for it.

May I also congratulate you, Madam President and thank you and

your Government for your support of the Assembly and your generous

hospitality.

I do not propose in this statement to touch on the facts or history

of current Australian policies and programmes with special concern

for the ageing.  These are explained in detail in the background

paper prepared for this Assembly and circulated to all delegations.

The paper places particular emphasis on the way in which policies

have been developed which take account of the sometimes special

needs of the large and diverse migrant population within Australia

as well as the needs and aspirations of the Aboriginals, the

original indigenous inhabitants of Australia.

This World Assembly on the Ageing is particularly significant as it

provides the World community with an opportunity to focus on the

issues of ageing and its consequences.

Firstly, it has prompted a full and detailed discussion of the

facts and background to this issue. Secondly, it has resulted in a

close examination of the implications not only of the increasing

numbers of aged people but also their increasing proportion of

a still rising World population. And thirdly, it has enabled us all

to gain an insight into the different circumstances in which we

all operate and so to understand that each nation will need to devise

appropriate policies to implement the principles and objectives of

the finally agreed plan of action.

.  .  ./2

- 2  -

Meeting the challenge of an ageing World population over the next

fifty years will be influenced by the prevailing World economic .

environment. Although World economic conditions today may be

difficult, we should not allow these circumstances to deter us.

Improvements in World economic conditions, which many are working

hard to achieve, will naturally make somewhat easier the always

difficult task of developing, implementing and adjusting policies

to cope with the consequences of an ageing population.

Australia has long recognised the need to pursue social policies

designed to take account of the special needs of the ageing.

Within our Federal system of government, that obligation has

traditionally been met by a sharing of responsibilities between

the Federal Government at the national/level, the State governments,

as well as local government authorities. Government activity has

been supplemented and supported by the work of a network of voluntary

organisations operating within the community. In many instances,

these formal efforts are in addition to, and effectively reinforce,

critically important family relationships and support given by

friends and neighbours.

Australia recognises the need to develop policies which enable the

ageing to live independently and with dignity in an environment

which recognises their intrinsic value and importance and encourages

them to contribute to the life and development of their communities

in whatever way they are able.

It is only by striving to meet that fundamental objective that it

will be possible to minimise the additional problems which can.occur

when old people are made to feel redundant and useless, an unproductive

burden on an uncaring community.

Clearly, their can be no claims to a monopoly of wisdom on a subject

as complex and wide ranging as ageing and its far-reaching

implications for personal happiness and national progress and

development. .

.. ./3

3

We have much to learn but believe also we have some experience and

expertise to share. Indeed, within our own region of Asia and

the Pacific, we have established a number of links of communication

which allow for the exchange of information and experience. Two

examples are the World Health Organisation Regional Teacher Training

Centre at the University of New South Wales in Sydney and the work

of the Asia/Oceania Branch of the International Association of

Gerontology which is organising a major conference on the aged in

Singapore in January of next year.

Australia is keen to encourage, not only in forums like this but also

in smaller regional groups, the exchange of views and knowledge

that is a prerequisite to the search for satisfactory solutions.

Two issues that will demand increasing*attention within such

mechanisms for the exchange of information and experience are

research and education and manpower training. There is an urgent

need not only to encourage further research into the process and

consequences of ageing but also to ensure that research and

information is then closely related to the development of specific

policies. It is essential that policies are not developed in

isolation from the research which tells us more about the problems

of ageing and the aspirations of the aged themselves.

Equally, it is becoming increasingly important to focus close

attention on the need to identify and train the volunteer and

professional workers who will be required to cope with the problems

and difficulties that the trends towards ageing will inevitably

bring and it is particularly important to put into effect programmes

which recognise the often long lead times required to identify,

train and place the people required to meet the demands of the

future.

Australia feels that the draft plan of action, while highlighting -

those universal problems that must be faced by all nations, does

pay particular attention to the sometimes very different problems

faced by developing countries in the care of the aged.

.. ./4

4

In many respects, Australia shares the concerns and problems faced

by the developed industrialised nations of the World. However,

while the proportion of aged persons is increasing, Australia

still has a relatively young population compared with most

European countries and other countries where life expectancy is

high. For example, the United Nations Demographic Year Book shows

that in 1975 the proportion of aged persons in the population of

Western Europe and Northern Europe was 14 percent. In the same

year, aged persons in Australia accounted for 9 per cent of the

population. A  particularly important factor contributing to

the relatively low proportion of aged persons in Australian

population has been continuing migration and refugee programmes.

In addition to the demographic distinctions, Australians are

conscious of their position as a developed country in a region of

predominantly developing nations. They are well placed to make a

positive contribution to the understanding of the nature of different

problems facing developed and developing nations in devising

policies to take account of the consequences of ageing.

Australia, like other countries with social security pension schemes

is currently facing the need to continue to finance an income

support system with an increasing number of age pensioners at a

time when for a variety of reasons there is a decrease in the

proportion of those contributing to the pool of public resources

through taxation . ·  This is a difficulty which may not yet have

the same acute significance for developing nations. There are,

however, examples of fundamental problems and challenges which do

face developed and developing nations alike.

One would be the need to devise a method of ensuring that elderly

people can continue to contribute to the productive life of the

community in a way which not only reinforces their self-esteem

and independence but also contributes to the overall goals of

national development.

.. ./5

5

An equally good example, and one in which we have something to

learn from nations whose traditional social structures have so far

been less affected by the process of industrialisation, is the

need to sustain an environment in which close personal relation­

ships either on a family or geographical basis, can provide the

protective and reassuring background for a vigorous and happy old age.

The importance of the family as the basic unit of society which can

provide a reassuring environment of support and, where necessary,

care and succour to its members cannot be emphasised too strongly.

It is worth recalling that in recent initiatives by the United Nations

to highlight the specific concerns of certain groups of people within

our community - women, young children, the disabled - particular

importance has always been placed on the role of the family in

assuming responsibility for the care and nurture of all its members.

It may be that the time will come whei it will be necessary to focus

our attention on the family itself to examine how, as a unit in its

many and various manifestations it faces up to its task of Caring

for, and supporting its members.

Of the many issues and concerns relating to ageing and its

consequences, there are three which will increasingly require the

attention of governments and the whole community in the immediate

future.

The first concerns the health and social consequencesof ageing.

A comparatively small proportion of elderly people do become so frail

and disabled that they require accommodation and care in special

institutions. However, it is important to make sure that through

education, assessment and early intervention, we work towards

the objective of prevention so that the later problems and

difficulties can be minimised to a great extent or even avoided '

altogether.

Where disabling handicap is inevitable, it is important to make sure

that the services provided recognise the need to sustain a balance

between institutionalised care and that which can most

appropriately be provided in the community. In Australia now, we

.  .  ./6

6

recognise the objective of providing care for disabled elderly

people wherever possible within surroundings with which they

feel comfortable and happy,  a factor which in itself can do

much to alleviate distress and discomfort. Our ability to achieve

this objective will depend to a large extent on the development of

specialised geriatric services, staffed by appropriately trained

personnel and underpinned by continuing research and development in

this field. Although the health consequences of ageing are

extremely important and do require special attention, it would be

wrong to assume that they represent either the entire or the major

perspective on an issue which demands a response across a very

wide range of policy areas and issues.

The second issue which is assuming an increasing significance in

the Australian context is that of income support. The transfer of

income and resources between the earning and non-earning sections

of the population is already acknowledged to be a difficult problem.

In the future, it will be necessary to devise mechanisms which

effect that transfer in ways which are both economically viable and

which meet the objective of providing adequate resources for

the services to and for the aged.

Up to this point, it has generally been accepted that the generation

which is no longer working should be supported by the generation

still, in active employment. But in the future, whether that

support is provided through Government-sponsored income security

schemes, or through more traditional family and community systems,

the increase in the numbers and proportion of ageing people will

inevitably place a heavier burden than ever before on the active

working population.

It may be that policies which meet the objective of doing what is

best for old people as people, will also be the most cost-effective

solutions and thus reduce pressure on limited public resources.

Equally, it is important! to examine the issue of the way in which

individuals are able,  through the various phases of their lives,

to provide the resources from those periods when they are productive

.  .  ./7

7

and therefore earning income for those periods when their

capacity is reduced or finally ended altogether.

The third major issue confronting us in Australia is the changeover

from the period of productive employment to a period of leisure

and retirement.

At present, the shift from the one to the other is often abrupt

and arbitrary to the extent that it occurs at a legally defined

age limit which may have nothing to do with an individual's capacity

to continue to "produce" and contribute through employment to the

development of the nation. Very often, the abruptness of the

change leads to psychological problems which stem from a feeling

of having been thrown to one side, no longer regarded as a fully

involved member of the community but rather as an old person with ·

nothing but problems to be solved by the rest of the community

and too often, that feeling of redundancy leads to exactly those

problems of old age which we are seeking to avoid or minimise.

There is a need, then, to examine the way in which individuals

are designated as working or not working so that, with increasing

flexibility, being old as measured by a legal retirement age need

not be synonomous with being of :no use to the community. Of course

it is not only within the context of formal employment that such

flexibility needs to be studied.

There are many other ways, perhaps through part-time employment or

through voluntary work, in which elderly people can make the sort

of productive contribution to their community which will feed and

reinforce their sense of their own worth and dignity and which

will help to avoid the difficulties that flow from the depression

and rejection of appearing to be discarded.

The rigidity of the line dividing work and leisure for old people

has for too long been allowed to create problems which then have

had to be treated using public resources already stretched between

equally pressing competing claims.

.. ,/8

8

\

The success of this Assembly will be judged ultimately by the

way in which we are able to realise the objectives enshrined in

the recommendations that are finally agreed upon. Australia's

commitment to the principles in the draft plan of action is

demonstrated not only by our presence at the Assembly but also

by the discussion of issues and information on ageing presented

in the documents prepared for and circulated during this meeting.

I am pleased to inform the Assembly that the Australian Government

recently announced its decision to contribute;. $25,000 to the

special trust fund for the World Assembly established by the

United Nations. .

In addition, and as with other nations represented at the

Assembly, Australia will be concerned to follow up not only the

recommendations of the plan of action, but also the knowledge and .

information that we have gained and will gain during the meeting.

It is in this respect that the non-government organisations involved

in the field of providing services to the aged and researching

the process and consequences of ageing can build on their

experience as a vital element in the overall network of organisations

and institutions involved in this field.

Perhaps less easily measurable however, will be the degree to which

within the circumstances of our individual cultural, economic and

social circumstances, we are able to reassert and sustain the

dignity and joy of age, recognising that old people can bring

the knowledge, wisdom and experience so vital to following

generations.

Canberra 5 August 1982

