13

Jj. AUSTRALIA,.l1-

PRIME MINISTER

E. & O.E. - PROOF ONLY

TRANSCRIPT OF PRESS CONFERENCE FOR FOREIGN PRESS AT CHOGM  CONFERENCE CENTRE, NEW DELHI,  29 NOVEMBER 1983

PM: Good morning, ladies and gentlemen.  Just a couple of  preliminary comments that I would like before making myself  available for questions.  The first is of course that I'm  not available for a general analysis of the conference,   which,  as you will appreciate Mrs. Gandhi and Mr. Ramphal  will be conducting such a conference at the end of proceedings

and it is not appropriate for me in any way to attempt to  usurp or appear to usurp that function. I will be available  to talk about any matter particularly concerning Australia  and the second thing I would like to say to the non-Australian  contingent, that we have had many requests for interviews and

I expressed my regrets that because of the pressures of time  and the conference I haven’t been able to make myself  available for those individual interviews and I hope that this  .may be some sort of substitute for that.

OK, it's over to you.

JOURNALIST:  Prime Minister Hawke,  Australia recently announced further steps to isolate the South African'Government,  but  they fall far short of the proposals that have been made by  both SWAPO and .... for breaking diplomatic ties with

Pretoria and full economic sanctions against South Africa. Against the background of these calls would you contemplate  stronger action? And, if you would, how do you think it would  affect Australia's substantial trading links with South Africa?

PM : Two or three comments on that. Firstly, the decisions which we have taken and which I announced in detail yesterday  were unanimously welcomed by the representatives at the conference  and were taken as amongst the strongest positions that have been

adopted by any nation.  Secondly, those decisions were taken by  my Government in the context of what was being done elsewhere and  we were going, as I say, as far as, and in many cases further  than what has been done in other countries.  This leads me to the

third comment that if, of course,  the rest of the Commonwealth  and the world community were prepared to take further ^action,  then my Government has made it clear that it would be up there  with them, but if you take,  for instance,  the case of economic  sanctions I had the experience through the decade of the 70s as

/2 .  .  .

2

head of the Australian trade union movement of being at  meetings of the ILO in Geneva when there was a great deal  of enthusiasm and motions being carried calling for  universal economic sanctions against South Africa. But

there was a distinct lack of correlation between the  enthusiasm with which the hands were put up to vote in Geneva  and the action that was in fact taken at home. So Australia  has made it quite clear that if the world is prepared,  or

the relevant parts of the world are prepared to act in that  way,  Australia will be there. Australia is not going to act  alone when other countries would simply be filling in  vacuums that might be left by Australia. So I conclude by

saying that what we've done is strong by any standards and  I repeat,  it was universally welcomed by my colleagues at the  conference. .

JOURNALIST:  You met Mr. Lee of Singapore here. Could you ' please report on that meeting and your relations with ASEAN  on the Cambodian question.

PM: Yes, well the meeting with Mr. Lee - the first meeting where  I hosted a lunch for him last week was extremely cordial and  direct and constructive and that meeting has been continued  throughout. We have spent a good deal of time together at Goa

and subsequently. I would say our .relations with Mr. Lee and  Singapore are excellent.  There is a directness about Mr. Lee  which I welcomed and indeed at the press conference that we  gave after that luncheon last week at the Australian High  Commission he straightforwardly said any problem that there  was is over,  as indeed it is. But he said that between two

countries which are as robust and direct as Australia and  Singapore it is likely that some time in the future there may  be differences. The important thing is that we have  established,  I believe, a close, constructive, direct  relationship between the two leaders of the countries and

it is within that framework that I believe any differences that  may arise in the future will be capable of being handled  sensibly and in the interests of our two countries. Now, going  to the second part of your question in regard to ASEAN. I

said before I left Australia, both inside the Parliament and  outside it, that there had been obviously a tendency to  overstate the differences that appear to have arisen.  There  were differences but they were not differences which in my

judgement in any way substantially affected the relationship  and that is because the thrust of Australia and the ASEAN  countries in regard to Kampuchea is basically identical. .The  conditions that we see as necessary for the resolution of that  problem are the same as ASEAN. That is the necessity for

the withdrawal of the Vietnamese troops, a creation of a  condition within which there can be a free expression of the will  of the Cambodian people which can lead to free and independent,

non-aligned Kampuchea and within which circumstance there can be  a return to that unfortunate country of refugees from it. Now,   those conditions are Australia's conditions.  Those conditions  are the conditions of ASEAN and there had been simply a  difference which had led us not to co-sponsor the ASEAN

resolution which basically went to the question of the emphasis  upon the Pol Pot element of the coalition in Kampuchea. Now

3.

those matters are fully understood by our ASEAN friends as  a result of discussions that I and my Foreign Minister,  Bill  Hayden, had in Bangkok and that I followed here and that  Bill Hayden has followed in Indonesia and it is not merely  out of my mouth,  it is clearly out of the mouths now of our

friends in Bangkok, Mr. Lee, Dr. Mochtar. It is quite clear  that that row, or whatever you want to call it, is over.

JOURNALIST:  Prime Minister what do you see as the main achievement of this particular summit?

PM: Good question.  That's getting dangerously close to the  sort of area that I talked about before - I really think that  ought to be the province first of all of Mrs Gandhi and  Sonny Ramphal. So I would make one comment in respect of  Australia's position and then one, if you like, other comment. As far as Australia is concerned the importance of the

Conference for me has been the opportunity to meet directly  the leaders of very many important countries.  And when I say  important, I don't want to underestimate the importance of the  smaller countries and meeting with them. I now have a basis  into the future of conducting relations between Australia and  other countries of the Commonwealth from a personal knowledge  of the people concerned and a considerable respect for them.  That's been very important to me.

As far as the Conference itself generally is concerned involving  Australia I think that the inclusion of Australia in the group  of five nations which has been established to work with the  United Nations Secretary-General to try and get a resolution

of the unfortunate situation created b y 'the UDI there in  northern Cyprus. That's important for us. We believe that  we have a real interest because of the large population of  Cypriot origin in Australia and our continuing involvement in  the police contingent in Cyprus, and I believe that we do have  an opportunity of playing a part there.

Without taking the proper area of Mrs Gandhi's and Sonny  Ramphal's responsibility I would observe simply in passing that  I think the way in which a common position was reached on  Grenada was to me remarkable. The initial debate was tough,   hard, divisive. Out of that, however,  due to processes which

I think could only uniquely happen in the Commonwealth,  a common  position was reached. And speaking for Australia, which is all  I purport to speak for here, I believe that the discussion, the  debate and the analysis of that situation in Grenada will have  been significantly facilitated by what happened here.  '

JOURNALIST: As a newcomer to the meeting whose views aren't widely known about the Commonwealth how has the meeting affected  those.

.  .  ./4

4 .

PM: In this way. I answered a question from my own press  grouping in this way - that I have never been one to emphasise  the mysticism of the Commonwealth, an element which at times  people tend to wax a bit lyrical about.  But what has been  made clear to me is that there is a special quality or capacity

for dialogue within the Commonwealth which I believe you would  not find reflected in any other significant international  grouping. And .that was,  I believe,  most evident in regard  to Grenada.

But picking up your 1  new boy.' point,  when I first heard the i   debate I expressed the view that it seemed to me virtually |   impossible that you could get common ground. But the readiness  of people with quite strongly divergent, and indeed conflicting

interpretations intially - their capacities to listen to one  another, to make some compromise,  with a view to looking to the  future to see what we could do constructively in the future  rather than have recriminations about the past, impressed  me very significantly.

I think also, again from Australia's point of view, on tie  Cyprus question - there was a concrete example of how this  rather unique group of countries have been able to provide a  working group to operate alongside the United Nations Secretary-

General and as I understand it will be welcomed by the United  Nations officers. Now that's useful.  .

In the broader area, as I've said in answer to a previous  question,  I think it does provide a particular chance to get  to know a range of people - aligned, non-aligned, from every  geographical area, from every stage of economic development.

JOURNALIST:  From what one has heard in the lobbies you appear to stand somewhere to the right of Mr Muldoon on economic  support towards Bretton Woods.  Would give us some idea of the  area of your disagreement ... terms' of your position on third  world problems.

PM: May I say a s Â·an example of the futility of the facile  application of tags like right and left in complex issues like  this,it may facilitate your journalism, it does nothing for the  understanding of issues.

The fact is that Muldoon, for a considerable period of time,   has had a view about the inadequacy of the existing institutions  which grew out of the Bretton Woods arrangement to deal with the  sorts of problems that are confronting the world economic  community in the 1980's. Now let's get the points of agreement  and then the different points of emphasis. It's got nothing

to do in this issue with left or right, or any other tag  of convenience.

The point of agreement between everyone would be that the world  of the 1980's and as we move towards the end of the twentieth, is  a different more complex world from the uncertainties that  characterised the end of the second world w a r .  I would argue,  and I think the evidence is irrefutable,  that those institutions

.  .  5

5 .

established at the end of the war have .  in fact shown a degree  of adaptability. The charter of the IMF has in fact been  amended three times - a fact which some people are not aware  of. And not merely in relation to its charter but in the way

those institutions have operated it is self-evident that there  has been a capacity to adjust within the institutions and in  their facilitation with the private sector that has meant  that the problems of the indebted countries have been capable of  being dealt with in a way which would not have been imagined  as possible several years ago. And therefore my view,  the view  of others, is that you've got to temper an understanding of

the dimensions of the problems that we're talking about with ,   the realistic objectives of trying to make sure that the major  donor countries, the contributor countries, to these institutions -  that they are going to remain co-operative and improve the  operation of the institutions.  Those are my views and therefore

I say that what's sensible is to try to ensure that the .

existing institutions have their capacities maintained as  a first step, in other words there is the 8th IMF quotas that  have to be finalised,  general arrangements to borrow, the  replenishment of the IDA has to be finalised by July of next  year.  Now it just seems to me a matter of common sense to  have as a first objective the meeting of those existing  requirements for the institutions. Then if we find, as I  believe we would, that there is a need to add to those

capacities then we should address ourselves to that. In  other words you're more likely to have this marrying of the  meeting of the dimensions of the problems with the involvments  of the major countries who have to provide the facilities for

these things to work.  We're likely to marry those things together  effectively if you do it through the approach of trying to  increase the effectiveness of existing institutions.

Within that approach there is room for some preliminary sorbent (?)  approach to a more general review and Mrs Gandhi and Mr Ramphal  will address themselves in talking about the conference to what  the conference has in fact done.

JOURNALIST:  The British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher had ... some figures in making this whole approach to the Interim  Monetary Conference somewhat halting and half-hearted ... (inaudible)

PM; It's not appropriate that I should address myself to that  because it is a decision taken yesterday and it will be for  Mrs Gandhi and Mr Ramphal to explain that to you.  As I said  at the outset I'm not here to try in any way to pre-empt their  exposition to you of the decision of the conference.

JOURNALIST:  Could I take up a new point if I may - your 1  new boy'   point.

PM: It wasn't mine it was someone else's .

JOURNALIST; You used the phrase yourself, so I hope you don't  mind if I use it.

PM: No, no I don't mind sharing things.

.  .  .  /6

6 1

JOURNALIST:  It was reported that your first impressions of the way the mission's organised was that it was at the retreat  that the hard work was done and that the sessions here in Dehli  were perhaps less useful and that perhaps that what might be  more productive in the future would be a four day retreat type

conference.

PM :  You don't capture exactly what I said because there is no  way in which I would say that the work here hasn't been hard  and in many ways as productive. But you do get to the basic  points. I have a feeling that,  I guess it reflects the busyness

that one has at home and the importance of issues there, that  you probably could handle a conference of this sort in a shorter  period of time.  Now I do value the retreat context which in I   fact most of it was involved in formal sessions. But it did  provide the opportunity for effective bi-lateralsi I would  diffidently make the observation that it would be worth looking

at shorter periods, perhaps with more preparatory work done. Let me make it clear that's not a criticism of the preparatory  work that's done by the Secretariat with the conference, but  what I'm rather saying is that if in fact we had more

documentation before we arrived, then it may be possible to  have a shorter period of conference and my preference would  be in that case not to shorten but lengthen the retreat  component of it. Now I just make the final observation - as

far as the observations of a first attender - those are my  impressions and it's the sort of thing I think which could  usefully be thought about and discussed. .

JOURNALIST:  ... that Australia was strongly opposed to the American invasion of Grenada ... the Commonwealth peace force. As a result of this conference has Australia's view on Grenada  and particularly the American invasion changed?

P M :  We expressed the view in the Parliament in Australia that if we had been consulted, which we were not,  before the event  we would have counselled against it. And that is the view that  I would hold now. I think that it is correct to say, speaking  not only for myself but I know in particular the leader of

one African country spoke to me just yesterday - he said he  had learnt a great deal from the debate and discussion on  Grenada. And anyone who sat through that debate and didn't  learn a great deal should in fact not be here.  And I think

that the communique reflects that learning process. Again  it's for Mrs Gandhi and Mr Ramphal to talk for the conference  about the resolution, but I suggest if you examine it the fact  that it is not recriminating about what's happened but is  directing itself to how the processes of the restoration of  normal government and the facilitating of what we may be able

to do to help, that speaks volumes.

JOURNALIST:  We have heard of the action which your Government proposes to take in regard to South Africa. Can you tell us  what has prompted you to take this action and ... (inaudible).

PM: You say what has prompted me. I would remind you that  I have a long history of commitment against apartheid,not merely  in words but in actions.  I became President of the Australian  trade union movement in 1970. Very soon after that we had the  prospect of the Springbok rugby tour of Australia and as head of

7 .

the trade union movement I led the flight within Australia  against that visit and it wasn't an leasy one I can assure. There were all sorts of threats to us involved,  physical  threats, legal threats.  And within the International Labor  Organisation the African states were1  kind enough early in

the 70' s and throughout to recognise; the lead that I'd taken  in Australia and the trade union movement under my leadership  had taken. So I came to government with a long history within  Australia and in the relevant international forums that I was

involved in of expressing the abhorrence which I and the movement  which I led had against that evil system. It's important that  that be understood.  I don't come to] government having to think  for the first time about this issue.  So, as I said, on one

other occasion, privately I think it! was, that in this world  there are all sorts of discriminations, favours for people and  disadvantages imposed upon people because of religion, income  and these sorts of things.  Now all 'of that discrimination I

find abhorrent. In respect of some bf those things if a person  wants to change his or her religious] adherence and wants even  to change his geographical position it's within the capacity  of individuals if they think that the discrimination may have

some basis,  it's within the capacity! of individuals to change. If I want to become black I can't become black. If you want  to become white you can't become whijte. And it just seems  to me intrinsically abhorrent that something which is totally  outside the capacity of a person to"bo anything should in any  conceivable circumstance be made a basis of discrimination. That's

something that I have felt deeply al|l my life and so do my  colleagues within my Government. So what we have done when we  came to Government merely reflected ileep convictions that we hold.  And I said in my contribution yesterday that - I paid tribute

to my predecessor and indeed it should go back before that to  the previous Labor Government under Mr Whitlam who took a very  strong stand which was respected throughout'the African countries.  Mr Fraser to his credit coming from a more difficult, if you like,  philosophical background maintained the position which had been

initiated by the Whitlam Labor Government and I pay him credit  for that. We felt when we came to office that there was more  that could be done and so we have acted in that way. We've  strengthened the stand in regard to sporting contacts. We  have indicated that there is welcome] on our part for the  African National Congress and Swapo to open offices in Australia.   We've started to establish a system bf scholarships for those

discriminated against within South Africa to give them the  opportunity of participating in the tertiary education system  which otherwise they would not have. We've made arrangements  deliberately to bring to Australia outstanding opponents of the

apartheid system so that there shall1be in Australia the  opportunity for the expressions of that view at least as equally  as in our democracy is provided to the other side. And we  are reviewing the airline policy between ourselves and southern  Africa and we have already cut one Sbuth African Airways flight  and we are reviewing the whole.  So those things we have done and  we have done it for the reasons that,I suggest.  We simply find

the system abhorrent and as I said yesterday it's important that  we at this conference express our rejection of the cosmetics with  which the South African government it trying to delude the world  at the moment - because those cosmetics even more deeply entrench

apartheid into the system.

8 .

PM: cont... Now in regard to the contact group I was pleased to  hear yesterday a representative of the African states, Kenneth  Kuanda, and others,  praising the members of the contact group  for the approach that they had adopted. Particularly they were  addressing themselves to the British Government and they were  continuing to impress upon the British that they should adhere

to their view and I'm sure they will, the rejection of the concept  of linkage, a concept which we as an Australian government reject.   What has been said by the British Government and has I think been  accepted by the African states that a contact group has done  everything that it can in respect of addressing itself to the  mechanics of the electoral processes - what needs to be done to  give effect to the decisions of the United Nations. Those

things have been done.  It now remains a question of the  pressure that we put in one way or another upon the South  African regime to allow the final processes of independence  for Namibia to be effected. 1

JOURNALIST:  Can the United States put that type of pressure on the South African Government.  .

P M : Well it is within their capacity. I said, and I repeat here, that we reject the concept of linkage and we have a good cordial  relationship with the United States and within that relationship  we will quietly and effectively as we can put that view to them.

JOURNALIST:  From your statement you say you are heartened at  Australia's point of view on South Africa ... banning the  entry of rebel sportsmen into Australia?

PM: That was in the package in which we strengthened the ban against amateur sportsmen and women. We took the view that all  amateur sportsmen and women wanting to come into Australia should  prima facie be regarded as coming with the impramateur of and  being representative of their country. And our southern African  colleagues have recognised that the total package was a strengthening

It is true that in respect of those rebels there is a recognition  not only within our country but in a number of the African states  that to give effect to that proposal was complex and unrealistic  and so we've said we will not proceed with that.  But in every

other respect there was a strengthening, and that was dealing  with a questioning if you like of actual practicalities.  I  repeat as far as the African _  states are concerned their judgement which was one which I would think is relevant. They  have acknowledged and welcomed the fact that the package as a  whole is a strengthening of our position in that area.  .

JOURNALIST: Can I ask a personal question. More than 30 years ago you first came to India and you converted from religion to socialism.  PM: The premise of your question is wrong so you're going to be in trouble. Can I tell you what happened and then you may  want to reframe your question.  I came here to a world conference  of Christian youth as a member of an Australian delegation. My experiences here started the processes of doubt in my mind  which accelerated and that was a conversion if you like from

faith to agnosticism.  It wasn't the sort of conversion you

>

9 .

talk about now.  That changing of your premise still leaves  you with a question.

JOURNALIST: What affect has this visit had on you and do you see any problems ... (inaudible)

P.M.: I see. No. I wouldn't say I'd led a totally aesthetic  few days since I've been here. But it has been a very  disciplined few days and I'm proud of that. The experience | I had thirty years ago was profound upon me and I hope that all  of one's life is a learning process and it has been for me and

this is that of another dimension to the learning>process.  I  understand again through visiting the country the enormity of  the problems that it confronts. I remind you just in  population terms of the difference. I think when I came here in

1952 the population would have been 300 million odd. Now it's  680 million. The annual increase in the population of India  is about equivalent to the entire Australian population. When  you think about and you see the realities of that here then

it concerns your understanding of the enormity of the problems  confronting Mrs Gandhi, her government and indeed any government.  So that understanding has been strengthened and my commitment,  and not only a personal commitment, but a commitment of my  Government to try and do within our limited capacity what we  can to help countries and people less privileged than ourselves  has been strengthened.

ENDS.

