245

29 July 1983  103/83

v

TRIBUNAL APPOINTMENTS

The former Secretary-General of the Australian Council of  Social Service, Mrs Joan McClintock has been appointed a  part-time member of the Administrative Appeals Tribunal.

Mrs McClintock, one of the most experienced people in  Australia in social welfare matters, will be appointed for

five years.

Mr Ewart Smith, a former Deputy Secretary of the

Attorney-General's Department has been reappointed as a

part-time senior member of the Tribunal for five years.

Mr Smith has been a part-time senior member of the Tribunal  for the last three years.

Mrs McClintock will bring a special expertise to the

Tribunal's social security jurisdiction. There is an  increasing number of applications being lodged with the  Tribunal in social security matters and Mrs McClintock's wide

ranging experience in this area will help the Tribunal  considerably in determining the cases before it.

Apart from her work with the Australian Council of Social  Service where she was Deputy Secretary-General from 1968 to

1980 before becoming Secretary-General in 1980, Mrs McClintock  has held significant positions in organisations dealing with

the less privileged.

246

She is a Commissioner of the Legal Services Commission of New  South Wales and a Member of the Child Welfare Advisory Council

in New South Wales. She is a former Deputy Commissioner of the  Commonwealth Legal Aid Commission and a Member of the  Australian Refugee Advisory Council.

Mrs McClintock is a former member of the Board of Studies,  Social Work, at Sydney University and at present is a member

of the N.S.W. Higher Education Bord Re-assreditation Committee.

In the three years he has been on the Tribunal, Mr Smith has

dealt with· applications over a wide range of the Tribunal's  j urisdiction.

An honours graduate from the University of Sydney, Mr Smith  held many senior positions in the Attorney-General's  Department before his retirement in 1980.

** ** ** ** **

Canberra

