From the Minister for Immigration  and Ethnic Affairs.

THE HON JOHN HODGES, MP

11/83 1 February 1983

AUDIO-VISUAL SERIES LAUNCHED

An audio-visual series called "Neighborhood Living",

aimed at helping migrants and refugees settle into the

community, was launched at Fairfield today by the Minister

for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs,  John Hodges.

The launching was held at Fairfield Council's .

administration centre in Avoca Road, Wakeley. .

The series will give new arrivals information about

living in suburban Australia. The series,  produced on

videotape by Film Australia, covers topics such as

"garbage do's and don'ts," renting,  tenancy pitfalls,

immunisation programs and community services.

The tapes will be available in seven community languages

Vietnamese, Khmer,  Lao, Cantonese, Polish, Spanish and

Arabic - and written material will be available for viewers

to take away after they have seen the tapes.

Migrant Resource Centres,  migrant centres and regional

offices of the Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs

Will have copies of the videotapes, to be shown or lent to

migrants and refugees.

Mr Hodges said the series grew out of the Fairfield

Council's concern at the lack of knowledge in the community

about the role played by local government and the services it

offered.

.  .  .2/

2

"The people in this series are not professional actors

and actresses,  but real people, residents of the Fairfield

area," Mr Hodges said.

"A bonus in making the series has been the positive

contribution it has made to fostering harmony in the community.

Film Australia reported almost overwhelming co-operation

from the people of Fairfield.

"1 believe that the "Neighborhood Living" series is a

significant addition to a broad range of services available

to new settlers through the Department of Immigration and

Ethnic Affairs,  and through state and local government.

"All these services recognise that people arriving in

Australia from different cultural environments face needs

which arise directly from their status as migrants and refugees. .  j .

"The Neighborhood Living" series is a welcome addition

to the services provided to meet these needs."

Media Contacts: Scott Prasser, Minister's Office (062) 73 3446 Anna Marsden-Stewart,  Department of Immigration  and Ethnic Affairs, (062) 64 2184 or Alberto  Corboz, Department of Immigration and Ethnic  Affairs,  (062) 64 2726.

