From the Department of Immigration  and Ethnic Affairs

24/84 13 April 1984

ETHNIC DIRECTORY INPUT CLOSES FRIDAY WEEK

Ethnic community contributions to a new Directory of Ethnic  Community Organisations would close on Friday 27 April 1984,  a spokesperson for the Department of Immigration and Ethnic  Affairs, which is preparing the directory, said today.

Organisations which had not yet responded to a questionnaire  seeking information for the directory should send their completed  questionnaire to Mr Alan Rice, Liaison and Communications  Section, Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, PO Box

25, Belconnen, A.C.T. 2616, without delay. The questionnaire  was sent by the Department's Central Office last month to the  last known address of all ethnic community organisations in  Australia.

Other copies of the questionnaire were available at all Migrant  Resource Centres and Regional Offices of the Department in  capital cities.

The spokesperson said that the directory, which was last printed  in 1981, had been revived by the Government due to constant demand  from government and voluntary agencies. The decision to cease  publication had been taken as a result of a recommendation by  the Committee of Review of Commonwealth Functions (RCF) in  April 1981.

The new directory was expected to be even bigger thah the 1 1980-81 edition, which listed more than 3000 organisations  from over 100 ethnic groups with fields of interest covering  welfare, religion, social activities, sport, culture and  education. The information in the directory was also important

for newly arrived migrants and refugees looking for other people  with the same language and interests.

The spokesperson thanked all organisations which had responded  to the questionnaire. Once the directory was published, free  copies would be forwarded to all listed organisations and  government and voluntary agencies working with ethnic communities.

Media Contacts: Alberto Corboz, Department of Immigration and  Ethnic Affairs, Canberra (062) 64 2726 or  Jan Butt, Department of Immigration and Ethnic  Affairs, Canberra (062) 64 2132.

