^5

__C\

MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION  AND ETHNIC AFFAIRS

Ό MPS 50/85

S-F.NATOR CHTPP AND THE GOVERNMENT'  S DECISION CONCERNING   TT.T.F.GAT, MIGRANTS FROM NEAR-NEIGHBOURING COUNTRIES

"Senator Chipp's personal attack on me is true to form. His views are based on false information and his language,   as usual, is outlandish, extravagant and irresponsible,"   the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, Mr Hurford, said today.

"The Government has decided to follow international   practice and not allow permanent refugee settlement to   people who arrive illegally from near-neighbouring   countries.  A decision has yet to be taken as to whether

the particular five Irian Jayans warrant consideration as   refugees who will be allowed temporary asylum.

"Senator Chipp should have learnt by now not to believe   all he reads in the newspapers.

"He has apparently been convinced by an article in this   morning's Age that the five Irian Jayans who recently   arrived illegally in Australia should be recognised as   refugees and allowed to stay here.

"Unlike Senator Chipp, I shall await a detailed assessment   of the claims of the five before determining their refugee   status.

"However, some of the more extravagant claims in this   morning's article about Irian Jaya, such as talking of   "cultural genocide no different from what happened in   Germany in the 1930s," are ludicrous and offensive to

Australia's Jewish community.

"Unlike Senator Chipp, I am concerned about the 'draw'   effect if these men and others in their category from   near-neighbouring countries are allowed to stay in   Australia.

"It is important to recognise that the five men arrived in   Australia by travelling five kilometres in a canoe from   the shores of New Guinea to the Australian island of Boigu.

Parliament House, Canberra

2

"Boigu is not the closest Australian landfall from New Guinea.  The Australian island of Saibai is only three kilometres away.

"The prospect of thousands of illegal immigrants  travelling these short distances to Australia is of major  concern to the Government,  if not to Senator Chipp.

"The advice I have is that a big influx is a real  possibility if Australia is seen as an easy target for  illegal immigration.

"The challenge for the Government was to make a policy  that would provide sanctuary for genuine refugees but not  encourage others with less worthy claims, such as those  who may come because they see Australia offering the

chance of a better lifestyle.

"This the Federal Government has done by adhering to a  well-established international practice employed by  Austria, in relation to its Polish refugees, and Malaysia,  in relation to its Vietnamese boat people, to name just

two examples.

"This practice is to provide temporary sanctuary for  genuine refugees and then seek a permanent home for them  in other countries.

"It is a practice which meets the needs of genuine  refugees for asylum while dissuading others who may simply  be interested in a more congenial neighbouring country.

"It is a tough policy. I accept that.

"But Australians expect their Government to control our  borders and to select carefully those who may migrate here.

"This it will continue to do despite cheap attempts to  gain publicity by opportunists such as Senator Chipp."

Canberra, 30 July, 1985

Contact: Mick Atkinson, Minister's Office, Parliament House, Canberra  Tel: (062) 72 7075 (08) 49 8048 (H.)

