22.

COMMONWEALTH  PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY  C. I. S.

PRESS RELEASE ALAN CADMAN M.P.   SHADOW MINISTER FOR   IMMIGRATION & ETHNIC   AFFAIRS

MORE OF THE SAME

"The Government's 1987/88 Immigration Program will be just more  of the same.

"The Government has offered a program of 120,000 migrants for  Australia this year. The program represents only a 5,000 place  increase on the indicative planning level previously announced.

"The Liberal Party would expand the program by 25,000 places with  skilled,  knowledgeable, employable and entrepreneurial migrants  as well as maintain the Family Reunion and extended family  programs. "

"The Minister has offered no new initiatives to reduce the  massive delays in migration processing. These delays can be as  much as 22 months in some posts. The increasing delays in  processing are causing tremendous distress to family members

trying to reunite relatives and are denying Australia valuable  skilled migrants who are urgently needed by business enterprises  here.  .

"One of the most disturbing features of the Government's Program  is that Skilled and Business places have been cut back by 2,500  places. .  .

"The only sector of Skilled and Business to be increased is the  Business Migration Program. The present Government has not  achieved its target in this area before, and the most recent  Departmental figures show that actual B.M.P. arrivals for 1986/87  are likely to be under quota.

"It is no wonder that the Business Migration Program has not been  successful under Labor when you have applicants from countries :   like Switzerland having to wait 14 months for approval.

"The Refugee and Special Humanitarian Programs have been  effectively cut back by 2,000 placei

"I generally welcome the modest, increase in the immigration  program,  however,  I am disappointed that the Government has not  taken the opportunity to fully expand the potential of our  immigration program in the best humanitarian and economic

interests of Australia." .

ALAN CADMAN M.P.

Canberra June 11, 1987

Contact: (062) 72 6294 or (02) 639 5155

