Jj. AUSTRALIA ι

PRIME MINISTER

TRANSCRIPT OF NEWS CONFERENCE, PARLIAMENT HOUSE   18 OCTOBER 1988

E & Ο E - PROOF ONLY

JOURNALIST: Prime Minister,  what are you going to do to ensure that the Edinburgh gets tied up in Adelaide?

PM: I've had some discussions with the Minister and I believe it's possible, it's possible that the Edinburgh may   be able to get tied up there.  There's certainly discussions   going on and I can't say any more than that at this stage.

JOURNALIST: Why not legislate to ensure visiting warships get a berth?

PM: I don't think legislation is the way to go but what we will do is to accelerate the acquisition of RAN tug vessels   so that as far as Australia is concerned the Navy will have   the capacity to provide the facilities which in some areas

it already does provide.

JOURNALIST: It does mean for the moment that although these ships have been invited to Australia there's no guarantee   that we can actually ...

PM: Let's get this into perspective. We've had 30 odd ships in Australian ports, in 12 Australian ports over the   last few weeks.  So don't let's have the picture being put   that the ships can't come into Australian ports.  That's 30

odd vessels in 12 Australian ports over the last 3 or 4   weeks. I'm informed that in 5 of those there has been   refusal of assistance but in fact that refusal of assistance   has been overcome in the way I've indicated. The Navy has

managed to get the ships in and may I say that includes   Melbourne where the US naval vessel Ingersol got into   Melbourne and it's been able to get out.  So in fact you   have the situation that the only circumstances to this point   where you haven't been able to get in is where there's been

a combination of other factors which in Melbourne in part   included the weather in regard to the Edinburgh.  As you   know it's got minor propulsion problems. If the Edinburgh   didn't have those minor propulsion problems,  of which you   are aware I think, then there wouldn't have been any   question of it being able to get into the Outer Harbour and   berth in the Outer Harbour in Adelaide. So the fact is that

as far as Australia is concerned, I repeat that these 30   plus vessels in 12 ports over the last 3 or 4 weeks,  in 5   cases where there has been refusal, that refusal has been

2 .

PM (cont): overcome by the use of Royal Australian Naval tug facilities and the refusal has,  as I say, been overcome.  In the case now of Adelaide that you refer to, I hope - I  can't promise it - but I hope that we may still be able to

resolve that situation which only arises there because of   this propulsion problem of the Edinburgh.

JOURNALIST: What do you think of the unions' action?

PM: I don't approve of it and I've made it quite clear neither the unions' action nor the attitude of people who've   given some aid and comfort to that.  These ships are in   Australia at the invitation of the Australian Government to

take part in the Australian bicentennial celebrations and I  reject,  as I indicated yesterday, the attitude that's been   involved.

JOURNALIST: Mr Howard says that the Socialist Left dominated Victorian Labor Government has acted in complicity   with the unions.

PM: Well as nearly everything that proceeds out of the mouth of the Leader of the Opposition, this is a lie.

JOURNALIST: Has there been further communication with Jakarta on the Blenkinsop case?

PM: I haven't specifically been, but there is a continual contact at the consular and diplomatic level on this issue.   As I indicated, as a result of our action and the strong   position that we took, the Indonesian authorities are going

to conduct, as they've said, a full and open inquiry. Our   people in Jakarta are in constant communication on this   issue because we will do everything we can to ensure that   that undertaking that's been given by the Indonesian   authorities will be carried through.  I have no reason to   believe that it won't be.

JOURNALIST: How confident are you that the Government will get its TFN legislation through or do you believe that the   Opposition is looking for an excuse to knock it off?

PM: Good question Niki.  You'd have to say that the signs are that they're looking for an excuse. We could not have   been more reasonable on this issue. Let me put in its   context of which I think you're all aware.  You'll recall it   was the Opposition itself which said in its repudiation of

the Australia Card that the answer was an enlarged expanded   tax file number system approach.  That was their position   and we have proceeded now with the preparation of the   legislation, both the tax file number legislation itself and   the preparation of the privacy legislation. We could not   have been more accommodating than we've been to the   Opposition both in terms of the discussions that Senator   Tate is having with the Opposition to take account of any

legitimate concerns that they may have about the provisions

3 .

PM (cont): of privacy legislation and I also responded immediately yesterday to Mr Howard's request. When he wrote   to me I responded within a very short time,  said "yes   alright we'll agree to delay the debate until the   Parliamentary week commencing the 31st of October". So it's   quite clear,  these are the facts. One,  that the   Opposition's position, its position, its stated public   position was in favour of the tax file number and it sought

to justify its opposition to the Australia Card on that   basis. We proceeded to prepare that legislation. We've   done everything we can properly to accommodate what may be   their legitimate concerns.  If against all that they still

take a position of opposition there is only one conclusion   that can be drawn and that is that this opposition still is   the opportunistic protector of the tax avoiders determined   to ensure that a greater burden is placed upon the honest   taxpayers of this country.

JOURNALIST: Do you think it's been well managed though from the Government's point of view, I mean the privacy   legislation not up there running,  able to run in tandem with   the tax file number legislation?

PM: There's going to be no problem as far as consideration by the Parliament is concerned of the two pieces of   legislation, no suggestion that there won't be the full   opportunity for the Parliament to consider them and I  acknowledge that in this area there are concerns.  In other   words, put the Opposition to one side. There are legitimate

concerns in the community about ensuring the appropriate   degree of privacy for individuals and that the legitimate   objectives of ensuring the full payment of taxes by those   who should pay should not operate in a way which is going to

entail any unjustifiable intrusion on the privacy of people.  So there hasn't had to be a lot of consideration. There are   people who are concerned about this issue and I think a   great deal of care has been taken to try and pick up all

those concerns.  And even at this stage where the Shadow   Attorney-General,  Mr Brown, wrote to Michael Tate and   Senator Tate said alright we'll discuss these matters   further.  Those discussions will go on this week. There's

no reason in terms of Parliamentary timetable why there   won't be the full opportunity for the Parliament to consider   these matters.

JOURNALIST: But why did even your own Caucus committee get the privacy legislation so late? Isn't that bad management?

PM: I don't think it's bad management.  We've had the situation where the Attorney-General is overseas on   legitimate Government business. Senator Tate has picked   this up and he's pursued the matter carefully. I think the   criticism would have been made more valid if in fact the

Government had rushed in and said we know absolutely what   all the answers to this are,  there it is, take it or leave   it. It's much more open criticism to I think,  the   Government, if it had adopted that approach.  It's much more

sensible when you recognise that you are dealing in an area   in which there are legitimate concerns to take your time   about it.

4 .

JOURNALIST: Is the Government sufficiently committed to the tax file number to push it through to a double dissolution?

PM: We are certainly committed to the legislation, we'll push it through and if the Opposition establishes, as I say,   it's hypocrisy by having itself argued for the legislation

then opposing it, it will be something that will be on the   books but in terms of this Government, the Government will   be running its full term Peter.

JOURNALIST: Mr Hawke, in terms of tomorrow's balance of payments figures, obviously you're not inviting speculation   about what those figures would be but -PM: It would be useless, we don't know in advance, don't

know and if I did -JOURNALIST: Do you have reason to be optimistic that in seasonal terms the figures would be better or -PM: Let me put it this way. Our position is this, that we   have not panicked by the figures for the first two months

and I wouldn't panic on the basis of this month if the   figures were a little bit higher than people might be   expecting. I say that not in any sense of complacency but   on the best advice that's available to me, well it's said   that obviously a lot of .... had come out, we need to watch

these figures closely. On the best advice I have I believe   that there will be a significant reduction in the current   account deficit for this financial year 1988/89 and that is   based upon these considerations. If we look first on the   import side, there is no evidence of a significant growth of   consumer type imports, the increase has been essentially in   the area of producer equipment which is a technical term and   that is as I've said, consistent with the picture we've got   for a very substantial increase in private investment this   year of the order of some 12 percent or so real terms

increase in private investment. So that has to be welcomed.   On the export side the seasonal picture suggests that the   export figures should increase in the later months and the   evidence is both as to volumes, good and the most recent

figure .... bank shows recovery of 2.8 percent in the   commodity price index which takes, recovers that loss of the   last couple of weeks and these increases in prices have been   in wool and wheat and metals. So taking all those factors   into account I believe there is ground for relative optimism   as far as the full financial year is concerned.

JOURNALIST: Mr Hawke, there is still some concern, especially after Senator Button's comments on the weekend   .... that the Government is not fine tuning its message on   tax carefully enough, are you taking any more measures to   try to get people to speak with one .... and secondly when   do you think you will have some idea whether the   announcement on tax next year will be accompanied by a May

type statement, or be a May type statement?

5 .

PM: Well taking the first question first Michelle,  let me be fair to Senator Button that he was clearly referring to -   perhaps he could have made it clearer at the time - but   there is no doubt that what he was referring to when he said

there was some figure around about tax cuts he was referring   to the total fairyland dimension of the $56 tax cuts that   have been talked about either explicitly or implied by some   of the ravings of the Opposition, which I think to some   extent some of them have retreated from and it's quite   proper that that had been made clear,  that it should have   been said. However having said that,  I have spoken with my   colleagues in the Cabinet and made it clear that on this   question of tax cuts that any statements about that area   will be made either by Paul Keating or myself.

JOURNALIST: Inaudible

PM: Yes,  at the Cabinet meeting yesterday I made it clear that any statement in regard to tax cuts will be made by   Paul or myself and that's accepted and understood. The   second part of your question, let me make it quite clear   that nothing has changed on this issue from what Paul and I  have been saying from the time of the Budget. That is that

the consideration of the levels,  timetable of tax cuts will   be decided by us as we go into the second half,  as we're in   the second half of this financial year and it will be   determined in the light of what happens to the adherence to

the wage decision principles and secondly what flows from   the discussions that we have with the trade unions on the   wage tax trade off. Now those things by definition, have   got to take place during the second half of the financial   year.  May I say parenthetically, where I'm talking about

these sorts of things that we also talk with the employer   organisations about the wages area.  It's not simply   discussions with the trade unions and those discussions will   go on and they will be conducted obviously in the light of   how the economy is going and what the projections are.  We   have not made any commitment, either in that context or more   generally to a May statement.  What has happened in the past

is if in the judgement that we make as to what is necessary   for the proper management of the Australian economy, that   decisions have to be taken then they are taken.  Now that's

how we've operated and we've operated extremely successfully   for five and a half years. We will stand ready to make any   decisions at any time if they are necessary but there is no   plan for such a May statement at this point.

JOURNALIST: To come back to the current account deficit, when you talked about reasonable optimism, are you talking   about being reasonably optimistic that you could still get   the 9.5 billion or are you saying that -

PM: Yes,  I understand the question. I don't rule the 9.5 billion target out. There is nothing that's been put to me   at this stage which would lead me to the conclusion that you   should rule the possibility of achieving the 9.5 billion

current account deficit out.

6 .

JOURNALIST: But how much higher can you afford to go beyond that before you have to start reconsidering other elements

PM: Well that's, with respect, not the question. I go back to what I said before and that is that we will be monitoring   the figures as they come in for each month and what I've   said is that on the best information available to me at this   point there is ground for optimism that the,  in seasonal

terms and for the reasons I've put and considerations I've   put to you, that there will be improvement in the monthly   figures as we go through the year.  So there is absolutely   no reason at this stage to be mouthing panic stations and

say well we've got to be contemplating at this point some   alteration of strategy. I repeat,  our record over the last   five and a half years shows that we always stand ready to   deal with circumstances as they develop if they emerge as   being different from the sort of forecast parameters within   which we frame the Budget.

JOURNALIST:  A few months ago you suggested that Mr Elliott might like to whak off, do you have any comments on his   decision to -PM: I clearly remember the rather colourful and appropriate

language I used at that time. I point out to you that the   circumstances that we are talking about are different now.   What's being said by Mr Elliott and his firm is that they   are contemplating the acquisition of a significant addition

to their brewing ... complex to the order of $1.8 billion   takeover that's been talked about and he is saying that the   size of their brewery interests are now, if that is   achieved, going to be of such a dimension that the share   market in Australia is somewhat too small to digest the sort   of share portfolio that is involved in the increase in the

size of that part of his operations.  Now let me say that we   have said, and I have said myself and Paul said it at Budget   time, that we see the acquisition of assets overseas by   Australian companies as a plus so I'm not making any

criticism of the proposed acquisition by Mr Elliott and the   justification, reason that Mr Elliott is giving for   contemplating this move in a couple of years time is quite   different from the sort of things that he was talking about   before.  In those circumstances I have no reason to repeat

the observations I made which were made in the   circumstances, Mr Elliott's circumstances at that time.

JOURNALIST: Prime Minister can I ask about your friend and colleague, the Treasurer.

PM: Yes.

JOURNALIST: You said last week that while you hoped he'd stay on as Treasurer for the long haul,  that you weren't   certain. Are you certain now that he'll stay.

PM: Yes I believe he'll stay.

7 .

JOURNALIST: Has he told you that?

PM: Well, let me say this. As has been customary with relations between Paul and myself since we've been in   Government,  yesterday we had another lengthy discussion   which covered a number of issues. But consistent with what

I've said to you before,  it's not my practice,  hasn't been   in the past,  and I don't intend to deviate from it now, to   talk to you about what I talk about with Paul or with any   other Minister.

JOURNALIST: It's a bad taste question but I'll try and put it tactfully.

PM: Good on you Laurie. I'll try and reciprocate in the same spirit.

JOURNALIST: For two weeks in Parliament the Government looked lousy and Paul Keating came back yesterday and you   were on top.  Has that got any leadership implications?

PM: As usual Paul performed very well. We had back in the portfolio,  in the key portfolio,  the Treasurer. The man to   sell that portfolio for five and a half years and who as I  have said on many occasions is the best Treasurer in the   world. I expected a good performance.  We certainly weren't

let down.

JOURNALIST: ... good will and friendship still in your relationship is there?

PM: As far as I'm concerned, yes, and I think as far as he's concerned,  yes.

JOURNALIST: So it's not just a public forms of words of having to work together?

PM: No we're both pretty intelligent, mature people who have a deep commitment to the success of the Labor   Government.  I think it's recognised that it's been a unique   and remarkably successful combination.  I don't think either

of us would allow any considerations to come in the way of a   continuation of that success because it's not just Hawke and   it's not just Keating it is about changing this country and   we don't have to rely on Keating statements or Hawke

statements about the success that we've achieved.  That's   something that's recognised internationally and we intend to   ensure that we continue the economic restructuring of this   country in a way which is going to secure its long term

future and those sorts of considerations are very very much   bigger than any question of individual personalities.

JOURNALIST: But if there had been enough restructuring, really enough restructuring, we wouldn't be here still   chewing our finger nails waiting for every month's current   account figures would we?

PM: That is absolutely inaccurate and a nonsequitur. Absolutely.

8 .

JOURNALIST: Manfactured exports,  the service industry, they're still not contributing enough to the export -PM: Well that's - ok let's get the figures,  15 percent increase in manufactured exports in 86/87, 13 per cent

increase in manufactured exports last year.  Example after   example now of Australian exporters winning in the most   competitive markets.  I was in Brisbane on Saturday night at   the occasion of the presentation of awards to Australian   exporters and in the whole range of areas that you wouldn't   have contemplated before we came to office,  success,  and

these exporters coming up to me and saying,  unsolicitored,   we would not have been able to do these things without what   your Government has done. So we are increasingly getting   the runs on the board.  But you can't expect in a period of

five years to transform an Australian economy which was so   overwhelmingly dependent upon exports of primary products,  both agricultural and mineral.  You can't do that in five   years but similarly no-one would've expected and certainly

this is the comment of people overseas and Australians   overseas talking to people overseas,  no-one would've   expected the degree of change that's taking place.  I  recommend that you might read the closing observations of Mr   John McIntosh at the seminar in New York.  Now I think that   John McIntosh should be regarded as a relatively impartial

at least, commentator on this. Leading Melbourne   stockbroker,  Mr John Elliott's stockbroker,  and he said what   has been achieved by your Government in the period you've   been in office is truly remarkable. It's made Australia a   great country. Now those are the words as I say of a fairly

independent I would've thought impartial observer.  Now   there's no complacency about that.  There's pride in what's   been achieved. There's still a lot more to be done and   we're in the process of doing that.

JOURNALIST: Mr Hawke talking about restructuring and mentioning the waterfront ...

PM: Yes.

JOURNALIST: Have you made a decision yet whether ... coastal shipping report first or ... wait for the final   waterfront report and deal with whole lot together later   next year?

PM: Later next year did you say?

JOURNALIST: Later next year.

PM: Well we'll be receiving this year the reports,  what you've got to remember there's a number of reports.  There   is the second report of the Interstate Commission.

JOURNALIST: That's coming early next year isn't it?

9 .

PM: Let me finish. There is a second report of the Interstate Commission that has already provided certain   material. We've got a report that's to come in from the   committee being chaired by John Moore and we will be this   year considering these issues but I don't pretend that we'll

be able to get to final decisions on the waterfront and the   maritime industries this year. But our process of   consideration in the Structural Adjustment Committee will be   beginning this year. I'm sorry but I really do have to go -

JOURNALIST: Last night the Minister for Science, Mr Jones, said Finance bureaucrats were virtually putting a line   through worthwhile science projects and a number of   scientists also criticised the Government's expenditure on   science. Is there any possibility the Government will   increase or fund such projects as researching the greenhouse   effect which has been run down - important issues?

PM: Let me say this that as a result of discussions with the Minister I have recently appointed an inter-departmental   committee which is going to review the whole question of   scientific research in this country and the Government's

involvement in that. What we've tried to do to this point   is to get an appropriate balance between the public funding   of scientific research and to get an increase in funding in   the private sector. There has been as you know an   historical imbalance if you compare Australia with the rest   of the world. In many areas the level of public and   governmental funding hasn't been too bad by international   comparisons but if you compare the input of the private

sector to what happens in the rest of the world it's been   pretty appalling and we've been trying to adopt measures, we   have in fact adopted measures, which have been calculated to   increase the input of the private sector and we have been

successful in doing that. Now the question is being raised   as to whether we don't need to look again at the level of   Government involvement and that's why I've now created this   inter-departmental committee which I'll be requiring to

report to us so that the Structural Adjustment Committee can   consider its report before the end of this year.

ends

\

