PRIME MINISTER

m

FOR MEDIA 14 DECEMBER 1988

I will visit major Asian countries from 29 January to 13   February next year - the Republic of Korea, Thailand,   Pakistan and India.

The Republic of Korea has an outstanding record of economic   growth in recent years and has become one of Australia's   most important trading partners. President Roh Tae-Woo was   a welcome visitor to Canberra in November during his first

overseas state visit. My return visit will allow me to   continue discussions and to observe at first hand the   positive political developments in that country.

Australia values its close relations with Thailand, which is   undergoing remarkably rapid economic growth. Our two   countries have co-operated on issues of bilateral and .   regional importance including Indo-China, refugees,   narcotics, economic development and trade issues. I look

forward to meeting my new counterpart, Prime Minister   Chatichai, and to discussing the full range of issues with   him.

My visit to Pakistan will allow me to meet Prime Minister   Benazir Bhutto and will reinforce international support for   Pakistan's welcome return to democratic civilian rule. This   will be the first visit to Pakistan by an Australian Prime   Minister since 1975, when Prime Minister Bhutto's father   hosted a visit by Mr Whitlam.

India and Australia have always enjoyed close relations. Our membership of the Commonwealth, our interests in the   Indian Ocean region, and our mutual concern over   international issues such as South Africa have seen our two

countries working closely together in the international   arena. I welcome this opportunity to visit the world's   largest democracy and to continue valuable dialogue with   Prime Minister Gandhi, who visited Australia in 1986 and   whom I have enjoyed meeting on many other occasions. My   visit will also provide an invaluable opportunity to

reinforce further the economic and trading links between our   two countries.

COMMONWEALTH PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY  MIC AH

