; α

LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  News Release by John Howard, MP

COMMONW EALTH   PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY  C. I. S. 77/88

IMMIGRATION AND ONE AUSTRALIA

There should be a reasoned, intelligent and moderate debate  about immigration policy. All participants should choose  their words with care.

Those who would prevent such a debate, by saying it is too  dangerous to start, insult the intelligence and tolerance of  the Australian people.

I stand by my comments of the past two weeks on immigration  and ethnic affairs.  I will not modify views designed to.put  the national interest and national unity at the forefront of  decisions on immigration and related matters.

The views I have expressed have been carefully formulated  and progressively articulated in various forums around  Australia over the past six months.

My One Australia vision is built on a deep commitment to  emphasising those things which unite all of us as  Australians, irrespective of our ethnic background.

It is also based on my strong belief that the special  values, traditions and institutions of Australia which  appeal to so many millions of intending migrants around the  world are worth preserving and proclaiming in a more robust

and unapologetic fashion.

The concept of One Australia is not peculiar to immigration  policy. It governs our approach to many other areas,  including Aboriginal affairs and industrial relations.

Aborigines should be aided and helped as Australians. Their  disadvantage is our disadvantage. Their long term hope lies  not in the divisiveness of a treaty but their equal and fair  treatment as Australian citizens,

I hold these views strongly and intend to pursue them  vigorously because I believe they are in the best interests  of my Party and our country.

My concerns about multiculturalism are not concerns about  the diversity of Australia. I welcome and enjoy that  diversity.

I remain totally and utterly committed to a migration policy  which draws people from all over the world.

At no stage have I sought to limit the opportunities of  Australians of various ethnic backgrounds to maintain,  cherish and preserve their heritage,

My argument with multiculturalism is not that it respects  and tolerates diversity but rather in many areas it  emphasises division and difference.

I am not alone in these views.  The Government's own  FitzGerald Report found that there was widespread community  hostility to many aspects of multiculturalism.

To me aspects of multiculturalism proclaim a  self-consciousness about our distinctive identity as  Australians.  We have special values as Australians.  They  have been fashioned and shaped by people from many  countries.  The Australian of today is very different from

the Australian of the 1940s.

He or she is nonetheless distinctively Australian.

Pride in our special Australian characteristics and  pre-eminence of commitment to those things we all have in  common are fully compatible with total tolerance and  diversity within our community

My remarks about multiculturalism have been subjected to  willful and despicable distortion by some.

My proposals in no way threaten the distinctive character,  traditions and practices of different ethnic communities in  Australia.

I do not seek to deny diversity, rather I seek to promote  unity.

An even greater distortion has occurred regarding my  comments on the migration intake.

I support a bigger migration program with a greater emphasis  on skills.

I support continued migration from Asia.

I do not and never will advocate a return to the White  Australia policy.

However, I profoundly believe that the Australian people,  through their government, have an absolute right to  determine who should come and settle in this country.

We need to maintain flexibility to ensure that at all times  our migration intake is serving the national interest.

As the Prime Minister himself put it in 1977, when he was  President of the ACTUi

"Any sovereign country has the right to determine how  it will exercise its compassion and how it will  increase its population."

That statement blows to pieces his moralising of late  regarding my views on immigration.

My great sin in the eyes of some commentators is to publicly  acknowledge that there may be a case for slowing down a  little the rate of immigration from Asia in the interests of

maintaining public support for the immigration program.

I do not resile from that statement. It was moderate, I  reject the absurd emotional claim that it was racist.

Since when has it been racist to assert absolutely our right  as a people to decide who comes to this country?

The Coalition's immigration policy will not be racially  targetted. It will not contain any reference to particular  races or countries of origin.

It will maintain the strong commitment to a family reunion  program and a humanitarian refugee program.

However, the balance of the program will be altered in  favour of a greater emphasis on skills.

The policy will provide for the selection of applicants on a  non-discriminatory basis. The program will, however, be  subject to the undeniable right of the Australian  government, in the name of the Australian people, to alter  the level and composition of the program to ensure the  maintenance of social harmony and cohesion.

As the current Prime Minister said in 1977, such an  assertion is a basic right of any sovereign country.

SYDNEY 11 August 1988

