Minister for  Immigration  Local Government  and Ethnic Affairs

Senator the Hon. Robert Ray

Parliament House, Canberra, ACT, 2600  Phone:(062)77-7860  Fax:(062)73-4144

4 Treasury Place,  Melbourne, Vic. 3002  Phone: (03)650-4479  Fax: (03) 650-9106

STATEMENT REGARDING BURMESE DIPLOMATS

The Opposition Foreign Affairs spokesman, John Spender, has  released a statement regarding applications from three staff  members of the Burmese Embassy for "political asylum and/or  refugee status".

The Minister for Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic  Affairs, Senator Robert Ray, said it was normally Government  policy neither to confirm nor deny the existence of such  applications.

Senator Ray said however that prudent policy had been  pre-empted by Mr Spender's release of copies of  refugee/political asylum applications from the three Burmese  diplomats.

"I only hope Mr Spender had the full consent of the  applicants to release this material and that he fully  explained to them the consequences of its release," the  Minister said.

Senator Ray said to publicise such applications might  prejudice their outcome, or affect the situation of the  people involved.

He said applications for refugee status were· dealt with on  an individual case by case basis.

Applications for political asylum are considered by the  Minister for Foreign Affairs and Trade.

Applications for refugee status would be considered by the  Determination of Refugee Status (DORS) committee.

The DORS committee consists of representatives of the  Department of Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic  Affairs, the Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet, the  Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade and the Attorney

General1s department.

The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for  Refugees also participates as an adviser.

I

7 ' \

S  3

The application would then be considered by the Minister for  Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic Affairs, taking  into account the advice of the DORS committee.

CANBERRA NOVEMBER 8

MEDIA CONTACT: Peter Cotton Minister's Office.   (062) 77 7860

/

