NEW S RELEASE ACTING MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION, LOCAL  GOVERNMENT AND ETHNIC AFFAIRS

MLG 2/88

COMMONWEALTH   PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY  C. I. S. 11 January 1988

AUSTRALIA'S IMMIGRATION POLICIES

The Acting Minister for Immigration, Local Government and  Ethnic Affairs, Senator Margaret Reynolds,  emphasised today  that Australia has a non-discriminatory immigration program.  "One of the fundamental principles of the program is that  people are selected on the basis of benefit to the .   Australian community".

Senator Reynolds went on to say that it was unfortunate that  Mr Perkins, in commenting on the immigration program, had  not referred to the Committee to Advise on Australia's  Immigration Policies (CAAIP).  This Committee is currently

conducting a wide ranging examination of Australia's  immigration policies and program and will report to the  Minister by the end of March.

The Committee's terms of reference (attached) recognise the  far-reaching impact of immigration on Australia's economic,  social and population development.

"The Committee has had consultations across Australia and  has met with, among others,  Aboriginal community  representatives" she said. "Charles Perkins is of course  welcome to present a submission to the Committee".

"As Mr Perkins himself said, immigration is not an area  where he is an expert. Mr Perkins should also be well aware  that it is dangerous to stereotype any cultural group, in  whatever terms.

"It is dangerous in terms of community relations and in  terms of assisting newly arrived immigrants and refugees to  settle successfully in Australia."

Further information: Hazel Moir (062) 727151

PARLIAMENT HOUSE. CANBERRA

003836

UUMM1 ΠΈΐ; Ί'υ AUVISL. UN AUSTRALIA'S IMMIGRATION POLICIES:  TERMS OF REFERENCE

In recognition of the importance of immigration the  Federal Government made an election commitment to a broad  ranging look at its immigration policies, including the  points system. An essential part of this will be full  consultations with the Australian community, including  ethnic organisations.

Immigration will continue to profoundly, shape Australia's  economic, social and demographic development. Immigration's importance is brought into even sharper  focus at a time when significant economic readjustment is

under way. The immigration program, particularly through  its family reunion and refugee components, meets social  and humanitarian considerations which take account of the  multicultural nature of Australian society and the  nation's international responsibilities.

Last year in excess of one million people showed an  interest in living in Australia. The Committee will look  towards the end of the century and ask why Australia

should accept immigrants, how many and who they should be.

Terms of Reference

The Committee will report to the Minister for Immigration,  Local Government and Ethnic Affairs in March 1988 on  Australian immigration policies. The Committee should  address all pertinent matters including in broad terms,

the following: .

.  the relationship between immigration and the  economy, including the effects on the labour  market and economic development;

.  the relationship between immigration and Australia's social and cultural development as  a multicultural society;

.  the relationship between immigration and key  population issues;

.  the overall capacity of Australia to receive  significant immigration intakes; and

.  the relationship between immigration policies  including compliance, and the administrative  and legislative processes involved.

In carrying out its work, the Committee should;

. have regard to the principles that Australia's  immigration policies are non-discriminatory in  respect of national or ethnic origin, race,  sex and religion and that it is a sovereign  right of the Australian Government to  determine who should enter;

003837

z

.  have regard to Australia's continuing commitment to play its part in providing  international humanitarian assistance to those  in need;

. note that the Government has ruled out an  amnesty for illegal immigrants;

. bear in mind settlement experiences insofar as  they are relevant to the framing of  immigration policies, noting that the  Government is separately developing a National  Agenda for a Multicultural Australia; and

. undertake full consultation with interested parties through written and oral submissions  and other appropriate means.

The Committee shall report on:

.  the guiding principles which should shape  Australia's immigration policies, looking  ahead to the end of this century;

.  the balance of objectives which should be reflected in policies in terms of composition  and level of immigration; and

. administrative and legislative mechanisms necessary, for the implementation of  immigration policies.

003838

