COMMONWEALTH  PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY  MICAH

P R I M E  M I N I S T E R

TRANSCRIPT OF NEWS CONFERENCE, PARLIAMENT HOUSE, 27 JULY  1989

E & Ο E - PROOF ONLY

PM: Well the time has come when a very specific question  has to be put to Mr Peacock,  the Leader of the Opposition.  The question is simple,  quite uncomplicated. Did he or did  he not say to a luncheon meeting of the executives of John

Fairfax that the Opposition would not be releasing all the  details of its proposed spending cuts before the election?  Most specifically, did he tell the luncheon that there would  be two lists of spending cuts,  one which would be released  before the election and one which would be kept secret?

JOURNALIST: Do you think he did?

PM: I'd be entirely unsurprised if he did and that's the  question that's got to be put him. The allegation has been  made now that he said there'd be two lists. One which he  would bring out and say to the people of Australia, 'this is

the proposal of the alternative government, here's the  spending cuts'. He has said however,  that that's the only  list that the public will be told about. They will not be  told about the list that's kept secret to be sprung after  the election if the people are ever silly enough to elect  him. Now of itself, I repeat this is enough to ensure that  they would never do that, here he is with his multi  millionaire President, John Elliott,  who wouldn't know

anything, anything at all about the needs of the Australian  people,  saying that you've got to slash expenditures. So  the man that he's put in as Leader of the Opposition -  because Peacock is Elliott's creation - is playing the  Elliott game,  here is Elliott puppeteering Peacock. He

said, 'now I'll put you in because you're going to slash the  welfare of Australians'. 'Yes, Mr President,  Sir', says  Peacock, 'but can I do it in a sly way'? 'Yes that's  alright, we'll do it the sly way'.  We'll tell the people,

'here's our little minimal list of what we'll hit you with'.   But he's told Fairfax there's a secret hit list and when we  get in the puppeteer of Elliott will smash the Australian  people with that secret hit list. That's the challenge that

faces Mr Peacock as he now goes on his phoney, in the true  sense of the word,  his phoney election campaign next week.

JOURNALIST: Why would he tell a group of newspaper  executives? Surely he'd expect it to get out?

- 2-

PM: Well I can't tell what happens when Mr Peacock,  the  puppet of Mr Elliott, I mean he may have thought that he got  some guarantee via Mr Elliott that he could say these  things. He's acting as Elliott's puppet,  it's quite clear

in these things and perhaps the puppeteer told the puppet  that it was alright to tell him these things.

JOURNALIST: Prime Minister,  logic dictates that if it is a  genuine secret list you can't publicly acknowledge it, can  he?

PM: Well, he would say in answer to that very interesting  question that he didn't publicly acknowledge it. He thought  he was having a secret meeting about a secret list but  unfortunately for the puppet, whatever the puppeteer might  have done and got some assurance that he could talk like

this and tell them that it was a real secret list, it wasn't  a secret meeting about a secret list. I mean, I hope  everyone understands just the dimension of what's involved  here. What's happened in Australian politics this year is

that you had a leader of the Liberal Party who wasn't doing  any good, he was no good for some obvious reasons.  So the  President of the Party arranged for Howard to be dumped.  You know I'm not talking after the event,  because I told you

all and you weren't quick enough to pick it up but I told  you what was going on, the President of the Party had to get  a show-piece to run the Party. So he said alright, out you  go Mr Howard and in I put my puppet. So it's all unfolding  because he said, the President, the multi-millionaire

President, the man with his retreat on the Mediterranean,  the Cote d'Azure, there he is. He's right, he knows all  about the needs of the Australian people. So he's put his  puppet in. He's said 'now sure you can talk about some cuts

to the Australian people, but not too big. So we'll draw up  the secret smash hit list'. So the puppet is, he's gone  along to the meeting which he thought was alright and he  said 'now that's what I've been told to do, that's what I'm  going to do, there it is'. Do you understand the enormity  of what's happening in Australian politics? Quite

remarkable.

JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, yesterday in light of the CPI  increase, the Metal Workers Union called for workers to get  their pay increases more speedily. Do you think they have a  case?

PM: The way in which the processes of the wage increases  should be applied is a matter to be dealt with through the  Arbitration Commission.

JOURNALIST: Do you accept now, along with the Treasurer,  that the wages outcome of 6.5 percent,  that it will now be  somewhat higher for coming -

- 3-

PM: I think,  as Paul said, that it may be minimally higher,  but what we're entitled to say - when I say we, I'm talking  about the Government and in this respect the trade union  movement - they are entitled as a trade union movement and  we as a Government in terms of running economic policy, are

entitled to be judged in terms of what's been achieved in  the six years. In that period very, very significant wage  restraint has been shown. Remember what the outcome of that  restraint has been. Very significant reductions in real  wages, an enormous increase in the competitive position of

Australian industry, a reduction in real unit labour costs  of the order of 10 percent. So that's been achieved by the  exercise of very considerable restraint and I don't believe  that the trade unions of this country and certainly the  Government of this country are not going to throw away the  benefits of all that restraint. Now I'm sorry, I've got to  get back to ERG -JOURNALIST: .... collapse of Hookers?

PM: Well, one doesn't like to see a significant company  collapse, but we live in a situation where,  as far as this  Government is concerned, we deregulated the market, we've  got market forces operating and market forces have operated  here. One hopes that in the circumstances this is not going  to provide problems for people who are involved in purchases  of properties and nor for employees,  but these results of  market forces, of decisions which are taken by companies and

that's the name of the game.  It's got nothing to do with  the fundamental strength of the Australian economy.

ends

