PRIME MINISTER

TRANSCRIPT OF NEWS CONFERENCE, PARLIAMENT HOUSE  5 JULY 1989

E & ÃŽÂŸ E - PROOF ONLY

JOURNALIST: When are interest rates going to come down  Prime Minister?

PM: You haven't learnt anything since I've been away. You  know I don't make a prediction about that.  All I'm saying  is what I said before I went. That is that all arms of  policy, including monetary policy, will remain as tight as

they need to be for as long as they need to be to achieve  the objective of policy, and that is to bring down the level  of demand in the economy. There are mixed signals at the  moment as to whether that is being achieved at the rate that  we would like but on balance my own feeling is that we are

starting now to see the impact of the tightness of the three  arms of policy, including particularly monetary policy. As  I say, all those arms of policy will be kept tight until  we've achieved the objective which is necessary and that is

to get a greater, a more appropriate correlation between the  level of demand and production in the economy. We can't  continue a situation where essentially we have demand  running at 10-11% and supply at about five per cent. We're  not going to move away from having policy calculated to

eliminate that gap.

JOURNALIST: While you were away Prime Minister some  backbenchers,  including Bob McMullan, said there should be  an increase in sales tax on luxury goods and possibly  postpone the drop in the top marginal rate in order to

finance a mortgage relief package for the lower income  earners.  Will that be seriously considered, that type of  proposal?

PM: Let me say again what I have said before I went away.  When you're conducting economic policy you try and keep  abreast of whatever range of suggestions may be made about  relevant areas of policy. Now that doesn't mean, and I want

to make it quite clear, it doesn't mean because some work  may be done in certain areas that there is any intention of  bringing into effect the sort of proposal upon which that  work is based. We regard it as appropriate that all members

of the Government, including backbenchers, should have their  ideas about economic policy and other areas of policy.  Where we think that it's appropriate to do any work on a  particular suggestion which may in fact have been done any

rate, then that will be done.  But I want to make it clear  that as far as the settings of economic policy are  concerned, we think that they are right. Any suggestions

-2-

PM (cont): about a luxury tax for instance cannot be seen,  and I wouldn't imagine are seen, by any of its proponents as  going to the fundamentals of policy. By definition it only  affects a particular area of demand. It can't therefore be  a substitute for the basic settings which, as I say, we  believe are correctly set.

JOURNALIST: How seriously is the Government considering a  mortgage support scheme?

PM: It's not a correct statement to say that the Government  is considering it. All I would say is that that's an area  where you would need a lot of work to be done before it  could even be considered. It would require a great deal of  work. The fact that work can be done, I want to emphasise,

does not mean that any such proposal will be implemented.  As I had cause to say before I went away and I merely repeat  now, it seems to me that in regard to some suggestions that  are made it is appropriate for work to be done and that will

be done. But we will look at any such suggestions in the  context of the overall setting of economic policy. What  I've got to emphasise again to all of you is that as far as  the three settings of policy, that is fiscal, wages and  monetary, we believe that those settings are fundamentally

correct. Any of these suggestions cannot be seen, and would  not be seen, as any substitute for those fundamentals.

JOURNALIST: When do we find out the Government's attitude  on these suggestions? In the Budget or before?

PM: We're about something like six weeks away from the  Budget. We'll be getting into the hard work of ERG in the  very near future. I think it would be unlikely that any  significant decisions would be made before the Budget which

is, as I say, in six weeks time. It would be very unusual I  would imagine for anything to be done before that.

JOURNALIST: Is it going too far to call this kind of  suggestion and the work that's being done now work on  ratbaggery?

PM: I think some proposals that I've seen could, without  an undue stretching of the English language, attract that  sort of label. But I wouldn't apply it to all the  suggestions that have been made.

JOURNALIST: Would revamping the First Home Owners Scheme be  an appropriate way of reducing the pressure on people  suffering under high interest rates?

PM: I understand some suggestions have been made in that  regard but you would have to have considerable doubts about  any proposals which involved increases in the outlays side I  would think in the present circumstances where what you're

concerned about is bringing back the level of demand.

-3-

JOURNALIST: Is there any possibility that the top tax rate  cut due for January will be postponed?

PM: That's not something I've considered.

JOURNALIST: Are you satisfied with the way Mr Willis is  handling the question of waterfront reform?

PM: Yes.

JOURNALIST: A bit slow though isn't it?

PM: I've given you my answer. Let's talk about slow. What  are your standards of slowness? I can't remember, not that  I must confess that I'm an avid reader of your writing, but  I don't recall in my passing reference to your scribblings  that I ever saw in the period of the seven years of the  conservative government that you were talking about rates of

reform in that area then. But if we were to set the  standards of that period as relevant, then what's being done  by this Government in the area of microreform generally and  on the waterfront and the maritime industry in particular is

a hurricane pace.

JOURNALIST: Did you get a feeling overseas during your  recent visit that the international economic outlook is more  positive than has generally been thought and that this might  give greater support to the Government's economic policies

over the next 12 months?

PM: I'm certainly not going to use reverse policy now that  I'm home going to refuse to talk about overseas matters.  Let me say that generally speaking, yes. I thought that the  sorts of things that were being said by the politicians, the  political leaders to whom I spoke and economic commentators,

seem to me to be putting a somewhat more optimistic view  about the level of activity in the year or so ahead than  perhaps had been talked about before I left. That I think  is a reflection of two things. Both the types of policies

that are being followed by the major economies and related  to that the sorts of- assumptions that are being made about  commodity prices over the same period. If you take the two  things into account I think it is valid to say that the

international settings within which we'll be operating in  this period that you refer to are somewhat better than  perhaps had been anticipated earlier this year.

JOURNALIST: What's your response to the Fitzgerald inquiry  findings, in particular the gerrymander recommendations?

PM: Let me say generally that I think Mr Fitzgerald has  performed magnificently. It's very difficult to comprehend  the magnitude of the material that he had to deal with,  comprehend, distill and then report on. I join with others  who congratulate him on a job well done. I think he rightly

makes a quite foundational point that if you have government  corruptly elected - and I'll explain that in a moment - then

-4-

PM (cont): you are likely to have the circumstances in  which corruption can flourish. When I say corruptly  elected, the electoral system is obviously a corrupt one in  the sense that there is a perversion of the system in terms

of giving one particular group an overwhelming advantage.  It helped to create the situation in which that group  thought it could never be thrown out of government because  the system was corrupt, the electoral system was corrupt.

If you have a government which thinks it can never be put  out of office then that is precisely the sort of environment  within which corruption can flourish. That was the essence  of the analysis by Mr Fitzgerald and it was for that reason

logically that he therefore said that there should be  immediately moves to end that corrupt electoral system. Let  me say on that that it is somewhat surprising to me that the  Premier of Queensland who has said he will deliver lock,

stock and barrel on the recommendations of Fitzgerald should  now be hedging, as he so obviously is, on that foundational  point and talking of conceivably going to the next election  on this corrupt basis, this corrupt electoral basis. In

that regard let me say this. The Australian Electoral  Commission has, I believe, an enviable record for integrity  and competence and I understand that the Australian  Electoral Commission would be happy to provide such  assistance to the Queensland review as is appropriate. Now

let me make it clear what I'm saying there. I'm not trying  to intrude the Federal Government into this matter but I am  saying if there's some suggestion about a difficulty of  getting a review in Queensland in the time scale before the  next state election is scheduled for then I understand that

the services of the Australian Electoral Commission could be  available. I would certainly ensure that whatever resources  were required were made available. But I make it quite  clear that's a matter for the Queensland government. I'm

simply saying to the Queensland government that if they want  the assistance of the resources of the Australian Electoral  Commission I understand that the Australian Electoral  Commission is available and I'm saying that I would ensure  that whatever resources were necessary to facilitate that  would be made available.

JOURNALIST: There's been new recent support from economic  experts and business for a consumption tax. Are your  arguments against such a tax, which would help increase  savings, essentially political or are they economic and

could you outline them?

PM: The essential economic argument of course Michelle is  that this was on the table some years ago. It was rejected  by a pretty broad spectrum of the community. In the context  of that rejection we then moved to a very broad  diversification of the tax base by a range of measures with  which you are familiar. We are now faced with a situation  where one of the issues that we have to be sure that we have

under control is the question of inflation. That is  important intrinsically. It's also very important in terms  of getting the appropriate wages outcome. I can't stress  too much in terms of the appropriate economic policies at

- - Ã¢Â–Â

s'

Â«  Â« Â·

-5-

PM (cont): this time the crucial nature of the wages policy  that we've got and getting the right wages outcome. If  you'll excuse me I'll just spend a moment on this. It's  directly relevant to your question. We expect, as you know,

to get out of the wages system in 1989-90 a wages increase  of the order of six and a half per cent. Anything that was  to disrupt that by the expectation of a significantly  greater inflationary outcome than the one which has been

talked about would be economically disastrous. May I say,  it's our capacity to get an appropriate wages outcome which  amongst other things very significantly distinguishes the  Government from the Opposition. I am amazed still to see  while I'm away and when I get back that they are talking

about a wages policy which would again guarantee the  economic disaster for Australia that they inflicted upon  Australia when last in office. They inflicted the disaster  of 11% unemployment,  the first time the economy had gone

into negative growth, the worst recession for 50 years for  many reasons but essentially the main reason was they had no  wages policy. We have and that's what can guarantee that  the Government rather than the Opposition can effect the

proper handling of economic policy in this country. But you  see Michelle, if you were to talk about a consumption tax  now you would undermine the very foundation of your wages  policy. Because that outcome that we're talking about of

six and a half per cent, which is historically an  unbelievably low rate of inflation given the level of  economic activity, would be brought asunder if in fact the  unions believed that you were going to be having an

inflation outcome significantly different from that which  has been part of the negotiations. So it is essentially an  economic argument that is appropriate in my judgement for  the rejection at this stage of a consumption tax.

JOURNALIST: You said earlier that it was no time to be  contemplating increases in outlays. Is the Government  considering any major cuts in Government spending in the  August Budget?

PM: The processes of preparation of the Budget, as I said,  will be starting in the Expenditure Review Committee  shortly. I can say that there will be some areas in which  there will be savings. There will be some areas but I'm not

going to go beyond that.

JOURNALIST: Why is the Government continuing to have any  work at all done on a luxury tax or mortgage relief when the  Treasurer has said that such measures are mere embroidery on  the fabric of policy?

PM: I've had the opportunity of reading everything that the  Treasurer has said since I've been away, including that  phrase. I've also read where he's said that it's

appropriate that work be done in a number of areas,  including the ones that you're talking about. The fact, as  I say, that you do work in certain areas carries no  guarantee at all that action will be implemented in that  area. But it's simply responsible to see what are the range

-6-

PM (cont): of implications of undertaking a particular  course of action which is in the economic arena. It doesn't  mean that every suggestion that's made that you do work on  because some of them plainly don't warrant any work at all.

Some are of sufficient prima facie relevance to do that  work. As I say, I've read everything that Paul has said  about this. As I said when I was overseas, I am at one with  him in all that he's said in this area.

JOURNALIST: What assessment has the Government made of the  impact of the tax cuts on the level of demand in the  economy?

PM: We believe that the first thing about that is that if  you hadn't had the tax cuts then you would've had an  increase in wages which would've been economically  unsustainable. Obviously there is an increase in demand

associated with tax cuts but the question, with respect, is  simplistic if you think that's the beginning and the end of  the question. What you've got to ask yourself is what  would've happened in the economy generally if you hadn't had

those tax cuts? Would you have had a containable wages  outcome? Now the answer is of course you wouldn't have.  You would've had a very significantly greater increase in  wages which would've had two things associated with it. At

least the same level of increase in demand but importantly  you would've had a greater cost impact associated with that  level of demand. The beauty of what's been done by the work  that we did in the early part of this year in getting the

tax and wage trade-off is that you get for a given level of  tax reduction with whatever level of demand increases  associated with that, you get it at a much lower cost to  employers than you would if you went the other way. So I

just put to you it's a very simplistic question if you say  what level of demand is going to be associated with the tax  cuts. You've got to say what level of demand and what level  of cost would've been associated with leaving a situation  where you would've had a wages free for all. In economics  you can never, or very rarely, be certain of anything. The

one thing that you can be absolutely certain of as a result  of what we have done is that any given level of demand will  be associated with a significantly lower level of costs for  employers in this country. I go back to what I said in  answer to Michelle Grattan's question, that this is what  distinguishes the Government and fundamentally distinguishes

it from the Opposition. The Opposition made an absolute  mess of the economy in an historically unprecedented way in  its previous term in office because it didn't have that  third arm of policy. It didn't have a wages policy. So the

only way you could control demand was by absolutely running  the economy down and giving yourself the historically  unprecedented experience of double digit inflation and  double digit employment. If you're going to have a proper

control of the economy, including control of demand and  costs, you've got to have a wages policy. That's what we've  got and what the Opposition can never have.

-7-

JOURNALIST: Your earlier answer on the outlays question  suggests that if there should be any sort of relief package  ... would have to be revenue neutral and funded either by  cuts in outlays or increasing revenue.  Is that correct?

... of general fiscal policy it would have to be revenue  neutral?

PM: It's a good attempt to try and get me to give you a  detailed outline of the decisions that are going to be  taken. I'm not going to do that. But I think I can go as  far as to say this. That quite clearly if you look at the

fundamentals of Government economic policy over the last few  years they have been associated with three successive years  of real reductions in Commonwealth outlays which have  enabled you to achieve this massive turnaround in the demand

that we make upon the community savings. A turnaround of  seven percentage points in the public sector borrowing  requirement. Turned the significant deficit into a very  significant surplus. That's all been associated with, as I  say, in the last three successive years of real reductions  in Government outlays. We're not going to be turning that  policy around at this stage. So without going any further

in answer to your question I can tell you that that context  of whatever increases in outlays there may be having to be  accommodated to our overall aim of reduction in real outlays  will continue.

JOURNALIST: Prime Minister there will be an increase in  real outlays in the environment won't there? Is that one of  the areas you will have to accommodate?

PM: Well we have already talked about that, but that's part  of a very very large total. What we have done in six years  of government,  Laurie, is where we've brought down this  massive deficit that we inherited and moved to a very

substantial surplus, it hasn't meant that every area of  activity has been cut. The secret of the success of this  Government in creating massive increases in employment, in

having a situation where, I would remind you, as it was  pointed out in the appendix to the last May Statement, a  situation where the proportion of Commonwealth outlays going  on social justice programs has increased from 50 to 55 per

cent. Where you've have an $8.8 billion increase in 1988/89  in welfare programs. All that has been accommodated in a  situation of real reductions in outlays. So what that has  meant is that you've had to make the decisions about

reorganising your priorities. Now obviously, Laurie, one of  the great priorities facing this Government and any  responsible government around the world today is in the area  of the environment. So yes there will be significant

increases in outlays.

JOURNALIST: What I mean is, I wonder how you rate the  environment as an issue compared to the economy?

PM: it is not a question of it being an alternative. Your  question seems to pose it as an alternative. You don't say  do we have economic growth or do we do something about the  environment. You do both. We will be able to accommodate

significant outlays in the area of the environment. We will  be able to accommodate those within the general program that  I referred to which will involve a continuation of overall  real reductions in Commonwealth outlays-.

JOURNALIST: Your response so far to the reaction to date by  ASEAN on your proposal for a Pacific trading group?

PM: I am very pleased with the way its going. What you  have to appreciate is that the meetings that are taking  place in Brunei are now in two stages. What they've done,   the meeting of the ASEAN Ministers, they've noted the Hawke

initiative, if I can put it that way. When they've finished  their meeting they then have the post-ASEAN Ministerial  Council Meeting. Gareth Evans will be getting there today,  as will be the foreign ministers or their equivalents, for

two or three days of meeting with them. And now it is in  those meetings that there will be more detailed discussion  about my proposal. On all the indications that we have had  so far, not only from the ASEAN members but also from Japan,

Korea, New Zealand, the United States and Canada, I am very  optimistic that we will see that idea progressed and  processed.

JOURNALIST: Mr Hawke, Premier Cain has proposed at the last  Premiers' Conference that the Commonwealth repay some of the  State debts and the Government promised a response to that.  What is your response to that?

PM: It won't be given at a press conference.

JOURNALIST: When will you be responding to that?

PM: I will have to talk with Paul and Peter Walsh about  that. We'll be having a talk about that in the near future.  They'll get a response in the relatively near future.

JOURNALIST: Mr Hawke, on the environment again. Given the  seriousness with which you take the environmental issues and  particularly the Greenhouse Effect, could there be a case  for mounting Senator Richardson's referendum proposal at the  next election?

PM: Well I suppose you could say there would be a case.  But I am not saying that because there's a case that that's  what will be done.  There may be a greater case for not  doing it. This is an issue that I would just want to talk

through not only with Senator Richardson but others. It  really hasn't got to the stage yet of us considering it as a  matter of Government policy. It's obviously worth  considering. I haven't anything more to add to that.

-9-

JOURNALIST: Mr Hawke, do you favour Bernie Fraser becoming  the next Governor of the Reserve Bank?

PM: I think you may appreciate that the question of the  appointment of the next Governor of the Reserve Bank will be  on the Cabinet Agenda, the meeting to which I am going very  shortly. I don't intend to pre-empt consideration of that  matter by my Cabinet colleagues through making any comment

at this stage. I would simply say that I find rather  ludicrous the observations, the gratuitous observations,  that have been made in regard to this matter by people in  the Opposition.

JOURNALIST: Will we get an announcement on that appointment  today, Mr Hawke?

PM: I would think so.

JOURNALIST: Is it a field of one Mr Hawke?

PM: I can't talk about Cabinet secrets like that Laurie.

JOURNALIST: Mr Hawke, before you went away you said you  were following events in Papua New Guinea on a day-to-day  basis. There have been some more developments while you  have been away. What are your feelings about that and will  you be discussing the situation of Papua New Guinea with

Rabbie Namaliu at the Forum in Kiribati?

PM: I can assure you that while I have been away I have  continued a day by day following of it. I have had the  cables and read them and discussed the issues with those  travelling with me. I think one must say that you can't be  but disturbed by developments there, developments not only  on Bougainville but with the murder of the Minister in the  highlands. There is a degree of instability there which  must cause very considerable concern. When you remember

that the Bougainville copper mine provides the best part of  20 per cent of the revenue of the Papua New Guinea  Government, that's been closed for some time now and its  opening is uncertain. You have not merely the concerns of  law and order associated with what is going on in  Bougainville but you have the economic implications of it as  well. So yes I will be discussing these matters with my

friend Rabbie Namaliu. He will be travelling with me to the  Forum and I will have considerable opportunity to discuss  these matters with him. I'll do that because we as a nation  have a very real concern with what happens there. I can  assure you that we will do everything sensibly that we can  to try and ensure that the nation of Papua New Guinea has  the best possible opportunity of developing, free of what  are assuming rather worrying proportions now in terms of  questions about its stability. That's going to require  understanding on our part and on the part of the people of  Australia. As far as I am concerned that understanding will  be forthcoming.

-10-

JOURNALIST: Prime Minister,  how do we know how to interpret  the growth in demand that will take place in the next month?  Can you tell us what the projection from Treasury is?

PM: That was a bit too convoluted for me. Would you put it  again? Now that we know what?

JOUNALIST: Now that we know how to interpret the growth in  demand that will take place from this month, could you tell  us what the projection is?

PM: I am not going to refer to any details that I have from  Treasury on this matter.

JOURNALIST: Were you pleased or disappointed by overseas  reactions to your idea of a wilderness park ... Antarctic?

PM: Well generally speaking I was pleased because I knew as  distinct from some of those travelling with me what the  situation was in the United States. ... I had cause to say  that we got this great story about the rebuff to Mr Hawke

from President Bush. It may come as some surprise to you to  know or not. But we knew what the position of the United  States was, and we knew what the position of the United  Kingdom was. So nothing new there. We weren't certain  about the degree of support that we would get from France.  We got magnificent support following discussions that I had

with the Prime Minister, and I am putting it in the  chronological order that I spoke with them, the Prime  Minister, the Foreign Minister and the President. We got  full support for our position. That was tremendous. And

then in Germany I got the undertaking from Chancellor Kohl  that they would examine, without commitment, that they would  examine our position. I left with him a fully detailed  document on that position. And in Hungary I also got the

same commitment there that they would - they were very  favourably impressed by our proposal and undertook to  examine it and let us know what their position would be.  So, if you take the position that we knew the United Kingdom  position and the United States position, there's no change

there, and we got the fully positive reaction from France  and indications in Germany and Hungary that they would  examine our position closely, I think that was a very good  outcome. I think we can say that with the support that we  have from India and France, the indications that we have of

favourable attitude in Stockholm, Brussels and Rome and what  I think will be inevitably the fact, and that is that the  public opinion on this issue will substantially increase in  favour of the proposal. I have a degree of optimism beyond  what people might have had a couple of months ago.

JOURNALIST: How detrimental is it that the US and the UK  ... in what you know is their position on this?

-11-

PM: it's not a question of detriment.  We said when we made  the decision we realised that we'd have a long and pretty  gruelling fight to persuade people to our position. I think  that the advance that we have made in what is now less than  three months since we have made the decision is really far  beyond what people might have expected at that time. All I  can say is that I hope that the pressure of informed public  opinion around the world, including in -the United Kingdom  and the United States, is going to lead a clear majority of  the nations concerned to embrace the Australian position. I  am hopeful that that is what will happen.

JOURNALIST: Prime Minister,  in the unlikely event that the  world doesn't embrace that position, will you still leave  open the possibility of signing the Minerals Convention?

PM: No I am not looking at that because I think that if we  were to say well yes that's something that we could look at  I think people would question whether we were serious. And  we are serious, we are totally serious. I mean it doesn't

seem to us to make sense if you believe in the fragility of  the Antarctic and its importance to be retained as a  pristine continent,  if you believe that,  it doesn't to us  make any sense that you talk about protecting it via a  Minerals Convention. I am really, as I say, optimistic that  we are going to be able to get the degree of support which

would persuade people to change their position. I think  there is starting to emerge an understanding that the  context within which that work started, you can say the end  of the 70s and the beginning of the 80s when the idea of the  Minerals Convention was starting, people are understanding

that the context at the end of the 1980s is a quite  different one.  There is simply a much greater understanding  around the world now of the importance of these issues and  the fragility of that sort of environment.  So I think that  we are not going to be faced with the position of people

saying we have invested all that work in the Minerals  Convention, wouldn't it be a shame if we didn't culminate  that work. I think people are starting to understand that  the environment is different.

JOURNALIST: Did the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade  nevertheless advise you that you need that option open and  did you ignore that advice? Is it true to interpret then  that you have ignored that advice?

PM: Well you're using a reasonable amount of imagination  there but I don't think I'd disclose any state secrets to  say this. That there are a lot of people in Foreign  Affairs, not only in our Department of Foreign Affairs but

in their counterparts around the world, who have invested a  hell of a lot of time and effort over the years in trying to  work up to this Convention. It is therefore understandable  that they have a degree of interest and commitment to it and

some of them may want to keep it much more on the table now  than I would think is appropriate.

-12-

JOURNALIST: Prime Minister,  do you still believe that  living standards can be maintained this year and gradually  raised over the course of the ...?

PM: On this question of living standards let's get some  basic facts established. In the period since 1982-83 up to  and including 1988-89, the financial year just finished,  real household disposable income per capita has increased by  over 10 per cent. Of course that's reflected, as you know,

the very significant growth in employment and also the very  significant decisions in terms of increased welfare  payments. And in this last year that has just finished,  what I said would happen, that is that there would be an

increase in standards, has in fact happened. You've had a  fairly significant increase in real household disposable  income in 1988-89 because of a number of factors. You've  had employment growth, significant employment growth, you've  had significant increases in profits, they are up, rural  incomes were up. You've also had the situation where  average weekly earnings were up around, the increase in  average weekly earnings were up around the inflation rate.  So in 88-89 there has been, in general terms, a significant

increase in real household disposable income. Having said  that, let me make it quite clear that I recognise that for  some people who have had significant increases in their  mortgage repayments that that generally valid observation  wouldn't apply for them. So there are some people, of

course, who have been obviously adversely affected. Now  that's the position from 82-83 up until the present and  particularly the delivery on what we said in 88-89 that  there would be an improvement in standards. Now as far as  what extent there can be of future increases in real

standards of income per capita it will depend obviously upon  the success that we have in bringing back the level of  demand from the unsustainable levels that it is now. That  will be a reflection of how long we have to keep tight  monetary, fiscal and wages policies. So I hope, as I said

earlier in this interview, that we will be successful  relatively soon in bringing back that level of demand. But  as to the likelihood of increased real disposable incomes  per capita in this year that we have now entered, 1989-90,  we have to keep in mind that the effect of the tax cuts, we

have to keep in mind the reasonably significant wage  increases that will be associated with the award  restructuring processes and also keep in mind the record  that we have in making sure that we look after those in the  community who most need assistance. So if you take those

things into account, as I say in the last year there has  been an increase in standards. The extent to which that can  be furthered in 1989-90, the year that we're in now, will  depend upon precisely how those factors operate. What I  want to see as compared to the position of the Opposition  who seem to have learnt nothing from the disastrous way they

conducted economic policy when they were in, we want to see  that we will keep the arms of policy tight enough long  enough to get the level of demand down to sustainable levels  but in a way which will enable us to do what we've done  through our whole period of office. That is to keep  employment growth going

t

1

%

-13-

PM (cont): within reasonable levels of inflation. If we  can do those things as we think we can then while we think  there will have to be restraint and not the improvements in  standards that otherwise would've been possible,   nevertheless we hope that as a result of the combination of  all the factors that I've referred to, that we'll be at

least able to maintain this increase "in standards which has  signficantly occurred in the last year.

ends

