COMMONWEALTH  PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY  MICAH

PRIME MINISTER

CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY EMBARGOED UNTIL DELIVERY

SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER  FOURTH MEETING OF THE COMMONWEALTH FOREIGN MINISTERS'  COMMITTEE ON SOUTHERN AFRICA  CANBERRA - 7 AUGUST 1989

The task ahead of this fourth meeting of the Commonwealth  Foreign Ministers' Committee on Southern Africa is an  important one for all members of the Commonwealth.

More than that, you are engaged in an endeavour of truly  global significance.

The scourge of apartheid is an affront to all humanity.

And eliminating that scourge - bringing to an end South  Africa's abhorrent practice of institutionalised racism - is  an obligation that demands the most committed involvement of  every Government and individual of good will.

The Commonwealth has a proud record of determined and  effective struggle against the racist regimes of Southern  Africa:

- in the period leading up to the withdrawal of South  Africa from the Commonwealth in 1961;

- through the peaceful creation of majority rule in  Zimbabwe;

- through the development of the Gleneagles Agreement  banning sporting contacts with South Africa;

- through the achievement of the Eminent Persons Group in  finding a valid and workable basis for a negotiated  settlement in South Africa;

- through our role in developing international sanctions  against South Africa and, with the regrettable exception  of Britain, through our own co-ordinated imposition of  sanctions, including financial sanctions;

- through our active support for the emergence of an  independent Namibia;

and through the continuing important work of this  Committee.

2 .

Australia is proud of the role it has played in these  efforts and, indeed, in the broader international struggle  against apartheid.

We remain totally committed to fulfilling our  responsibilities in these tasks.

For all these reasons, then, it is a pleasure to welcome to  Canberra our distinguished overseas visitors, and to wish  this meeting success in the critical work ahead.

We meet against a backdrop of confused signals and  expectations about the current situation in South Africa.

We hear talk of the release of Nelson Mandela and  suggestions of negotiations with representative black  organisations such as the African National Congress.

Of course these would be enormously welcome developments if  ever they occurred.

They would be substantial steps down the path towards the  elimination of apartheid.

But let us not forget the basic facts.

The massive convulsions of the mid-1980s - in which the  black communities of South Africa were once again confronted  by the violence with which apartheid represses its own  citizens - are no longer,  due to censorship, the daily diet  of Western media reporting.

But in the face of more than three years of consecutive  states of emergency imposed by the South African  authorities, the repression continues still.

The grotesque system of apartheid continues - the refusal of  basic political rights to the black South Africans who make  up 75 per cent of the population, the banning of black  organisations, the jailing and exile of black leaders and of

others who seek to speak out against the repression, the  racially segregated Parliaments,  the infamous Group Areas  Act with its bizarre injustices of the homelands system.

These are the basic and terrible facts before us.

We can take comfort only from the fact that the internal  contradictions of this system will ultimately bring about  its demise.

The responsibility of the international community - not  least of the Commonwealth - is to try to bring the South  African authorities to understand this, so that the  inevitable end of apartheid will not be bloody civil war but

a peaceful transition to majority rule.

That is the purpose of sanctions :  to bring South Africa to  its senses, not to its knees.

3.

Leading South African financial spokesmen - including the  Governor of the South African Reserve Bank and the Finance  Minister - acknowledge that sanctions are working.

South Africa is now facing a net outflow of capital at a  time when it desperately needs foreign funding to help  support the gross inefficiencies of apartheid.

It cannot service the principal on its debt.

Its agricultural products are subject to boycott in many  countries.

It has been forced to halt production of the once  prestigious Krugerrand.

It cannot modernise much of its weaponry or its ageing  warships and fighters.

Its representative sports players are largely confined to  their own country.

All of these factors are telling reminders to white South  Africans that their Government and their country will remain  the pariahs of the international community until they  abandon apartheid completely and forever.

That is the message that must be understood by the  President-presumptive F.W. de Klerk and his colleagues.

The way forward has been outlined with clarity and fairness  by the Eminent Persons Group.

It is a testament to the work of the Group, led by Malcolm  Fraser and General Obasanjo, that they should have made such  an accurate reading of the circumstances in South Africa in  such a short time.

We will not,  and we cannot,  settle for apartheid with a  so-called human face.

Such a thing is a contradiction in terms.

We insist on real change.

There can be no real change if life in South Africa  continues to be premised on the basis that the colour of  one's skin determines one's place of residence, one's level  of education, one's rights under the law, one's lifestyle,  the way one participates in the political process, indeed,  one's very place in society.

Some people believe that change can take place in some parts  of South African society while leaving the fundamental  structures of apartheid intact.

The most obvious case is sport.

4.

Some choose to see the end of segregation in sports arenas  and the beginning of efforts to involve young blacks in  sports such as rugby and cricket as evidence that South  Africa has mended its ways and should be readmitted to

international sporting contests.

Nothing could be further from the truth, and now that a  rebel British cricket tour has been agreed on, and that a  rebel rugby tour is being organised with the possible  involvement of Australians, it is even more essential that  we do not mistake the appearance for the reality.

The reality is, of course, that the very structure of South  African society, and the actions and expenditures of the  white minority government,  confine non-whites to  second-class participation in all aspects of South African

life, including sports.

Under apartheid's residential segregation, those granted  access to facilities enjoyed by whites have to travel  considerable distances and at great cost and inconvenience.

Under apartheid's education system, young whites have access  to superior sports facilities while the black school system,  starved of funds, cannot offer anything comparable.

The rebel British cricketers, and those in Britain,  Australia and elsewhere who condone such tours may believe -  some claim they do believe - that these events will actually   help break down the barriers of apartheid. Unfortunately,

the opposite is the case.

The deception involved in organising such tours, the  gloating from South Africa which follows their announcement,  the cosmetic and peripheral multiracial events with which  they are embroidered all underline the fact that they give

comfort and support to the apartheid regime.

Let it be clearly understood that reform, on and off the  sporting field, has a long way to run before desegregated  sport in South Africa becomes a reality.

Until then, there can be no sporting contacts.

Equally, let it be understood that broader international  contacts with South Africa cannot be normalised until  apartheid itself is a thing of the past.

In particular, let it be understood - and let this meeting  make perfectly clear - that, to achieve this goal of the  total abolition of apartheid, sanctions must be maintained  against South Africa.

I will have the pleasure tomorrow of returning to the issue  of sanctions when I launch the book Apartheid and  International Finance by Keith Ovenden and Tony Cole.

5.

The work your Committee is undertaking, and will continue at  this Canberra meeting - the work of assessing the impact of  sanctions and investigating ways of widening, tightening and  intensifying current economic and other sanctions - is  fundamental to achieving our goal of a free and just South  Africa.

I emphasise again, as I always have, that I and my  Government see no virtue in sanctions for the sake of  sanctions.

They have no virtue other than as an instrument to bring the  South African regime to the bargaining table.

For it is only at the bargaining table that justice can be  done - justice that involves not only full democratic rights  for all South Africans irrespective of the colour of their  skin, but economic justice that will see equality of  opportunity for all within a system where the accumulated  capital, entrepreneurship and skills of whites will be fully  welcomed and employed.

So you have a challenging and exhaustive agenda before you.

You will be continuing your dialogue with representatives of  South African opinion and hearing first-hand testimony from  a number of witnesses about current trends and developments.

You will discuss South Africa's destabilisation of its  neighbours and the costs they have incurred as a result.

African members of this Committee need no reminding from me  about the nature of the direct threat apartheid projects  beyond its own borders. For you, it is a daily concern that  goes to the heart of the security and prosperity of your own

societies.

Australia, for one, is committed to continue our efforts to  assist those states and to contribute to their economic and  social development.

We have recently announced a three-year $110 million  extension to our existing development assistance program in  Southern Africa, on top of which we will continue where  appropriate an emergency relief assistance involvement.

You will also be discussing the heartening, though still  uncertain, movement forward in relation to Namibia and  deliberations on how the international community can best  assist a smooth and peaceful transition to independence.

Resolution 435 is now being implemented, UNTAG has been  deployed and the refugees are returning home.

Australia is pleased to be assisting this process through  our contingent of 300 engineers in UNTAG.

The Commonwealth has of course already signalled that we  would welcome an independent Namibia into our ranks.

6 .

You will in short be preparing the ground for a constructive  and thorough consideration of South Africa by the  Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting in Kuala Lumpur in  October.

I hope that CHOGM itself, at which I look forward to  participating personally, will be able to assist the  progress of dialogue in South Africa leading to genuine  negotiations with authentic representatives of South  Africa's people.

Against that background, it gives me much pleasure to  declare open this fourth meeting of Commonwealth Foreign  Ministers on Southern Africa.

I wish you success in your deliberations and express the  hope that this will be one more step by the international  community towards bringing about a genuinely free and  multi-racial South Africa.

**********************

