P R IM E  M IN IS T E R

CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY EMBARGOED UNTIL DELIVERY

SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER  DINNER WITH MEMBERS OF THE  CHINESE-AUSTRALIAN COMMUNITY  CANBERRA - 6 OCTOBER 1990

,A .  *

' i  ,

ϊ !

Sixteen months ago, I stood with many others in the Great  Hall of this Parliament House, to remember with sorrow and  outrage the brutal massacre that polluted Tian'anmen Square  and disfigured the face of China in the eyes of the world.

As we meet tonight, those terrible events still cast a dark  shadow over us.

The bright candle of democracy that in May and June 1989 had  shone so brightly, in Beijing, Shanghai, and elsewhere  throughout China, remains snuffed out. The path towards  freedom and human rights that was then being opened up,  remains blocked.

And of course those thousands of young Chinese citizens who  were so brutally killed by their own leaders live no more -  except in our memory, where their vision of a better future  remains fresh and bright.

China's decision, in the late 19701s, to embark on new,  outward-looking, and more liberal policies - especially in  the economic sphere - put it years ahead of other centrally  planned economies.

This preparedness to enhance the basic well being of the  Chinese people through modernisation, openness and, in  particular, contact with the West, laid the foundations for  the exceptionally close relationships that developed with  Australia in the 19801s and which my Government did all it  could to foster.

What a tragedy it is - not just for China but for China's  relationship with Australia - that those policies of  liberalisation, and that exceptionally close relationship,  were brought to a premature end by the events in Tian'anmen  Square.

Yet in the face ofj|all these real and profound reasons for  sorrow, we meet tonight in a spirit of companionship and  even, of relative confidence for the future.

COMMOI PARLIAMENI MIC

2.

That confidence has three strong sources.

First, there is the knowledge that Australia is doing what  we can as a nation to reverse the unacceptable conditions  that prevail within China today.

Second, there is the knowledge that we have safeguarded the  future of those Chinese residents who were stranded in  Australia sixteen months ago. _

And third, there is the knowledge that as the world changes  so dramatically, "so in time must change inevitably come to  China too. Because surely the fundamental lesson taught to  us by the recent events in Eastern Europe and the Soviet  Union is that economic and political freedoms go hand in

hand; and to the extent that China today is continuing to  achieve economic liberalisation, that attempt cannot  ultimately succeed unless it is accompanied by social and  political freedoms.

I know you share the confidence derived from those three  sources, and I appreciate both your expression of support  for what the Australian Government has done, and is doing,  in the wake of these terrible events in China, and the  opportunity you have given me to speak on these matters this  evening.

In the days following Tian'anmen I gave, you recall, two  firm undertakings.

First, I said that no resident of the People's Republic of  China in Australia at the time of the massacre would be  forced to return to China against his or her will. Second,  and of equal importance, I said that no-one would be forced

into making a premature choice between China and Australia.

Those undertakings were borne out in the subsequent  decisions of Federal Cabinet - and I want to acknowledge, in  Gerry Hand's presence tonight, his crucial role in reaching  those decisions.

Residents of the PRC in Australia on 20 June 1989 will be  able to remain in Australia for four years under a special  category of temporary residence permit. The conditions  under which they can remain are as generous as any granted

by any country in the world. Holders of these special  permits are allowed to work. They can apply for their  spouses and dependent children to join them in Australia.  They are provided with access to social services, labour  market programs, English language training and education.

But the door also remains open for those who want to return  home to China. A significant number have already done so.  But many others need time to think about their future; to  watch developments in their homeland; to seek assurances for

their safety. We have given them that time.

3 .

The situation for PRC residents who have come to Australia  since June 1989 is equally clear. They can apply - and  numbers are applying - for refugee status on exactly the  same conditions as all other refugee applications.

These decisions were correct morally, administratively and  economically. They were right for those Chinese residents  directly affected; they had the overwhelming support of you,  Australians of Chinese descent; and I confidently predict

that they will come to be seen as right for Australia. For  those Chinese who stay will undoubtedly contribute  significantly to the well-being of our economy and our  country.

There is really only one group that has looked upon the  decisions with some dismay and that is, not surprisingly,  the Chinese leadership, which has responded with assurances  about the safety of students who return home to China.

Such assurances can ultimately only be assessed by  individuals as they make their own decision about whether or  not to return to China; if they turn out to be well-founded  assurances - and I want to make clear I hope they will -  many more will no doubt be encouraged to return.  But the  point is that it is up to the individuals to decide; our

arrangements - to give them time to decide - will remain in  place.

So let the Australian message be very clear. We do not want  China to continue down the path of repression. We want to  see China resume the path of reform and modernisation.  As  Australians, we will do all we can to discourage the former

and to encourage the latter.

This determination has underpinned all we have said and done  as a Government since June 1989.

Australia has enduring interests - political, strategic and  economic interests - in our relations with China, derived  from our geographical position, our trading environment,  and  from our wide variety of people-to-people links.

As early as July last year, we made the fundamental decision  to keep open Australia's lines of access to as many sections  of Chinese society as possible, and to maintain economic,  educational and cultural exchanges.  To do otherwise - to  embark on a policy of mindless isolation of those in China  with whom we can cooperate and maintain bridges of dialogue

- would not be in our interests, or the interests of the  people of China for whose future we deeply care.

4.

So in the months that have followed we have, with  considerable success, encouraged China to contribute to a  peaceful resolution of the tragedy of Cambodia; we have  voiced our support for China's participation, with the

economies of Hong Kong and Taiwan, in the process of Asia-  Pacific Economic Cooperation which I launched in Canberra in  November last year. We have hosted a visit to Australia by  the Chinese Minister to Metallurgical Industry last May for  the opening of the Channar Iron-Ore Joint Venture, and the  Australian Minister for Trade Negotiations, Dr Blewett,  visited China recently for discussions about our key  economic interests.

But at the same time as we have done all this, we have  maintained our emphatic, consistent and principled  opposition to the continuing repression of democracy and the  suppression of human rights in China.

We have taken every opportunity, in bilateral and  multilateral forums, to make known this opposition to the  Chinese. And it was plain that the Government's judgement,  at this stage, that Dr Blewett should not meet with the  Chinese Premier was a most eloquent and effective statement  of our views.

While we recognise that ministerial contacts actively  contribute to the pursuit of the enduring interests to which  I have referred, we allow such contacts only after a  considered analysis of the balance of Australia's interests.

Such assessments involve real difficulties, including the  incidental difficulty of leaving the Government open to the  cheap shot from those in the Federal Opposition who find it  easy to theorise but who do not have to implement their  policies in the real world.

But let no one doubt that we will continue to pursue  Australia's interests with diligence and judgement,  including our very real desire for China to resume its  process of reform, and to realise its huge potential.

I know many of you will be meeting tomorrow with members of  the Federal Opposition. That's entirely appropriate, and I  am sure it will be a stimulating meeting. May I preface  that meeting with a few comments about Dr Hewson's views on  China.

I have read the press reports of Dr Hewson's recent visit to  China - the suggestion that he accepted the Chinese  assurances about the safety of students who return to China;  his rejection of a special visa category for Chinese

students in Australia in favour of an impractical and  undesirable case-by-case approach; and his extraordinary  characterisation of some Chinese students in Australia as  "shish kebab" students.  These are all of some concern to  me.

5.

But when you look beyond these various elements at the basic  view Dr Hewson seems to have about how Australia should deal  with China, you find an even more surprising thing. Because  when you boil it all down, what Dr Hewson apparently

advocates is that we should push the Chinese hard on human  rights, while seeking openings for continued commercial  contacts.  In other words, you have the basic elements of  the Government's policy that we have pursued since July last  year.

Now I could say I welcome Dr Hewson's support.  But frankly  I'm disturbed by the Opposition Leader's apparent attempt to  carve out a separate partisan position where there is no  essential policy difference in overall posture towards  China.

Grandstanding is a cheap trick - but in foreign policy terms  it's an unwise one. Dr Hewson has not yet plugged his  credibility gap on foreign policy, and he certainly has not  displayed any sense that he understands the totality of this  country's interests in regard to China.

The fundamental fact is this: the Australian Government has  responded to the tragic reversals in China decisively and  appropriately. We are doing what we must to ensure China  sinks no further into the past. And no one will be happier

than I will be when China can once more resume a totally  positive involvement in the region and the world.

My friends,

Since Gold Rush days, Chinese migrants and their descendants  have played an important part in Australia's history. In an  often hostile environment they have helped to build the  wealth of our nation and the richness of our community.

I want to say tonight that Chinese Australians have much  more to contribute to Australia's future.

One of the underlying principles of my Government's National  Agenda for a Multicultural Australia is that it is in the  interests of all Australians that we fully use the valuable  skills and talents of our ethnic communities.

I know that multiculturalism means different things to  different people. But of one thing there can be no doubt.  Australia today is a culturally diverse society in which  four out of every ten people were born overseas or have

parents born overseas.

And we are a richer nation for it. Australia today has an  excitement and vibrancy which is the equal of any country in  the world.

6.

Last year I launched the Garnaut Report on Australia's ties  with North East Asia. The report underlined the fact that  our trading partnerships will be enhanced by a greater  understanding of the different values and cultures of the  countries we deal with. And it noted that Australia's Asian  communities are a key resource which needs to be employed to

assist us in involving ourselves in the economic, social and  political life of our region.

So the Chinese-Australian community has a special role to  play. Your understanding of Asian society, the language  skills that you have maintained and passed to your children,  coupled with your undoubted commitment to this nation, can  only enhance our ability to build a stronger position for us

in our region.  That is multiculturalism at work.

Friends

I am aware that many of you have travelled to Canberra from  Cabramatta.  As many of you will be aware, the "Pailau"  Beautification Association plans to erect a ceremonial  Chinese archway at the entrance to the Cabramatta Mall.

The plan features a pair of golden bronze lions to mark the  entry, according to ancient Chinese tradition.

Just outside the House of Representatives, two marble lions  stand in the Chinese gardens, a gift from the people of  China to mark the opening of the New Parliament House.

The lion, a symbolic guardian of the community, is a symbol  both of your commitment to Australia and of Australia's  commitment to a multicultural society.

It is in that spirit that I am pleased to announce my  personal support for the Cabramatta Pailau Committee's plans  and to dedicate one of the lions to Australia's  multicultural future.

And it is in that spirit that I express my appreciation for  your invitation to address you this evening, and my best  wishes for your safe return home.

