it.

PRIM E M IN IS T E R

TRANSCRIPT OF NEWS CONFERENCE, PARLIAMENT HOUSE, 30  JANUARY 1990

E & Î E - PROOF ONLY

PM: The Cabinet today considered a report from the Foreign Minister on developments in Eastern Europe. That  report to, of course, a considerable extent was based on  .Gareth Evans'  recent visit to two Germanys and to Poland,  Hungary and Czechoslovakia. Out of that report the  Government made a number of decisions which we regard as  constituting at this stage an appropriate response to  those important developments. Gareth Evans will be  putting out a more detailed press release later on this  afternoon. But I'll just refer to some of those  decisions. We will establish an Australian program of

training for Eastern Europe which we'll put at least $5M.  That will be some contribution from Australia to meet  what is now an obvious need. But after these something  like two generations of a repressed command economy there

of course has not been an emergence of the sorts of  commercial and economic skills in those countries which  are necessary to enable them to undertake the sort of

market development that they intend to pursue now. It's  been made clear that they would appreciate assistance in  developing those skills. So Australia will adopt this  program and it will involve having people from these

countries coming to Australia to undertake studies in  various areas of business management, environmental  safety, agricultural technology, just to give those

examples. And it would also entail some visits by  experts in these areas to those countries. We also  intend to upgrade our diplomatic representation in the  region. We have embassies now as you know in Moscow,  Warsaw, Budapest and in Belgrade and we intend now to  establish an embassy in Czechoslovakia, in Prague.  Czechoslovakia has a population of some 16 million people

and with its background and traditions we believe it's an  appropriate area to enhance our diplomatic  representation. Austrade will also be keeping its  Eastern European coverage under close review. We'll be  encouraging an increasing range of high level and  parliamentary visits to these countries. We'll be making  a contribution to the stabilisation fund for Poland. It  won't be a large contribution, a large one hasn't been

requested. But it will be indicative of the commitment  that we have and w e '11 follow on the announcements that I  made in October of last year of our commitment to assist

2

in the redevelopment of Poland. So without being  exhaustive, those are some of the decisions that we've  taken. As I say, the Foreign Minister will be issuing a  press release on these matters later on today. Alright.  Any questions?

JOURNALIST: When's the mission in Prague likely to open?

PM: I'm not quite sure how long that will take but we'll process it as quickly as we can. Obviously it will be  this year.

JOURNALIST: What sort of cost would you be looking at?

PM: I think the order of the cost all up will be something like $2.5M ...

JOURNALIST: Have you considered Bucharest yet?

PM: Not at this stage.

JOURNALIST: Is the Government concerned about the trend it seems in Eastern Europe of the new governments not  being fully established and ..., particularly in Romania?

PM: Sure. It's always been something that I think people should've taken into account, that you get the  euphoria and the understandable proper euphoria of change  but not always the understanding of the complex  difficulties that they are in turning around, as I say, a

couple of generations of the imposition of a repressive  command economy, an absence of political freedoms. And  then what has to happen is on two fronts - on the  economic and political front - fundamental change. In  other words you've got to have the processes emerging  whereby you can have a free democratic election for  parliament and to get those processes underway which will  enable an election to be fairly and properly held is not  easy. Of course in the economic area perhaps the  difficulty is even more profound because you've had, as I

say, two generations of a command economy in which the  opportunities for initiative and decision making, a  proper allocation of resources is entirely absent. And  so it's always going to be the case that the euphoria was  going to be followed by the question marks then as to how

these issues are resolved. I think the important things  are these. Firstly, that there is no doubt about the, in  my judgement, irreversibility of the decisions that have  been taken and the commitment of the peoples of these  countries to pursue these courses in the political and  economic field. And secondly of course, there is an  overwhelming, large commitment on the part of the  countries of the West to cooperate. I've been  particularly pleased I might say, as I think you would've  heard me say before, that in the case of the United

States and the countries of Western Europe it hasn't been  a case of gloating and saying well the system that we've  always despised and said could not last, has crumbled.

3

I've rather taken the view that we all have the  responsibilities now towards the people of these  countries to do everything we can in a practical way ...  in rhetoric but in a practical way to facilitate the  processes of political and economic reconstruction. So

I'm not surprised that the difficulties and tensions are  emerging. It would've been remarkable if they hadn't. The important thing is that I think we have the basis for  optimism for the future.

JOURNALIST: Is this seen as a starting point ... built on further in recent years or is ... level likely to be  maintained with economic assistance?

PM: We have the commitment to act in concert with like-minded countries, I mean we didn't wait for others. The  announcement I made I think on 15 October indicated our  commitments then. Gareth attended the meeting of the G24  at the end of last year and we will be cooperating fully  with them. To the extent that there needs to be some

perhaps change in emphasis in the things that are to be  done in the light of developments that take place, we  will accommodate to that. We, as I have said in answer

to a previous question, share the commitment of the  countries of the West to being practical and generous in  our assistance and the forms that we've decided upon now  are those that seem appropriate and are a practical  response to specific requests that were put to us. If  those requests change in some form we'll be receptive to  it.

JOURNALIST: Further east Mr Hawke, has there been any indication the difficulties facing the Soviet Union may  cause Mr Rhyzkov to think again of his visit here?

PM: Well I must honestly say that there's obviously some speculation as to whether the rapidity and gravity in a  sense of some of the changes that are taking place may  cause him to change his timetable ... visit to Australia.

It has happened before. But we've had no indication to  that effect. I certainly hope it doesn't happen. We  would very, very much welcome a visit from Mr Rhyzkov for  these reasons. Firstly, we have as you know, over a  period of some time been taking practical steps to

improve the relationship between our two countries. It's  important for us, it's important for the Soviet Union and  in our small way i t 's important that we make that  contribution globally to the improvement of relationships  of the Soviet Union with the rest of the world. Secondly  of course, it will give us a remarkably direct  opportunity to hear at first hand an assessment by Mr  Rhyzkov of both the nature of the changes that are taking  place and his assessment of the implications of those  changes for the future, both for the Soviet Union and for  the immediate region and globally. So we hope he's still  coming and we expect that he is.

4

JOURNALIST: Just moving back-to domestic issues Mr Hawke.  The negotiations between the Government and the  ACTU for the next wages system will take place soon. Do  you see that as embodying significant steps towards an  enterprise bargaining?

PM: Let me preface my answer to that question Paul, by saying that of course you must understand that in the  changes that have already taken place in the wages system  there has already been quite a significant move. By  definition, restructuring is not something that you  undertake in negotiations about restructuring ... not

something that can alone be undertaken at the sectoral  level. They have been increasingly undertaken within  individual enterprises and very successfully in many of  them. So what we will see in this next stage is a

further development of that. But I want to make this  point clear. As far as the Government is concerned in  the negotiations that we'll undertake with the ACTU,  centrally important to that will be ensuring our capacity

to predict and deliver on aggregate national wages  outcomes so that w e '11 have the combination of the  decisions by the Industrial Relations Commission which  will make the decisions as to general minimum wage

levels. And to the extent that the negotiations do take  place as we would welcome in the individual enterprises,  we will ensure that the mechanisms are in place, both in

terms of relationships with the ACTU and the Commission,  to be able to do as we've done in the past to formulate a  national economic policy on the basis of predictable  national wages aggregates outcomes.

JOURNALIST: Does that mean Mr Hawke therefore that you wouldn't be too keen on the idea of removing the ...  claims provision...

PM: Not in an unqualified way, no.

JOURNALIST: inaudible

PM: Well obviously you've got to understand that we're at the very, very early stages of negotiations in 1990  for this next year. We will listen to what the ACTU has  got to say. We'll also have discussions with the  employers. We've got some, we'll have some ideas about  this. But our guiding criteria will be two really. One  that I have stressed in the answers that I 've already  given, and that is that we have to be able to have a  predictable figure for the national aggregate wages  outcome. I'll have that criterion. But we'll also want  to try and have processes which will enable the  continuation of the flexibility which has already started

to emerge under the restructuring process which has  commenced. The experience to this point shows that it's  possible to do both.

JOURNALIST: Mr Hawke, are you upset that the cost of health care is rising and if so how does the Government

5

plan to fund that increase? And in that context do you  endorse Dr Blewett's promise of no increase in the  Medicare levy in the next term of Government if you win  the election?

PM: I endorse that and let me make it quite clear Laurie, that our future Medicare expenditures are there  in the published forward estimates. Those expenditures  grow according to the special formula, it's understood  which takes account of relevant costs, hospital costs,

and factors which could lead to a blowout.  It also has  in that special formula a provision for taking account of  the ageing of the population. So those factors are  there, they are published in the forward estimates and I  would remind you that with those future Medicare outlays  covered, we have outlays as a percentage of GDP falling

steadily to 22% by 1992/93. So our position is clear,  it's understood. I must say that that stands in very  stark contrast to the position of the Opposition. I  don't want to take a great deal of time I might say  personally adding to the difficulties that are already  apparent for the Opposition. But let me make this point,  that it's been somewhat compounded even further today, I  understand, by the fact that the Leader of the Opposition  still doesn't seem to be quite sure how he wants to  handle this. Because I understand in the text of a  speech that he was to deliver today that he distributed,  it included the passage - this was distributed this  morning and I quote - "in any case I give you an iron­ clad guarantee that within the context of the reviews of  the present health scheme and any associated changes in  the taxation system, no individual or family will be  worse off". When he came around to delivering the speech  that was deleted. So we have a position as far as the  Opposition is concerned that due to a combination of  obviously incompetence and dishonesty, because they must  have known at least as far back as October of last year

that what they were saying couldn't be delivered. We now  have a part exposure of their fiscal irresponsibility. I  say a part exposure because let me make these points  briefly. They have given the ambit of 0 to $2.6B as the

shortfall that will have to be made up as a result of the  loss of the levy. That of course doesn't take account of  the incentive tax rebates for taking out private  insurance. So it's someting there in the order of $2.6B

for that. But you should understand too when you're  looking now at the exposed fiscal incompetence of the  Opposition that you have to add to that $2.6B the  undisputed figure of about $3B which was put out last  year as the cost to the Coalition of funding the two tier  tax scale. Because that was the calculation that was put  out. It hasn't been disputed. ... the cost of creating  the two tier tax scale on the basis that no-one would  lose. You now have also in the last two days the  emergence of the commitment of another half a billion  dollars confirmed by their spokesman this morning in  regard to roads. W h o 's their spokesman there? Mr Sharp.   Mr Sharp has been having a little bit of difficulty

6

making up his mind about this one but I understand  according to a transcript that was given to me just  recently, he says that he has said that in the first year  of a Coalition government they will undertake that

funding increase in roads which he says is in the order  of half a billion dollars. So if you bring it all  together my friends, you'll see that you've got something  of the order of $2.6B in the area of health. You've got

$3B to deliver on the tax scale. And you've got half a  billion dollars in roads. At least $6B. This great  gaping, fiscal hole. So while the emphasis has been on  the health area just in the last two or three days, it's  only part of their problem.

JOURNALIST: The question of your promise not to raise the levy. You made an identical promise in 1984 and  then broke it. Why should people believe you now?

PM: Well I think they've seen the way in which now, in the period since we've made the adjustments, the way it's  worked in which we have in fact as I say been able to  show in the forward estimates, the expenditures and the

formula upon which it's worked. I believe that the  people will have reason on the basis of experience to  believe that we can and will deliver.

JOURNALIST: Mr Hawke,  will the Budget surplus remain at $9B over the next couple of years or will you fund tax  cuts and any other spending increases out of a lower  surplus?

PM: The range of decisions that we will have to take will be based upon a continuation of the approach that  we've had in the past and that is that we will be having

a significant Budget surplus. Any decisions that we take  in the near future in regard to additional programs we  will be seeking to fund. We will be making detailed  statements in the weeks ahead now - between now and the  election - of precisely what additional programs we may  have, how they'll be funded and what implications they  will have for fiscal outcomes. The people will be left

in no doubt as to the way in which we go about ... will

be on our promises.

JOURNALIST: Spending cuts or tax increases, Mr Hawke?

PM: There won't be an enormous amount of room for savings. We've been there very substantially but there  will be room for some savings. We'll indicate that at  the appropriate time.

JOURNALIST: Does that mean there'll be no overall economic statement Mr Hawke? And secondly, do you intend  to make a Cabinet decision on your attitude to the  Garnaut recommendations on tariffs before the election?

PM: Economic statement? Well I really haven't got anything to add to what I've said before on that,

7

Michelle. If we regard it as appropriate to have a  larger statement, we will. We'll obviously, out of the  discussions that w e '11 have with the ACTU and the  employers in the area of wages and the considerations  that are involved in that, there'll be some statement  which reflects the outcome of those discussions. Now we  have a number of on-going reviews in place. Now it

depends upon the assessment that w e '11 make at the time  as to whether it 's appropriate to bring those together  into a larger economic statement - and that's what I 've  said before - I have nothing to add to that. As to the

Garnaut Report,  we announced earlier the processes that  we've established and as ... be done of course through  the Structural Adjustment Committee, to consider all the  range of recommendations that Dr Ross Garnaut has made.  The work is proceeding as decided by the Structural  Adjustment Committee. Now as to the timetable for

specifics of those inquiry processes and decisions, I  can't at this stage comment ... to whether on the  particular one you mention - that is what he had to say

about tariffs - it's being considered. Now what the  timetable of decision on that will be, I'm not in a  position to say.

JOURNALIST: Is Parliament coming back for more than two weeks on February 20?

PM: I'm not sure at this stage, my dear friend. At least that's a subtle way of asking.

JOURNALIST: How attractive do you find the idea of going into an election campaign promising increased petrol  taxes to pay for the improved roads?

PM: Well I would say this about that question. That part of the background of it is of course against the  very massive campaign of misrepresentation that has taken  place about the declining proportion of revenue that the  Government gets from oil which is allocated to roads. If  you look at the total take of the Government from oil  which is in the components of excise - not just excise  which has been referred to - you will see that in fact we  have marginally in our period of office allocated more to

roads as a proportion of that take than in the last year  of the previous government. Now in those circumstances  where it's clearly not the case that we have been

niggardly in the allocation of that proportion, I think  if you were to consider this question of an increased  impost for the purpose of increased allocation of roads  it would be seen in a different light than against the

proposition that we have drastically cut our allocation  to roads from the total take from oil.

PM: Now, now I just, Laurie, I just put that background to say I think the reaction of people to this point has  been on a misapprehension about the allocation of the  Government's decision. Whether in fact we will make a  decision to have such a further impost for the purpose of

8

additional allocation of roads is something to be  considered. There's certainly been no decision taken  about it.

JOURNALIST: Are you saying though that you think you could persuade them that a new tax in that area would be  a good idea?

PM: Well, what I'm saying is this, that I think it would be very difficult to persuade the Australian people that  that would be appropriate. If it were the fact that this  Government had significantly reduced from it's total  revenue from oil, it's allocation to roads, that would be  a very, very difficult thing to do and that is the  background which is attempted to be established by a  certain people who are running campaigns. What I 'm

saying is that when you look at the facts that is not so,  that in fact we have marginally increased the allocation  to roads from the total oil take compared with the last  year of the other government. So, in that context it may  be not so difficult if it were .... judged that it were

appropriate to make more funds available for roads and to  fund that, not just to do it out of surplus. It's not  the same position, as some people are trying to  represent, as a massive decline in the proportion of

funds allocated to roads.

JOURNALIST: Have you made your mind up yet Mr Hawke whether y o u '11 debate Mr Peacock?

PM: I beg your pardon?

JOURNALIST: Have you made your mind up yet whether you'll debate Mr Peacock on television during the course  of the campaign and when during the course of that  campaign -

PM: That decision was made ages ago. I forget how long, ages. I mean, I -

JOURNALIST: (inaudible)

PM: Well, if it's Mr Peacock who's leading them, yes.

JOURNALIST: .... support of the invasion of Panama, Mr Hawke, but despite the fact that Vietnam have withdrawn  their troops from Cambodia, the Australian Government  still hasn't resumed aid to Vietnam, direct aid to  Vietnam.

PM: Well, I'm glad you said direct aid, because, as you appreciate that -JOURNALIST: .... resume and if not, are we guilty of double standards?

PM: No, we're not guilty of double standards obviously because, as I think you appreciate, Milton, because you

9

did qualify your question, there has been forms of  assistance in other ways through non government  organisations and multilaterally.  Now quite clearly the  question of direct resumption of direct aid to Vietnam is

inextricably bound up with the delicate negotiations that  are taking place now in regard to Cambodia and I don't  believe on anyone's part there is any suggestion, in  regard to Australia, that we are acting other than in an  entirely appropriate and entirely constructive way in  regard to the Indo China region. indeed I'm very proud  of the response, the virtually universal approbation that  has been given to the Australian initiative and, as you  will appreciate, while pursuing that initiative, we are

also adding to it now, as Gareth Evans just announced  very recently, by sending a team there to Cambodia so  that, not only Australia, but the rest of the countries

that are going to be involved in finding a resolution of  that tragic situation there will be better informed about  the practical difficulties and realities that we'll have  to face up to if together we're going to pursue this  concept of United Nations presence there in this period

leading up to elections. So, Milton, I don't think there  is any suggestion on anyone's part that we're acting  other than in a totally constructive and principled  fashion in regard to this region.

JOURNALIST: (inaudible)

PM: Well, yes, but there is no expectation that we should inject into this complex situation the difficulty  that may be created in some people's perception by the  resumption of, and I don't think that as far as Vietnam  is concerned itself, that they are pressing this point.  They understand that we are engaged in the very delicate  series of negotiations in which now Australia has assumed  a, you know, a quite pivotal role. So there is really no  expectation about this and there's no reason at all to

run the risk of in any way prejudicing the capacity that  we obviously have generated to get support from all the  players in this complex situation by making a decision  which no-one's really seeking.

JOURNALIST: Mr Hawke, what specific initiatives do you expect out of your New Zealand trip?

PM: It really will be an exchange of information. I don't know that there will be any specific initiatives,  but I certainly want to hear directly from Mr Palmer the  results of the fairly extensive review which you would  understand they have undertaken of the South Pacific

region and their relations in that region. Also be  interested to hear how they feel their relations with the  United States are developing. So we're also scheduled to  have discussions in regard to the way the CER is  developing, we're obviously rather pleased with the way

that's going. Certainly one other area which I know that  I know Mr Palmer wants to talk with me about are the  developments in Bougainville because there is a

10

reasonably .... New Zealand presence there as well.  So  you'll see it will be essentially an exchange of views  and a discussion about issues of importance to us in the  region and in our bilateral relation. There is no

specific decision that we are scheduled, scheduled to  take.

JOURNALIST: (inaudible)

PM: Now I think there was one over here -JOURNALIST: Mr Hawke, when can people with 17 percent mortgage rates look forward to some home loan relief? Will it require a further easing of the monetary policy

as the banks are suggesting?

PM: I think that you will recall that the Treasurer in addressing this issue put it, and I certainly agree with  him, that this was a limited initial step .... follow  that the decision in regard to mortgage rates would be a  matter for the banks.  It may be, as he said, that for  different banks there would be different points because  of the different composition of their books, but clearly

the impression seems to be amongst the banking industry  that they will require a further move. Now I'm not going  to speculate on when that will be. All I can say is that  there does seem to be a very general acceptance in the  community and in the financial community, the banking

sector, that a) the decision that we took was right, the  timing was right and the conditions have now been created  under which, within the not too distant furure there will  be a reflection of this lowering regimen in the mortgage  market, but I'm not going to speculate as to when that  will be.

JOURNALIST: I just want to follow up Glenn's question, Prime Minister -PM: Yes.

JOURNALIST: You're spending a lot more time at the Commonwealth Games than you are discussing Bougainville  with Mr Palmer. What's your response to the cynics in  talkback radio and elsewhere who've unkindly suggested  you're mainly going to Auckland to bathe in the reflected  glory of our medal winners?

PM: Yes well, you can't, you can't really win with those  cynics and I don't really try to. The fact is that as  well as the Commonwealth Games being on there, it is the  150th celebration of the Waitangi Treaty. I have been

asked, now going back more than a year, by the New  Zealand Government to go over at this time to combine a  visit which would recognise that celebration, as well as  the Commonwealth Games,  and to undertake discussions with

them on a range of issues. Now the cynics will always be  there, Laurie. If I allowed myself to be deflected by  the cynics, you wouldn't do anything.

11

JOURNALIST: Mr Hawke, the 50 defence force personnel who are going to Papua New Guinea, will any of them be on  Bougainville and do we actually have any military -PM: We've made it quite clear that our people are going up there, our military personnel who are going up there

for training purposes will not be involved in  Bougainville.

JOURNALIST: We don't have any military personnel on Bougainville at the moment?

PM: Not to my knowledge and it certainly has been, that has been the intention of the Government that there  should not be.

JOURNALIST: Will you be discussing Bougainville with Mr Namaliu at any time in the near future, Mr Hawke?

PM: Well I've just had my Ministers and my senior Ministers up there who've had discussions with the Prime  Minister there and with other ministers. I've been given  a full report on those discussions. If I were to find it

necessary in the light of any new developments to talk  with Rabbie I would do so.

JOURNALIST: Do you envisage any circumstances in which Australian troops might be directly used on Bougainville?

PM: Not in terms of the dispute between the Government of Papua New Guinea and the BRA. I've made that quite  clear and I say that unequivocally. Australian troops  are not going to be involved in an internal dispute  within Papua New Guinea. That's proper from our point of  view and obviously from Papua New Guinea's. I mean, let  me make the point again and I'm certainly not saying it's

the case with you, but there seems to be an almost  unstated assumption in some areas when they talk about  Papua New Guinea that, that Papua New Guinea is still a  colony or that it isn't a fully sovereign independent  country, so it's an area in which we have some right or  opportunity to just to go in and act capriciously as in a  non sovereign community.  Papua New Guinea is a sovereign

independent country and Australia will not be committing  its troops into that country in terms of a resolution of  some internal problem in that country.  The only  situation in which Australian defence forces could be

involved and would be involved is if we made the  judgement that it was necessary for the purpose of  evacuating and securing the safety of Australian  citizens. In no other circumstance.

JOURNALIST: Mr Hawke, will your Government ensure that foreigners can earn no more than 20 percent of our  commercial networks as announced by Mr Willis?

12

PM :  Well, the Minister is examining this both in terms of intention of the legislation and in terms of what the  present situation seems to have been. I mean, in other  words, it seems clear from certain .... statements have  been made by the Receiver for the Channel Seven group

that more than 20 percent has in fact been involved. Now  the Minister is looking at this matter and will be  reporting to the Government in the near future on it.

JOURNALIST: What would you see as the appropriate maximum level of foreign ownership?

PM: Well, certainly a minority and I will want to - I've just had a very brief discussion with the Minister and he  has undertaken, he's said to me that he's examining this  issue in some detail and will be reporting back. If  there's some decision that needs to be taken to clarify  this, well, then a decision will be made by the Cabinet  at the appropriate time.

JOURNALIST: The Thomastown by-election on Saturday Mr Hawke, are you expecting a very big swing against Labor?

PM: I haven't been following it closely enough. I'd expect that a) you would get a normal by-election swing.  You always get some. I guess there'd have to be some  addition to that from some concern about the industrial

relations position in regard to the trams down there. But I really haven't spent any time addressing what the  magnitude of the swing may be. All I can say is that it  clearly will be something that will be relevant to  Victoria and despite what will no doubt be the frenetic

attempts by some to beat it up as having some federal  implications I will not lose any sleep about it.

JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, have the Opposition's problems over health policy tempted you to call an  election sooner rather than later?

PM: No. No, I mean I think that, as I indicated in an

answer I gave earlier, that it's indicative of their  unfitness. As someone said recently, not only are they  unfit to be in Government, they are unfit to be in  Opposition. And the longer you give them y'know, the  more they show their incompetence, as well as their  dishonesty. Because I think everyone recognises that

they were not telling the truth about this situation for  a period of at least three months. Now the more time  they have the more likely it is that - I mean I'm not  saying therefore that the election's going to be on May

12 - but I'm simply saying that there are at least as  many arguments coming out of this for giving them longer  to expose their inadequacies than just jumping onto what  has been perhaps the most egregious example of their

incompetence.

JOURNALIST: Mr Hawke, Mr Peacock says he is telling the truth about the fact that health costs will balloon in

13

the 90s. Now do you acknowledge in any way that Medicare  will eventually outdo its usefulness?

PM: No, not in its concept it won't outlive its usefulness. We've shown in the period in Government that  in terms of our own decisions and the sort of  negotiations w e 're capable of having with the States that  we have the capacity to make adjustments. And you look

at the range of decisions that we've taken. Without  being exhaustive about it decisions we made last year in  regard to new hospital funding arrangements with the  States and decisions that we've taken in regard to  cutting back on the enormous explosion of income that was  occuring in some specialist areas of doctors. We have

shown a capacity to adjust and to the extent that that is  necessary in the future we will. But the underlying  principles will not change and those are simply these, as  you know - 1) universality and 2) equity. Those  principles are neither negotiable nor, under us,  changeable.

JOURNALIST: ... you may actually have to spend more in the future than ...

PM: Well I've simply said that, in answer to the question that Laurie put earlier, that our forward  expenditures are there in the forward estimates. They  are published. They are consistent, as I say, with the  position. We're covering what will be required to be  covered under the formula which takes account of

increased costs in areas where there can be a blowout.  Having taken account of those according to the formula we  still have a position where outlays are going to be  declining as a proportion of GDP down to 22% in 1992.

JOURNALIST: Do you think the behaviour of our athletes in Auckland has been an embarrassment at all?

PM: I think initially it was. I think it probably embarrassed them. But importantly, and to their great  credit, I congratulate them and I'm sure Australians are  proud of them. After that initial perhaps over­ exuberance in behaviour by a few, by a few I emphasise,

they've got down to the serious business of competition  and fair and effective competition and they have got the,  I was going to say the runs on the board, they've got the  medals on the board. That's certainly going to be a  pleasure for me to congratulate them personally on behalf  of the people of Australia in the next couple of days.

ends

