MINISTER FOR  FOREIGN AFFAIRS  AND TRADE M211 6 December 1990

No. Date:

EMBARGOED UNTIL DELIVERY

PROSPECTS FOR CAMBODIAN PEACE SETTLEMENT

The Minister for Foreign Affairs and Trade, Senator Gareth

Evans, warned today that the window of opportunity for

achieving a comprehensive settlement of the Cambodian conflict

could shortly close.

In a Ministerial Statement to the Senate today, Senator Evans

reviewed developments since Australia launched its Cambodian

Peace Initiative on 24 November 1989.

Senator Evans considered that progress in the past twelve

months meant a comprehensive settlement was now much closer

than ever before. But is was important for the Cambodian

parties to appreciate that the international community did not

have infinite reservoirs of commitment and patience over

Cambodia.

Senator Evans said it was incumbent on Australia under these

circumstances to do what it could, along with other countries,

to generate within the next month or two an unstoppable

momentum towards a comprehensive settlement.

Senator Evans said that a comprehensive settlement was the

best option for the people of Cambodia. If it proved

unachievable, Australia and other Western and regional

countries would need to review other policy options.

However, he emphasised that any course other than a

comprehensive settlement would be very much a second-best

option: "the simple truth of the matter is that unless and

until China is prepared to withdraw from the picture - and

COMMONWEALTH PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY  m ic a h

2

only the UN peace plan seems capable of delivering that - then

whatever Australia and other countries choose to do, the

continuation of bloody civil war is inevitable."

Senator Evans outlined the background to the Australian

initiative (pp 2-6) and progress made in the past twelve

months (pp 6-13).

He addressed in detail the various criticisms that have been

raised about the Australian UN Peace Plan, particularly in

relation to the position of the Khmer Rouge (pp 13-19).

On the question of Khmer Rouge gains, Senator Evans said that

Intelligence assessments available to the government showed

them to be much less dramatic than often reported. There was

no prospect of an early military takeover by the Khmer Rouge

unless there was a total collapse in the military, political

and social morale of the Hun Sen administration. In the

absence of a comprehensive settlement, however, the long term

outlook for Cambodia was not good.

* *  *

CANBERRA

PROSPECTS FOR A CAMBODIAN PEACE SETTLEMENT

Ministerial Statement by Senator Gareth Evans, Minister for

Foreign Affairs and Trade, Senate, 6 December 1990

It is now just over a year since my statement in the Senate on

24 November 1989 which launched Australia's peace initiative

on Cambodia, and an appropriate time for a statement reviewing

the progress which has been made in diplomatic efforts over

that time to resolve this tragic conflict. I make it with

three particular objectives.

First, it is appropriate to put on record, so far as is now

possible, the full extent of Australia's involvement in these

diplomatic efforts. It is not yet certain that the Cambodian

conflict will be capable of final resolution by the end of

this year or early next, but that is now, at the very least, a

real possibility. If a comprehensive settlement is achieved

within that kind of timeframe, along the lines that Australia

initially proposed and the international community has since

adopted, then we will have played a role of which we can be

very proud in bringing to an end the killing and suffering

which has so plagued Cambodia's modern history, and in

removing a major source of international discord in our

region.

Secondly, it is appropriate to answer those few persistent

critics, both within and outside Australia, who argue that

there is something fundamentally flawed or misconceived about

the Australian peace plan, in that the Khmer Rouge will be

able to exploit the peace process militarily, politically or

both - particularly in the proposed transitional period under

UN administration - and will in any event, at the end of the

day, simply not accept any outcome which does not leave them

in control of the country. It is important that clear answers

be given to these kinds of concerns lest there by any move at

the last minute to dilute or move away from what remains

Cambodia's best chance to achieve a lasting peace.

XXIV/90

2

Thirdly, I believe it is timely to make the point that while

we are much closer than we have ever been to reaching an

effective, workable comprehensive settlement to the Cambodian

problem, there are grounds for fear that the window of

opportunity in this respect may well start to close around the

end of this year. The key international players - not least

the Permanent Five Members of the Security Council, whose role

this year has been central in maintaining the peace momentum -

do not have infinite reservoirs of commitment and patience.

As other major issues continue to clamour for attention, and

if the Cambodian parties themselves remain intransigent, it

cannot be assumed that the key international players will not

walk away from the Cambodian problem. If they do, the result

can only be continuing civil war and possibly worse.

The Cambodian Conflict; Settlement Efforts Prior to November

1989

In April 1941 the French, still in effective colonial control

of Indo-China, ensured the election of Prince Norodom Sihanouk

as King of Cambodia, although initially he performed a largely

titular role. The period between 1941 and his overthrow in

1970 was characterised by efforts by Sihanouk to assert

growing independence and effective neutrality for Cambodia in

a region deeply involved in continuing conflict. In 1955 he

abdicated as King in favour of his father, resumed the title

Prince and also took over executive authority for the

government as Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs

and Trade. Following the death of his father in 1960, he

assumed the title of Head of State, but continued to exercise

executive authority.

In March 1970 Prince Sihanouk was overthrown in a military

coup by Marshal Lon Nol and went into exile in Beijing where

he established the Royal Government of the National Union of

Cambodia (GRUNC). Over the next five years the Lon Nol

regime's hold on power declined in the face of both internal

3

corruption and external threat from Sihanouk supporters,

allied with the powerful Khmer Rouge guerillas. In 1975 the

Khmer Rouge occupied Phnom Penh, overthrew the Lon Nol regime

and Sihanouk took up his position as Head of State. Sihanouk

found that he could have no place, however, in what became

quickly obvious was the monstrously cruel regime of Pol Pot's

Democratic Kampuchea (D K ), and he resigned as Head of State in

April 1976, but remained in Phnom Penh under house arrest

until January 1979.

The virulent anti-Vietnamese attitudes of the Khmer Rouge led

to border clashes with Vietnam and eventually to invasion by

Vietnam on 25 December 1978. Phnom Penh was captured on 7

January 1979, the DK Government ousted, and the People's

Republic of Kampuchea (PRK) proclaimed on 11 January under the

leadership of Heng Samrin (Hun Sen became in 1985 Prime

Minister of the PRK, subsequently renamed the State of

Cambodia (SOC)). In June 1982 the Coalition Government of

Democratic Kampuchea (CGDK) was established in Kuala Lumpur,

bringing together - united in their opposition to the

Vietnamese invasion if little else - the non-communist

Sihanoukists and the Khmer People's National Liberation Front

(KPNLF) under the leadership of Son Sann, together with the

communist Khmer Rouge.  (The CGDK was later renamed the

National Government of Cambodia (NGC) in February 1990).

Australia, under the Fraser Government, made clear in 1980 its

decision to derecognise the DK regime and formally did so in

February 1981. No Australian Government has recognised either

the SOC or the NGC since, although the recognition issue has

been academic since our 1988 decision to recognise henceforth

only states and not governments. (On the question of who

should have credentials to occupy the Cambodian seat in the

United Nations, Australia has abstained since 1981.)

While not supporting either side to the conflict Australia

has, however, been consistently active in pursuit of a

settlement of what is undoubtedly the region's most pressing

4

source of instability and a situation which has for far too

long been the scene of horrific human suffering. After 1983,

the Australian Government became particularly prominent among

those countries seeking a solution. Along with others, we

sought to identify areas of shared concern in the positions of

the various parties to the Cambodia dispute and sought to

encourage dialogue on the basis of the following broad

principles: withdrawal of all Vietnamese forces from

Cambodia, matched by an effective arrangement to prevent Pol

Pot and his Khmer Rouge forces from returning to power in

Cambodia; free and fair elections for Cambodia; the creation

of conditions for the peaceful return of displaced Cambodians

to Cambodia; and guarantees that a post settlement Cambodia

would be neutral, independent and non-aligned.

Until July 1988 there was, nonetheless, little substantive

movement towards a peaceful settlement. The period until then

was characterised by ritualistic statements and plans for

settlement incorporating aspects that were known to be

objectionable to the other participants. Australian

activities were, nevertheless, vigorous and included visits by

Mr Hayden to Vietnam and Laos in 1983 and 1985, and visits to

Australia by Vietnamese Foreign Minister Thach in 1984 and

Prince Sihanouk in 1985. Specific Australian initiatives

designed to help break the stalemate included the Pol Pot

tribunal concept and the series of seminars organised by

Griffith University and supported financially by the

Australian Government.

Following Mr Hayden's efforts in the mid 1980s regional

countries, and in particular Indonesia, sought to play a more

active diplomatic role in pursuit of a solution to the

Cambodia problem. These efforts led to the two Jakarta

Informal Meetings (JIMs) in July 1988 and February 1989.

These meetings were inconclusive. Although they did result in

some clearer definitions of the issues involved, there was no

progress on lessening the differences among the four Khmer

factions.

5

Hopes for a major move forward had arisen with the

announcement by Vietnam in January 1989 that it was prepared

to withdraw all its troops from Cambodia by September that

year. Seeking to force a breakthrough, France judged in mid

1989 that the time was ripe for a full international

Conference on Cambodia. The Paris International Conference on

Cambodia (PICC) was accordingly convened, with joint

Indonesian chairmanship, in Paris in July/August 1989: it

brought together all four Cambodian factions, the six ASEAN

countries, the Permanent Five Members of the UN Security

Council, Vietnam, Laos, Australia, Canada and India as well as

Zimbabwe (representing the Non-Aligned Movement) and a

representative of the UN Secretary-General.

In the event the Paris Conference failed, but not without

coming very close to succeeding. A comprehensive settlement

strategy was mapped out involving, in broad terms, the

monitored withdrawal of all Vietnamese forces; a ceasefire;

the cessation of external support; the creation of a

transitional administration; and the holding of free elections

- all under the supervision of an international control

mechanism. It also involved measures to guarantee the

neutrality of Cambodia and non-interference in its internal

affairs; to deal with the repatriation of refugees and

displaced persons; and to ensure the reconstruction of the

country.

That settlement strategy foundered for a number of stated

reasons, but only one of them was really crucial: one side to

the conflict, the combined resistance forces of Prince

Sihanouk, Son Sann and the Khmer Rouge, together with their

international backers, demanded a place for each of the four

internal parties, including the Khmer Rouge, in the

transitional administration; this was a demand which the PRK

Government of Hun Sen, and its international backers, were

simply not prepared to concede.

6

Vietnam proceeded to withdraw its formed military units more

or less on schedule, but this was accompanied not by a renewed

momentum for peace - despite various efforts by the Paris Co Â­

Chairmen, the Thai Prime Minister and the US Secretary of

State - but rather a resurgence of fighting, continued

external supplies of arms and material, and a general

hardening of diplomatic positions. Although international

opinion remained overwhelmingly in favour of a comprehensive

settlement - as the UN General Assembly vote on the ASEAN

resolution again proved - the stumbling block remained the

composition of the proposed transitional administration, in

particular the role proposed in it for the Khmer Rouge: even

on the basis that the Khmer Rouge would have but a minor role

in a quadripartite administration, and that it would be shorn

of its former leadership.

It was to break this impasse that the Australian peace

proposal, announced in outline in the Senate on 24 November

1989, was put forward.

Thp. Australian Proposal and Diplomatic Developments Sinne

The central concept of the Australian proposal to reinvigorate

the peace process was very simple. So as to sidestep the

power-sharing issue which had bedevilled the Paris Conference,

and constrain the role of the Khmer Rouge in the transitional

arrangements, we proposed that the United Nations be directly

involved in the civil administration of Cambodia during the

transitional period. Along with a UN military presence to

monitor the ceasefire and cessation of external military

assistance, and a UN role in organising and conducting

elections, UN involvement in the transitional administrative

arrangements would ensure a neutral political environment

conducive to free and fair general elections.

The Australian initiative recognised that a logical

consequence of such a role for the United Nations would mean

having the Cambodia seat at the United Nations either declared

7

vacant or transferred to a neutral representative Cambodian

body for the duration of the transitional period. In other

important regards, the Australian initiative preserved the

objectives of a comprehensive political settlement as defined

at the Paris Conference.

The idea of United Nations involvement in a transitional

authority was not in itself new, although the degree of detail

with which the concept was subsequently developed certainly

was. Prince Sihanouk had in March 1981, and occasionally

subsequently, raised the idea of some form of United Nations

trusteeship. And during 1989, US Congressman Stephen Solarz

had developed the specific idea of a neutral United Nations

interim administration: discussions I had with Mr Solarz in

New York last October and subsequently have been crucial in

shaping my own thinking.

In advocating the very substantially enhanced UN role in the

settlement that we did, the Australian Government recognised

that we were being ambitious. Though well experienced in

peace-keeping operations and monitoring elections, the United

Nations has not so far had a role in the civil administration

of one of its member States, nor in having primary

responsibility for organising and conducting elections as

distinct from monitoring them. In addition, conditions within

Cambodia - including the potentially fragile character of any

ceasefire, the difficulty of monitoring guerilla forces, and

the lack of developed transport and communications

infrastructure - would mean that the overall UN operation

would be much more difficult than that which had been

experienced in most other situations.

While recognising from the outset the inherent difficulty and

complexity of what we were proposing, the Australian

Government was encouraged by the new vitality and credibility

the United Nations had been able to demonstrate through its

success in facilitating an end to the Iran-Iraq war and the

Soviet withdrawal from Afghanistan, and its role in

8

implementing the Namibian settlement. The transformation of

East-West relations under way in 1989 was also relevant to our

calculations in two ways. First, close collaboration between

the United States and the Soviet Union on a number of

international disputes had strengthened markedly the

collective authority and influence of the Five Permanent

Members of the UN Security Council. Secondly, as the effects

of historic changes in the Soviet Union and Europe worked

their way through to the Asia-Pacific region, it was becoming

clear that the Soviet Union, Vietnam and probably China were

more interested than before in achieving a Cambodian

settlement if their minimum objectives could be obtained.

Despite these positive pointers, however, we knew that a long,

gruelling effort would be required to translate the Australian

proposal -into reality.

The initial international response to the Australian proposal

was nothing less than quite remarkable. It very quickly

became clear that the idea was one whose time had come.

Within a matter of weeks, most of the participants in the

Paris Conference had picked up the proposal for an enhanced UN

role as a viable way around the power-sharing impasse and the

problem of the Khmer Rouge, and given it varying degrees of

public as well as private endorsement.

This process was considerably assisted by a remarkable feat of

diplomatically effective endurance by Department of Foreign

Affairs and Trade Deputy Secretary, Michael Costello. He had

been tasked early in December 1989 to pay a quick visit to

Hanoi - in between talks scheduled on other matters in Hawaii

and Tokyo - to take preliminary soundings. The response was

so encouraging, and developed with each successive meeting

such a snowball effect, that this initial detour turned into a

series of 30 major meetings with key players in 13 countries

over 21 days straddling the December 1989-January 1990 period.

During the course Of this odyssey the Australian 'idea' became

a fully fledged Australian 'initiative* or 'plan', as we

constantly refined and developed the detailed elements of the

9

proposal and responded to suggestions or criticisms from our

various interlocutors.

1 was particularly encouraged by the positive reaction of the

US Administration, which had the foresight to propose to the

Soviet Union in late 1989 that they join the other three

Permanent Members of the Security Council in a series of

consultations on Cambodia. Representatives of the Permanent

Five met in Paris on 15-16 January and agreed by consensus on

a set of sixteen principles which would form the basis of

their future discussions. Those principles included strong

endorsement of the concept of an enhanced United Nations role

in the transitional period.

The January meeting of the Permanent Five was significant in

another sense. It marked the start of a two-track

international approach to the Cambodia problem - the Permanent

Five process and the Paris Conference process - between which

a productive interaction has continued all this year.

By late January, Indonesian Foreign Minister Alatas, who, as

Co-Chairman of the Paris Conference, had been exploring the

possibility of an informal regional meeting on Cambodia, felt

sufficiently encouraged to convene a meeting in Jakarta on 26Â­

28 February involving the four Cambodian parties, Vietnam and

Laos and the ASEAN countries. In recognition of the

contribution we were making to the peace process, Australia

was invited to attend as a resource delegation.

In preparation for the Jakarta Informal Meeting on Cambodia

(IMC), as it became known, I despatched a technical mission to

visit Cambodia, Bangkok and the Thai-Cambodia border area from

2 to 16 February to gather information on the administrative

structures of the State of Cambodia and of the National

Government of Cambodia, with a view to filling in gaps in data

necessary for the development of a United Nations role in

Cambodia leading to free and fair elections. Working very

rapidly, with a Departmental task force now numbering over a

10

dozen senior officers, we produced in time for distribution at

the Jakarta Meeting a 155-page series of Working Papers,

incorporating the technical mission's findings and covering in

some detail all the necessary elements of a comprehensive

settlement.

The Papers were subsequently published as Cambodia:____ an

Australian Peace Proposal - the now familiar "Red Book". They

examined in particular detail a role for the United Nations in

civil administration, organising and conducting elections and

in maintaining a secure environment in which Cambodians might

exercise their electoral choice free from fear, intimidation

and violence. The Papers also explored a range of costings.

Conventional wisdom had it that such an exercise would be

beyond the resources of the United Nations. Our indicative

calculations showed that such a proposal (estimated, for the

preferred 'mid-range* scenario, to cost $US 1.3 billion for 18

months) was both practicable and affordable.

The Jakarta IMC came very close to reaching agreement on a

statement of principles providing for an enhanced role for the

United Nations in a comprehensive settlement, but in the end

it just failed to do so, consensus breaking down on the

question of whether the agreed record should make specific

reference to "the prevention of recurrence of genocidal

policies and practices". While the outcome was disappointing

in that regard, the meeting did begin a process of consensus-

building and confirmed that if there was to be a way forward,

it must be through an enhanced role for the United Nations.

Moreover, the concepts and suggestions in the Australian

Working Papers began to permeate international thinking, and

found expression in papers developed by the Permanent Five

over the course Of six major consultative meetings on Cambodia

they held between January and August this year.

Despite alternate gloom and false dawns, the negotiating

process has ground forward during 1990. Continual Australian

diplomacy both in and around Indo-China, at the United

11

Nations, and in Permanent Five capitals has helped maintain

the renewed momentum which our initial initiative generated.

Necessarily our role during this period has been supportive

and back-room in character, rather than politically centre-

stage, but it has been no less substantial and constructive

for that, and has been widely acknowledged as such.

In recent months the accumulated diplomatic efforts of all

concerned have borne fruit, with five significant developments

occurring in fairly rapid succession. In noting these recent

achievements I pay particular tribute to the valuable personal

contribution that has been made to the international

negotiating process by my friend and colleague, the Indonesian

Foreign Minister Mr Ali Alatas, whose perseverance and

resourcefulness through a series of difficult meetings hosted

in Jakarta by his Government have been most impressive.

First, at its sixth meeting on Cambodia, in New York on 27-28

August, the Permanent Five reached agreement on a framework

document setting out the key elements of a comprehensive

political settlement of the Cambodian conflict based on an

enhanced UN role. Along with other interested governments,

Australia welcomed this document as a major contribution to

the peace process. While there were naturally areas where we

wanted to see further elaboration, we considered it to

represent a skilful and judicious balance of the various

interests involved.

Secondly, at a meeting in Jakarta on 9-10 September hosted by

Indonesia and France as Paris Conference Co-Chairmen, the four

Cambodian parties accepted the Permanent Five framework in its

entirety as a basis for settling the Cambodian conflict, and

agreed to establish a Supreme National Council (SNC) as called

for in the Permanent Five framework, which would, among other

things occupy the Cambodian seat in the United Nations. At

Indonesia's invitation, Australian representatives attended

this meeting and helped behind the scenes achieve a successful

outcome.

12

Thirdly, the United Nations itself endorsed the basic elements

of the peace plan, urging the parties to elaborate the

Permanent Five framework into a concluded comprehensive

political settlement in UN Security Council Resolution 668 of

20 September, and UN General Assembly Resolution 45/3 of 15

October. These resolutions also welcomed the agreement of the

Cambodian parties to form an SNC "as the unique legitimate

body and source of authority in which, throughout the

transitional period, the independence, national unity and

sovereignty of Cambodia is embodied", noting that the SNC

would "designate its representatives to occupy the seat of

Cambodia at the United Nations".

Fourthly, the Paris Co-Chairmen hosted a Working Group meeting

in Jakarta on 9-10 November at which agreement was reached on

the form and structure of a comprehensive settlement

negotiating text. This meeting was attended by the Paris

Conference Co-Chairmen (Indonesia and France), the Co-Chairmen

of the Conference's three Working Committees (Canada and

India, Malaysia and Laos, Japan and Australia), the other four

Permanent Members of the Security Council and a representative

of the UN Secretary General. Australia had prepared and

circulated a full draft negotiating test as an input in to the

Working Group meeting, and this work was substantially drawn

upon during the discussions.

Fifthly, pursuant to the mandate given to the Paris CoÂ­

Chairmen by the Jakarta Working Group meeting to complete the

drafting of a negotiating text, representatives of the CoÂ­

Chairmen and the UN Secretary-General met with Permanent Five

officials in Paris on 23-26 November and reached consensus on

a full draft comprehensive agreement.

These developments, cumulatively, represent a particularly

satisfying result for Australia, not least because there is at

last achievement of a central objective we have pursued since

February this year: agreement by the Permanent Five and other

13

key players in the Paris Conference process to approach the

final stages of a comprehensive settlement process working

from a single negotiating text. No-one, including Australia,

believes the present draft text is yet perfect, but it is

certainly now in a shape that will make rapidly achievable the

final negotiation Of a comprehensive settlement at a resumed

Paris Conference - provided always the will is genuinely there

to make this possible.

The remaining steps in the settlement process are: first, for

the SNC to meet, resolve outstanding questions about its

composition and chairmanship, and indicate its willingness to

join in a resumed Paris Conference; secondly, for the PICC CoÂ­

ordination Committee, involving all Paris Conference

participants, including the SNC representing Cambodia, to meet

to finalise the text of the comprehensive settlement

agreement; and thirdly, for a Ministerial session of the Paris

Conference to convene to endorse and sign that agreement.

After these steps have all been taken, it would be then for

the UN Security Council to pass a resolution instructing the

Secretary-General to take the necessary action to implement

the settlement.

The most optimistic assessment has been that these steps, up

to the point of the Ministerial signature, can all still be

completed before Christmas 1990. But that is now an extremely

optimistic scenario; certainly it depends crucially, in the

first instance, on the willingness of the SNC to commence

immediately full participation in the negotiation process.

Questions raised about the Australian UN Peace Plan

Notwithstanding all the momentum now accumulated behind the

peace plan originally proposed by Australia and now endorsed

in outline by the UN (hereafter referred to as the "UN peace

plan"), criticism persists in certain quarters about certain

aspects of it. The most important objections are that it

makes too many concessions to the Khmer Rouge who, it is said,

14

will be able to exploit the process politically, militarily,

or both - particularly in the proposed transitional period

under UN administration - and who will not in any event accept

and final outcome which does not leave them in control of the

country.

I. The first question raised by this kind of criticism is

why we seek to engage the Khmer Rouge in the peace process at

all. Why not simply take the position that their past record

of atrocities entitles them to no consideration at all, and

that the best option in these circumstances is to establish

relations with the Phnom Penh government and encourage it to

hold free elections - in which at least the non-communist

resistance resistance would be able to participate - as soon

as possible? Now that Vietnam had withdrawn virtually all its

troops, and was no longer sustaining by occupation the

government it had installed, was it not now possible to

accept, at least pending elections, the SOC as the legitimate

Government of Cambodia?

This course has not been without its temptations, but is not

one that has, hitherto, been able to withstand close scrutiny.

If it were simply a matter of adopting a strategy that would

effectively isolate and marginalise the Khmer Rouge, not very

many voices would be heard in strenuous opposition. But the

point is, simply, that the Khmer Rouge cannot be effectively

isolated and marginalised, with its military influence

nullified, so long as it continues to be supplied, especially

by China, with arms and money and diplomatic support. China

has consistently maintained that it will give a commitment to

cease military support to the Khmer Rouge, and support a

ceasefire, only in the context of a comprehensive settlement

agreed by all four Cambodian parties. The simple truth of the

matter is that unless and until China is prepared to withdraw

from the picture - and only the UN peace plan seems capable of

delivering that - then whatever Australia and other countries

choose to do, the continuation of bloody civil war is

inevitable.

15

II. A second criticism made of the UN peace plan, or at least

the protracted process involved in its negotiation, is that

the delay in its implementation is being exploited by the

Khmer Rouge to make major military gains and extend their

political influence.

This criticism makes two assumptions, both of which lack

foundation. The first is that there is an alternative,

quicker way of achieving peace in Cambodia - but if the

current international negotiating process were not taking

place, there is simply no reason at all to assume that the

Khmer Rouge's military activity would have been any less in

recent months. The Australian initiative has not provided a

smokescreen behind which the Khmer Rouge has fought - they

have been fighting without encouragement from us for decades.

The other assumption, which needs to be addressed in more

detail, is that the Khmer Rouge have in fact been making

significant gains in recent months, and that there is as a

result a real prospect of their regaining control of the

country in the short to medium term. The media often carry

exaggerated and unfounded accounts of Khmer Rouge advances,

but the situation reflected in intelligence assessments

available to the Australian Government is less dramatic.

These assessments do indicate that the Khmer Rouge is making

steady long-term progress with the same sort of guerilla

strategy which brought it to power in 1975, but that there is

no prospect of an early military takeover by the Khmer Rouge.

The only exception made, and it is a very important one, is in

the event of a total collapse in the military, political and

social morale of the Hun Sen administration.

Recent media reports that the Khmer Rouge have recently

received 24 Chinese tanks have, understandably, attracted wide

attention. The Australian Government agrees with the view

that, if such reports of recent delivery were true, they would

indicate an ominous shift by China away from support for a

16

comprehensive political settlement towards a military victory

by the Khmer Rouge. But after full examination of, and

consultation with our partners on, information from all

sources, there is no evidence available to the Australian

Government that the Khmer Rouge have recently received tanks

from China. Indeed, the consensus among the experts is to the

contrary. It is also worth noting that, while possession of

tanks may give the Khmer Rouge some psychological advantage

over the SOC, the logistic requirements to maintain, fuel and

operate them, especially away from border areas, would stretch

Khmer Rouge resources in current circumstances.

The SOC armed forces also have tanks and sufficient artillery

to counter Khmer Rouge use of tanks. All along, the important

question for the SOC has been their ability to use this

hardware in a militarily effective way. Fighting has been

limited in recent weeks, and casualties on both sides remain

light. The pattern has been one of the SOC's maintaining

static deployment against Khmer Rouge guerrilla harassment.

There have been suggestions that the onset of the dry season

from this month may see the SOC move to counter-offensive

activity, but so far there are few indications of preparations

for that.

It is certainly the view of the Australian Government that, to

minimise any risk of significant change in the present

military balance before the comprehensive settlement is bedded

down, the current negotiating effort should be complemented by

an immediate ceasefire and cessation of external arms supply.

In this context we have been seeking support also for early

despatch of a United Nations military "good offices" mission,

to facilitate implementation of a period of military selfÂ­

restraint.

While it is not the case that the SOC is facing any imminent

disaster, it nonetheless has to be acknowledged that prospects

of the SOC regime's surviving over the long term are not

especially good if current trends inside Cambodia are allowed

17

to continue. The long-term vulnerability of the SOC regime is

compounded by chronic economic and administrative weaknesses.

The regime has been heavily dependent on external assistance,

particularly from the Soviet Union, but that is now being

significantly reduced. The situation is exacerbated by

Cambodia's very limited capacity to earn foreign exchange or

to generate internal revenue. There are chronic shortages of

basic necessities, particularly fuel. While the SOC has put

in place measures to liberalise the economy, it has not

developed adequate mechanisms to generate the income necessary

to fund government services.

III. The third criticism is that once the UN peace plan is put

into operation, the Khmer Rouge will be able to exploit the

transitional arrangements to facilitate their return to power.

This is of course something which has been given very close

attention in the international deliberations to date, and will

no doubt continue to loom large in what remains of the

negotiating process. The most important point to appreciate

is that the SNC, while fully embodying the sovereignty of the

Cambodian nation, is not expected to itself exercise the full

range of executive authority that one would associate with an

ordinary government. There is a sharp distinction in this

respect between the SNC's role, and that proposed for the

quadripartite transitional administration in the pre-November

1989 peace plan which implied a quarter-share in the day-toÂ­

day government of the country by Khmer Rouge officials. The

presence of just two Khmer Rouge nominees within the body of

12 (or 14) constituting the SNC should not of itself cause

concern, and is in fact readily accepted by the SOC regime.

Nor does the SOC regime, it should be said, resist the idea of

letting the Khmer Rouge contest the UN-supervised elections

provided Pol Pot and his most notorious associates are not

allowed to stand as candidates. While it appears they are not

in fact proposing to do so, in any case the United Nations and

most relevant national governments including Australia would

18

naturally refuse to cooperate with a process which was

belittled by the presence of candidates of such notoriety. A

further important election safeguard, proposed by Australia

and accepted by other countries, is that the general elections

organised by the United Nations should take place with secret

balloting for a single national constituency with proportional

representation. This will minimise the risk of intimidation

of voters in areas controlled by the Khmer Rouge, for example.

More generally, of course, the whole concept of an enhanced UN

role in the civil administration of the country during the

transitional period is to ensure a genuinely neutral

environment for the conduct of the election, in which no one

party would stand to benefit by way of either assistance or

neglect from a central government.

IV. A fourth criticism of the UN peace plan is that the Khmer

Rouge will not in any event accept the final outcome of any

process which does not leave them in control of the country.

It is difficult to believe that the Khmer Rouge would win more

than a minor share of the vote in any genuinely free and fair

election, although it would be unwise to underestimate the

degree of support they have been winning - with their fiercely

anti-Vietnamese nationalism and freedom from accusations of

corruption - especially among some segments of the rural

population who did not suffer directly their earlier

brutality.

Certainly in these circumstance, given that there is no

evidence that the Khmer Rouge's stated abandonment of their

previous ideology and methods is anything more than tactical,

there can be no guarantee that they will not resume fighting

after the transitional period with weapons which have been

hidden from the UN monitoring teams.

While acknowledging there can be no absolute guarantee that

renewed fighting will not occur, two crucial new factors will

19

have a positive bearing on the outcome. First, China will

have given an international legal undertaking to cease arms

supply to the Khmer Rouge, will be under close international

scrutiny to uphold that undertaking, and can be reasonably

expected to honour it. While the Khmer Rouge may well have

access to two or three years supplies of arms in caches, and

will be able to make a major nuisance of themselves during

that time, thereafter - without continued external support -

the danger they pose to the fabric of Cambodian society will

be dramatically reduced. We can expect them to be genuinely

isolated and marginalised.

A second relevant consideration is that the new Cambodian

administration will be accepted by the whole international

community as the government of the country and is very likely

to receive substantial economic, social and technical

assistance during the rehabilitation and reconstruction

process envisaged under the comprehensive settlement. Taken

together, these factors will mean that the newly elected

Cambodian Government will be in a much better position that

the present Hun Sen regime to withstand any renewed challenge

from what will be in any event a considerably constrained

Khmer Rouge.

The Comprehensive Settlement Window

Taking stock of the current state of the peace process, it is

apparent that there are two conflicting trends. On the one

hand, following the successful fusion of the Permanent Five

and Paris Conference components, there has now been prepared

an integrated draft negotiating text for a comprehensive

settlement. If the Cambodian parties and their international

backers show the necessary political will, we should now be

only a month or two away from a comprehensive settlement. On

the other hand, the Cambodian parties are still unable to

agree among themselves on the relatively minor - compared with

other matters at stake - issue of the Chairmanship and ViceÂ­

Chairmanship of the SNC as established at the September

20

Jakarta meeting. Not altogether unreasonably, the Paris

Conference Co-Chairmen maintain the position that they will

not reconvene the Paris Conference Co-ordination Committee

until the Cambodian parties sort out the SNC impasse.

It would be a most unhappy result if the peace process were to

break down at this late stage around this essentially very

marginal issue. As already noted, it is not as though the SNC

is intended to be a body with strong executive powers. Its

role is intended to be largely formal. Throughout the

transitional period, the SNC will be the unique source of

authority and the embodiment of Cambodian independence,

sovereignty and unity. Its role is to represent Cambodia

externally and to delegate to the UN the powers necessary to

ensure the implementation of the comprehensive settlement.

But for China, Vietnam and all the Cambodian parties, it is

increasingly clear that the SNC issue has now acquired

considerable symbolic significance.

In late October and early November, Australia undertook a

series of informal consultations in Phnom Penh, Hanoi, Beijing

and Bangkok on the SNC impasse. We also consulted with Prince

Sihanouk in Pyongyang. While it was clear that a deadlock

might continue for some time, we encouraged the principal

parties to consider a compromise formula whereby Prince

Sihanouk would be elected as Chairman and a thirteenth member

of the SNC, Prime Minister Hun Sen of the SOC regime would be

elected Vice-Chairman, and the SOC would be invited to

nominate someone to become a fourteenth member of the Council,

with these arrangements being implemented either at clearly

defined separate stages of a single meeting or at two

successive meetings of the SNC. There are indications that

something along these lines might eventually be acceptable to

all the parties, but disagreement for the time being persists.

In parallel with the continuing SNC impasse, there have ben

recent reports of dissatisfaction by the SOC regime and

Vietnam with aspects of the Permanent Five framework of 28

21

August, as elaborated in Paris on 26 November 1990, including

questions which relate to the administrative and military

mandate for the proposed United Nations Transitional Authority

in Cambodia. The continuing sensitivity of these issues has

been known for some time. Australia’s view is that the

reported expressions of concern by the SOC and Vietnam confirm

the urgency of resolving the SNC impasse quickly so that the

Cambodian parties can address directly the substantive issues

of the comprehensive settlement at a reconvened session of the

Paris Conference Coordination Committee.

As I stated at the outset it is important for the Cambodian

parties themselves to appreciate that the international

community does not have infinite reservoirs of commitment and

patience to provide to the peace process, particularly if the

Cambodians themselves are not willing to help maintain forward

momentum. There are indications that the commitment to the

peace process of some of the key international players will be

difficult to sustain much beyond the end of the year. The

Gulf crisis and forthcoming major issues in Europe are likely

increasingly to command the priority attention of most

Permanent Five countries.

Taken together, these observations point to the conclusion

that, while we are now much closer than we ever have been to

reaching a comprehensive settlement of the Cambodian conflict,

the window of opportunity for progress may well start to close

around the end of this year. It is incumbent on Australia and

other like-minded participants to give every possible support

to the Paris Conference Co-Chairmen in the period immediately

ahead so that, if possible, an unstoppable momentum towards a

comprehensive settlement can be generated by the end of the

year, even if the culminating Ministerial session on the Paris

Conference has not taken place by then.

As I also indicated at the beginning of this statement,

despite the efforts of Australia and many other players and

despite all the progress made during the past year, it is

22

still by no means certain that we will be able to achieve a

comprehensive settlement of the Cambodian conflict. We should

know one way or other during the next two months or so, as the

parties are forced to come to grips with the actual

obligations set out in the single negotiating, text.

If it becomes clear that, despite the best efforts of all

concerned, a comprehensive settlement is unachievable,

Australia, along with other Western and regional countries,

will need to review other policy options. It is very clear

that any course other than a comprehensive settlement would be

very much a second-best option. Diplomatic recognition and

the moderate levels of economic assistance which might be

forthcoming over time would obviously help the SOC

psychologically and to some extent practically. But the Khmer

Rouge military threat, on the assumption of continuing arms

supply form China, would remain a major challenge to the

survival of the SOC regime. The internal weaknesses of the

SOC regime, with all that they imply for its long-term

vulnerability, could be expected to continue.

Given the sorry history of Western military involvement in

Indo-China in recent decades, it would be a very large

assumption that any future Australian government, or any

future government in the West generally, would be willing to

contemplate the despatch of military forces to help the SOC

fight the Khmer Rouge. Certainly Vietnam has made it clear

that it cannot afford to, and will not, play that role again.

Up to 200,000 Vietnamese troops, fighting over a period of

nearly 11 years, were not been able to eliminate the Khmer

Rouge so long as it was supplied by China, and there is no

reason to assume that anyone else would do as well.

The kind of alternative policy approach which is constantly

recommended to the Government - built around recognition of

the SOC - has, then, obvious limitations in helping save the

ordinary Cambodian people from continuing civil war and the

appalling prospect of a second military takeover by the Khmer

Rouge.  Nor can it be assumed that it will help in removing

the Cambodian conflict as a source of international tension in

the region.

Recognition of these realities strengthens the Australian

Government in our conviction to do all in our capacity to help

achieve a comprehensive settlement in the coming months. We

are further reinforced in our commitment by the knowledge that

Australia's diplomatic contribution to the solution of this

deep-seated and complex problem has been welcomed and

encouraged by the key international players in the negotiating

process and all Cambodian parties except the Khmer Rouge.

Just as importantly, Indonesia and other regional partners

have welcomed the contribution we have made towards resolving

an issue which has obstructed the harmonious development of

relations in our region for over a decade.

Given all that has been achieved so far in the Cambodian peace

process, and given the importance of the issues at stake -

partly in terms of our own regional standing, but more

importantly for the long-suffering Cambodian people - we do

not intend to walk away from the effort to achieve a

comprehensive settlement as long as there remains some

reasonable prospect of success. While we may eventually have

to consider other options if others allow the window of

opportunity to once again slam shut, to do so now would be to

demonstrate a lack of that nerve and stamina in foreign policy

which is increasingly necessary in the ever-more fluid and

uncertain international environment we now face.

23

* * *

