No. Date:

M159 19 September 1990

AUSTRALIA.  VIETNAM AND THE REGION

The following is the text of an address by the Minister for  Foreign Affairs and Trade, Senator Gareth Evans,  to the  Conference on Vietnam's Economic Renovation,  at the Research

School of Pacific Studies, ANU, to be delivered at 9.40am this

morning in Canberra.

EMBARGOED AGAINST DELIVERY

*  *  *

COMMONWEALTH   PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY  MICAH

Opening address by Senator Gareth Evans, Minister for Foreign

Affairs and Trade, to the Conference on Vietnam's Economic.

Renovation.  Research School of Pacific Studies, ANU, Canberra,

18 September 1990.

To a casual third country observer, it may not be immediately  obvious why Vietnam should be as significant to Australia as

it is. We have no common heritage. While in the same region,  we are not neighbours. We h ve only recently sought to engage

in commerce in a serious way. Yet for more than three decades

Vietnam has been.  the catalyse for a large part of our foreign  policy energies. For many of my generation the war in Vietnam

was a searing introduction to the complexities of foreign

policy. Then as now, our approach towards Indo-China has been  central to our dealings with other countries in our region and  has affected the perspectives of others about the sort of

country we are. And it has contributed significantly to the  process by which Australia has been able to develop its own  sense of self within the region.

Vietnam did not feature prominently in Australian thinking

before the Vietnam War. Like many others, we watched the  French lose Indo-China with alarm. Vietminh control of North

Vietnam following on from the "loss" of China worried us lest

a red tide surge through Asia. We joined with others in the

South East Asia Treaty Organisation and prepared ourselves to

resist. Then we fought in Vietnam, as part of a crusade

against an enemy the actual nature of whose objectives we  failed sufficiently to understand. As I said in the 1989

Beanland Lecture:

A better understanding of Vietnam and its history would

have led us to the view that, while undoubtedly a man  deeply committed to the cause of international communism,

Ho Chi Minh was not a Chinese puppet playing out some

XVIII/90

2

scripted drama for the extension of Chinese communism

through all of South East Asia and beyond.  Had we known

more of Vietnam we might have seen more grey and less

red. It was a costly ignorance.

By the end of the War, Australia had entangled itself in Asian

affairs in a way which had tested the fabric of our own

society but which had also accelerated the beginning of some  sense of belonging to the region. And because Vietnam had

caused our identification of a common cause with the United

States to be questioned, we increasingly came to examine Asia  more from our own regional standpoint and on the basis of our  own appreciation of our own interests.

We have not of course been physically involved in what

historians may well term the Third Indo-China War - the

complex of events which, after the fall of Saigon in 1975,  flowed from Vietnam-Cambodia hostilities and the Sino-

Vietnamese rift, and which tends to be encapsulated in the  expression "the Cambodian issue".  But that war has been an  essential focus of our own regional diplomacy and that of

others for over a decade. The three major powers - China, the

Soviet Union and the United States - have had a significant

stake in the issue.  It has been a major cause for difference  in Sino-Soviet and US-Soviet relations. It has separated

Indo-China from ASEAN. The policy of others on the Cambodian

issue - including of course Australia - has been the subject

of minute scrutiny by the parties principal and has to some

extent been the touchstone of how we and others have been  perceived in the region.

And if we have sometimes been seen as almost too involved in

Indo-China issues, it has been because we have compelling

interests in Vietnam and the. rest of Indo-China.

.  Although not an immediate neighbour, Indo-China is in a

region which has been a source of instability in an area

of strategic importance to Australia:  in this sense

alone, our pursuit of a settlement in Cambodia has been

far from some exotic whim.

.  We also have an interest in a trading and investment

partnership with Vietnam as its economy develops:

3

ultimately Vietnam could become not only a valuable

bilateral partner but a valuable regional player in the

Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) grouping.

.  We have a humanitarian interest in Vietnam and the

Vietnamese:  most Australians would genuinely like to see

a more prosperous and settled Vietnam and the Vietnamese  people having greater freedom with which to enjoy that

prosperity.

.  And we also have an interest in people ceasing to try to

leave Vietnam illegally. While we accept that conditions

there are difficult and often miserable, the flow of boat  people has often resulted in more misery as countries of  first asylum and countries of resettlement have had to

balance humanitarian imperatives against the need to  discourage a greater outflow, largely for economic  reasons,  from Vietnam.

But our interests in Vietnam and Indo-China go further still.  Our policy towards Vietnam has had an indirect,  but important,   effect on our relations with other regional countries,  such as

those of ASEAN.  How we act towards Vietnam has affected the  way we have been perceived in the region. Thus our

relationship with Vietnam has assumed a significance greater  than the sum of the elements of our relationship with Vietnam

seen in isolation:

.  In the 1960s and early 1970s our role in Vietnam meant

that we were seen in the region primarily as an ally of

the United States preoccupied by military security  .  Later, we were seen as a country prepared to differ in

some measure from expressed conventional wisdom on  Vietnam (for example, on the desirability of isolating

Vietnam and declining to recognise the Coalition

Government in Cambodia because it included the Khmer

Rouge). In this process we received a certain amount of  disapproval from regional friends  .  Most recently, we have increasingly been accepted as a

country with genuine security interests in Indo-China

which has been able to play a constructive role in the

search for a comprehensive settlement of the Cambodian

issue.

Our diverse approaches towards Vietnam and Indo-China have

been shaped by our perceptions at any particular time of our

interests in the area - security, economic and so on. We

fought in Vietnam because, like the Americans,  the Government

of the day saw our involvement as necessary to contain

envisaged communist expansion; another element was of course

our enthusiasm to bank credit points with the US for drawdown

at some future time of need.  Later we regarded the isolation  of Vietnam as only likely to make it more dependent on the  Soviet Union, a situation in fact contrary to our security

interests. Our approach therefore came to diverge somewhat  from most of our neighbours and allies, although we accepted

that their interests needed fully to be reflected in our

policy.

Now, as a political settlement to the Third Indo-China War

becomes a real possibility, the'  potential mutual benefits of  Vietnam achieving normalisation in its relations with others

in the region should begin to be realised - not only in terms  of an enhanced sense of security, but in terms of accelerated  regional economic development and intra-regional commerce.   And with increasing prosperity, the flow of boat people from  Vietnam - a long standing source of tension in the region -

should diminish.

The process of integrating Vietnam into the region is one

which is very much in Australia’s interest and one which we  will vigorously pursue. It is a process for which we are

particularly well equipped with a Vietnamese diaspora in

Australia of over 130,000 people, who, as old memories

gradually disappear, can help build Australian ties with an

emergent Vietnam.

It is of course easier to talk in convenient phrases of  "integration into the region" and "end to isolation" and so on

than to chart with accuracy the sort of role within the region

which Vietnam might assume.  It has to be said that that will

not be an easy task :  there are a number of aspects of

Vietnam's current situation which weaken its capacity

effectively to integrate into the region.

4

First, even although South Vietnam was the recipient of

enormous quantities of American investment until 1975, Vietnam

has been at war since 1940 - albeit with lulls in the late

1940s and 1950s. Indo-China as a whole is probably a

generation behind most ASEAN countries in developmental terms.  The per capita GNP in Vietnam is of the order of $US175

compared, for example, with Thailand's per capita GNP of

$US1,190. Thus, relative to most of its neighbours, Vietnam

has a very long way to go.

Moreover, in the North since 1954 and in the whole country

since 1975, Vietnam has suffered from the inefficiencies  inherent in a centralised system based on high subsidisation  and inefficient allocation of limited resources. The Northern  post-war leadership were largely warrior politicians who had  risen to the top of their system through their capacity to

prosecute a war rather than because of any experience in  governing a peacetime economy - let alone in how to integrate

the widely different economic systems which obtained in the  North and the South. And that problem of integration was

exacerbated by the fact that many of the skilled economic

managers in the South left or were detained in 1975.

Moreover, there was a frustrating incompatibility of plant and  equipment: one half of the country had been trained and supplied by the Soviet Union and China. The other half had

been dependent on the United States.

The Vietnamese economy has had scant opportunities offered to

it by the West or by its neighbours since 1975. The

application of the United States Trading with the Enemy Act to

Vietnam effectively amounted to a United States commercial

blockade of Vietnam. But the United States was also

instrumental in blocking loans to Vietnam by the international

financial institutions such as the World Bank and the Asian

Development Bank. Principally because of Vietnam's intervention in Cambodia, most Western countries and Japan do

not have development assistance programs with Vietnam. Quite

apart from these difficulties, Vietnam has suffered from all

the problems inherent in a command economy seeking to trade

effectively with Western free enterprise economies, and has

been heavily reliant on COMECON trading partners.

5

6

Moreover, while in the last two or three years the West has

been taking a closer look at trading opportunities with

Vietnam, Vietnam has been receiving less from COMECON

countries than hitherto. The Soviet Union has cut back its

aid and recent events in Eastern Europe have resulted in a

reduction in the number of Vietnamese workers in Eastern  Europe, so aggravating economic problems in Vietnam by

increasing unemployment and reducing remittances.. .

These economic restraints on Vietnamese growth have, since  1954 in the North and 1975 in the South, been matched by a  Marxist/Leninist political system, the restrictive aspects of

which have impeded any real sense of political commonality

between Vietnam and most of its neighbours - tending to instil  a sense of otherness about Vietnam and compounding regional

fears about its intentions. The rigidity of the Vietnamese  system has been placed in starker relief as Vietnam's Soviet  and East European allies have pursued their own revolutions

towards liberalism.

All this said, there are a number of factors both internal and  external which could accelerate Vietnamese economic growth and

enable it to play a significant regional role.

Vietnam is a strategically located, resource rich country of

67 million people with a certain demonstrated capacity to  organise and see things through. The Vietnamese are a  diligent and capable people who want to live better. There is

a high standard of literacy and people are eager to learn:  visitors to Hanoi will recall the sight of students reading

textbooks for long periods under inadequate street lighting.

The country has significant natural resources :  coal, seafood,

coffee, oil. For the first time in decades, Vietnam has had a

surplus of rice production and was able to export

approximately 1 million tonnes in 1989. There is also no

doubt that Vietnam has the potential to rapidly develop as a

major tourist destination - with its rich traditional culture,

striking landscape, and a modern history which has touched the

lives or captured the imagination of people in many countries

around the world.

7

Moreover, the Vietnamese leadership has over the last decade

embarked on a gradual process of economic reform. The Sixth

Plenum of the 4th Party Congress in 1979 recognised that

fundamental reforms to the socialist economic system were

inevitable. The Plenum legitimised some private production

and began a process of dismantling .the agriculture

collectives.

Since the 6th Party Congress in December 1986, the Vietnamese

Government has gone a lot further through its adoption of the  economic reform program known as Doi Moi, or "Renovation" -

the subject of this seminar. Doi Moi was designed to rectify

the inefficiencies of the State industrial sector, to

streamline the development of the non-state agricultural  sector and to free the economy to respond to market forces.  It was particularly intended to encourage foreign investment.  It sought to reduce the role of the State bureaucracy in the  system and to remove many of the constraints on the operation

of private enterprise in Vietnam.

Substantial results from the Doi Moi initiatives, have

included:

.  the introduction, in December 1987, of a Foreign

Investment Law;

.  a measure of autonomy for some State-run economic establishments and an increase in non-government economic

enterprises;

.  increased agricultural production;

.  the introduction of a rationalised import-export policy

intended to encourage exports and discourage imports of

consumer goods; and

.  bank interest rates were raised in a successful attempt to encourage private savings and reduce bank cash flow

problems.

While Doi Moi represents a recognition of the economic

realities facing Vietnam, there remains much to be done to

establish firmly the renovation process,  and to secure a

pattern of stable economic growth which will meet the

aspirations of the Vietnamese and allow Vietnam to take its

place in the regional economy.

There has under Doi Moi been a measure also of political  reform. But while political statements and resolutions since

the 6th Party Congress have consistently reaffirmed the  importance of political reform, greater emphasis has, at least

until very recently, been placed on the necessity of  preserving ideological principles and the primacy of the party  system. The Vietnamese leadership refers to the need for.  political stability to provide a framework for economic

reform. The disinclination to accord political reform the

same weight as economic reform was in part a reflection of the

Vietnamese nervousness over the events in Eastern Europe.

So far the Vietnamese Government has resisted or effectively  diverted the kind of pressure for political reform which  existed in China.  However, the process of Doi Moi can only  succeed if economic reform is accompanied by some

liberalisation of political activity.  Inevitably, increased  contact and interaction with non-socialist nations through

developing trade and investment relationships cannot help but

change the political perceptions and expectations of many

Vietnamese. And even within Vietnam, there must be doubt  about whether devolution of economic decision-making can be

made, to work effectively in the absence of a similar process

taking place politically and socially. It would be a matter  for extreme regret if, at a time when Vietnam was seeking to

improve its regional links, it were to engage in the sort of

political repression which occurred in China. This is not

immediately in prospect, but were it to take place, many of

the gains made by Vietnamese diplomacy in recent years would  disappear.

The signals on political change in Vietnam are at present

mixed. Over the past year or so, more conservative elements

have appeared to be in the ascendant in the face of pressures

8

for change.  Yet there are straws in the wind which could

suggest that the leadership may be beginning to adopt a less

ideological approach to government. For example, the speech

of Prime Minister Do Muoi on Vietnam's National Day was  notable for its absence of rhetoric. Vietnam might work

towards a more pluralistic and less rigid system of

government. I doubt that such a shift would be radical or

rapid or that the current leadership would be prepared to

discard the ideology which has sustained it for years. But  there may be some measure of rethinking going on. If it is,

we applaud it.

Along with what is happening and what has the potential to  happen inside Vietnam, the changes in Vietnam's external  environment suggest a significant shift in the disposition of

others to accept it.

This is not the forum in which to retrace in any detail the  arguments on whether or not Vietnam's intervention in Cambodia

merited the response it received from China, ASEAN and the

West. Governed by men who had taken the South in less than  two months and Cambodia in two weeks, Vietnam infuriated its  erstwhile men .or, China, and its former enemy, the United  States. It caused grave concern amongst ASEAN, particularly

Thailand. The problem for Vietnam was that, whatever the

effect of its invasion might have been in saving the Cambodian

people from the genocidal regime of Pol Pot, it was in

manifest breach of the most fundamental of all international

relations principles, that of non-intervention: it was just impossible for any Australian or like-minded government to

pursue a normal, let alone expanding, relationship with Vietnam in these circumstances. This opposition to Vietnam  was only likely to dissipate with the perception that Vietnam

no longer posed a security threat to its neighbours, and that

the government in Phnom Penh reflected the will of the

Cambodian people rather than that of Hanoi.

Since 1989, Vietnam has taken considerable steps to break the

long-standing impasse on Cambodia, in particular with its

withdrawal of all formed military units from the country.  Although the momentum slowed again considerably in the first

9

half of this year, with the Vietnamese Government being

frustratingly unwilling to go the extra distance needed to bed

down a comprehensive settlement,  in the last few weeks there

has once again been an evident willingness to encourage Phnom

Penh to come aboard the settlement plan, based on Australia's

proposals, now agreed by the Permanent Five members of the UN.

If through the remaining end-game of the settlement process

Vietnam continues to play a positive and constructive role, it  will immeasurably strengthen its relationships with the region

and the wider world.

Commensurate with the progress .  that Vietnam has made on

Cambodia recently, there are indications that significant  progress is being made in Vietnam's relations with China. The

two issues are not of course unconnected: a significant  reason for the existence and continuation of the Cambodian  problem has been Sino-Vietnamese tension and vice versa.

Although the two countries still remain apart, the rapid  acceleration of discussions between them over recent months

gives many grounds for optimism. If the recent progress on  Cambodia holds,  relations with China should improve rapidly.

It is also noteworthy that Vietnam responded positively to the  United States, decision announced on 18 July, to open a

dialogue with Vietnam on Cambodia.  Two meetings have now been  held, together with some other direct contact in the context

of the recent Jakarta meeting,  and the results have been

encouraging.  Once again the nature and speed of the progress  towards normalisation of the United States/Vietnam

relationship will undoubtedly depend on how quickly a

comprehensive Cambodian settlement is achieved.

As I have said,  this Australian Government has long believed

that Vietnam's isolation is undesirable and that it was in the  interests of regional stability - and therefore Australia's

security - that a solution to the problems which prevented

normalisation between Vietnam and the rest of the region be

found.  It also seems ironic and unnecessary that at a time

when Vietnam's ally, the Soviet Union, is rapidly and

comprehensively repairing its relations with the West, Vietnam

should somehow still be seen as part of the Evil Empire.

10

Given the .preoccupation of the Vietnamese leadership since the

Second World War with security, it is understandable that

shifts in policy do not come easily when they have the

potential to impinge on that leadership's concept of security

requirements. Ultimately however it is in Vietnam's interest

to appreciate that security depends not only on military

strength and on military alliances, but on a multidimensional  approach involving a whole network of links with the region -

political, commercial, cultural and developmental. If such

links can be constructed, the greater will be mutual

confidence and the better will be the long term prospects for

Vietnam's genuine security.

Our bilateral dealings with Vietnam have, I hope, in some

measure reduced Vietnam's isolation. We have not entered into  a bilateral development assistance program with Vietnam

pending resolution of the Cambodian conflict. However, we

have helped meet the basic humanitarian needs of the

Vietnamese in the areas of health, agriculture and education  by channelling assistance through Australian NGOs and  multilateral organisations: to the extent of $21.2 million in

1988-89 and $16.8 million last financial year.

We have also taken a number of steps to develop the trade and  investment aspect of our relationship with Vietnam. In June

this year, Senator Button visited Vietnam as leader of a high  level Trade Mission and signed during that visit an Agreement  on Trade and Economic Cooperation with Vietnam. We have also

undertaken to negotiate an Investment Protection Agreement and

Double Taxation Agreement. Australian companies - in

particular OTC - already have a conspicuous presence on the

ground, and everyone acknowledges that the potential for rapid

expansion of that presence is immense.

It is now not only possible, but likely, that Vietnam is on  the verge of a new era in its dealings with the region and

with Australia. The political and security factors which have

impinged on Vietnam's capacity to deal normally with its

regional neighbours are changing. Vietnamese leaders are

moving gradually away from the demonstrated inadequacies of a

11

centralised planned economy and have made some progress in

according greater political freedoms to their people.

It is becoming a truism to state that the world as we know it

has changed irreversibly in the last couple of years. The

ideological bipolarity which shaped the strategic thinking of

most countries for a generation and a half, and which shaped  the destiny of Vietnam far more than most countries, has gone.

We all need to adjust to these changes. And because Vietnam's

destiny was so moulded by the rules of the old world, it may

find the process of adjustment all the harder. It is in its

interests to try.

On a previous occasion I noted, in the context of the Cambodia

issue, that Indo-China has been the graveyard of many  delusions, and must not be allowed to become the cemetery of  peace. I can now be more positive. If Vietnam and Indo-China  can now attain and nurture peace, the natural dynamism of  South East Asia will be immeasurably stimulated and Vietnam  will achieve its long struggled-for goal of true security and

independence.

With the continued flow of people, ideas and commerce between

Vietnam and the rest of the region, its true potential should  at last be realised. In that process, our own bilateral  relationship with Vietnam should at last begin to bear fruit.  For over a generation, the nature of our relationship with

Vietnam has been an issue of contention, both at home and in

our dealings with others in the region. It is our hope and

expectation that during the 1990s the relationship will no

longer be an issue of contention. And it is our further hope

that because we have been prepared to persevere and have been  willing to recognise the need to work towards Vietnam's

acceptance in our region, that our relationship will evolve at

last into a true and durable and highly mutually beneficial

partnership between us.

12

*  * *

