PARLIAMENT OF AUSTRALIA

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

D R  J O H N  R. H E W S O N ,  M.P. SHADOW  TR E A S U R E R   M E M B E R  FO R W EN T W O R T H

1/90

9 January 1990

E & E 0 - PROOF COPY ONLY

TRANSCRIPT OF PRESS CONFERENCE -

ADELAIDE, TUESDAY 9 JANUARY 1990

Jrnlst:

Hewson;

Jrnlst;

Hewson;

Jrnlst;

Dr Hewson, why April the 7th?

Well, it looks to me like it'll be sometime in March  or April that he'll call the election. I don't think  Hawke will be able to help himself, I think he'll find  it very difficult not to take credit for any gold  medals we win at the Commonwealth Games; he probably

is already taking credit for the cricket - at least  the wins and I think he'll allow enough time just to  stitch together a wage tax deal .  .  create the  impression that interest rates are falling, do another  deal with the banks on housing interest rates, maybe  even come up with some scheme for linking

superannuation into housing or whatever then go to an  election.

Is that timing good for the Coalition as well?

Well we've been ready since the latter part of last  year and we anticipated actually that they'd go to an  election following the July 1 tax cuts and I think  they abandoned that strategy when they failed to

capitalise on our change of leadership in political  terms.  It caught them by surprise and they then  weren't ready to go in July and then we've had a  succession of things designed to create the

circumstances of an early election - the world's  greatest environment statement, the world's greatest  multicultural statement and the world's greatest  budget, the world's greatest aged statement, the  world's greatest pilots' dispute, now we're going to  have the world's greatest Commonwealth athlete and

swimmer.

Over the past week or so we've seen some downward  pressure on interest rates. You mentioned that the  Government would manufacture, artificially manufacture

COMMONWEALTH

PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY  MICAH

Hewson:

Jrnlst:

Hewson:

Jrnlst:

Hewson:

Jrnlst:

Hewson:

a fall in interest rates for the election so, is what  we've seen so far part of that contrived fall in  interest rates or is the market genuinely reacted?

To be clear interest rates will come off this year as  activity slows down. Now we haven't got clear  evidence that activity is slowing although, you know,  there's some mounting evidence let's say that it's

slowing but when the evidence is there interest rates  will fall but that's not the real issue so you get  interest rates down by sedating the economy,  flattening and pushing unemployment up - what do you

do then? How does the Government disengage from that,  how do they create sustainable falls in interest  rates? Of course, if activity picks up again, of  course, back go interest rates in an upward direction.

How far do you think they'll fall?

Well I don't know, I never make predictions in this  life about interest rates and where they'll go. I  mean the circumstances are there though as activity  slows for interest rates to come off.  But the real

question is how is the Government going to sustain  those falls in interest rates and on their track  record they never have. I mean after the '84 election  it was early '85 and the were already on the up again;  after the '87 election it was early '88 and interest  rates were on the way back up again, each time to

record levels so, I mean they've never had a policy  for sustainable reductions in interest rates?

Is it just a ploy to tide them over for an election  and then they'll go back up?

Well, they're trying to pick, the words I think they  use are an aperture or window of opportunity or  something, they will try to create the impression that  the fall in interest rates that is coming as activity

slows will be sustained and, of course, they've never  been able to do that and they won't be able to do it  this time on the policies they've announced.

So you don't accept the assessment from groups like  BIS Schrapnel that the economy is heading for a softer  landing that you might have suggested in your speech?

No, I still think that there is a real danger of a  hard landing and that danger grows every day they  don't change policy and every day that we see the wage  pressures mount the way the are. If you look at the

CAI numbers yesterday that earnings growth could be  over 10 per cent, I mean, that's got to be a cause for  great concern. Of course as Chris Higgins, the  Secretary of the Treasury, said in his recent speech,

it's the wages outcome that'll determine the severity  of the landing and if wages do accelerate, the  probability of a hard landing grows quite

significantly and that's what you're really seeing. I  think, they'll stitch up a wage deal but at what  price. I mean the workers felt that they were conned  last year and they committed to a 6.5 per cent

earnings growth and inflation they were told would  fall to 3 - 4 per cent, well it's running at 7, 8

maybe 9 per cent. This time they won't be conned and  in those circumstances they'll expect a foreshadowed  higher earnings growth and the situations getting out  of control - and precisely the worst time. I mean,  you've got the Government with interest rates coming

off risking an $A crisis at the time when there's  mounting wage pressure, you're in danger of a wage  price devaluation spiral and it's a very real risk.  Look, I think Hawke knows that the worst is yet to

come in economic terms and he's still trying to go  early and that's why I think he'll go as early as he  can - March or April.

Jrnlst: You are also saying that the state of the economy  means this is not the time to bring in tax cuts. Will  the Liberals bring in tax cuts?

Hewson; We've foreshadowed tax relief to families but the  difference between them and us is that we've paid for  it. We've paid for it by cutting government  expenditure and they haven't. I mean they should  because in the circumstances of last year where the  economy was over heated I mean its irresponsible to  give unfunded tax cuts and particularly on top of wage

increases that are unrelated to productivity. So what  we've done is we've said we will tie wages to  productivity and fund our tax cuts. Now we've  foreshadowed tax relief over the three years and we

have said quite explicitly that that will be paid for  by cuts in government expenditure.

Jrnlst: You've said that 1990 is going to be the worst time  economically for Australia since the Great Depression.  The worst is yet to come. How bad is it going to get?

Hewson: Well it is a question of timing now as to how far the

Government let it slide. I have been saying this now  for a couple of years. I'm quite concerned that as  every day goes by and you have policy inactivity that  the magnitude of the problem grows and to me I mean

the prospect of debt levels still accelerating through  the next several years, of inflation sticking at  around 8%, of rising unemployment, a very flat  economic activity, record levels of small business

failures and personal bankruptcies in 1990. I mean  how bad do you want it? That is very bad by

historical standards.

Jrnlst: How does it impact on the average Australian?

Hewson: The average Australian has been through a period of  sustained falls in their living standards,

particularly they feel of course the very high  interest rates if they are home buyers struggling to  pay 17 or 18 per cent home loan interest rates of 20 -  25 per cent business interest rates so there has been  an enormous amount of pain sustained now over a much

longer period than most people expected would be the  case. And that's the most obvious impact but they  have been subjected to a significant fall in their  living standards and what we are about is giving a

sustainable increase in living standards by solving  the problems.  .

Jrnlst: Do you concede that falling interest rates are a  political problem for you though?

Hewson: No not at all. I mean I think as I have said all

along as activity comes off, as activity slows  interest rates will fall but I am concerned about  sustainable falls in interest rates. You don't want a  fall in interest rates that lasts a few months and  then there is an exchange rate crisis or something and

back up go interest rates which has been the history  in 1985 and for difference reasons it was the history  in 87/88. What you want is sustainable falls in  interest rates. You don't want them just to come off  a bit only to see them go up again after the election.  That will be the difference. The choice between those  who have got policies to sustain falls in interest

rates and those who haven't.

Jrnlst: What, under the Liberals they would go down and they  wouldn't come up?

Hewson: No, what we've said is that we are about sustainable  reductions in interest rates which is that by bringing  inflation down to the level of our trading partners  over the first term, we'll bring about the  circumstances in which there can be a sustained fall

in interest rates and that's the key. Right now we've  got inflation still accelerating and the Government is  talking about lower interest rates.  OK interest rates  come off a bit because the activity slows but if you  don't deal with inflation and debt problems you know  you can't sustain a fall in interest rates and that's

the situation.

Hewson: OK, thanks a lot.

****

FOR FURTHER INFORMATION; (02) 327 7700

