MEDIA RELEASE SENATOR ROBERT HILL LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION IN THE SENATE  SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS Thursday, November 28 Canberra

107/91

HILL CONCERNED ABOUT AUST. FORCES AFTER PHNOM PENH VIOLENCE

The Shadow Minister for Foreign Affairs, Senator Robert Hill,  today raised serious concerns about the role and safety of  Australian peacekeeping forces in Cambodia in the wake of last  night's violence in Phnom Penh.

"The near lynching of Khmer Rouge leader Khieu Samphan  illustrates just how fragile and potentially volatile is the  situation in Cambodia," Senator Hill said.

"Uncertainty about the participation of the Khmer Rouge, and the  formation of a coalition between Prince Sihanouk and Mr Hun Sen  raises doubts about the viability of the UN plan.

"Any breakdown in trust between the factions of the Supreme  National Council (SNC) and any major outbreaks of hostility have  direct implications for Australian military personnel.

"The primary function of the 40 Australian members of the UN  advance mission already in Cambodia is to establish communication  links between the factions and the SNC headquarters.

"Their task is already hazardous, as they face the danger of land  mines and continuing military clashes in the countryside.

"But their task will become more unpredictable and possibly more  dangerous if tension between the factions escalates and the  desire to communicate breaks down.

"The 500 or so Australian personnel expected to be part of the  second stage of the UN presence could also face a more serious  situation than originally envisaged.

"The Government has not provided Parliament and the Australian  people with enough information about the cost, role and safety  of Australian forces committed to the peacekeeping operation.

"There are still questions to be answered on the involvement of  our personnel in aspects of the UN operation - including  disarmament, ceasefire enforcement, repatriation of refugees,  administrative functions, and the conduct of elections.

"The Government should provide full details of Australia's  commitment so it can be properly debated and scrutinised."

(ends)

Enquiries: Senator Hill or Mark Batistich on (06) 277 3170

C O M M O N W EA LTH

PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY  M IC A H

