COMMONWEALTH  PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY  MiCAH

PRIM E M IN IS TE R

CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY EMBARGOED ITNTTT. DELIVERY

SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER  FOREIGN CORRESPONDENTS CLUB  SYDNEY - 23 SEPTEMBER 1991

Last year I addressed this club in December.  It was a few days  after the United Nations Security Council had authorised  military action to force Iraq to withdraw from Kuwait. We all  hoped then that force would not be necessary. But we accepted  that if Iraq would not comply voluntarily with the UN's  demands, then Australia, along with many other nations, would  commit forces to combat in support of the United Nations.

I explained to you here last year our reasons for taking that  momentous decision. I spoke about the importance of the Kuwait  crisis for the shape of the world order in the post Cold War  era.

Well, Saddam Hussein did not draw back; the international  coalition did go to war on behalf of the United Nations; and of  course they were very swiftly successful. We will probably  never know the true scale of Iraq's casualties; the coalition's  were mercifully few. But for all who suffered we grieve. Even

short wars impose a terrible cost.

So I think it is proper that I return this year to the  propositions I was putting to you last year, to see how the  world has gone since the Gulf War; to see whether it is indeed  a better place; and to see what more needs to be done.

Looking back over the past nine months, one would have to say  that there are many solid grounds for satisfaction about the  way the international community is developing.

.  First, of course, there was our swift success in the Gulf  itself. Since the First World War, the international  community has been trying to build the institutions and  summon the will to resist military aggression. This year,

for the first time, we made it work, and that has made us  all safer.

.  In the aftermath of the Gulf War, the international community organised an unprecedentedly swift and effective  response to the plight of Kurdish refugees in and around  northern Iraq. Australian soldiers joined an enormous

international humanitarian effort which transcended  international boundaries,  and the United Nations showed  unprecedented initiative and resourcefulness in protecting  Iraq's Kurds from their own government.

2.

Elsewhere in the Middle East, the end of the Gulf War has  indeed, as we hoped and believed it would, brought a new  urge for peace between Israel and her Arab neighbours, and  new hope to the Palestinians.  The Gulf War showed the  people of the Middle East that they have interests in  common, and taught them that they can cooperate to serve

those interests. The present moves towards a peace  conference are only a beginning. But they are the best  beginning we have seen in decades, and we urge all sides  to let the conference happen, and to make it work.

In South Africa, while violence and prevarication have  impeded the establishment of an interim government and the  commencement of constitutional negotiations, the promises  of President de Klerk's historic speech of 1 February 1991  have been largely fulfilled. The legislative pillars of  apartheid have been dismantled, political prisoners have  been freed, and exiles can return. Our impatience for the  establishment of the new South Africa should not blind us  to the enormous progress that has been made. I will  return to this issue later.

The Australian-French initiative to prevent mining in  Antarctica and preserve the wilderness continent has been  crowned by the agreement this year to an absolute ban for  fifty years, with strong provisions for its indefinite

extension. This is one of the most far-reaching  international environmental agreements so far. And next  year the UN Conference on Environment and Development will  aim to extend international action on the environment

still further.

Cambodia's factions have at last agreed on a settlement  process which will lead to free and fair elections for a  national government under UN sponsorship. For Australia  this is specially gratifying. The Cambodian problem has

threatened the stability of our own region, and Australia,  through Gareth Evans, has contributed much to the UN plan.

Also in our own region, many of the more durable relics of  the Cold War are breaking up. North and South Korea have  been admitted to the United Nations, holding out hope for  a peaceful future for the Peninsula. And China and Taiwan

have agreed to participate together in APEC.

Almost unnoticed, the conclusion of the START treaty  between the Soviet Union and the United States committing  them to cut their nuclear arsenals for the first time,  marked a stage in the end of the Cold War as decisive as

the collapse of the Berlin Wall.

3.

. And lastly, of course, there is the Russian Revolution. There is no irony in that phrase.  It is now obvious that  the events of the past month take the people of the Soviet  Union back again to the point at which, in 1917, they took

the path of communism, and offer them again the choice of  freedom. Having by their own actions overthrown the  largest, most powerful and most intrusive state apparatus  the world has ever seen, there can be no doubt what their

choice will be. Already, to our great delight, the Baltic  States have been restored to independence.

All that adds up to a lot of good news. I do not of course  claim that all of these happy developments are the result of  the Gulf War. But I do claim that all of these developments,  in so many different areas,  show that we were right to believe

that the end of the Cold War offered not just an end to rivalry  and terror, but a beginning of cooperation and hope; that there  is indeed a new world order; inchoate, amorphous,  but real.

We can see that reality in all of these developments.  We see  people and nations moved by the same group of instincts and  aspirations; peace and freedom from aggression, democratic  institutions of representative government, the rule of law,  respect for human rights, the economic opportunities of a free  market, and respect for the environment.

And in every case we see a new willingness - indeed a new  determination - to cooperate internationally to fulfil these  aspirations.

Your profession places a premium on scepticism, and there have  been plenty of sceptics about the new world order.  But  journalists, and foreign correspondents in particular, have  their own quite central place in this new world order.  Because  one of its features is a growing acceptance of the role of the

international free press.

Journalists under air attack in Tel Aviv and Riyadh - and  Baghdad; among the Kurds in the squalid mountains of the  Turkey-Iraq border; and with the people of Moscow around the  Russian Parliament in August,  have done their vital part to  build the determination to cooperate which has made the new  world order work. So don't knock it - you're a big part of it.

And journalists are part of it again right now in Yugoslavia.  The Yugoslav crisis is important, not just because the lives  and welfare of millions of people are at stake, many of whom  have close links to Australia; nor is the crisis important only  because it threatens the peace and stability of an important  portion of Europe.

It is also important because, like the Gulf Crisis last year,  the way the world responds to the tragedy in Yugoslavia will  help to define in important ways the sort of world we are to  live in. Like the Gulf, it too is a test of our new world  order.

4.

And that is why Yugoslavia matters. Through our Yugoslavian  communities, Australia has a direct and vivid stake in the  crisis through the most fundamental human connections of family  and friends. But beyond even that link, Yugoslavia matters to  Australia and other nations all over the world, because it  matters to all of us that we live in a world in which the

international community will not stand idly by and watch  thousands die and millions suffer.

The world has a right to expect that we can find a means to end  such senseless violence. It certainly has a right to demand  that we try everything that might work. That is why I have  from the outset rejected the reasoning of those who argue that  the United Nations should not even try to address this problem,  and who can give no better reason than that such a thing has  never been done before.

In 1991 it should be unthinkable that the United Nations could  stand back from a crisis that threatens the lives of millions,  and the peace of Europe, on a point of precedent.

And we should all be deeply disappointed if we find the limits  of the new world order drawn in the fields and towns of  Yugoslavia. I have higher hopes.

That is why I have written to the Secretary-General of the  United Nations to urge that the issue should, as a necessary  first step, be brought before the Security Council urgently. I

am glad to see that my call has been widely supported, and a  meeting is now expected later this week.

Ladies and gentlemen

Australia's interests are engaged in Yugoslavia, as they are  engaged throughout the world in the emergence of the new values  I have spoken about.

.  Australia's security has been enhanced as nuclear confrontation has waned, and as the United Nations has  shown that it can respond decisively to aggression.

. Our economic interests are enhanced as market forces encourage growth in economies long held stagnant behind a  wall of centralised bureaucratic command.

.  Our environment is enhanced as more governments are forced  by their own people to take greater account of  environmental values.

And less tangibly but perhaps most importantly, our humanity is  amplified as more and more people around the world start to  realise the universal aspirations to dignity, security and  prosperity through the institutions of democratic government  and market economics.

For every culture and society around the world there will be a  unique way of translating that society's aspirations into  effective political and economic institutions.

5.

We in Australia understand that fundamental human aspirations  may be realised in different ways, reflecting different  cultural and political traditions. Within internationally-  accepted standards of human rights, different societies place

different values on discipline and on freedom; on cohesion and  on individuality; on respect for elders and on self-expression.  We should not be disturbed by these differences; they exist  between neighbours everywhere.

It is an essential element of Australia's cultural tradition  that we respect and tolerate values and perspectives that are  different from our own. We feel no embarrassment about  discussing such differences, because we accept that people of  good will may differ on significant issues without respecting  one another any the less.

But I am sure that this is not a uniquely Australian or Western  characteristic.  I have found that some of our neighbours are  perfectly happy to discuss these cultural differences. I am  sure that they do not intend that Australia should conform to

their traditions, just as I know that we do not expect them to  conform to ours.

But I know that they do expect that we should make an effort to  understand their traditions and institutions before we comment  on them, and we expect the same of them. I would have to say  that these expectations have not always been met from either

side.

Ladies and gentlemen,

Each country has to work out its own way to meet the needs and  hopes of its people. But there is great scope for  international cooperation to support individual countries'   efforts to achieve a better future for their own people, and to

the benefit of us all.

Few international bodies are better equipped than the  Commonwealth to foster such cooperation. The Commonwealth  brings together both developed and developing countries.  It  draws on the strengths of its politically and culturally  diverse membership to address the important issues involved in

the development of what we might call '  good government1  in an  informal and consensual way. By '  good government ’  , I mean the  institutions and practices which turn aspirations to democracy

and prosperity into practical reality.

At the Commonwealth leaders'  meeting in Harare next month we  will be looking at the role of the Commonwealth into the next  century. Work carried out since the last meeting in Kuala  Lumpur has suggested that good government is one area in which

the Commonwealth can and should take a larger role.

Clearly this is a role for the Commonwealth which accords  precisely with broader international developments.

6.

I look forward to discussions on this with other Commonwealth  leaders in Harare.  We will be looking at ways to build on our  shared traditions and institutions to enhance democratic  processes and sound economic practices within Commonwealth  member countries.

In many respects the Commonwealth is already leading the way in  providing practical assistance to help member countries develop  good government.  The Commonwealth Secretariat is running  training programs on electoral procedures for member countries,

and it is providing electoral observer missions in Bangladesh,  Guyana, and Zambia.

Within the Commonwealth membership itself, there has been a  heartening shift towards the principles and practices of good  government. Multi-party democracy is becoming more widely  entrenched, and economic policies are becoming more market-

oriented .

In Africa, for example, Ghana is making steady economic  progress under a freer market. Nigeria's transitional  administration is moving towards multi-party democracy.

Zambia's first multi-party elections since independence will  take place in October, and the Commonwealth will assist in the  achievement of this national milestone.

Namibia, only recently independent, is already showing all the  signs of a robust democracy and a growing economy. I am proud  of Australia's role in assisting that process, and encouraged  by the early indications that a stable and functioning  democracy has taken a permanent hold in Namibia.

One area where we in Australia and the Commonwealth at large  feel a special obligation to help is in the development of just  political and economic institutions in South Africa.

South Africa is now approaching a crucial stage of transition  from the shameful era of apartheid to what we hope will be a  full non-racial democracy.

That South Africa has reached this point, after so many hard  years of oppression for the majority of its people, is a  testament to the vision and courage of Nelson Mandela and other

black leaders, and the foresight of President de Klerk, and to  the people of South Africa themselves.

But South Africa's substantial progress towards a free non-  racial democratic future is also due in no small measure to the  determination and cooperation of the international community in  adopting and maintaining sanctions against the apartheid

regime.

The Commonwealth has played a leading role in developing and  implementing international sanctions.  I take pride in  Australia's role in this; we have been consistently at the  forefront of those who have sought to apply international  pressure to South Africa to bring it to its senses. And we

remain at the forefront now in formulating appropriate  international responses to the process of reform in South  Africa.

7.

The barriers in South Africa have not and will not come down  overnight. Dismantling apartheid will be a long and difficult  process. The continuing bloodshed on the streets is a tragic  testimony to the culture of violence built up over many years

of distrust and suspicion.

The recent peace accord is a heartening sign but it will be  some time before real peace can be guaranteed. International  pressure will still be required to ensure that the reforms  underway in South Africa are brought to fruition and the

aspirations of its people fully realised.

This was recognised by the Commonwealth Committee of Foreign  Ministers on South Africa at their recent meeting in New Delhi.  The Committee has recommended to Heads of Government in Harare  that the reforms implemented to date be acknowledged by the

immediate lifting of so-called people-to-people sanctions -  including visas, airlinks, and cultural contacts. Trade,  economic and financial sanctions will be maintained until  further specified progress has been made. We hope that will

not take long.

And we must remember that in South Africa, as in so many other  countries, the political revolution is only the start.  Establishing a resilient, steadily-growing economy which can  fulfil the aspirations of all South Africa's people will be an  enormous challenge. South Africa's leaders must be careful not  to raise unreal expectations in their followers.  The struggle

for economic prosperity will be no easier than the struggle for  political freedom.

The urgent need to rebuild South Africa's economy after the  ravages of apartheid means that sanctions should not be applied  any longer than is necessary to secure essential political  reforms.  And we must start now to foster economic as well as

political reform.

My Government has already established training and economic  planning assistance programs for South Africa. The  Commonwealth is also playing a leading role. A Commonwealth  working group has studied the needs of a post-apartheid

democratic South Africa and in Harare we will be looking at  ways in which Commonwealth members can assist in meeting those  needs.

Lastly, and perhaps most importantly, South Africa's economic  regeneration will require the same condition that makes other  economies flourish; a free international trading system. That  system is now under a grave threat.

Ladies and gentlemen

Amidst all the heartening developments over the past year, in  one area the world has moved backwards.  Against the trend, the  world trade negotiations in the Uruguay Round have scarcely  moved since last year when the Brussels ministerial meeting  which was meant to conclude the Round fizzled out.

8.

You will all know where we stand on the principle issues of the  Round. We have sought to bring agricultural trade under the  GATT for the first time, so as to reform the gross distortion  in this sector of world trade which hurts us so badly. We have

succeeded, through the Cairns Group, in bringing agriculture to  centre stage. To secure a result we have been prepared to make  major concessions both in agriculture and in other areas.

You will know that we hold the Europeans principally  responsible for the impasse. But I do not want here to recite  our grievances. I want to make a more general point. I have  said that the events of the past year have confirmed that there

is a new world order,  and that it is based on principles of  cooperation and liberality. We have seen what can now be  achieved through international cooperation which even five  years ago would have been undreamt of. And we understand that

all of our nations live by trade; it is the foundation of our  prosperity.

So how can it be that in 1991, the nations of the world cannot  agree to reform the GATT to everyone'  s advantage? With so much  at stake, why can't we get a result? Because I very much fear  that without the GATT, the achievements of the new world order  will be put at risk. That is why it is so imperative that  other vital issues like Yugoslavia - important as they are - do  not prevent world leaders from becoming deeply and personally  engaged in the complex issues of the Uruguay round. There is  no more important issue. Quite simply, the future of the

international community depends on it.

* * * * * * * * * *

