W o

Philip Ruddock MP Federal M ember for Dundas  Shadow M inister for Immigration

and Ethnic Affairs

Electorate  Tel: (02) 858 1011  Fax: (02) 804 6739

Parliament House  Tel: (06) 277 4343  Fax: (06) 277 2062

RESPONSES UNINFORMED ON IMMIGRATION CHANGES

The negative response to the Coalition's immigration and ethnic affairs proposals in the  FIGHTBACK blueprint for Australia by some interest groups is uninformed but predictable.

Launching the comprehensive package on Thursday, Dr Hewson said the reform proposals  were not designed to cater to vested interests, but to the interests of ALL Australians.

Important reforms, contained in the package to areas such as health, education, social policy,  taxation, business and superannuation also benefit migrants.

In relation to claims made by some migrant resource centres that the immigration and ethnic  affairs proposals are "inhumane and racist" and "economically short-sighted and  discriminatory" several points need to be made.

Labelling "racist" any new proposals which upset a few taxpayer supported centres is  irresponsible in the extreme, divisive and demonstrably unfounded. The Coalition's  immigration policy could not be clearer in this regard. The Coalition remains committed to  an immigration policy which does not discriminate on the basis of race, religion or ethnic

origin. . -

The Coalition's decision to reduce the immigration program at this time is based on a rational  assessment of Australia's capacity to absorb migrants during the worst recession in sixty years.

A reduction in the program is seen as a responsible alternative to inviting migrants to come  here when employment opportunities are minimal. The unemployment rate for new migrants  of a non-English speaking background and low skill base, is around three times the national  average. Surely it is "inhumane" to ask migrants to come here only to have them compromise  their integrity by languishing unemployed and dependent.

Furthermore, at a time of tight budgetary constraints, and with current settlement programs  already seriously under-funded, our capacity to successfully settle migrants is significantly  reduced.

Again it seems "inhumane" to invite people to Australia when we are unable to provide  adequate post-arrival programs to enable them to settle successfully and quickly into a new  environment.

Ethnic spokespeople and groups ought to be the first to recognise the validity of this  proposition.

An adjustment to the focus of the immigration program towards a more skilled entry is  essential to continued public support and economic efficiency of the program.

COMMONWEALTH  PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY  MiCAH

The Auditor General's report has confirmed this proposition and argued that recent changes  to the points test has unacceptably diluted the skills component of the program.

However the balance will reflect our consistent and deeply held view that the family reunion,  humanitarian and refugee components are an essential part of the overall immigration  program and we will not abrogate our responsibilities in this regard.

The final point that needs to be made is in relation to the Coalition's proposal to withhold  social security benefits from migrants for the first two years after arrival. First, refugees and  those with humanitarian claims are exempt and secondly, there is a hardship provision to  allow those in changed circumstances to claim special benefits.

The total cost to Australian taxpayers of social security payments in 1990-91 to overseas born  clients who had been in Australia for two years of less was $399 million. Savings from this  proposal is still only $250 million after fullimplementation. Thus nearly $150 million will be  available to assist the genuinely needy.

The Government recently recognised that some measures had to be taken to reduce this  impost on the taxpayer when it introduced the bond arrangements to supplement the  assurance of support required from migrants entering under the preferential family reunion  category. It was also a recognition that people who have undertaken the responsibility to  support their sponsored relatives were not meeting those responsibilities but were passing  them on to the Australian taxpayer.

The Migrant Resource Centres do their clients a disservice by suggesting that there were no  rorts in this system. Senator Richardson recently revealed that some $23 million in assurances  of support were outstanding and were unlikely to be recovered. Under changes introduced  by Labor in office, assurances are now much more limited in liability and only sought from

a small group of family sponsored entrants.

The support of the Australian people is crucial to the maintenance of any immigration  program. Such support as it has historically enjoyed has been seriously eroded over recent  years in the light of sustained abuse. There has been documented abuse across all categories  of the program, and while this may not be the "fault" of those people who have exploited the

possibilities, it has undoubtedly discredited the program.

The Coalition's comprehensive reform package will ensure that Australia's economic, political  and social infrastructure can, in the long term, support an increased immigration program  backed by extensive and appropriate settlement services. We will also ensure that the  immigration program is administered fairly and efficiently and managed with the proper  balance of compassion and control.

A smaller and tighter immigration program is the only responsible alternative to one which  is currently characterised by sustained abuse, enormous cost, scant support and no integrity.

The critics would do well to recognise this and work for something better.

25 November 1991

