No.

M189 Date 29 October 1992

DiPLOMATIC APPOINTMENT: GENEVA

The Minister for Foreign Affairs and Trade, Senator Gareth Evans, today forrnallly  announced the appointment of Ms Penny Wensley as Australian Ambassador and  Permanent Representative to the United Nations at Geneva and Ambassador for the  Environment.

Senator Evans said that Ms Wensley would be well placed in Geneva to carry out the  principal functions of Ambassador for the Environment, which included promoting  Australia's policies on global environmental issues and representing the Government  at international conferences and negotiations on the environment.

The Prime Minister foreshadowed Ms Wensley's appointment on 3 September when  announcing the retirement of Sir Ninian Stephen as Australia's Ambassador for the  Environment.

Senator Evans said that Ms Wensley's appointment was part of the Government's  continuing commitment to the environment.

"Australia has established an international reputation as a country committed to  progressive environmental policies and will continue to contribute to international  efforts to address environmental problems," he said.

Ms Wensley led the Australian delegation to the UN Inter-Governmental Negotiating  Committee, which negotiated the landmark Framework Convention on Climate  Change. She was also a senior Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade adviser to  the Australian delegation to United Nations Conference on Environment and  Development.

Australia's UN mission in Geneva manages Australia's participation in international  meetings, particularly those relating to multilateral negotiations on human rights,  humanitarian relief, the environment and refugees. It also has relations with fifteen  Geneva-based organisations,~-irtduding specialised agencies covering world health,  international telecommunications, intellectual property and meteorology.

The mission is also responsible for Australia's consular and information work in the  French-speaking part of Switzerland.

Ms Wensley is a senior career officer of the Department of Foreign Affairs and  Trade, having joined the then Department of Foreign Affairs in 1968. She has served  in Paris, Mexico City and Wellington and was Consul-General in Hong Kong from  1986-88. She is currently First Assistant Secretary of the Department's International  Organisations and Legal Division.

Ms Wensley will take up her post in December.

