MEDIA RELEASE

7K.P.

LEADER OF THE NATIONAL PARTY OF AUSTRALIA  SHADOW MINISTER FOR ENERGY AND RESOURCES  MEMBER FOR FARRER

Enquiries Parliament House Canberra, A.C.T. 2600. Phone (06) 277 4058 Fax (06) 277 2052

BRIEFING NOTE FO R MEDIA:

Herewith a preview of part of the speech to be m ade by Tim Fischer MR, Federal  Leader of the National Party, on Friday morning, 19 June, when opening the New  South Wales State Conference of the National Party.

This extract is m ade available for media use today (Thursday) but if utilized it is  suggested it be with future tense, e.g. Fischer is expected to say or will speak out on  o[ will state., etc.

Additional key issues will be raised in the speech proper under the theme "Staying the  Course (and we are ready) for Government".

This extract highlights the following:

* a long overdue defence of National Party icons versus Labor's St  Ben and St Gough!

* Fightback: Some asp ects re Jobsback!

19 June 1992

COMMONWEALTH PA R LIA M EN TA R Y  LIBRARY  MiCAH

Against this, the National Party stands tall arid ready to serve Australia in Federal  Coalition.

To build on the work of our icons - and I say to this New South Wales Conference -  that it is time we defended them in the same way Labor creates St Ben Chifley (he  only tried to nationalise banks). St Gough Whitlam (who pushed us towards a  welfare state and a dependency ethos).

It is time we corrected the continual re-writing of history including War time history  by Labor. They talk of the McEwen years in terms of a backward looking nation. It  is a lie of huge proportions.

So let me highlight four McEwen actions which help facilitate a fair assessment of  Sir Jack McEwen and his place in history.

Firstly, it was Jack McEwen who gave direction to this nation's migration policy in  1938 by opening up migration from Holland and laying down guidelines used by  subsequent Labor Ministers for Immigration.

Secondly, it was McEwen in 1940 who, as Minister for External Affairs, appointed  Ambassadors to countries outside the British Empire for the first time, totally  destroying the Keating thesis we never thought beyond Britain.

Thirdly, it was McEwen in 1957 who forced through - against considerable  opposition - the first trade treaty to be signed between Australia and Japan, in turn  leading to Japan becoming Australia's largest trading partner. This was opposed by  Labor at the time but has given a huge boost to Australia over the years, including  beef and sugar.

Fourthly, it was Jack McEwen who in 1961 moved to abolish all import licences  totally and dramatically reduced the exceptionally high level of export protection  which had been adding to the cost of Australian industry.

I would also remind Conference, that it was Doug Anthony who was responsible for  the closer economic relationship we have with New Zealand which has resulted in  greatly increased exports (and imports).

It was also Doug Anthony's efforts in the Middle Blast and Asia generally, which  expanded our export opportunities. Doug Anthony is truly a national icon.

Lastly, I would highlight Sir Charles Cutler who as State Leader from 1965  onwards, completely revamped education in New South Wales and provided for free  school bus transport.

So I dispatch Labor's re-write of history to where it belongs - the garbage bin!

Black Jack McEwen, Doug Anthony and Sir Charles Cutler were political giants, in  Government, who gave strong leadership, determination and dedication.

This great Party has a proud record of achievement in Government and I look  forward to the day that this proud record is fairly presented in the context of the  times. I am sick of judgement being passed on our great Leaders with the wisdom  of hindsight and with the jaundiced eyes of Labor sympathisers.

In this context, Mr Chairman, let me also acknowledge Bruce Cowan who, of course,  is retiring as the Member for Lyne.

I can unreservedly say, that Bruce has served the electors of Lyne with  determination and dedication. He has given excellent service, both in State and  Federal Parliament, and as a Minister for the Crown, a Chairman and Member of  many key policy committees and as a very good all-rounder.

Congratulations Bruce Cowan!

For the future, I say to this New South Wales Conference th at the National Party  will fight for a "fair go" for the family, for the farmer, for the job generating and  productive sector.

In the Coalition's "Fightback!" program we WILL deliver:

The abolition of seven taxes including the big trifecta of all Sales Tax,  all petrol and diesel Fuel Excise Tax and all Payroll Tax.

The largest reduction in Income Tax in our nation's history (an  average of 30 percent).

The lifting of an enormous weight of taxation off the productive  sectors of our economy. Let no one underestimate the enormous cost  reductions which come from the "Fightback!'' package.

NET benefits - 1 say again net benefits (that is, the cost of GST is  taken into account) are of the following dimensions:

Agriculture over $1 billion

Mining nearly $700 million

Manufacturing almost $5.5 billion

These enormous cost reductions will completely change the way we  think about our industries. They will completely change our views  about our international competitiveness as a nation.

To fully capitalise on these changed circumstances we MUST have  industrial relations reform and I assure the New South Wales  Conference that this is and will remain our first priority.

I take this opportunity to point out to the "Nervous Nellies", that when "Fightback!"  was successfully launched by John Hewson last November, it swept all before it.

In fact, it help sweep Bob Hawke out of office and the "Fightback!" program was  extremely well received.

Then came the Keating blow torch and also some special interest criticisms. I have  taken a personal interest in each of these criticisms as they have arisen and I can  report to Conference that they just don't stack up.

It is critically important that the National Party stay the course in supporting the  "Fightback!" program for what it does for Australia AS A WHOLE in boosting jobs  and exports - in particular - as well as what it does for the individual, for the farmer  and the family.

Given the fact that to date there has been no media advertising campaign,  "Fightback!" is travelling extremely well and will soon travel even better as Labor's  next Budget backfires badly.

But there are other aspects of the "Fightback!" package which have not been given  great publicity by the media, but which deserve it.

Firstly, we have decided that education and training, of the highest standards, are  central to ensure real job opportunities and the opportunity for satisfying lives for  all Australians.

Education is nothing less than the gift of one generation to future generations. The  care we put into education is a measure of our consideration for our children and  our hope for the future.

For that reason, a Coalition Government is committed to mqjor reforms in the  training and education areas which will mean an extra $3 billion of expenditure over  the rest of this decade.

It will mean more money for government schools and greater choice between  government schools for parents.

It will mean more money for capital improvement in the non-government sector and  it will mean increased funding for TAFE and our universities.

The second areas I would like to highlight are in social security.

A Coalition Government will expect migrants to our country to contribute to the  nation's tax base before they draw benefits.

For this reason, we will not permit future migrants access to social security benefits  for two years after they first arrive, unless they are given refugee or humanitarian  status. We must end the practice of migrants coming to this country and, sometimes,  within a very short period of time lining up for social security benefits at the  Australian taxpayers' expense.

Secondly, we will be cutting out the Sole Parent Pension when the youngest child  turns twelve. We are not going to throw the mother - and it usually is the mother -  onto the scrap heap, we are going to move them onto the unemployment benefit and  the training system so th at they can get back into the work force.

This is a tough choice, but the plan fact is that a lot of people who pay tax in  Australia have both husband and wife trying to make ends meet by going out to  work. They might have kids three, four and five years old who they have to make  some sort of arrangement for on a daily basis. Despite this, a significant percentage  of their tax dollar goes to looking after somebody else's family before they get to  look after their own.

These are tough times, and it's time for some tough decisions!

But Labor avoids the really tough decisions because we have an incompetent Labor  Government and because the "Cocoon of Canberra" or the isolation of Canberra has  meant that the decision-makers often don't know just how tough it is in 1992.

It is my firm view that a mqjor reason for interest rates staying so high for so long  is that Canberra did not realise the severity of the recession when it first set in.

This is because the Canberra economy in no way reflects the national economy.

