PRIME MINISTER

E & OE PROOF COPY ONLY

TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P.J. KEATING MP

JOHN LAWS PROGRAM, 2UE, SYDNEY 21 JANUARY 1992

PM: Good morning John.

JL: You are running close to time.

PM: I'm right on time. Never been so early.

JL: Absolutely right on time. Is that part of the deal when  you are Prime Minister you have to be on time?

PM: I generally try to run on time.

JL: Tell me other things about being Prime Minister that  come as a surprise to you.

PM: I don't think any of it is a surprise but it is a different job than the one I have done for a long time.  You know, it has got many other bits and pieces to it  policy issues which are new and varied. Above all else

I think taking responsibility for the direction of the  thing.

JL: Yeah. Well we saw the pre-recorded, heavily edited  dress rehearsal last night so let's get into the real  thing now. Can you really sit there in front of me this  morning and insist as you did last night and look  Australia in the eye, of which you are quite capable of  doing, and tell us you didn't do any deals with anybody

to get the top job.

COMMONWEALTH   PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY  MICAH

2

PM: No. I didn't do any deals with anybody. It was a matter of choice for the Labor Party and it is like most  of these things, I mean you make alliances, friendships  and things. But they are not deals. Deals go to people

getting positions and policies and what have you.

JL: Are they fair dinkum friendships or are they friendships  of convenience?

PM: Oh well, I think, you know, you do end up with a certain  core group of supporters in this game and you get a few  added on along the way and sometimes there is more of  them or less of them, and it Just depends on the  circumstances I think.

JL: But you didn’t do any deals with the left?

PM: No.

JL: What about the centre left?

PM: No. Nor the centre left.  The centre left were  substantial supporters of mine.

JL: Not that it really matters mind you.

PM: No.

JL: One would expect to swing it around the way it was swung  around would require a bit of engineering, a bit of  manipulation.

PM: I understand that, but no, nothing which you would call  a deal. They know what I generally think about things.  To that extent they needed to be sure of what I thought  about things.  But beyond that, no.

JL: Did you have to alter you attitude to certain things in  order to accommodate them.

PM: I don't think so. I think that the fact that I thought  the economy more recessed than maybe the official family  was telling the Government, the bureaucracy was telling  the Government,  struck a cord with some people in the  Caucus and it was that in which they were interested. And as time wore on they believed that that was true and

therefore a number of groups were interested in what  they thought I might do about it. But beyond those sort  of generalised things, that was about the main.

JL: Anyway, I imagine one of the prime requisites for the  job is to be reasonably flexible.

3

PM: At least keep your mind open. I think to have an open  mind about things Is Important. You can get a closed  mind In this game I think. That is, you know,  particularly when you have been the author of policies

and where you are not Just putting them in but defending  them. You have got to know when to stop defending  things and when to move on.

JL: Tell me this. The general consensus at the moment seems  to be, and I only came back last Thursday, that you are  not yet looking comfortable in the role of Prime  Minister. Do you think that is a reasonable

observation, again it would be understandable.

PM: I don't know. I think some of the commentators want me  to come out sort of fighting every time they see me. I  think they think I'm on the floor of the House of  Representatives all the time at Question Time. Well  you're not, you're not, and therefore to be thoughtful

about what you say and to be not smothering people in  argument is, I think, appropriate for the moment. I'm  feeling my way. I'm listening. I'm trying to get a  grip on where I think the place is going and that is as

I think it should be at the minute.

JL: You say that you are feeling your way again, that is  understandable, is the whole thing a bit overwhelming?

PM: Not really, no it is not overwhelming, I don't think.

JL: It is just another Job.

PM: It is another Job, but it is a different Job, and it's a  job where the ultimate responsibility is yours, with the  direction of the place. I think it is like, the great  burden of these jobs is never the hours or the time, it

is always the responsibility. The responsibility is  what weighs upon you. That is what I find the  difference, but as far as the Job, I mean a lot of  people I'm sure that have had this Job in the past have  wondered - well what should we do. Well that is really

not my problem. I mean, I have got a reasonable idea of  what we should do. But what I think is important is to  tap other people's ideas of what we should do now.

JL: That is an Interesting observation - people say what should we do, that is really not your problem. I would  have thought it was absolutely and totally your problem.

4

PM: No what we do though is our problem, but I'm saying knowing what to do, that is having an idea of what to  do, and what I'm doing with these round of meeting  which we have had with the business community and the

trade unions and others last week and this week is to  tap into community opinion about how they see the  economy and society and what they believe the remedy  should be.

JL: Ok, you've got in round terms, 12 months to get the place moving again.  is It possible to do it in 12  months?

PM: I think so. I think that a is a possibility.

JL: Only a possibility?

PM: More than a possibility. Provided the Government takes the right policy steps.

JL: well you are the Government,  aren't you?

PM: That's right. And that is why it is very important to see what people think. I mean, we tend to think that  most of the various interest groups,  they come our way  at various times and what they have to say is pretty  much on record,  or pretty much been said to us a month  ago or we nave some idea of it. But it is nice to hear

their contemporary view and hear it direct. And you  can pick things up which you haven't heard before,  and  I think we have done quite a bit of that in the last  week.

JL: Ok, well you say providing the Government takes the right steps. From that we could glean that in the past  the Government hasn't taken the right steps.

PM: well I think, all governments can only feel their way through a situation and with this recession, I mean we  have felt our way, we rely upon the statistics as they  come in, you rely upon anecdotal evidence,  you are  generally just trying to feel your way through.

JL: ok, well the same people got it wrong before. What kind of assurance that they won't get it wrong again?

PM: Well I think the only way now is up. And therefore what the Government will do will be to take the economy  up, to take the place up. So one should hope that we  get the general direction right.

JL: When you say the only way is up, does that mean that  anybody could get it up now, it is so flat that it  wouldn't matter who was there it would go up?

5

PM: Oh no, I think it will require changes to bringing it  up faster than it might otherwise naturally do, and  leaving it to its own natural devices, I don't think it  is good enough right now. i think we have to do more

and assessing what to do is what we are about now.

JL; Yeah. What did you do wrong, or what did they do wrong  that needs to be changed?

PM: It is not they, it is me. I was the Treasurer for a long time. I think that there are two things, I mean,  there was first of all the boom in 1988 had to be - the  spending spree and the rise in activity in imports had  to be slowed down, we lifted interest rates to do it.

I think we have left interest rates on probably too  long, they didn't come off quickly enough through 1990  and 1991. Remember this, i took interest rates off for  the first time in January 1990, exactly two years ago  this month, to avoid this recession.

JL: Ok, but you didn't succeed.

PM: but I don't think we took them off quickly enough. And  secondly there was what the Americans call the asset  price overhand.

JL: Let's keep away from that stuff.

PM: I know, but let's off, but let's say what it is. it is  a belief in inflation. A belief that if you bought a  couple of shops, or you bought a flat, or you bought  another house, that inflation would kick it along and  over a period of time without any effort on your part  you would be more wealthy. And that belief in

inflation was there while inflation was high. But now  inflation is low and we have seen asset prices fall it  is that fall in asset prices which has knocked a lot of  business confidence around and I think as properties  have been tipped to the market both here and in the  united States and in Britain and in Canada and  countries like us. We have all got recessions now at  the same time that it is that fall in asset prices  which I think has really knocked confidence about at  least to unemployment. When unemployment starts to  rise, people then start to worry about their spending,  so they cut their spending and so the thing generally  winds down. So it is a combination of the two things.  The interest rate rises and the speed of the decline in  them and this big belief in inflation and the collapse  of inflation of expectations which has seen asset  prices fall and ..

JL: Well all of that is very natural. I mean, if inflation  exists you can understand people who want to invest,  wanting to capitalise on the fact that inflation is  there. So the public can't really be blamed for that.

You say that you didn't take interest rates off early  enough, are you going to take them off now?

6

PM: Well we have, we just took them off another l per cent.

JL: Are you going to do more?

PM: Not at the moment.  we are at 7 1/2 per cent and I can't remember how long it was ago that we had, if you  like, bill rates at 7 1/2 per cent. So they are down a  long way. They are down li percentage points from

1990. They are a long way down. I mean, I suppose  what I'm trying to say, John, is this, that if it were  not for a long running belief in inflation and asset  values and the rest, the recession wouldn't be as deep

and if the banks who went into a basically a very big  lending spree in the late 1980s because of collapsing  asset prices they've pulled their head in. They won't  be lending as they were lending. And the combinations  of the two has produced a recession of greater depth  than any of us believed.

JL: There are 23,000 people in this country waiting for refugee status which can take a long time. The other  day some more arrived in the west as you know, claiming  to be refugees and even called refugees by some, there

is no guarantee that they are in fact that. Why should  we continue to allow these people to stay in our  country when our country is economically unstable, it  needs all the help it can get and we have unemployment

running at a dangerous level and we import more people  into the place that we can't employ. Now are you going  to do something about that?

PM: Well this is where our border was breached by a group  of people who arrived by boat unannounced.

JL: well so did the other 23,000.

PM: Well some of them have come in all sorts of ways. But  we are now assessing those to see what their real  status is.

JL; And if they are not refugees, are you going to send  them back?

PM: Well I will see what the report says.  I don't want to pre-judge it. We have got people now up there speaking  to them. But on the general point about migration  which I think is what you were directing your remarks  to, we have seen the program change over the last half

a dozen years to rise rather sharply in the late 80s  particularly when we saw a need to bring in skill sin  demand,  one of the things which was in evidence between  1985 and 1990 was skills shortages in the economy,  and

we had a large complementation of skills coming from  the migration program. In a slower economy,  you don't  need that skills supplementation and what the  Government has been doing has been slowing the program

7

up, and it has slowed rather considerably now from its  peak of say about 1988.

JL: Why don't you stop it until the place is right  economically?

PM: well I don't think that is the right thing to do. I think that you can't just turn these programs on and  off.

JL: Why?

PM: Well because there is a whole system of people being assessed over a period of time, being interviewed  between the various categories of migration whether  they be business migrants, skills in demand, family

reunion. The operation of these various categories  which are different than each of the other and to just  simply wind the program off and try and wind it back  up, you won't be able to wind it back up. And it is  not very easy, and it is very harsh often to wind it

right back.

JL: Harsh on whom?

PM: Well it is harsh on, I think, the people who have been  part of the process to date.

JL: Well maybe it is, but surely your first responsibility and our collective first responsibility is to this  country, and you know that politics is all about  perception and if we are perceived to be in such a  condition that we have almost 1 million unemployed  people, it seems to some extraordinary that we continue  to import people from other parts of the world who,  too, are likely to become unemployed.

PM: Well some will, no doubt. But it has been a long term program, a long term program to complement the natural  growth of our population and governments in their  wisdom have increased it and decreased it as things  have changed, but they have never cut it out.

JL: Governments aren't always wise. Because the Government did it in its wisdom, there might be a limit to its  wisdom as indicated by the situation in which this  country now finds itself.

PM: But I think they have been wise, I mean it has kicked our population along, the place is a more interesting  vibrant place because of the migration program.

JL: Yeah, but I fail to see what value there is in having a whole lot of interesting unemployed people around the  place.

PM: Well it won't be all unemployed.

8

X

JL: But there are a lot of unemployed.  There are a million unemployed people in Australian seeking work and we  continue to bring people in from other parts of the  world.  Now the perception is that that is stupid and  unfair to the people who, really are the responsibility  of the Government.

PM: But it is a medium term program, well it is a long term  program with a medium term perspective and I think that  the thing about it is, you have got to decide whether  you think this country can take a share of people from

abroad. Is advantaged by a more diverse and larger  population and if you believe that, a program should  exist, and perhaps it should change in its quality and  its quantity as time goes by, but most governments have  changed it at various times. We had huge numbers come

into Australian and then it dropped off to much smaller  numbers and it has picked up as prosperity picked up,  and where there have been difficult times it has  dropped back. Can I say the more general point is by  and large I think it has been accepted by most  Australian. The migration program has been good to  Australia, has made it a more interesting place, made

it a more economically robust place. And it has been  very important at various times to complement skills,  the business migration program is now bringing quite a  lot of people from various parts of the world.

JL: Ah yes, we saw what a rort that was being turned into  by people coming here from Hong Kong and other places  buying real estate and going home, saying they were  unable to.make their business investment and yet that  was part of the package.

PM: But there is a lot here though, John, there is a lot  here.

JL: Of course there are and when you say that it has been accepted I agree with you I think that it has been  accepted. I'm not sure that it is accepted now,  because it has been accepted doesn't mean that it is  going to continue to be accepted.

PM: Well there has always been a debate about the numbers  whenever the economy goes off the boil and that is fair  enough.  And I think the Government has taken note of  that and that is why the program has been scaled back

in the last few years and we have got a review of the  program underway now. And then in April, or about  April, which is the normal cycle of these reviews, we  will consider the intake again for the coming year.

JL: What is your recommendation?

PM: Well I will wait and see what the review turns up.

9

JL: Well assessing it at this stage, you see, you say that most people accept it. Most people that I talk to  don't accept it and I think that, with respect to you,  I speak more of the population of Australia than you  do.

PM: You certainly speak to them, whether you speak with them I '  m not sure about that.

JL: Well they speak to me.

PM: Well that's true, that's true.

JL: They pick up the telephone and dial the number.

PM: That is right. I don't doubt that you have a perception, and probably a correct one, that people  think the program should respond to difficult times,  and I think it should.

JL: Shouldn't you respond to the people?

PM: Yes, but I'm not going to pre-judge what is a reasonably sophisticated process of review every year,  and then the Minister, in this case Gerry Hand, will  bring a recommendation to the Cabinet.

JL: But on the information you have know, what would your  recommendation be?

PM: Well I'm not going to make a recommendation. I won't  be recommending.  It will be Gerry recommending to the  Government rather than me recommending to him. But the  program has been coming back and I would be surprised

if there was a discernible trend in any other  direction.

JL: But down?

PM:  But down? But when I say that,  I don't mean down the way some of our colleagues in the Opposition mean down  because I think from them we will see a repeat of what  we saw in 1988 which was basically about how we

shouldn't have more Asians here, we shouldn't have  Asians in this country.  I mean, if you scratch most of  these characters what you get is a little bit of that  sort of talk from them and that won't be motivating us.

JL: No. Well of course it is not specifically Asians, its people that we have to employ, that is the problem, it  doesn't matter where they come from.

PM: I know, I understand that but from the Liberal Party's point of view the sub-plot in the late 1980s was about  Asians.

10

JL: OK, prior to my going away in December, I read a story about a pie manufacturer who warned us that the great  Australian meat pie might soon ship to China, tasty  products, warned that high labour costs, high taxes  expensive food ingredients would force lots of  businesses off-shore. Now it didn't seem very

important at the time, but when you look into it, in  china's Xnandung Province they will give you the land  to build your factory. They will provide you with  labour at $A160 a month and offer a flat company tax  rate of 16 per cent. Now the $A160 a month is nonsense  in this country. But why don't we consider doing  things like they are doing in China. We have got  plenty of land why don't we give it to people in order

that they can create enterprises and businesses here.  And why don't we offer them a special company tax to  come in from other parts of the world instead of us  going off-shore, bring them here give them the land we  have got plenty of land?

PM: Well the thing is, they are a developing country and they are re doing all the classic things which  developing countries have done, you know, Korea was  doing that some time ago, and now they are doing it.

I'm sure it happened in Taiwan.

JL: Do we ever give land away, I never heard it was giving  land away?

PM: No we don't, I don't think. I mean, certainly the Commonwealth doesn't. But I mean, the States have  industrial parks and they let people have access to  them.

JL: When I say giving away, I don't mean give it away forever.  Give a lease arrangement to these people, but  at a proper rate to encourage business to come here,  why don't we do that? -

PM: Well, because I think it is important to understand what we are. This is a developed place. We run a  sophisticated society and public sector.  services here  are in evidence wherever you look, whether it be

hospitals, roads,  or railways, or what have you. And  we finance this public sector with the second lowest  rate of tax in the world bar a decimal point. We are a  decimal point higher than Japan. We are the second

lowest tax country in the 27 countries of the OECD,  now you can't provide this sort of public sector with  these sort of services and this standard of living with  the tax rate very much below that.  So if you want to  give big tax breaks to developing companies, what you  have got to do is put tax hikes on ordinary people.

11

JL: Why can't it be done for a short period of time?

PM: Well it all costs and once you do these things, that is  it. you set a new benchmark.  I mean, you can't  compete with them because you see ....

JL: Why can't you?

PM: Well let me just give you an example.  Now I was  talking to a company last week. They went to Malaysia  because it had a tax holiday for 7 years - so they said  we set up a business in Malaysia - unfortunately they

said the 7th year is up so now we are going to Sri  Lanka which promises a tax holiday for 15 years.  That  is no tax for 15 years.  Well if we try and run this  country on a basis of no tax for 15 years, you won't  keep this sort of society of ours together.

JL: No, but this is a more attractive place to be so surely  with some sort of incentive.

PM: But we don't need to do the things which those people, in other words,  rely upon wage rates and labour  conditions that those companies rely upon in those  countries.  We produce different things.

JL: But we need to do something.

PM: We are doing it. We literally exported our heads off  all through the 1980s.

JL: You can't say that because we are developed country that we don't want to continue to develop.

PM: No, but all the developed countries, we have got a corporate tax rate of 39 per cent with full dividend  imputation. In other words, you don't pay tax on  dividends twice. Germany has got a corporate rate in  the '50s. Most of the countries we compare ourselves  with have got corporate rates like us, Britain, the

United States, what have you. They don't have 15 per  cent tax rates.  Or zero tax rates as business  incentives because they are developed places and you  can't run your developed society on zero tax rates.

JL: OK, well if we can't do that for people who want to create businesses from other parts of the world, what  sort of incentive could we offer to the people who are  one by one going to the wall, and they are one by one  going to the wall, here in Australian. Surely at this

time, we should be offering them some kind of incentive  to keep their business instead of taking it to Sri  Lanka or Singapore.

12

PM: Well the best incentive offered to them is growth, is  to get back to rates of growth and that is what the  point of the Economic Statement will be about.  to  restore growth to the economy, to get the economy out  of the recession.

JL: How do you do that?

PM: Into recovery. Well it won't be long before you will see. But we are now assessing how best to do that, but  one of the things which we have obviously done in the  last two years is reduce interest rates, which  themselves will have their effect upon the economy and  we will be doing other things which we think are

sensible in the short term but are also supportive, if  you like, of the structure of the place over the long  term.

JL: Like what sort of thing?

PM: Well I don't want to go through ...

JL: Well just give me an idea of what sort of thing?

PM: Well some of the public infrastructure, for a start, which was left to languish in the '80s as we cut the  public sector back, and which can take the place of  some of the private investment we're now not getting.

In some of those areas we're looking closely now.

JL: Does that mean increasing the public sector? Ã¢ÂÂ

PM: Not particularly, but it means for the moment in areas of public infrastructure where there are needs, and  where they are an important part of the efficiency of  the economy, then they are areas I think which we can

look. But the main thing is to provide growth to the  economy and that's the best thing we can give the  business sector, small, medium and large. And there's  not much point in saying well here's a low tax rate,  but sorry there's not much growth around,  because if  you look at the small business community in particular,  both them survive on growth.

JL: By-growth, you simply mean that somebody who has, they're making matchboxes, you're going to make the  place so efficient that people are going to want to buy  more matchboxes?

PM: Well we're finding, firstly to lift activity and demand  so theres a demand for product in Australia and people  start hiring people again to produce product.

JL: How do you do that?

13

PM: Just: by lifting activity. We did it after 1983-4,

JL: Well if it was that simple why wasn't it done before?

PM: Well in 1983-84, when we came to office after that recession, we turned it around within about 12 months.   And I hope that in the same way we can do that now.

JL: We'll have to do it quickly because from what I hear, and correct me if I'm wrong,  but from what I hear from  business people we are not in a position to be able to  trade competitively with other countries, we are  disadvantaged here in Australia?

PM: I don't think that's true. Because what is happening and has happened,  we are now running a very large goods  and services surplus, we are running a huge merchandise  trade surplus. A lot of Australian companies I have  spoken to in the last two weeks have said, we've made a  shift, because the domestic market is down we've made a  more rapid shift to exports and we'll stay in exports.   Now we are doing that because the place is largely  competitive, its competitive in wage rates, its  competitive by the exchange rate, its a generally  competitive product that I'm will to support.

JL: Well, why are we in recession?

PM: Well we are in a recession in the domestic economy, while the international economy is also not doing well,  the truth is we can eat a bigger share of it and that's  one of the things which is at least holding employment  where it is and keeping the place growing where it is

is the fact that we have a thing which we never used to  have called net exports.  In other words we are now  exporting a large part of our product, particularly in  manufactures.

JL: OK that's fine, and I understand it is very important  but its very hard to convince people who haven't got  any money and have got kids,  and they haven't got any  clothes and they are flat out having a house, that  because somebody is selling something overseas its  going to be to their advantage, its not to their  advantage now. Surely the domestic economy, as you

refer to it, is at this stage in your career and in the  history of this country the most important thing?

PM: Absolutely.

JL: Well what do you do about that? It's all very well to talk about the exports

14

PM: Well, exports are what give you production and there  would be a lot of people employed in factories out  there now, probably listening to us, who are doing so  for products which are going to be exported, and if

they were not going to be exported their jobs wouldn't  be there. So exports have filled a very large void in  this cycle and that's why these export growth numbers  and the merchandise trade surplus is very important to  us, they are complementary to domestic growth.

JL: Well its not working ....

PM But it doesn1t invalidate your point and that is that  the domestic economy has to grow more, we can't have  the thing, if you like, in the negative, that is  contracting which is what its been. It's contracted by  about three per cent in the last year and a half or so.  And that's what's produced the angst and produced the  unemployment. We have got to get that back to positive

rates of growth.

JL: OK well how do you do that domestically?

PM: Well a combination of I think, a change in confidence  which comes from a willingness on part the of the  Government to let the economy grow. That people in the  business community know now that the Government wants

the economy to grow. Where in 1988 and 1989 and 1990  they thought the Government wanted the economy to slow  down which we did. We now want it to grow, and we have  now provided one of the instruments of that growth,  much lower interest rates, and we can provide a more  direct stimulus to the economy coming from the  Governments own policies, and that's what we are now  examining with the business community as to how best to  cast those so they complement, if you like, interest  rate reductions. To try to induce and engender a high  degree of business confidence to get people out there  spending again and to pick the place up.

JL: Prime Minister Paul Keating back to the subject of Australia and its immediate future domestically, and I  think that you agree that that's what matters at the  moment.  Certainly that's what matters to the people

listening to this radio program around Australia.

PM: Exactly. To get back to growth and to get the place moving again, to get employment shifting and to do it  as quickly as possible. That's got to be our first  priority.

15

JL: OK you can understand the frustration of people and confusion of people when you can go into a supermarket  and you can buy imported canned tomatoes,  I think from  Italy, cheaper than you can buy the Australian product.   So here we have the dilemma of the people who are doing  to tough having the opportunity to buy the product  cheaply but we also have the converse situation of  those producing the product here in Australia not being

able to compete. Why do we import canned tomatoes?

PM: I think a number of reasons.  I mean it makes me furious as it does you I'm sure. It does make you  furious because its just absurd but I think we really  haven't developed as well as we might agriculture  businesses which extend beyond the agriculture into  canning and into promotion and into the efficient  production of canned products often particularly in the  horticulture/agriculture sort of ... fruit and  vegetables.

JL: Is that because we are not smart?

PM: Well I don't know. I think it might be the fact that a  lot of these were done through co-operatives in the  past and the co-operatives flourished well enough  before the trade in these things world wide, there's  .  now a greater trade in food products and that we

haven't seen the sort of efficiency and competitiveness  coming from the canning of these sort of foods and  their marketing.

JL: OK, well what do you do about that? I mean why ...

PM: Its a sort of breakdown of entrepreneurship. I mean there should be in that particular industry more  entrepreneurship I think than there is and its a pity  that people say well its not a pity you saying it but  its a pity its being said, you know what can we do  about the fact that we have got sort of canned tomatoes

from the United States or Italy or Israel or somewhere  like that and you know, I think one of the things we  can do well in Australia is food and food processing.

JL: In order to let us do that, and I know that this is a simplistic point of view but most of mine are, why  can't we put some type of moratorium on non-essential  imports?

PM: Well because what happens then is that people put a  moratorium on our non-essential exports.  The trading  world is a very nasty place and once you get into sort  of trade reprisals everybody gets into you. I mean we

are still shipping great stacks of meat to the United  States and Japan and if we were to say

16

JL: But why are we doing that, because Japan needs it, that's why they're buying it.

PM: Yes but they can buy it from other places and

JL: And because America needs it

PM: But again it has got other options. I mean if we get into the trade reprisal business so will they and  that's not a goer and the fact is we have got to do  better.  It's not their fault that we are not doing  better, in some of these areas we have just got to do  better. Now its happening. You can see it, I was  talking to one chap last week in these rounds of  consultations who has brought together a whole lot of

food products and is now marketing them much more  efficiently in Australia. These were formerly brand  names which had sort of been left by the way-side,  business which were not running efficiently but making

largely food stuffs. Now that's changed for that  particular person and his business and for those  products.  And that general change is what we need. In  other words you see an opportunity and go and exploit  it, not just to say well look we can actually import  compete, compete against these imports but actually  export them ourselves.

JL: But are you going to encourage people to do it because  the number of people that come to me directly and  indirectly to tell me that they have had a wonderful  idea that they've wanted to start a business doing  something here in Australia, and have been unable to  get co-operation from the Government and they end up  doing it elsewhere and successfully. Now what are you  going to do about that?

PM: Well I think it's happening I mean you know and again another company I spoke to last week has just taken  over Petersville, this is Pacific-Dunlop has just taken  over Petersville which is a big food producer and that

includes Edgell and all those business Edgell, you  know, peas and beans and these things

JL: and tomatoes

PM: and hopefully now with a larger company, a greater understanding of the value of the product it produces, Â· Â·  its capacity to sell into the largely growing SouthÂ­ East Asian market, we will see now the marketing of

those products but we haven't seen enough of the export  opportunities being obvious to people, investing in  them, getting an existing business and making it more  efficient, marketing the things better in Australia, I  mean its often true of the large supermarket, they have

often said to me you can't get people to quote the

17

supply a lot of the food lines that just don't quote  because they think they will get too tied up to Coles  or too tired up to Woolworths so they don't quote and  so what happens they end up taking stuff from Italy or

from Portugal or somewhere like that.

JL: Would the Government be in a position to subsidise producers of those kinds of products that have unfair  competition if it is considered unfair from overseas?

PM: Well, we don't subsidise agricultural produce in Australia.

JL: I know we don't, but why don't we?

PM: Well because when we do it becomes a cost on the rest  of us. In other words, you know, I mean we are getting  the very thing we are complaining about in the GATT. I  mean the reason why our wheat producers are not being  able to sell now as profitably in the markets is  because of subsidies from the European Commission and  the United States. Now if we get in the same game the  thing is they can outplay us at that game, theres no  point in us getting in.

JL: Then we can't compete?

PM:  We don't have a deep enough pocket to go into an export subsidy war and wouldn't want to.

JL: OK well let's get back to ...

PM: And that's why, can I just say in the GATT in the Uruguay round,  the General Agreement on Trade and  Tariffs where all this is being discussed at the  moment, we're saying keep the markets free from  pollution, keep them open, keep them free from this  export subsidies, give the honest producer a chance. Now if we were to say well look, forget all that

rhetoric we didn't really mean that what we are going  to do now is start subsidising canned tomatoes and  canned this and something else then the whole game goes  bad and I think it will work against Australia over the  long term.

JL: So what do we do? Stop canning tomatoes and do  something else?

PM: No. Do it efficiently. What we should do is someone say look I've got a tomato here which is as good as any  other tomato, I can put in a can for this price  providing I have an efficient business ..

JL: Yes but then you have difficulty doing it because of work practices and all sorts of added tariffs here

18

PM: Well the good management smooths all those things out. I mean the huge shift in productivity which we are  seeing in businesses today is coming from the fact that  good managers getting rid of work practices which are  bad. See, a good management which actually make any of  these businesses competitive.

JL: Despite the trade union movement?

PM: Not despite them, with their support.  I mean by and large the trade unions are knocking out restrictive  work .. I mean if there's one thing which has come  through four to three days of very intense meetings now

is the almost every hour declaration by managers of  major companies and small companies of the changes in  enterprise bargaining and workplace reform.

JL: Because the union movement is becoming more coÂ­  operative?

PM: Yes absolutely because they are saying lets not only  keep our jobs lets make the place better.

JL: What about the 17.5% holiday loading which is a laugh, and laughed at all over the world?

PM: Well a lot of other places in the world have got it to, its in the United States

JL: Not at 17.5% its not.

PM: Well its every higher I think in some places.

JL: But that doesn't make it right?

PM: Well you know why its there,  because most people  earned, often earn in their normal working week more  than the standards weekly wage because they get a bit  of overtime

JL: Some, some not all

PM: So when they go on holidays there is a compensation.

JL:  Yes

PM: This is a feature of many, many economies.

JL: But the man who introduced it even says its stupid now.  A bit late now but he even says its stupid now.

PM: Who said that?

JL: Clyde Cameron.

19

PM: Clyde,  well I didn't know he said that but look the main thing is labour costs in total and labour costs in  total in Australia now by OECD standards are low. I  mean its another thing that has been said over and over

again in the last three or four days in the last week  by people running businesses, look this is now  basically a low labour cost country. John that is the  truth, this is a low labour cost country which includes  holiday leave loading.

JL: Well it is and that's why Japanese motor companies and others want to set up large factories here because it  is becoming a low labour country.

PM: And that includes the holiday leave loading on these things.

JL: Yes, it would be better still if we didn't have the  holiday leave loading though wouldn't it?

PM: Well I don't necessarily think that's right.  I mean I  think, you know, if someone goes off on their annual  leave they don't take a big drop in pay.

JL: What about penalty rates on the week-end though? For working Saturday's, whoever said that Saturday is  different from Friday or Thursday?

PM: Well, now this is an old hobby horse one of yours I  know,  I know.

JL: Its a good one

PM: You're like a dog at a bone on these penalty rates.  Look, they are changing, they are changing over time,  they perhaps should change more slowly in some places I  agree particularly in the hospitality industry but I  think a bit of that is changing.

JL: Are you going to encourage the change?

PM: Well part of my job now is to make this a competitive labour cost country and I did that across the board, it  was part of my job in the 1980s to get inflation down,  we have now got a 3% inflation rate instead of a 10%

inflation rate and that was in a large part  accommodated by shifts in wages so its not my job to  run bull-at-a-gate at one particular thing ..

JL: But nobody wants you to do that, but could we receive  some sort of guarantee that you will give your careful  consideration to penalty rates?

PM: Your a great one on guarantees you are.

20

JL: Yes its very important .... its very important to me and penalty rates stop people getting work.

PM: Well look, I can see that the structure of penalty rates are not always conducive to employment and  productivity but changing them is not a simple matter  ....  the Government particularly can change overnight.

JL: No but you've got friends.

PM: Yes well I hope I've got a few.

JL: Have a quite talk to Bill.

PM: Poor old Bill, you'd get him to do everything.

JL: Well I mean he is the man to do it because by having  those.

PM: Well you get him in, next time you get him in you put  it on him.

JL: OK I will but in the meantime you might put in a word for me because you're keeping young people out of work  and the same thing in the United States.  If you want  to go to a restaurant in the evening or at lunch time  you drive up the to the restaurant, get out of your car

somebody parks it. .

PM: Look the whole service sector in the United States is  far more

JL: Fantastic?

PM: Sophisticated than here.

JL: That's right.

PM: And we have got to learn to be like that.

JL: Ok and people are doing it Saturday nights, Sunday nights and their lunch time and they're doing it for  what they get in tips. No you couldn't do that in  Australia because you would have to join the Transport  Workers Union before you could drive the bloody car.

Now that's stupid isn't it.

PM: Well I think that the proof of the pudding is in the eating. They have a service sector which is a vast  employer, I mean we do to but theirs is greater and the  services are more varied and more sophisticated.

JL: But you see a bunch of young kids could set up valet parking as they insist on calling it in America, and be  contributors to the economy but making money and

21

keeping them gainfully occupied instead of hanging  around sticking needles in their arms, but they can't  do it because of some stupid work practice or having to  belong to some union and pay union fees.

PM: Well that's not necessarily true. I mean a lot of people are working in places which are not unionised. It doesn't stop people working.

JL: How long do you think it would take before the TWU wasn't down on people who set up valet parking outside  restaurants? About a day and a half?

PM: No, no I don't think its going to worry the TWU very much. The truth is as long as it doesn't happen  because it hasn't occurred to people. I mean we just  don't have these sort of services here. I mean in the  US

JL: It has occurred to me.

PM: I know because you travel and you experience it. But you can see there was a time when there wasn't  propriety car parks, you know car parks operated as  businesses in Australia that happened in the United

States many, many decades ago, its been with us a  couple of decades only and I think, you know, we will  see a much greater sophistication in services,  personal  care things.

JL: Ok but you can only do that with the co-operation of the trade union movement?

PM: John don't underestimate the co-operation. I mean we are seeing, this is not rhetoric, we're seeing now such  mammoth changes in productivity and work place reform  the likes of which most businesses could not have  contemplated a decade ago, could never have  contemplated and it is why Toyota is coming to  Australia. Toyota motor company, probably amongst the  most efficient in the world and which is going to set

up a $400M state of the art plant in this country. It's not doing it because it thinks labour relations  are bad, they know that productivity is good, they know  that the trade.  unions ..are co-operating and we are  making great strides.

JL: That's right, but I have watched the progress of that  from fairly close quarters and its been interesting to  note the reaction of the trade union movement who have  been more than co-operative.  Now obviously they are

smart because Toyota obviously are going to employ a  lot of people in Australia, now that kind of coÂ­  operation is the sort of thing that will help to get  the place back. But it means that the unionists, the

22

trade union movement has got to co-operate with the  Government doesn't it?

PM: It does and what I'm saying to you is that it has, and that's why the inflation rate is 3% and that's why  interest rates are 7.5%.

JL: Ok but tell my why.

PM: If inflation was 10% interest rates would be 13/14.

JL: Its great to have 3% inflation. One of the reasons it  is three per cent is nobody is spending any money and  one of the reasons is nobody's got any money.

PM: The main reason is wage change in the 80s and the second reason is, in part, the deflation coming from  the recession. But its only a part, a very large part,  the largest part was a decline in inflation coming from  wage changes.

JL: Yes, but obviously inflation is going to be low if nobody has got any money to spend.

PM: Well, that's not true. We came out of the 1982-83 recession flat on our backs with a 10% inflation rate.

JL: That's true. What about the engineering company that  can buy Australian made BHP steel cheaper in Singapore  than it can buy it in Australia? That's slightly  bigger than tomatoes.

PM: True and I think we need competition in steel like we do in everything else and I think it is a great pity  that we have to import certain varieties of steels  because they are not available here.

JL Yes but this is Australian made BHP steel which can be  brought cheaper in Singapore $700 a ton in Singapore,  $1000 a ton here. Now how can you allow that to  happen? Not that its your direct responsibility.

PM: No its not my responsibility, but look obviously, I don't know that the numbers are actually right I can  -  only ...take -  your word for those.

JL: Well do.

PM: It may be its been part of an export deal, a package deal which BHP has done a sort of shop deal for steel  to some supplier in South-East Asia which they are now  supplying back. But I'd be surprised, well pretty

surprised if you could buy BHP steel cheaper abroad  than you buy it here.

23

JL: Well you can, you can buy it in Singapore for $700 a  ton as opposed to $1000 a ton here.

PM: Well no doubt that someone in BHP will hear this conversation and give us an answer.

JL: If the answer is yes that is a fact, what can you do  about it?

PM: Well I think BHP would say it seeks to be competitive inside the Australian economy and supplying product. The complaint against it is it doesn't supply enough  product, enough of various types of product that it

should, but there is no doubt the export markets are  very competitive and if you've got people saying, well  look you can have an Australian job at BHP we export  steel but we've got to export it cheaper than we have  been exporting it then BHP will probably taken the view

that we want to keep that employment and we want to  keep those exports. So its losing profitability and  margin exporting but better to have the product export  and have the jobs than not have it all and that's  probably the position right now.

JL: Yes except they are paying the price here in Australia and obviously they are going to suffer long term  because people are simply bringing it back from  Singapore cheaper than they can get in Australia.

PM: Well look, I mean the international steel market is now  becoming over supplied, it is very competitive out  there and there is not there is probably price falls  and theres discounting in all markets.

JL: There's a dreadful expression that has come into our language and that I hope you'll never use, when people  talk about a level playing field which seems to be all  the go, why are we doing that with a level playing

field when nobody else seems to be?

PM: I don't think we are. I mean, I think anyone who  believes there's a level playing field off-shore  outside of Australia is basically deluding themselves, I mean its catch as catch can out there and survival of  .the.fittest and the smartest and I think that if anyone

believes it is fair and reasonable and above board and  level they are having themselves on.

JL: Ok well we are about to run out of time and I know you  have got a lot to do with your day jut to rap it up,  the illegal immigrants, these boat people, apart from  costing us a fortune in searching, if we find out that  they are not what they claim to be will you send them  home?

24

PM: Well I don't want to pre-judge that.

JL: Would that be your desire?

PM: I don't want to pre-judge that let's wait and see how they interview, where they're from, what their claims  are and there's a very clear process there in dealing  with people who cross our borders and there is no

reason why that process won't work just as well on this  occasion as on any other occasion.

JL: So it would be likely that if they are not what they  appear to be that they won’t stay in this country?

PM: Well again that is pre-judging them and I don't want to do that because to do it in the position I hold,  prejudice is their position, and the processes are such  that they shouldn't be prejudiced.

JL: Ok the other point, when you assess immigration in April it won't rise?

PM: Well I'm not saying that

JL: No I was asking.

PM: The trend has been down, the trend has been down but that is not the dissimation of the program which some  people wish and it won't be and it won't be motivated  by crude political instincts like we have seen from the

Liberal Party in the late 1980s and which we are seeing  a bit of now. In other words we will be looking at the  long run future of the Australian population, its  growth, a contribution of the migration program and

looking at the labour market and the capacity to absorb  people in that market, to house them and making a  judgement about the intake for the following year.

JL: OK but in the present circumstances being as they are, would it be reasonable to say that it is unlikely that  it will rise?

PM: Well it hasn't for the last couple of years. It's  unlikely to rise this year.

JL: Ok something else that I think we should touch upon briefly. Will you be doing something to restore  confidence for the job getters in Australia quickly?

PM: Well that this the whole point of what I'm doing now, that is trying to make sure whatever the Government  does that is what we announce,  when the statement is  announced,  that we have assessed as fully as we can  with business and with other groups in the community

25

the likely measures to have the greatest and earliest  impact upon activity and employment.

JL: Will the dole rise?

PM: Well that's not an issue which we are examining right now but the question I think is not a matter of the  dole rising its activity rising is what we need. We  need basically more people being employed and that can  only come from producing more product and that means  getting confidence going, getting people confident

again about the economy that they think there is a  future out their. We actually face a good 1990s in  many respects - low inflation, lot of good structural  things there's no reason why this country can't get

back to decent rates of growth and more satisfying  levels of employment.

JL: Prime Minister thank you very much for your time and let's hope we can talk again very soon.

PM: Thank you John.

ends

