P A R L I A M E N T  O F  A U S T R A L I A

H O U S E  O F  R E P R E S E N T A T I V E S

OFFICE OF PHILIP RUDDOCK, M.P. M E M B E R  F O R  D U N D A S  S H A D O W  M IN ISTER F O R  IMM IGRATION  A N D  ETHNIC A F F A IR S  A N D  SH A D O W

M IN IS T E R  A S S IS T IN G  T H E  L E A D E R   ON ETH N IC A F F A IR S

SU IT E  3 0 2

E A S T W O O D  C E N T R E   1 6 0  R O W E  S T R E E T

E A ST W O O D , N .S .W . 2 1 2 2   T E L . 8 5 8  1011

FAX. 8 0 4  6 7 3 9

P A R L IA M E N T  H O U S E

C A N B E R R A , A .C .T . 2 6 0 0

T E L . ( 0 6 )  2 7 7  7 1 1 1

FAX. ( 0 6 )  2 7 7  4 1 7 8

14 January 1992

TRANSCRIPT OF INTERVIEW  M R PHILIP RUDDOCK MP, SHADOW MINISTER  FO R IMMIGRATION AND ETHNIC AFFAIRS

MORNING WITH ROD HENSHAW, ABC RADIO

E & O E

oJB JEC T: Coalition Immigration Review

Rod Henshaw: But first today, the immigration debate. The Federal Coalition is giving  definite signals that they intend to complete the overhaul of the present system of  immigration if they win power at the next election. Shadow Immigration Minister Philip  Ruddock wants to tighten up several areas which amass points for would be migrants

to Australia including ability to speak and write English. Well, some estimates reduce the  immigration intake by up to half under the Coalition's way of doing things. As well, Philip  Ruddock is looking to reintroduce a Business Migration program. As you well know the  previous system failed recently its already been dismantled although the Federal

Government I notice is looking towards replacement around about mid February, next  month. Let's take a closer look at what Philip Ruddock has in mind - he's with me on the  line now:

Mr Ruddock, Good morning

PMR: Good morning Rod

Rod: Could you be a little more specific as to how much you wish to reduce the intake  by, is a 50% reduction accurate?

PMR: Well it's inaccurate in the sense that we haven't specificed a particular target nor  do we intend to; obviously there are areas of concern to us, some of them because  people come here who do not meet criteria and then manipulate the criteria to obtain  entry and marriage is one of those areas. Spouses....

Rod: We'll come to that one in just a moment because there are quite a few aspects  here; but why won't you stipulate an amount that you want to catefy or at least a target?

1 0 0 %  R E C Y C L E D  P A P E R

COMMONWEALTH  PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY  MICAH

PMR: Well the reason is, is simple, if you look at what's happened in recent years, you  would appreciate that the program was described by Senator Walsh as being formulated  with a serious of cave ins and blow outs, and I think what he was saying was that it grew

in a rather unregulated and certainly not in a sensible way, and there were a number of  changes made - the abandonment of the requirements of people who come under the  Concessional Entry categories have some English level of competence was one aspect.

The requirements that families guarantee assurances of support for relatives if given  Concessional Entry was also abandoned for brothers and sisters and nephews and nieces  and this led to a rapid growth in the number of people over a fairly short period of time.  I mean the program went from something of the order of 70,000 - 80,000 to over a

140,000 ..

Rod: Now correct me if I am wrong, didn't the actual requirement of points, to mean the  total points, weren't they increased to help people to, or perhaps to make it harder for  people to obtain the required amount of points?

PMR: There was a marginal change announced about a week ago by the Minister which  had the impact of reintroducing the floating pass mark and increasing the number of  points in both the Independent and the Concessional Family category by 5 points and the  Minister said, and I agree with him when he announced that decision would have

marginal effect on the total size of the program.

Rod: Well the points system is being, has had more starts than Pharlap really hasn't it,  it's had more changes than you and I could imagine ...

PMR: Well I think that is essentially true and a lot of that has occurred because of  pressure to enable larger numbers of members of families to be able to be reunited with  members of their families who are in here Australia. We understand that, but it's a  question of where the balance should be ....

Rod: Where does it lie, because if you are going to do away with the points system or  overhaul it again, how are you going to put something in place that is going to be fairer?

PMR: Well fairness is one of those concepts that is fairly difficult. You have to have a  program that is fair to migrants who do settle in Australia, who want to have family with  them, but it also has to be fair to Australians and we know that at the moment it is  costing something in the order of $400 million a year to pay benefits to people who have

been in Australia for two years or less and one of the substantial reasons for that was the  abandonment for the requirement for assurances of support. You see when we are  talking family reunion, nobody would want to stop spouses being able be reunited if they  are in a geniune relationship or dependent children or even parents if the majority of of  their children are here in Australia being able to be reunited, but when you go to the

extended families (brothers & sisters, nephews and nieces) and you give them a  Concessional entry and there is no requirements for families to offer assurances of  support now for those members...

Rod: But even when there was, it was hardly enforceable, can you tell me how many  times it was enforced?

3

si

PMR: Well that is one of the reasons that we have moved to the policy position - that  no benefits would be payable in the first two years after people arrive unless they are  refugees or unless there have been some very marked changes in circumstances.

Rod: So just let me get this right - Are you proposing to make people make sponsors  responsible for making sure that people are looked after?

PMR: Yes

Rod: Financially?

PMR: Yes. I mean that is a, when ...

Rod: How are you going to enforce that though?

PMR: When you have... because we won't be paying the benefits, and I mean one of the

Rod: So in other words, if your sponsor won't look after you, stiff Cheddar?

PMR: Well I mean if sponsors invite family members to Australia they would be required  to give assurances of support and if they are not prepared to meet those obligations the  family would need to put pressure on them but if then...

Rod: But that is all you could, that is what I am saying,

PMR: ...If there has been marked change in circumstances, is it fair to deny benefits, we  say no, in those circumstances you would provide a safety net

Rod: So you're looking for a guarantor rather than a sponsor then aren't you?

PMR: Well that's what we're expecting the family members to be and that's what it used  to be. I mean what's often forgotten is that the assurances of support even though they  have been honoured in the breach in the main where they are required was a system that  was clearly in place and was working and applied to both Preferential Family categories

and the Concessional Family categories and one of the changes that was made by the  Government was to remove the requirment for assurance of support in the Concessional  category.

Rod: OK let's turn to Business Migration: I know we also want to talk about the so called  green card or the marriages of convenience; Business Migration, what went wrong there  do you reckon?

PMR: Well there were two things that were wrong - firstly the government relaxed the  criteria. It essentially said money is sufficient and we are not going to expect people to  have a business plan and we are not going to monitor effectively what happens to them  after their arrival; there were no requirements for people to report, no requrimemnts

that they provide even an address to which they could be contacted. They also put in

4

place a system whereby the private sector was involved and we are in favour of  privatisation as you know but privatisation of a government function of scrutinising  peoples entry whereby you gave accredited agents the resposibility of determining  whether or not poeple had a successful business record and the agent was paid by the

person who wanted to come was always fraught with difficulty. They never knew who  their client was, well did have a fair idea that the person who they should be responding  to was the one that was paying the bill, and of course one of the things the government  has done correctly was to scrap the Accredited Migration Agents system because it was

never going to work and I was surprised when it was introduced in the first place.

Rod: Well it seems to me and having spoken with a couple of Accredited Agents that  maybe there wasn't enough follow up there, I mean the intention was there, they got  them out here and they put the money in but that's about as far as it went...

PMR: Well understand what was happening: you had good agents and bad agents, you  had some people who were using subagents particularly in some of the major centres  within our own region and they were seeking for their clients entry for Australia. They  saw their responsbility was to get the person in, not to supervise Australia's immigration

rules.

Rod: So how about this system that is coming in next month that the Federal  Government...

PMR: The Business Skills system seems to me to be a better system, it requires that they  are assessed by departmental officials with the govemmenmt employing essentially  consultants if they need a person with a business background and some business skills to  look at a particular case and instead of the consultant being engaged by the applicant.  The consultant is in fact the agent of the Government and the Government pays the bill,

the cost of it is included in the fees the Government charges and I think the responsibility  in that case will be clearly sheeted home to the consultant, that he has to do the job for  the Government of the day and there is no skin off his nose if the person is rejected. And  I think that scheme will work very much better than the scheme that we have had in

place in the past

Rod: That takes us to ... I'm sorry did you have another point to make there..

PMR: Yes I'm only going to say that the Business Migration program properly  administered is in the national interest. It is important. It brings capital and it also ought  to bring people who have skills and experience in business and are able to create new  job opportunities for Australians so you shouldn't, as I said throw the baby out with the

bath water, when you simply scrap the old scheme....

Rod: Marriages of convenience then or green card - how does it get the name green  card?

PMR: Oh green card is the card that you need in the United States of America to settle  permanently. So the play, the particular film that you saw and I saw and enjoyed was

t

\

based upon the American experience. What they were trying to get was permanent entry  to the United States that was the green card and that's why it was called Green Card.

Rod: Well I guess I'll have to wait until it comes out on video, (inaudible., video in  Sydney) what about then, is this a great event then here in Australia, is it a practice?

PMR: It is a matter of very real concern, the category of entry that has been growing  most significantly in recent years has been marriage and one of the reasons for that has  been none of the other tests for entry are applied so people who would have no other  prospect of being able to get here if they can manipulate a relationship for the purpose

of gaining entry, will do so. We know that there have been a large number of cases of  that sort. The Government changed the rules to allow those poeple who applied for entry  on-shore, that is within Australia, to submit to a two year qualifying period, they gave  them only temporary entry permits if they were granted residency, so that they could  revisit them after two years and see whether or not they were still living together still in  a genuine relationship. And what we're saying is look, it wouldn't be unreasonalbe to  extend those same sort of requriments to those who marry off-shore and apply from off­ shore.

Rod: Ok Philip Ruddock, let me just paraphrase perhaps my first question - how over  extended do you reckon our present system of immigration is?

PMR: Well there are two aspects to this - what you need to understand is that the  published figures do not reveal the full extent of the number of people settling in  Australia quasi permanently. We took something of the order of 20,000 students from  Peoples Republic of China at the time of the Tianamen Square Massacre without

assessing their bona tides as to whether they needed protection or not and now we're  allowing 14,000 of their spouses to come to Australia. They are all given temporary entry  permits so they are not counted as migrants and of course Prime Minister Hawke when  he was in office said and it hasn't been changed as far as I know that nobody would be

asked to leave. So there is in effect a large number of people staying on in Australia  permanently who are not counted in the official statistics. Now if you take that to one  side, Australia still has one of the largest immigration programs in the world, only the  United States and Canada have programs that approach ours but at this stage neither of

them are larger in percentage terms related to total size of population than Australia's;  and in the worst recession in sixty years you have to ask yourself can Australia  successfully absorb a large number of people, particularly when we are bringing people

with a little English language competence in many cases and no skills or low levels of  skills when we know such people are those who exhibit most predominantly in the  unemployment statistics.

Rod: Philip Ruddock we will leave it there, many thanks indeed for your time this  morning.

PMR: Nice to talk you Rod.

5

*****

