d° e ,  Î¿ Î¹  o"?s°o" M edia R elease 4/92  16 January 1992

OPPOSITION WELCOMES RECOGNITION OF CROATIA AND SLOVENIA

The Federal Opposition welcomes Australia's decision to  recognise Croatia and Slovenia in line with the decision of  the European Community. In a media statement issued yesterday  by the Shadow Foreign Minister, Senator Hill, the Coalition

Parties specifically urged the Government to take such a  decision. We are pleased that it has now done so.

Furthermore, for months now, the Coalition has been calling  for the establishment of an Australian consulate in Zagreb.  We are pleased that the Government has now also agreed to such  action.

The Federal Opposition has consistently supported the rights  of the peoples of Yugoslavia to peaceful self-determination  subject to the protection of minority interests within  existing republic borders and progress towards a  comprehensive, peaceful settlement of all outstanding Yugoslav  issues.

We have been fully supportive of the EC-sponsored and UN­  endorsed peace process in Yugoslavia and we have rejected any  attempt to change republic borders through the use of force.

We believe that Slovenia and Croatia have met the standard  international law conditions for recognition - namely, a  permanent population, a defined territory, a government  independent of any other authority and a capacity to enter

into international relations.

In recognising Croatia and Slovenia as independent states, the  Coalition Parties also emphasise the importance of continued  Australian support for moves by the international community to  secure a lasting peace.

Immediate issues that deserve Australia's active support  include the return and resettling of refugees and other  humanitarian issues arising from the conflict.  We also hope  that an effective ceasefire will allow the early deployment of  the major UN peacekeeping force in Croatia and the early

lifting of economic sanctions on Serbia and Montenegro.

As these tasks proceed, the Coalition Parties warmly welcome  Croatia and Slovenia to the community of nations.

FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT : (06) 277 4022

COMMONWEALTH   PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY  MICAH

