Philip Ruddock MP ί ο

Federal Member for Dundas  Shadow Minister for Immigration  and Ethnic Affairs

Tel: (02) 858 1011  Fax: (02) 804 6739

Electorate Parliam ent House

Tel: (06) 277 4343  Fax: (06) 277 2062

DETENTION STIIJ. THE PROPER COURSE

R ecent legislation to prevent the release into the community o f unprocessed asylum seekers must be seen  in the broader context o f the problems currently besetting the refugee determination process.

The fundamental problem has been the delay in processing. There are three principle reasons why this has  happened.

Firstly, the appalling decision to grant extended temporary entry to the more than 20,000 Chinese nationals  here at the time o f the Tienanmen Square massacre. This has led to the expectation that all who had  arguable (and sometimes not even that), but nevertheless unfounded cases for refugee status, could lodge  a claim.

As a result the system o f refugee determination, which was equipped to handle up to 500 cases a year,  collapsed.

Secondly, Gerry Hand's failure to acknowledge the depth o f the crisis meant that urgent procedural reforms  and the task o f acquiring additional resources and staff support, were neglected. T he convoluted appeals  system, including two tier administrative appeal and protracted additional judicial review with its attendant  appeals, had also not been rationalised.

The Coalition has put forward some positive suggestions to rationalise the process, including the requirement  to obtain leave before access to second tier review is permissible.

Finally, asylum seekers, and the Khmer claimants in particular, have not been guiltless. With the aid o f many  well-meaning supporters and taxpayer-funded legal advisers, refugee claims have b een  withdrawn, re-lodged  and re-argued ad nauseam.

The delay, which is clearly the responsibility o f the parties involved and the Government, is now being used  as the basis for suggesting that those who are now properly and legally held in detention should be released  into the community. The folly of this course o f action would be to allow asylum seekers to claim "absorption"  as a basis for remaining in Australia.

Other considerations include the fairness to genuine refugees abroad and their families in Australia, and the  enormous cost to the Australian community o f locating and arranging the departure o f those whose  applications fail.

While there is very clearly a case to reform the law to speed up the refugee determination process, there is  no reasonable argument for releasing detainees into the Australian community. They are merely people who  have arrived in Australia without proper documentation and authority.

10 May 1992 COM M O NW EALTH

PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY  M IC AH

