SENT BY

: Xerox Telecopier 7021 ;14-10-93 ; 3:49PM ; 0627341'8- 616 2775287;# 1.

TRANSCRIPT OF PRESS CONFERENCE WITH SENATOR GARETH EVANS. AUSTRALIAN MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIR$ AND HRH PRINCE NORODOMSIRIVUDH. CAMBODiAN MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS HELD AT PARLIAMENT HOUSE OF MONDAY

GE: Thank you ladies and gentlemen for coming. I'd like to introduce you this morning to His Royal Highness Prince Norodom Sldvudh, the Foreign Minister, first of all of the provisional government of Cambodia and now of course In the newly installed Royal Government of Cambodia. I'm absolutely delighted to welcome Slilvudh to Australia. This is his first overseas visit as Foreign

Minister and we're particularly thrilled that he should choose to make that first visit to Australia You all know about the background to our meeting. What we've talked about today I think bolls down to a series of topics related to the establishment of the new government, Its likely future, the future of the round table exercise with the Khmer Rouge, the nature of Australia-Cambodia future cuoperatlon In terms of aid assistance and military cooperation and also some other questions about returnees and people determined not to be refugees and

bilateral housekeeping matters If you like of a similar kind. Needless to say the talks between us have taken place In an excellent spirit, friendship and cooperation. They started out on a very good basis with Saturday In Sydney which was a splendid occasion with the return of the Australian soldiers and

police officers and the celebration that accompanied that. So I say again how delighted I am to welcome Sirivudh to Australia I don't know whether you'd like to say something by way of opening remarks otherwise we could throw it open to them for questions?

HRH I would just say that with great honour for me as Foreign Minister of the Royal Government to visit on my first trip abroad to Australia in that we have big Interest to come to Australia after our partnership In the region concept but you know we have traditional links with France for a long time but now we realise that In the region, In particular as ASEAN group and an Asian Pacific

Cambodian and the Royal Government now have decided to Interest more and more on Australia bilateral and I think that too  to teach to come to accept the deep gratitude to Australia, to Gareth Evans, our friends. I think I Just remind that he was for us the architect of the peace plan - the famous -

known by Cambodian people. We could talk about Paris Agreement, talk about peace process, there was a lot of things done before Paris so thank you very much for your commitment to achieve peace for my country and thank you for all Australian boys - your contingent held down a very good Job In my country and I think I am very. proud. It for me is a good day. Remind the past

of a peace agreement and now talk about the future as you said very well between Cambodia and Australia.

GE: Thanks very much Slrlvudh. Very much appreciate what you've said. Questions.

COMMONWEALTH PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY MICAH

SENT

. BY : Xerox Telecopier 7021 ;14-10-93 ; 3:50PM ; 062734179- ► 616 2775287;# 2

2

Matthew Frost (SBS News):Q: As you may be aware there are currently a number of Cambodian nationals in Australia seeking refugee status. Some of those have had their applications turned down. Is It your opinion that it is safe for people who have left Cambodia to return now. That they face no danger?

HRH: I would like to say first that In the principle of a government that's supposed to be a liberal one based on the real democratic way that will constitution have a guarantee for human rights Issue myself. I know very well what Is a human right We are very conscious about this sensitive and Important Issue. I would

like to say yes we propose to guarantee all human rights respected In my country. Safety like security we must confess that we face some security problems as you know, regular problems as Cambodia facing 20 years war but In the principle people supposed to be free, liberal thinking, and I think that our compatriots abroad are welcome and as a Foreign Minister engage myself to provide them passports and freedom as real citizens rights to come back In Cambodia. So I don`t think that any more human rights abuse. The Royal Government will look on this very carefully. I would like to assure them that yes not only for Cambodians In Australia but for all Cambodians around the world and abroad they must know that the time has changed now in Cambodia.

Terry O'Connor (Australian Associated Press) Q:  On the question of bilateral aid did you firm up any of the proposals of Australian aid to Cambodia in the defence cooperation area?

GE: As far as defence cooperation Is concerned yes I addressed that specifically this morning because HRH won't have the opportunity to meet Robert Ray - I was conveying a message from him. If and when we're asked - and we are expecting a formal request quite soon to come from the Government - we've

indicated that there are three areas In particular In which we are happy to help with defence cooperation on a modest scale. One is In the development of a national defence communication plan, secondly so far as the Cambodian navy Is concerned we're ready to help straight away with a study of maritime support systems, will be CRAF Navy, and thirdly were happy to help In the context of demining with some assistance to the Cambodian Mine Action Centre -CMAC. Again the nature precisely of that assistance will need to be clarified In further exchanges but In principle we stand ready to help In certainly those three areas if requested. As to aid more generally, Prince Sirivudh will be

meeting straight after this with Gordon Bilney to discuss in a bit more detail the nature of the way In which we are going to spend the almost $60 million that has been directed to Cambodia since the peace settlement taking us through until 1995. The question as to the prioritisation of that aid and how it might best be broken up between the different projects and functions Is still really being sorted out and I think It wilt be the subject of a more detailed statement later on. Is there anything more we can say about that subject at the moment - I don't think so. It will be up to Gordon Blaney to sort out the details of that with the Cambodian Government and he will do that.

SENT

, BY : Xerox Telecopier 7021 X14-10-93 ; 3:51PM ; 062734179- ► 616 2775287+# 3

3

HRH:

0: Would you like to see it, do you believe there Is a continued role for Australla's defence personnel In the demining and training area?

HRH: Yea we are very Interested in that we have just signed some bilateral agreement with France to assist with our national defence but once again before we go straight to the. point about defence I would like to come back to the point of spirit. Cambodia as a small country we realise that on the rich and even the language, even myself I just speak French cannot widen the region so

I think that in the principle of the English language It Is welcome and we would like to balance the situation to say we need English and assure the French as some special  of the region that as economic deals and negotiation I'm sorry to say Cambodian people need Australia to provide education support for this period. Second thing, in the same time on behalf of the Royal Government we would like to say yes the French can provide us with some Instruction and that In terms of a balanced situation I think that Australia can do well to assist

us In particular like my friend Gareth Evans said, in the navy area and some damming and telecommunications in particular because we are to be used for the timing of the Australian system and with national army their Interest to set up some system on an Australian basis. We need personal Instructors to form and to train national army not to be aggressive army but just to defend conceptions in the region. I read of a request and honoured to hear that Australia has commit engagement to assist us.with defence.

GE: I think It should be understood In further response to the supplementary question that we're only thinking In terms of quite limited numbers of personnel. It Is essentially technical, managerial, advisory, Instructing sort of support rather than sort of hands on operational exercises of any significant scale. I think both sides see It In those.terms. So please don `t write another story on Australian troops back to Cambodia. It's not quite like that.

Peter GI 1(Australian Financial Review).Q:  Looking at the broader Issue of International aid to Cambodia to restructure the country In the wake of the last 20 years, are you happy with the anticipated speed of aid flowing to Cambodia from the commitments given In Tokyo last year?

HRH: Yes we are quite encouraged to hear that Tokyo pledged commitment as quite Important and I would like to reiterate again that Paris, that famous International Conference on the Rehabilitation of Cambodia was held In Paris, I think $110 million more for Cambodia so we are quite encouraged. But at the

same time I must say that equal engagement Is for long term and middle term treatment. Cambodia as a sick man you know needs now quickly some balance It means we still need volunteer contributions to balance of payment to pay our salaries of our national police and civil servants so If we can Just wait for the long term and middle term treatment the man will be dead and the doctors will not treat any more so this Is why I reiterate again to Australian people, government and friends that we still need volunteer

SENT BY:Xerox Telecopier 7021 014-10-93 ; 3:52PM : 062734179-

► 616 2775287;# 4

4

contributions. The Royal Government wants to stabilise the situation on the balance of payments and I think that some of us here and our Finance Minister slowly to get more contributions to this matter.

Q: Senator Evans, In light of that comment, do you think Australia's doing enough to keep the patient alive In the medium term?

GE: Yes we've- been very active supporters of the concept of short term budgetary support and assistance and very actively lobbied and also put our money where our mouth Is and In that respect we'll continue to do so. There's been no criticism of us of any shortfalls In this respect. We know what the needs are and we are very anxious to meet them.

Graeme Dobell (Radio Australia).Q:  Can I ask you how wall you think that this unique system of having two Prime Ministers of a Coalition system has worked so far and also your expectations of the round table with the Khmer Rouge?

HRH: Thank you for your very Important question. The Cambodian situation Is very special. It Is the first time that the peace agreement Is very special to UNTAG and we made everything special, not like the others. For our stability and our national reconciliation achievement I think that to the formalist you know Asian way - Asian don't like to lose face - sure there are some winners of election, for Instance, Prince Ranarridh, my President. But it's good to have some followers along to maintain stability during the transitional period so the Idea

about the so-called provisional government we must applaud Prince Sihanouk who said look now there's no winners and no losers and the fathers I bring to my two sons together and so you will go Prime Minister. Now we have made progress from the Royal Government we moved to first Premier and second

Premier and I would like to say practically speaking,  Prince Ranarrldh has been Invited to make a speech on the house of the Royal Government and Prince Ranarrldh has made . That too Is good to have Mr Hun Sen as my second Prime Minister and i think the formula Is likely to contain some stability in terms of but we must recognise the real political situation and agree that we have big Interest to get them vote between the two big parties and practically get It from one prime minister that Asian way is very special and

agree it is not a problem until now they collaborate really well with good conferences more and more move to the Prime Minister role. But the second question it's more important to resolve the Khmer Rouge Issue more than to get confusion about the first Premier and the second Premier.

Graeme Dobell (Radio Australia). Q:  Given the military action In the north and with the likelihood of the round table next month how do you think the new government Is going to be approaching the Khmer Rouge.

HRH: Before we talk about the military operation I would like to react to one conception. The Khmer Rouge problem - why do we talk about Khmer Rouge - I'm not personally obsessed by the Khmer Rouge. I know that a lot of

SENT BY

: Xerox Telecopier 7021 ;14-10-9 ; 3 : 52PM 062734179- ► 616 2775287;# 5

5

journalists are really Interested about the Khmer Rouge. They get more success than us. The problem Is

GE: They're beginning to learn - it took them some timel

HRH (continuing.) The point Is you want partition of Cambodia or not. Cambodian people, ask them, don't talk tome about Khmer Rouge but can you answer me If you want partition of Cambodia„ and friends of Cambodia, everybody, Cambodian people told me, Your Royal Highness we don't want any partition, we want Cambodia as a whole, a unified Cambodia If you think like this yes, we must resolve the problems of the Khmer Rouge Issue. How to resolve them. It means we don't want Cambodia, non-Khmer Rouge a big one run by

real government and a small Island handled by the Khmer Rouge. The concept is let the door open because we must achieve national reconciliation and we must achieve rehabilitation of Cambodia. Let the door open and bring the tiger from jungle to town. It is very dangerous to bring the tigers to town, we must

try to move to transform the tiger to the cat and when the tiger's licking the cat we can bring him In the living room. But one time In the living room we must provide some milk, not too much milk too Is very dangerous and to provide some milk is not enough. There must be some shampoo you know because your living room is beautiful and cannot allow the cat to disturb the living room and so we can cut the claws. That's the spirit but how to transform the tiger to the cat. First I would like to say some friends support the tiger to disturb me.

It's Thailand. And I point out - clearly I'm sorry I asked permission in Australia to point out this problem - I am very pleased to most my friend, counterpart, Prasong Soonsirl, the Foreign Minister of Thailand. I'm not too much welcome in Thailand now because I made some strong declarations last month. Thailand must understand now that It Is better to have religion, between state to state -= It means between kingdom and kingdom but not between kingdom to the outlaw group which Is the Khmer Rouge. So I feel that Thailand

understands very well and moved to the right track not to support any more Khmer Rouge to show me from the Thal soil and to allow the Khmer Rouge to use Thailand and detain UNTAC people. I would like to make clear with Thailand that yes now Cambodia is a sovereign state, we have royal government and I wish that Thailand must have cooperation between state to state and l feel that in Now York ASEAN partners, Indonesia, Brunei, Philippines, point out clearly to the Thai ' friends that please you must understand the Royal Government of Cambodia. And once again I reiterate my request to Thailand to stand on the rightful position and not any more help the Khmer Rouge and I ask Thailand not to talk to me and everybody, even Australia, to talk about any faction, Is not any more faction. The round table support must be between the Royal Government the legitimate government and the outlaw group called Khmer Rouge under the chairmanship of His Majesty the King, Norodom Sihanouk, Clearly I am very disappointed and 1 did not call the Australian press this morning to talk about Cambodian faction trying to achieve their  there's not any more faction I'm sorry. There's a government and outlaw groups. So we hope that no longer the Khmer Rouge will come and they must respect three conditions, I can add one, four; must

SENT BY

: Xerox Telecopier 7021 ;14-10-93 . 3:53PM ; 062734179-3 616 27'15287.# 6

6

recognise the new constitution, It's been recognised by national assemblies elected by two million people to the fair and free elections; they must recognise His Majesty the King our head of state; they must open their door because the notion about Is not puny' more acceptable and the army must be dismantled and reintegrated Into our national army and talking about the milk -yes, we can Imagine some advisory role In the government, a role In the government Is too much milk, that is a little milk, an advisory role perhaps but It depends on their attitude and they must come without any conditions and I would like to say there arent any more tigers, they are beginning to be cats

because they are defection on the field. I don u t know the number exactly but approximately close to 2000. I'm not definite but yes the soldier from Khmer Rouge are defecting every day and the government faces this problem. And I talked to my friend Gareth Evans of Australia and to Americans to work for the

program If the Royal Government to welcome and to fit Khmer Rouge defection that we promote this . I hope that they not say no to me, that not provide the rice to me because they said we cannot provide rice to the Khmer Rouge. Is the defect to the Khmer Rouge. So I am pleased that Australia understands very well this concept. So is one half of the pressure. I talk about Thailand, I talk about defection, I talk about Cambodian people who don't want any more fighting. Just to show as one spirit they are not logical with themselves. When I turn the button to the Khmer .Rouge broadcast Hun Sen is a puppet of Vietnamese. Prince Ranarrldh and Prince Sirlvudh are new puppets. But they claim and they ask to be adviser to the puppet - not logical. If one political

party fail In this spirit and not logical you can not have success In your struggle. That I would like to point out.

Peter Gill (Financial Review) 0: Senator Evans, have those supporters of Cambodia In recent times made representations to Thailand along the lines that they should no longer be supporting the Khmer Rouge?

GE: Well I have of course had a number of discussions with my Thai counterpart, Sqn Leader Prasong, and yes the whole question of the relationship between the Thai Government, Thai military, Khmer Rouge on the border and the new Cambodian government has featured quite prominently in those discussions Just has Indeed the subject of Burma. I'd be Interested to know In the light of

some reports this morning. The Issue Is a real one and the  of concern that has been articulated by Prince Sirivudh Is a real one In the sense that In the past there has been a degree of support more Informal and unofficial of course than official and that has given some support and encouragement

unquestionably to the Omer Rouge. And equally, clearly, If the situation Is to stabilise and the new government is to be able to get on with the job and to bring a durable and viable peace, then certain consequences that flow from that. May I say that I think this government of Chuan Leekpal and Prasong the

Foreign Minister understand that very clearly and are fully supportive of this and I am sure they are doing their beat to make this work that way In practice.

SENT BY-Xerox Telecopier 7021 ;14-10-93 ; 3

:

54PM 062734179i 616 2775287# 7

7

Peter Gill (Financial Review) 0: To what extent Is the problem the Government's Inability to control the military?

GE: Well I don't want to go Into any great detail In this discussion. I don't think it's as big a problem as It has been in the past. The ground has changed since the May revolution In Thailand. There are still some  tendencies that are evident but the ground has changed. I think the direction Is clear but It's Important that the kind of message Prince Slrlvudh Is wanting to give Is reinforced by all Cambodia's friends and I think that helps very much the position that Prasong and Prime Minister Chuan when friends make clear their concern and express their support on that approach. And that's certainly the spirit In which I've approached my discussions with the Thals.

Terry O'Connor (AAP) Q: How soon would you see Cambodia perhaps Joining ASEAN?

HRH: I would just . like to add a few words that we will  the Prasong visit In my country. I feel from the newspaper before but now I have an official note from the Thai Prince that Prasong would like to visit Cambodia. I join and agree with my friend Gareth Evans that yes now I think the direction is clear. We feel that Thailand, the Prime Minister and Prasong the Foreign Minister of Thailand, we will have him as soon as possible In Phnom Penh and perhaps It's my own opinion. I must tell you It is better that the Foreign Minister of Thailand can come before the round table to meet the Cambodian Government in November. So we are pleased to talk to him and we are quite sure that Thailand understands that our relations are important more than we to

business nervous listeners are one part, a small part of Cambodia. And to respond to your question. Yes I was the first Cambodian Foreign Minister to be Invited as a special guest on 26th ASEAN meeting In Singapore. Our conception that I tell you even we Interest In Australia Is the region concept. We are not members of ASEAN, we are not holding status of observer but we would like to follow up and........

(Side 2 of tape)

status. What are you doing here In Singapore. I told her then look, I have two neighbouring countries, Laos and Vietnam from the Indo-China block. And although between the former block, Indo-China block and ASEAN, Cambodia Is equal distance. But I told you that my  Laos and Vietnam

have signed bilateral treaties. Are they come to be observer of ASEAN. So I told the Journalist yes I go to Singapore to observe very closely the observers. So I think that to the explainer was and I continue to do that very closely In the next meeting In Thailand.

SENT BY

: Xerox Telecopier 7021 ;14-10-93 ; 3:54PM ; 0627341?- 616  616 2775287;# 8

8

Glen Schloss (News Ltd) 0: How long before Cambodia gets back onto a normal footing?

HRH: Thank you for your' encouragement. First we must achieve this national reconciliation and  to establish it as a main condition. The second thing Is we must convince donor countries In the West to do come to my country to promote from areas Infrastructure Is the main question In mining and how to achieve agricultural situation, food. Sure we can talk about defence and can talk about communications but first Its political stability and infrastructure It

means  power and other  . I hope that as soon as possible we achieve this. Cambodia Is ready to welcome foreign Investment In the little ways. It means we can talk about tax systems, how to promote and encourage foreign Investor to come to Cambodia They cannot come If there Is still

rockets from the Khmer Rouge. You build the bridge, the bridge will be destroyed the next week, they build a factory and the factory will be gone. You cannot talk about It so I would like to say yes free condition for Investment. I hope that 94-95 we are supposed to be in good shape or the beginning of good shape but once again we must have future and 80 million from Tokyo plus bilateral commitment from Australia and the other countries can provide us the good means to rebuild our Infrastructure and our national society of

education.

Terry O'Connor (AAP) Q: When would you foresee Cambodia re-opening its Embassy here and and secondly how much Is held In trust for Cambodia?

HRH: First we would like to say yes we want an Embassy here and congratulations and gratitude to Australia to maintain the Embassy is in good shape, we need to have some renovation and I think we have some funds waiting for us here to allow us to implement in way to representation. We are very interested to have presence here In Canberra even Defence Attache and Commercial Attache because this can help our trade too. We encourage Australian

business to come to Cambodia and I think we must talk about  how to run this embassy here and our communities here In Canberra and Sydney and Melbourne are quite dynamic and I'm very pleased and proud about them. They have contributed to your economy and I think that I can send them • back as your representative for OTC, for Qantas, they must use Cambodian Australians to represent your company In my country.

