Leader of the Opposition

17 October 1995

*

wh/ab

TRANSCRIPT OF THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  THE HON. JOHN HOWARD MP  SPEECH TO THE REAL ESTATE INSTITUTE’S POLICY  CONFERENCE, CANBERRA

E & OE........ ..................................................................................................

Could I start by saying how pleased I am to have been invited by the Institute to formally open  this policy conference. Could I also commence my speech by commending the Institute on  choosing to have at this time, at this stage o f the cycle in the political and economic debate in

Australia a conference of this kind designed to examine not in a superficial way, but examine  in a more reflective and analytical way the various policy questions that surround the entire  real estate industry in Australia.

I make it plain to you on behalf o f the Coalition that both the Liberal and National parties have  a very strong commitment based on philosophy and also an understanding o f the character o f  the Australian people, o f the importance o f your industry and its various branches within the  Australian community. Your industry brings together a large number o f individual unjts, some

o f which are very large but the great bulk o f which ar<^quitgsm all and you represent  quintessentially a group o f people who believe very strongly in independent, private enterprise.  You understand the importance o f property ownership and I think it is important at gatherings  o f this type for political leaders to reaffirm their fundamental commitment to the importance o f  private property ownership and the sanctity o f private property ownership within our society.

As your President has said, private home ownership in Australia is the highest probably in the  Western world. It has been a character o f Australian society since the end o f World War Two  that Australians more than most people around the world have aspired to private home  ownership and I also take this opportunity to strongly reaffirm the Liberal and National  Parties' very strong commitment to a policy in Government that will encourage and achieve  the maximum possible level o f private home ownership in this country. I am not one o f those  who in any way walks away from the ideal which has been part o f the Australian dream for so

long o f private home ownership. The notion that there is something now unfashionable or out  o f date or quaint about suburban home ownership in Australia and the way in which it is  understood by most Australians is a notion that I personally repudiate very, very strongly  indeed. That is not to say that with the passage o f time and the demands o f urban planning  and the various pressures that are placed upon particularly our major cities, there are going to  have to be some shifts o f emphasis. But this idea that is peddled by some that the traditional  notion o f owning a home with a back yard and some kind o f amenity surrounding it is in some  way an indulgence and a selfish desire o f the middle class o f this country that can no longer be

Parliam ent H ouse, C anberra, A.C.T. 2600 Phone (06) 277 4022 Fax. (06) 277 2055 1

perpetuated is an idea that I can reject and I think it represents a...those who peddle it are  really advocating a retreat from one o f those things that has given to the character of  Australian life a very important quality over the past couple o f generations.

Private home ownership is not only important for the sense o f individual security and the sense  o f individual success and the sense o f individual achievement that it gives to people but it is  also a very important social stabiliser. Families' principle purchase during their lifetime is the  family home. There is nothing more directly related to the sense o f well being and the sense o f

security that families have than the ownership o f a private home and I think Government  policies should always be designed to give the maximum number o f Australians the maximum  opportunity to achieve private home ownership. That is not to say that there isn't a role, and  there should always be a role in the most efficient way possible o f providing subsidised  housing accommodation for those in our community who cannot afford and will never aspire  to afford to buy a home o f their own, and there is absolutely no incompatibility between those  two notions and there is no reason why your industry as it has in the past shouldn't continue to  play a major role in both.

But o f course your industry goes far beyond the suburban block and far beyond private home  ownership. It also o f course reaches into commercial property, to valuing and to all the other  aspects o f economic activity and business endeavour that cover a very large industry that  employs literally tens o f thousands o f Australians. Aspects o f the industry I know have gone

through the roller coaster experience o f much o f Australian economic life over the past few  years. I am as conscious as many of you are o f the ups and downs o f the commercial building  industry in Australia. I'm conscious that in recent years sections o f our large cities have gone  through significant gluts o f commercial property. I'm also conscious o f the forward indicators  regarding housing construction in Australia and I'm very aware o f the ebbs and flows o f  investment in housing which have taken place over the past few years.

But I know that your industry more than most has a vested interest in stable, economic  conditions. It is important in any policy analysis o f matters affecting the real estate industry  that we pause for a moment to look at the various elements o f economic policy that bear on  your industry. You frequently hear the economists, you occasionally hear the politicians  debating about the mix o f monetary policy, fiscal policy and other aspects o f Government  economic management. It is no unreasonable criticism to say that over the past few years, we  have had an excessive reliance in this country on the use o f monetary policy as an instrument  to regulate, subdue and to control levels o f economic activity in Australia and I know that for

your industry, nothing is more anathema to the stability o f the industry than a policy approach  which employs from time to time severe monetary restrictions through the use o f high interest  rates in order to achieve economic objectives.

I don't intend to dwell on the point for too long but any address o f this kind would be  incomplete without my saying something about what has happened to housing affordability in  this country over the past 10 or 15 years. It is beyond argument that housing affordability in  Australia now is much less than what it was in the early 1980s. Between 1983 and 1995,  adjusted in constant dollar terms, the cost o f servicing the average mortgage in Australia rose  by no less than 50%. From $674 a month, to $951 a month and whatever may be the  footnotes to that, whatever may be the corollaries to it, whatever may be the explanations for  it, nothing can gainsay the fact that that has struck directly and quite tellingly... ladies and  gentlemen, nothing strikes more directly at the affordability o f housing in this country than that

2

particular statistic, and if you look at all the measures o f housing affordability, you will find  there has been a significant decline over recent years. High interest rates must carry the major  responsibility for that change, and those policies which have produced high interest rates in  Australia in turn must carry their share o f responsibility for those high interest rates.

In recent weeks the Coalition has attracted some publicity, some ridicule, some criticism for  the fact that it has sent trundling around Australia something called a debt truck. Now that  debt truck has been criticised as a political gimmick. It has been criticised as PR device. It  has been criticised for trivialising the debate on a great national issue but as I am sure this

audience knows better than most, occasionally the use o f such devices to draw attention to an  important national issue, then when the attention has been drawn to the issue the serious, inÂ­ depth debate can commence, is part and parcel o f how one must conduct one's operations and  one's business.

If that debt truck has helped to heighten in the eyes o f the Australian community the link  between the high level o f our overseas debt and the high level o f interest rates in Australia then  I think it has certainly done political debate in this country a significant service because there is

a link. It's an unbreakable, unescapable link between the level o f interest rates in this country  and the level o f our overseas debt. And all o f us know from our own private and business  experience, if one has to borrow money from a situation where one is already heavily in debt,  when one is already heavily mortgaged, where one is regarded as a fairly unreliable credit risk,

obviously the prospective lender is going to charge a premium for the additional  accommodation. The same thing applies to us as a nation and the idea that you can  completely disaggregate those components of our overseas debt which are due to Government  activity from those components which are due to private activity, and then pretend that it's  only the Government activity that is relevant, completely misunderstands the thought  processes o f international bankers and how our global financial system operates.

The fact is that the risk o f this country in the eyes o f the world is generated from our  aggregate indebtedness and those overseas who lend to this country draw no real distinction  between whether the debt is owed by the Government, by Government agency, by a private  company or by a private individual, and it stands to reason that if we owe the rest o f the  world...(tape breaks) ( 1 min missing)

I am proud you've chosen to have this conference here in Canberra. It does provide an  excellent opportunity for the sort o f contact that is taking place now and the contact that will  take place later on during the conference, at dinner and at various other meetings. But for our  part, we regard ongoing dialogue between our two parties and their various spokesmen and  your industry as very important to the process o f policy development and policy

understanding.

The other issue that I would like to touch on very briefly relates to two particular policy items  that I know are very important to anybody associated at all, either at the Real Estate Institute  level, also at any other level, to the building, the home construction and the commercial  building industry o f Australia - and that is the impact of our industrial relations laws upon

aspects o f the industry. As I'm sure all o f you know, Australia has one o f the most efficient  home building industries in the world. And one o f the reasons why we've had, and can boast

3

o f having had, such an efficient home building industry is that that home building industry is by  and large being built upon the operation o f the sub-contractor system within the industry. In  industrial relations terms there's been a very stark difference between the suburban cottage  building industry, which has been based on independent sub-contractors, and the commercial  building district industry o f our major capital cities, which has been based on an entirely  different approach.

And although there have been some improvements in recent years, the broad industrial  relations experience o f those two industries have been very very different. And I think there is  a very strong case for preserving the separate character o f the home building industry in  Australia, reserving the role o f the independent subbie in that industry, keeping that industry  immune and free from any o f the industrial mores that have inflicted the CBD section o f the  industry and that, o f course, means preserving the essentially non-union character o f the  cottage building industry in Australia.

And in that context I have to say I greet with some concern the announcement made by the  Prime Minister when he addressed the CFMEU in Sydney a couple o f weeks ago, when he  foreshadowed the introduction into Parliament o f legislation to drag within the PAYE taxation

net many independent contractors. And he cited the building industry as an example o f where  many o f these independent contractors (are found) And let us understand what is involved  here. What is involved here is riding rough shod over the centuries old distinction that our  legal system has always drawn between the employer/employee relationship, which is a well

defined, well understood relationship, and the relationship o f principal and independent  contracting. And the fact is that those two relationships are different in character. They have,  as I say, for centuries attracted a different legal consideration. And the notion that you would  arbitrarily ride over that difference and you would, for purposes o f taxation, impose the same  rules on the independent contractor as you impose on the employer/employee relationship, is  to really promise a very significant change in some o f the rules under which some o f our

important industries operate. The fact is that many people become independent contractors  because they don't want to be employees. They become independent contractors because they  want to run their own business and many o f them are driven to become independent

contractors because o f the administrative and regulatory complexity which now attaches to the  employer/employee relationship. Many o f our independent contractors being in the building  industry, or any other industry, are refugees from the complexity o f the employer/employee  relationship, which is being made more costly, more complicated and more burdensome by

absurd laws such as the unfair dismissal provision that was introduced by M r Brereton a  couple o f years ago, a provision that has completely distorted the balance between what is fair  to both sides in the industrial relations bargain, a law that has, in fact, encouraged many small  business people to shy away from the employer/employee relationship and to seek

arrangements elsewhere.

N ow  I see this announcement made by the Prime Minister as really the thin end o f the wedge  to try and drag within the industrial relations umbrella, o f his notion o f industrial relations, the  independent contractors. And not only in the building industry but in many other industries  throughout Australia, because once you extend the PAYE tax net, what you are doing is really  throwing the door open to a fundamental assault on the independent contractor status and it  will be yet another attempt by the government to drag independent contractors within the  reach o f the industrial relations system. And the implications o f that is that if it's unchecked, is  that we could well end up with our central business district industrial relations experiences

4

being visited upon the suburban cottage home site constructions, and that I think would be a  very, very adverse development.

The last thing I want to mention is to acknowledge the importance that I know your institution  attaches to superannuation policy in the context o f home acquisition and in the context o f  saving for the purchase of a home. I remind you that, at the time o f the last election, both o f  the major political parties made a commitment that superannuation could be accessed for the  purposes o f deposit on the acquisition o f a home. I think it is a matter o f great regret that,  along with a number o f other commitments that were made before the election by the present  government, its commitment to that particular provision was dumped very quickly and very  cynically soon after the election had taken place. I think your President has fairly encapsulated  the approach that has been taken by the Coalition to this matter. We recognise the importance  o f this to your industry. We recognise that there is a relationship between the disposition o f  people to make provision for their superannuation and thereby save, and the accumulation o f a  deposit for the acquisition o f a family home.

We are at present fine tuning some aspects o f our retirement incomes policy - and I don't  intend today to make any detailed announcement o f it - but I wouldn't want the opportunity to  go by without saying that we had good reason to make the commitment we did at the time o f  the last election. We continue to have that matter very much under attention and I hope that  in the fullness o f time that the announcements that we do make in that area will be seen as

sensible announcements and announcements that will attract the support o f your organisation.

Can I conclude, M r President, by wishing the conference the very best o f success. I know it is  a challenging time for the industry in Australia. You have been as an industry buffeted more  than many by the roller coaster character of Australian economic activity over the past few  years. I know the importance o f continuity, the importance o f stability and the importance o f  predictability in your industry. And I take the opportunity to reaffirm the very strong  commitment o f both the Liberal and National Parties to the goals o f you industry. We are  unrestrained and unqualified believers in the essential objectives o f your industry, the essential  goals o f the people who work in your industry. I personally admire the entrepreneurial flair o f  many in it. I personally respect the enormous risks that are taken. I understand on occasions  during times o f recession the high business mortality rate o f people who are involved in all  aspects o f the real estate business. And the fact that so many o f you survive and others come  back for more, is testament to the fact that the spirit o f the work ethic and o f private enterprise  and the willingness to take a risk providing there is a proper incentive and a proper reward and  a proper return, is anything but dead in this country.

Thank you very much for having me this morning. I apologise for the slightly croaky  presentation and I wish your conference every success. Thank you very much.

5

