LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION

JOHN HOWARD



Interview with Keith Conlon, Radio 5AN, Adelaide, 7 April 1995: transcript [Topics:  Senator Crichton-Browne, Qantas, Woodchips, Cricket, Superleague, Privatisation]

EOE

CONLON: John Howard, welcome.

HOWARD: It's very nice to be here Keith.

CONLON: You were in town yesterday as well. Where did you get to?

HOWARD: I arrived mid-morning, yes. I visited a nursing home and I went and talked to the wine  growers.

CONLON: They would have impressed upon you that you should stay with your ideas of no higher  wine taxes?

HOWARD: Absolutely. They didn't need to. We have a simple commitment. We are opposed to and  we will vote against any increase in tax burdens on the industry. The industry is important to the  whole of Australia, but in relative terms, it is more important to the economy of South Australia  than the industry in other States is to the economies of those States.

Anything that affects the viability, the growth potential - and it's an enormous growth potential -  the wine industry - in this State, is bad news economically for South Australia and the future of  this State is tied up quite a lot between the linkage between the wine industry, the development of  the tourist industry and the associated benefits of both and they do interlink. Therefore, to impose  further tax burdens on the industry would be unwise and very much a against the interests of the  State.

CONLON: I hope we can get to the Budget and what you will wear and you won't wear later during  our discussion because we have quite a long time with you. But, the issue which has been creating  a lot of time behind the scenes for you is that of Western Australian Senator, Noel Crichton-Browne. And we've just reported at 9 o'clock, as you've heard that he says he is not a Liberal  Party liability. He may stay on in politics for the sake of the organisation.

Could Noel Crichton-Browne staying on be possibly for the organisation?

HOWARD: Well, I don't want to comment further to what I said yesterday. He is, as he indicated to  me 2 nights ago and indicated publicly, considering the matter, and I understand he's talking to  his family and to his friends and to his Liberal Party colleagues. In the circumstances, I don't want  not to say anything more for a few days. He and I will talk again early next week. Beyond that, I  don't want to add anything.

CONLON: Can I put to you what The Australian is saying today on its front page that you, are  eventually, prepared for a confrontation if need be?

HOWARD: Well, you can put anything you like to me but I will simply bat it back along the wicket  and say that we had a talk. We both want this issue resolved in a manner that promotes the  interests of the Liberal Party - that's my dominant concern - and that will be the governing factor  in everything I do. My supreme responsibility as Leader is the overall national welfare of the Party.  I know that a man like Noel Crichton-Browne who's spent all of his adult life and a bit more serving  the Party will also be concerned about the long- term benefit to the Party or disbenefit, therefore, I  will, for the time being, put the matter aside and we'll meet again early next week.

CONLON: Can I just ask about the way it's been dealt with, and before we leave it, do you accept  the risk is involved in your behind-the-scenes approach - or your low key approach - can be  interpreted as being soft, weak on domestic violence?

HOWARD: I don't think anybody can say I've been soft or weak on domestic violence. I've made it  very clear all along that I am completely repulsed by any instances of domestic violence,  something I've had a strong view of all my life. And that's something that I'm sure is widely felt in  the community. It is one of those things that I do find repulsive and I've never been in any doubt  about that.

This is a difficult issue, but the difficult issues come with the territory. I'm confident that in the  end, it will be resolved in a way that is supportive of the Liberal Party's interests and that's my  goal. I mean, it's the interests of the Liberal Party and the reputation of the Liberal Party and its  long term success which is my responsibility as Leader, and that will govern everything I do in it. I  did say yesterday that the right way to handle issues and challenges sometimes is to handle them  in a quiet unostentatious fashion. Bellicose words and noisy declarations do not always equate to  strong firm leadership. Sometimes strong firm leadership requires you to handle things with gentle  persuasion and argument and encouragement and behind-the-scenes discussion. People who see  strong leadership as always being in terms of thumping the table and point fingers and yelling and  screaming don't really understand the complexities of human nature nor the variety of challenges  that political leaders have.

CONLON: The tone of calls that I see just from notes on them is that there is a fair bit in the  direction of the economy and so on. Perhaps I'll just set up the calls then ...

HOWARD: ... Sure ...

CONLON: ... with a look at the unemployment figures and their implications - the lowest in 4  years. Australia drops below 9%. South Australia, on the other hand, goes above 10%. What do  you see in that?

HOWARD: Well, any overall improvement in unemployment I always welcome, I make that very  clear. But we still have a very high level of unemployment. If you compare us with, for example,  with the United States where the unemployment rate is just over 6%. We're still a good bit higher  than say a country like New Zealand so we shouldn't get excited that the unemployment problem  is behind us and there are some worries that the job growth that we were seeing for a long time is  starting to flatten out and that's often the forward indicator of future trends with unemployment.  As far as the variation around the States, you will always have a bit of a variation and it's not  uncharacteristic that you'll get a bounce around within an overall figure that remains fairly  constant. You can get a bounce around between the States. One will suddenly go up one month  and then the next month there will be a bit of a correction. I don't myself read anything in  particular into the South Australian figure beyond observing that the increases in interest rates  that we've had over the last 6 months have begun to bite in some areas of the economy and I'm  sure that that applied in South Australia.

The best way I can summarise it is that any improvement at all on the unemployment front I  unreservedly welcome. It's very modest and we still have, what, just under 9%. It's still a very  high level of unemployment and there's no guarantee that it won't bounce back again next month.  I hope it doesn't and we still have a good distance to go.

The fear I really have about unemployment is that we won't have reduced it very much before the  economy starts slowing down again and starts going up. And you have this ratchet effect that  when you have a recession, the unemployment goes up and then it starts to fall a little bit and  then you have another dip and it goes up again to the higher plane.

If you look back over the last 20 years that's what's happened. We had a recession in the early  70s and unemployment jumped and it never returned to the pre-recession levels and then it  jumped again in early 1981 and it never returned to the pre-1981 levels and it's jumped again.

CONLON: There as some complications in that but that's the sort of thing our listeners might want  to tease out.

HOWARD: It's very hard to see us returning to the sort of unemployment levels that existed when  I suspect I left school and also you left school.

CONLON: Thirteen past nine on News Talk on 891 5AN. It's the leader of the Opposition in the  studio taking your calls - it's Sid from Greenacres is first. Good morning Sid.

SID:- Good morning John.

HOWARD: Yes Sid.

SID: Well, I'm looking forward, but when you take over government, there will be, in general,  many unpopular and hard decisions to make. Now is it possible to carry out these decisions in the  first year? If not why not? Because we have to bear in mind that people will be criticising you and  not those who lefts the mess.

HOWARD: Well, any government worth its salt from time to time has to take decisions that are  unpopular and I certainly won't be reluctant to take decisions that might involve some short-term  unpopularity but will have a longer term benefit for the country.

I answer your question by saying that all of our decisions will be carried out in a fair manner. We  will give to the Australian community a clear general direction of where we are going or propose to  go before the next election.

Obviously, we will find when we are in government things that we weren't told about. All new  governments seem to find that and they certainly all say it. But, government is a question of  making decisions in the long term benefit of this country and then being willing to explain the  reason for those decisions in a candid, frank and open manner. And if you take the public into your  confidence and you level with them and you don't raise their expectations unreasonably about  being able to perform miracles, then they will go along with you even though some of your  decisions are unpopular and unwelcome.

CONLON: Thanks very much Sid. Dean from Glenelg I think has really a supplementary on this.  Good morning Dean.

DEAN: Yes, look the question is a policy free zone and the reason being that Howard just like  Keating are economic rationalists. They believe in cutting money with the States in the public  schools in the public hospitals and health and education and so on so they have to balance - the  Federal Government - has to balance its budget which is quite contrary to logic and reason and  these politicians have learned nothing from John Maynard Keynes, 1930s and World War 2 when  we had massive government spending which solved the unemployment problem. I just want to  know if John Howard is an economic rationalist just like Keating, except that he might be a little bit  more extreme. Howard's idea of labour market deregulation will be like England where there's no  minimum wage and no maximum hours.

CONLON: Have you got the drift?

HOWARD: Yes, I think I have, yes. Can I just pick up your last point. I mean, minimum wages  have never been an article of faith in the United Kingdom on either side of politics including on the  Labour Party side. It's just a different culture there than what it is here.

As far as my economic views are concerned, I believe in a rational economic approach. I don't  believe in a harsh insensitive approach. Anybody who imagines that you can produce wealth in this  country and you look after the people who can't look after themselves unless you have a strong  economy, unless you have high levels of investment, and unless you have a climate that  encourages people to take risks, doesn't understand the first thing about economics. I have no  doubt in the world that running the economy in rational reasonable fashion is the only way to go.  All the evidence of the last 30 years indicates that.

Growth economies of the Asian-Pacific region, despite all the talk about government intervention,  the growth economies in the Asia-Pacific region have been fuelled, have been based upon  encouraging private business investment. So they've been based on the notion that giving people  incentives - you take a risk and you take a punt and that is the foundation stone of any ...  (inaudible) ... run economy.

As far as John Maynard Keynes is concerned, his theories were extraordinarily helpful and valuable  in the 1930s and 40s and nobody has totally, these days, turned their back on Keynesian. Of  course, you still use fiscal policy to bring about changes in the level of economic activity. Because  you are an economic rationalist doesn't mean that you've never read Keynes. There's always a  mixture.

I don't dispute for a moment the need for government fiscal policy to have an influence on the  level of economic growth. And as far as the States are concerned, just for the record, can I say to  you that the last Budget that I brought down in 1982 as Treasurer of this country, in proportionate

terms, gave the States a better deal - all of the States a better deal - from the Commonwealth  Treasurer than the last Budget brought down by the present Government.

All of the spending cuts that have been made by Labor in the last 12 years has really been at the  expense of the States. Their spending on their own programs has gone out and their revenue  grants to the States have steadily fallen. And when State Premiers - whether they're Dean Brown  or Wayne Goss or in future, Bob Carr of NSW or Richard Court in Western Australia say that  they've been short changed by the Commonwealth, they are telling the truth. Labor and Liberal  alike.

CONLON: John Howard, the Leader of the Opposition in the studio as we switch direction with  Yvonne from Maylands. Good morning.

YVONNE: Good morning Keith. Mr Howard, why is the Liberal Party ignoring its own research as  evidenced in the Australia 2000 Australia Speaks project which showed that immigration and  multiculturalism are the number one and number two concerns of the Liberal Party membership?

HOWARD: Well, those issues did come up in that survey, but when a political party puts together a  program, it takes account of a lot of views, not only of the views of its own members, but also the  views of the broader community. And the views of Liberal Party members is important to us. But,  Party membership is only a fraction of our voting base and we have to listen to the whole  community.

CONLON: If you listen to the whole community though, Mr Howard, on behalf of Yvonne, the  membership have got it right. There is a great deal of concern about the increasing levels of  immigration.

HOWARD: I think most people in Australia now think economically, we shouldn't have higher levels  - but, of course, we don't. At the moment, immigration now is lower than it was in the 1980s -  sharply lower.

CONLON: Half as much?

HOWARD: Less. In 1988 I think from memory, we took something like 170,000. We're well below  that figure now. In fact, I don't think we'd be half that. I think you're looking at 60 or 70,000. Our  policy very firmly is that the level of immigration is influenced by economic circumstances and  there is not a case at the moment for any significant increase in immigration.

CONLON- : What about Bob Birrell's point this week alone that really you've got to look at family  reunion. It has to be tightened up. It's just not realistic at the moment. We are not getting people  who will fuel the economy.

HOWARD: There is certainly substance in the argument that you need to have an immigration  program that puts an emphasis on people who can make an immediate contribution to Australia's  welfare, and that is often giving greater preference to people with immediate skills and who can be  slotted straight into a position. I've always argued that. We've got to have a mix. We must always  some refugees ... (inaudible) ... because we do owe the rest of the world, as a fortunate society,  certain obligations. But we need also to fulfil our obligations to ourselves and getting people who  have got skills no matter where they come from and who can be slotted straight into positions  where there are shortages is a high priority. Perhaps it should be an even higher priority.

CONLON: Back to the hip pocket now Mr Howard with Mel from Mount Barker. Good morning Mel.

CALLER: Yes good morning Keith, good morning Mr Howard. Welcome to South Australia.

HOWARD: Thank you.

CALLER: A bit wet and windy.

HOWARD: That's all right.

CALLER: My question relates to our money being tight on our savings, Mr Howard. I'm in small  business and we have tried to get some money together however we find ourselves being  frustrated what with FID and the banks putting their two bob in now, and the ...

HOWARD: Or taking it out you mean.

CALLER: Yes, take it out. And the Federal Government getting its hands on our bit of investment  that we have through taxation. Would you get at people again to ask them to invest their money  whereby they're not being penalised by not being taxed?

CALLER [sic]: We had a policy at the last election of giving a modest tax break for savings. We've  said again that we will have some policy before the next election to encourage greater savings.  The low level of savings in Australia is one of our biggest problems and it's one of the reasons why  we have high levels of foreign debt. When you import more than you export, you have to pay for  the surplus imports from somewhere and if you don't invest enough as a nation then you have to  borrow from abroad to do it, and in order to break that habit we need to encourage more domestic  savings and we certainly have a policy directed towards at that.

CONLON: Mel from Mount Barker, thank you very much for that. Rex from Kurralta Park is next.  Good morning Rex.

CALLER: Good morning Keith and good morning Mr Howard. Many Australians, I would say  hundreds of thousands of Australians, are concerned at the fact that the people's property such as  the Commonwealth Bank, Telecom, Qantas and many other state institutions are being sold in  many cases to overseas firms. Now obviously these institutions bring in billions of dollars into the  Australian Treasury and if they were retained they will continue to do that for years to come. In  the case of Qantas, Qantas is our national flag carrier and it surely is an unpatriotic act to sell that  to a foreign company, as 20% of it has already been sold. Now, common with these sell outs of  the people's property has been widespread unemployment. It's occurred in England, it's occurred  in Canada where now 85% is regarded as full employment. Now I put it to you and I'd like to know  whether the Liberals would agree with this, that we should retain our national assets, we should  continue to make them function economically and efficiently as they do. It's a lie to say that public  property does not function as efficiently a private enterprise.

CONLON: Rex, thank you for that.

HOWARD: Look, I'm afraid Rex I don't agree with you. I support the privatisation of Government  assets where there is a strong public benefit in that privatisation occurring. It is wrong to say that  when you sell shares in Qantas or the Commonwealth Bank to Australians you are giving away  Australian assets. I would argue to the contrary that you are actually more directly endowing  Australians with the ownership of their assets, and surely a Commonwealth Bank in which there  are hundreds of thousands of Australian shareholders is more directly owned by Australians than a  Commonwealth Bank just owned by the Government which is the remote, impersonal  representative of all of the Australian people.

I believe that there was a very strong emotional response from the mums and dads when they  were able to buy shares in the Commonwealth Bank and the same thing in relation to Qantas  when that float finally gets off the ground. If the Government had floated it in the middle 1980s  which I advocated they would have got a much higher price for it, and the shares bought by  Australians then would have been a lot more valuable than they will be, although they will be quite  valuable in the future, and as far as overseas experience is concerned, can I say to you Rex that I  travelled on the old state owned British Airways. It was then British Overseas Airways Corporation  - BOAC and British European, and can I tell you the comparison between travelling on those two  airlines and travelling on British Airways now is enormous. The whole attitude, the mood, the  activity and everything in people is much better.

I would like to see the employees of Qantas given preferential treatment to buy shares in the  company they work for. I'm a great believer at when you sell these public assets you ought to give  some preferential treatment to the employees, the people who have worked there for years and  given loyalty to the company, and in that way you will enthuse them. I am enthusiastic about  movements in this area. If they handled it properly and you give some preference to the workers,  and you guard against excessive overseas investment, it's a win win situation for Australians and  it's a win win situation for the utilities involved.

CONLON: We're heading back to the southern suburbs where Mr Howard was yesterday. Janet,  good morning.

CALLER: Good morning Keith, good morning Mr Howard.

HOWARD: Good morning.

CALLER: Nice to speak to you.

HOWARD: Thank you.

CALLER: Mr Howard, Mr Keating has appeared to become the Prime Minister for the minority  groups. Will you be a Prime Minister for the majority. If so, how can you still retain the confidence  of the minorities and win Government?

HOWARD: Well, most minorities are also some of the time part of the majority. People, for  example, who feel very strongly about the environment also have to pay their mortgages and they  pay taxes and they have to worry about the education of their children and whether they can  afford to have private health insurance, and they also would like occasionally to negotiate directly  with their employer to get a better deal for the good work they're doing in their factory or their  office. So this idea that certain people live permanently in minorities and they're not concerned  about mainstream issues is a mistake but having said that, I do believe that the present  Government is governing too much in response to the pressure of minority groups and it's getting  itself into a lot of trouble.

The woodchip issue is a classic example. What the Government has done on that issue and why it  is in such an appalling mess is that in one breath it tried to placate the industry, the next breath it  tried to placate the greenies, and then it went back to the industry and now back to the greens  and the net result is that neither side trusts it, and it deserves every bit of the pain that it suffers.  By contrast, we never at any stage raised the expectations of the environmental movement that  we could agree to everything they wanted but we at least said we could go part of the distance  and we stuck to that.

Many of their representatives are now saying to them as well, we didn't like your policy as much  as we liked the Labor Party's policy but at least you have been consistent, at least you have stuck  to your guns.

CONLON: How many coupes would it have been worth, your policy, do you think in round terms?

HOWARD: Well, our policy was not so much based on the number of coupes. Our policy was based  on the national forest strategy that was worked out in 1991 between the Federal Government, the  State Governments, the conservation movement and the industry.

CONLON: But when it comes down to the loggers, especially the Greens, you end up with having  to say that area is in and that area is out.

HOWARD: No, no what you do is you negotiate regional forest agreements and you look at each  area and you try and reach an understanding between all those parties as to the right way to go.  Now, if the Government had stuck to that which they should have, then they would not have been  in the mess that they are in now. Obviously this is an area where there has to be a balanced  compromise. It's a bit of a tautology but you have to have some kind of balance. You can't agree  totally with the industry. Equally, you cannot agree totally with the conservation movement and  most sensitive conservationists, and we are all conservationists - I have made it very clear as far  as the Liberal Party is concerned, conservation is an issue permanently on the political agenda in  this county. It is not a fad of the 1970s. It is permanently with us and all generations of  Australians are concerned about the preservation of our environment and it's the last big  mainstream political issue - conservation.

I talk about the mainstream. When I hear mainstream Australia, it does articulate a concern about  the environment. It's a question of recognising that and factoring it in to policy decisions and  making certain that you get this precious balance, that you don't get this precious balance by  being intimidated by interest groups. You get it by saying to people at the very beginning, you've  got to have a compromise. There has got to be some give and take or otherwise you will never get  a solution.

CONLON: John Howard, just one more call, Mr Howard and it comes from Clarrie in the West Lakes  area. Good morning Clarrie.

CALLER: Good morning John Howard. How are you?

HOWARD: I'm very well Clarrie.

CALLER: I wish to talk about the Senator Crichton-Browne issue. Is it policy of the Liberal Party to  forgive? I feel that he has been harshly treated. Now, I don't get the morning papers. I don't get  time to read them and is it the, the domestic violence, is that against his present wife?

HOWARD: I'm going to be restrained in what I say about this because I do have a sensitivity  towards matters relating to people's family lives. I don't find this an easy incident, an easy matter  to deal with. The facts are that a restraining order was taken out. I mean, that's an undeniable  fact. I'm not going to sit in moral judgement. That's not my role as a Party Leader and I don't pass  moral judgements on people. I deal with political perception and political reality. That is my  responsibility as a Party Leader. It's not a question of forgiveness or non-forgiveness. That's not  once again my, part of my responsibilities or within my gift. What is within my responsibility is to  make a judgement as to whether certain perceptions are or are not within the interests of the  Liberal Party and I have certain views about this. I have communicated those views to a lot of  people who count and have responsibilities inside the Party. I have had a number of discussions  with Noel and his wife. I don't want to detail those discussions. They were in their detail private  discussions and as far as I am concerned will remain so and I go back to what I said at the  beginning of the program - this matter has to be dealt with in a fashion that best promotes the  interest of the Liberal Party. That's what's driving me. I am not being driven by any views about  moral sanctions. I being driven - that's not to say I disregard concepts of morality and behaviour -  certainly not but they are for the individual and we all have our own value systems and attitudes  and certainly, I don't seek to make harsh judgements on people. I just seek to apply my  understanding of what is in the best interests of the Liberal Party.

CONLON: Barry thanks for that call. Mr Howard, it's time for you to move on to the next  engagement. I know you're speaking at a Premier's lunch today and there's more to come this  evening. Can I just perhaps slip a couple of sports questions in - a dedicated cricket fan. First of  all, was the West Indies game a one off?

HOWARD: I hope not. It was absolutely terrific and I think the psychological value, to demolish  them on their home turf for the first time in decades is just terrific.

CONLON: You would have loved to have been there?

HOWARD: I would have loved to have been there. In fact, one of my brothers is over in the West  Indies at the present time. Cricket fanaticism runs in the family and he's the brother that votes for  the other side but we have a common love of cricket and he's over there actually watching the  series, following it around and I think he's a lucky blighter to be able to do that.

CONLON: And sending you postcards saying, look, I'm here and you're not.

HOWARD: That's right. We both vote for Australia but he votes Labor.

CONLON: And the other one, the Superleague just in parting, do you find it somehow indecent that  two super rich men seem to be gabbing for the control of young men's lives and maybe what  seems to be the complete take over of a people's game.

HOWARD: This is one of those things where you have mixed feelings. I am a person who believes  in markets and am a person who believes that just as a radio personality is entitled, if he or she  can do it, to negotiate megabucks, and a number of them do, don't they?

CONLON: Not here but over there. Some do.

HOWARD: They do and if somebody is a gifted surgeon or doctor or somebody is a very gifted  businessman, they get paid a lot of money and if someone is born with a great sporting gift, surely  that person is entitled to get something out of that.

CONLON: So that's one side.

HOWARD: That's one side. I understand that. I mean, if you were a Ricky Stuart or somebody like  that and you've got the opportunity of getting in a short period of your life, which inevitably your  peak playing years are, to get paid extremely well for it, you can't blame these blokes. But as  somebody who follows sport, I mean. I like rugby league, I follow it. I enjoy going. I can't go a lot  but I enjoy the game. I enjoy a lot of football codes. I really do but I guess the one that I watch  the most would be rugby league. I have mixed feelings. I have sort of had that old fashioned view  that the game belongs to the players and clubs and spectators but on the other hand, without  commercial sponsors, the sport now would be not as widely supported.

CONLON: The district game is a myth?

HOWARD: I think to some extent it has become a myth. I think it varies a bit. I don't think it's a  myth in parts of Melbourne.

CONLON: It's not a myth in Footscray or Collingwood.

HOWARD: No, it's not and it is still not a myth in places like St George, that's the club that I  support. I don't live in that district now but I used to and it is not a myth in parts of Canterbury  and I wouldn't think it's a myth in Newcastle and Wollongong. I mean, the Steelers have really  captured the imagination. I have very mixed feelings that I don't think a lot of the followers of the  game have. I mean, we are very happy to have ... the followers are happy to have the money  from the companies and the wealthy people. Ford sponsorship, Winfield sponsorship, the Benson  and Hedges for cricket and so on, people are very happy to have it and it's kept the game going  and providing a lot of this money is put back into encouraging younger people and giving them an  opportunity to play and the whole thing doesn't become a super super elite of a small number of  very richly endowed players with not much done at the grass roots level. I think that would be a  shame. I have mixed feelings and I guess the other thing I would say is the people who have been  running rugby league over the last few years have done a good job. Rugby league has changed a  lot of support bases and diversified and they haven't done a bad job. It's very easy to attack  sports administrators because they're all, we get fanatical about our following of the sport and  then if anything goes wrong and you blame the administrators it's never ...

CONLON: It's a bit like blaming the pollies really.

HOWARD: That's fair enough. I've got mixed feelings. I can't in all conscience say that you just  ignore the money. That's silly because nobody else in a sense does. I don't see a well paid media  commentator saying, well, yours should be a community based thing, do they.

CONLON: On that note, we'll take that as a personal note to some of your Canberra friends in the  Press Gallery.

HOWARD: No, no, I mean, I understand. I mean, it's part of our life and you've really got to have  a balance. I don't think money should be everything but you can't ignore it and the spirit of the  game and the history of the game and the way it all started, I mean rugby league had origins in,  it's the working man's game originally and it's a very interesting journey unlike Australian rules  which has always had a very diversified past. The base of the origin of rugby league was the fact  that working men couldn't afford if they were injured to have time off from their jobs and therefore  the pressure started for them to get paid.

CONLON: John Howard, it's obvious that you are passionate about sport as with everything else in  Australia. Thanks very much for your time today.

HOWARD: It's a pleasure



