Senator Vicki Bourne Australian Democrats _________ Human Rights Spokesperson

27 June 1996 .... MEDIA RELEASE 96/371

“Migration Bill will Put nation in  International Disrepute - Democrats” The Australian Democrats today reacted strongly against the Government’s  Migration Amendment Bill (No. 2) 1996 which if enacted would prevent the Human  Rights Commissioner and the Commonwealth Ombudsman accessing and informing  refugees of their rights under Australian law.

Democrats’ Human Rights spokesperson, Senator Vicki Bourne cited several human  rights instruments including the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights  and the Body o f Principles fo r the Protection o f All Persons under any form  o f  Detention as international instruments which were likely to be offended if the Bill  were to become law.

“What we have to understand is that those people are being held in incommunicado  detention. They have no access to anyone in the outside world. Not even priests  wishing to hold religious services for these people, nor the International Red Cross  have been given permission to check upon their living conditions. We dont even  know their names. It is a total outrage,” said Senator Bourne.

“The proposition that individuals from non-English speaking backgrounds and from  culturally different nations to Australia need only ask for legal assistance is both  flawed and deceitful.” said Senator Bourne. “What we are perhaps looking at here is  a thinly veiled attempt to reintroduce the ‘dictation test’ ; the much derided pillar of  the white Australia policy.” She added.

Senator Bourne said the Bill which the Government's attempt to rush through all  normal Parliamentary processes was a blot on Australia’s human rights record.  “How can we now maintain international credibility concerning human rights when  the Government is prepared to disregard or obligations here on Australian soil.” She

added.

For further information, contact John Davey on 0411 885 405  COMMONWEALTH PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY

A U S T R A L I A N D E M O C R A T S

