MEDIA RELEASE  MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS  ALEXANDER DOWNER

EMBARGOED 3.30PM AEST

~ --

~ft -l,,-AUSTRALIA ~ ~'77"'.~//´!"'f.::!:.- "'/ //7...,......." , .....

AA23 14 November 1996

$2.6 lVlILLION FOR CRISIS IN ZAIRE

I have today decided to provide $2.6 million in emergency assistance for the humanitarian  crisis in Zaire.

In allocating these funds I have taken advice from many sources, including up-to-date  information from the Director General of Au sAID , Mr Trevor Kanaley, whom I directed to  Nairobi for this purpose.

On the basis of his and other advice it seems clear that a situation of dire proportions is  currently unfolding in Zaire. Up to one and a half million people are on the move, some of  them refugees from neighbouring Rwanda and Burundi as well as displaced Zairean citizens.

But the urgent humanitarian need at this stage is not for food and other supplies, rather it is  for logistical support, mainly experienced personnel.

Allocations to Australian NGOs have been made taking this advice into account, as well as the  organisations' proven track record in delivering emergency aid in Rwanda or Zaire and  demonstrated capacity in one or more of the following emergency sectors : food, health, water  and shelter. The NGO allocations are as follows:

" $300000 each to CommunIty Aid Abroad (Oxfam), World Vision Australia, Medecins  Sans Frontieres, Australian Red Cross and CARE Australia

" $200 000 each to Adventist Development Relief Agency (ADRA), Australian Catholic  Relief (CARlTAS), Austcare and UNICEF Australia .

The money will be used to provide experienced personnel to supervise the distribution of  supplies, provide necessary medical attention and coordinate relief efforts, once access to the  refugees and displaced people is possible .

In addition to the NGO funding, $100 000 will be provided to help maintain the UN's  Integrated Regional Information Network, a vital communication tool, which collects and  disseminates daily reports on the crisis .

$200000 will also go the World Food Program for communication equipment.

.. .Iover

..

At this stage there has been no consolidated appeal for assist ance from the United N ations and  reports indicate the UN is relativel y well-stocked in the region. However a contribution to the  operation of UN agencies might be required as the situation develops .

I anticipate that as access to eastern Zaire improves, the full extent of the humanitarian crisis  will be revealed. I fear the current situation may even be more extreme than Goma in 1994.  The Australian Government stands ready to respond further with emergency assistance as the  situation demands.

lVledia Contact: Peter Collins (Mr Downer's Office) 062777500/0411 414 695  Andrea McLaughlin (AusAJD) 06 206 4966

EASTERN ZAIRE EMERGENCY

The conflict in eastern Zaire is one part of a complex regional jigsaw of ethnic conflict.  At the centre of the conflict is the outflow in July 1994 of over one million Rwandan  refugees, including up to 30 000 armed militia of the former Rwandan Government.

The Hutu refugees from Rwanda arrived in 1994 in an already neglected , isolated and  poor region of eastern Zaire, itself a venue of ethnic tensions between local Hutu and  Tutsi communities. Further complicating these tensions , central government control in  Zaire is weakening, with President Mobutu , who has ruled the country for over thirty  years, very sick and possibly dying in Europe.

Tutsi militia now hold the towns of Goma, Kivu and Uvira in a 20 kilomtre wide strip  along the border between Rwanda and Zaire. Estimates suggest several hundred  thousand refugees are on the move . Added to these people are probably several  hundred thousand internally displaced Zaireans.

A new caseload of refugees has emerged: up to 50 000 Zaireans fleeing fighting in  eastern Zaire, have arrived in Rwanda, Burundi, Uganda and Tanzania.

All international aid workers have been evacuated from Zaire, but both multilateral and  non government organisations are positioning themselves to move back into Zaire.

Two small needs assessment missions and a small shipment of relief supplies entered  Zaire on Monday 11 November 1996. They should be able to report progressively  where the people in need are, what their health condition is, where it is safe to work  and what supplies are needed.

The UN agencies are relatively well-stocked . The World Food Programme has, for  example, 63 000 tonnes of food in the region, sufficient for two to three months. They  have one Hercules, six Buffalo aircraft and 140 trucks standing by.

The United Nations has split coordination between Rwanda (Kigali) and Nairobi. A  small coordination team comprising Department of Humanitarian Affairs (DHA),  UNHCR, UNDP and WFP has been set up in Nairobi. UN-run sector meetings are  now being held in Nairobi and Kigali, attended by the major NGOs .

Since November 1993, and prior to the present crisis, AusAID has provided $20.6  million to the Great Lakes region. These funds were channelled through multilateral  institutions and Australian NGOs.

November 141996

