ALEXANDER DOWNER, M.P.

SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS FEDERAL MEMBER FOR MAYO

-

6 \ It Barker Rd, Stirling, S.A. 5152 Tel: 6I (Sr 370 9288 Fax: 61 (8) 370 kir,

THE RESEARCH INSTITUTE FOR ASIA AND

THE PACIFIC

1996 ASIA POLICY LECTURE

SECURITY AND PROSPERITY IN ASIA

MR ALEXANDER DOWNER, MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS

TUESDAY 20 FEBRUARY 1996

UNIVERSITY OF SYDNEY

COMMON

M r WEAL ARLIAXEENTARY  SIP

EMBARGO: 4:00 PM TUESDAY 20 FEBRUARY 1996

CANBERRA OFFICE: Parliament House, Canberra, A.C.T. 2600 Tel: 61 (6) 277 4885 Fax: 61(61 277 2062 Re Peen, •

1.

The Coalition's Tradition in Asia

Our own speeiril role Lies in South East Asia and consequently our foreign

policy is largely but not exclusively concerned with that region".

That statement was not made by an Australian politician in the lead up to

the 1996 election campaign. That statement was made by Richard Casey,

Minister for External Affairs, in December, 1954.

I begin with that quotation in order to emphasise the long standing

commitment the Coalition has had to engagement with our region as a

principal focus of Australian foreign policy.

Nothing is more false or misleading than the continual claims of

Mr Keating and the Labor Party in general that the Coalition has no

interest in our region and never has had. The facts belie this claim.

It was a Coalition Government which initiated the Colombo Plan, a

scheme Mr Evans described in his book as a "modest version for Asia of

the Marshall Plan".

It was a Coalition Government which negotiated the 1957 Japan Australia

Trade Agreement, an agreement which formed the foundation of the

Australian trading thrust into Asia. For the record, the Labor Party

opposed the signing of that agreement.

At the humanitarian level, it was a Coalition Government which took in to Australia, large numbers of ludo Chinese refugees during the Late 1970's

and did so in the face of some community opposition and substantial

opposition from the Australian Labor Party_

1

These days, the Labor Party seems to

think there is political mileage to be

made in claiming the Coalition has no interest in Asia.

I thought until recently that that would be the end of the argument : but in recent days the Labor Party has taken it further.

Gareth Evans and Paul Keating have decided their political interests would be served by suggesting we in the Coalition are racists and as a result will not be able to deal effectively with Asia.

This is the basest, crudest and most disgusting argument I have heard in an election campaign during my time in Parliament.

The last Liberal Government led by Malcolm Fraser, fought racism vigorously, particularly in South Africa. As I have already pointed out, it showed deep compassion towards Indo-Chinese refugees.

The decision of the Fraser Government to accept boat people was not deeply popular in Australia.

Yet, never let it be forgotten that in a gross act of inhumane cynicism the Australian Labor Party exploited for all it was worth antipathy towards these refugees and opposed their entry.

This from the Party which was the founder of the White Australia Policy.

This from the Party which opposed the Australia-Japan Trade Agreement so it could pla y the anti-Japanese card.

This from the Party which later tolerated Graham Campbell's denunciation of a multi-cultural Australia for fifteen years.

9

This from a party which has tolerated wha.t many Asians would interpret

as a racial slur: few would know that in March last year Sen.ator

MeKiernan, Labor WA, attacked various organisations for a conspiracy to

populate northern Australia with Asia138.

Senator McKiernan clearly caused deep offence to many people within the

Asian community with his remarks which he made on Perth radio station

6PR.

And what has the usually very vocal Mz Keating said about this? So far,

absolutely nothing.

•

The Let is Messrs Keating and Evans know the Liberal Party is not

racist. But there are apparently no limits to how low they will sin.k

These types of claims have brought Australian public Life to a new low and

do great damage to the image of Australia iriternationa_lly.

If the Labor Party were honest and accepted there was a national

consensus about the importa.nce of engagement with Asia, then the image

of Australia in the region would be the stronger for that. By continually

trying to claim the Coalition lacks a commitment to our region, the Labor

Party is not only  deceiving the people of Australia but generating concern

in the reg-ion about th.e commitment of our country to that region.

Once a Coalition Government is elected in Canberra, this debate will come

to an end a_nd our obvious commitment to the region w-ill he there for all to

see.

As I have said. the Coalition regards engagement with Asia as our highest

foreign policy priority. That priority springs from the fact that our

relationship with our region is quite clearly driven by two considerations:

3

First, Australia's security and our broader strategic environment will

always be determined by the stability of our region.

Secondly, the rapid growth in the East Asian economies and their geographic proximity to Australia means that economic engagement with our region is not only very obviously to our advantage but presents with

us with an opportunity few countries can enjoy.

2. Security in the Asia-Pacific Region

I want first to discuss the strategic importance of our region and the Coalition's approach to security issues in the Asia/Pacific.

In the post Cold War world with the passage of the old certainties of the past, it will take the Asia Pacific region some time to rework the strategic balances and replace them with new stable security arrangements. At present, we are fortunate that the political climate in the region is one of

relative stability and tranqu illi ty. It would be naive to suggest that this environment could never change. It obviously could.

There is an overriding challenge to regional security which I believe underpins many of the difficulties within the region. It is the problem of ensuring that rapid economic growth actually delivers a more secure environment.

Rapid growth, whilst desirable of itself undoubtedly leads to power shifts both between and within countries.

These shifts in power present the great challenge for the region.

4

I strongly disagree with Mr

Evans' rosy assessment that there is a

powerful convergence within the region simply because the regional economies are becoming more prosperous. This is a good example of Gareth Evans at his naive worst. What is more, I similarly reject the Huntington thesis of clashing civilisations.

These are both stylised theses which posit extremes of change and which ignore the fact that although identity exists at many levels the primary identification continues to be with the nation.

The primary source of political power continues to be the State.

And the primary economic unit continues to be the State, despite the importance of transnational corporations and capital flows.

The dominant reality in international affairs therefore continues to be the State. And the paradigm upon which conflict is most generally founded is State versus State.

Put simply, national interest continues to be the basic force in regional affairs, rather than divisive cultural realms or homogenising theories of convergence.

In East Asia there are therefore sotne bilateral issues of security concern for the region which flow from the changing power relations between different States. Much has been said and written recently about tensions between China and Taiwan. In that regard I welcome the initiatives of

the United States in encouraging both China and Taiwan to act with caution. Australia should join in this encouragement.

0

The potential for conflict on the Korean Peninsula remains a matter of

concern as does the still unresolved question of sovereignty over the

Spratly Islands.

The existence of these potential flash points in the Asia Pacific region

means that work must he done towards underwriting the security of the

region_

For our part, the Coalition has strongly supported and encouraged the

development of a web of bilateral and multilateral security ties within the

region.

It was a Coalition Government which in the early 1970's negotiated the

Five Power Defence Arrangements which remain as relevant today as they

did in years gone by. The Coalition welcomed the signing of a security

agreement with Indonesia by the Federal Government (although we were

unhappy about the secrecy surrounding the agreement). The Coalition

has also given strong support to Australian involvement in the ASEAN

Regional Forum and we believe the ASEAN Regional Forum has the

potential to develop as a very useful vehicle to help our region develop a

greater sense of cohesion.

There are two other points to make about the security of our region.

The first is the question of China. The role of China in the East Asian

hemisphere is somewhat analogous with the role of Germany after

German unification in 1870. In the late nineteenth and early twentieth

centuries not only did Europe fail to accommodate itself to the emerging

power and significance of Germany, but the Germans were unable to cope

in a mature and constructive way with their new role_ In our region,

China is emerging as a major power both economically and strategically.

The challenge for the region is to ensure we fully engage China in regional

affairs and in playing its proper part in contributing to regional econ.omic

development and security,

For China's part, it needs to understand the concerns an emerging giant

can cause to neighbours and ensure that its actions are carefully

contemplated in the spirit of regional cooperation and constructive

engagement.

I have no reason to believe the region will not accommodate successfully

the emerging role of China but I think it is necessary to repeat what is

often said: contairunent of China is a policy which will lead in the end to

disaster. Very few political leaders speak of containro,ent of China but

many have that as the underlying theme of their security policy. That is

something in our region we should actively discourage.

In that context Mr Evans advocated a de facto containment policy at one

stage during the last year.

In a speech to the ARIA-Australia Institute on 20 M_axch 1995, the Foreign

Minister declared:

In a region where the idea of power balance retains considerable resonance, there may be much to be said, moreover, for working

over time to unite the lesser sized countries in the region,

including those of South East Asia, Indochina and Australasia,

into a more cohesive grouping of their own"

This sounds like code for a policy of containment towards China.

Mr Evans now tells us he opposes containment: his problem though is his

message is confused and unclear_

The second important issue

is the question of US involvement in the East

Asia region.

US engagement in the region remains centrally important to regional

security. If the United States were to weaken its various security

arrangements with countries in the region such as Japan and Korea, if it

were to downsize its presence or even withdraw from Japan, then I believe

the stability of the region would be seriously undermined. The United

States has successfully acted until now as a balancing wheel in the region

and we need to ensure it remains actively engaged.

There is of course a consensus about this in Australia and it is important

that consensus remains firmly in place. That is why the Prinae Minister's

abuse of the Coalition for showing what he regards as too much interest in

Pennsylvania Avenue is damaging rhetoric because it transmits to Washington a message that Australia is half hearted in its commitment to

the continuing involvement of the United States in our region.

Other Ministers do not make that mistake but then other Ministers do not

carry the same weight as the Prime Minister.

I remain optimistic about the evolution of appropriate security arrangements for the East Asian hemisphere but I make this point so even

the Prime Minister can understand: the Coalition believes that Australia's

interests are overwhelmingly served by the Australian Government being

focussed principally on Australia's own region.

Economic Engagement with the Region

said at the beginning of my speech that the economic opportunities

offered by the rapid growth of the East Asian economies are for Australia

enormous. But this statement, which the Government believes to be a

8

blinding insight

is merely an expression of the bleeding obvious. The real test is our practical performance.

Our objective must be to encourage the opening of markets in our region

as we in the same way have opened and will continue to open our own markets to the outside world.

The Coalition behoves that we need a dual approach to market

liberalisation in the Asia Pacific region.

First, Australia must endeavour to open trading opportunities in the

region through strong bilateral links. We believe that the Labor Party has

given too little emphasis to engaging countries in our region on a bilateral

basis and one of the consequences of that is that we have been less

successful in gaining market access than may otherwise have been the

case.

It is, for example, noteworthy that as Australia reduces its tariffs on

passenger motor vehicles (from 1 January this year they fell to 25%)

countries like Malaysia are taking advantage of that Liberalisation and

exporting passenger vehicles to Australia. I have no objection to that. If

Australian consumers have a greater choice then that is to their

advantage and ultimately it is the Australian people who will make the

judgment about what sort of motor vehicles they want to buy and drive.

My point is this. While we have given Malaysia greater access for their

passenger motor vehicle industry, Australian built motor vehicles cannot

be sold in Malaysia; their levels of protection are simply prohibitive.

Obviously bilateral trade negotiations must be conducted in a way which

is consistent with the rules of the World Trade Organisation but our goal

9

must be to maintain our own pace of tariff reform

whilst persuading

others to bring forward their ow-n reforms.

Having said we will increase Australia.'s emphAsis on bilateral trade negotiations, that is not to say that we vvill turn our backs on multilateral

negotiations. They obv-iously are important.

The Coalition has strongly supported APEC and believes that it can

become a centrally important vehicle for reducing regional and perhaps

even global protection.

We also believe there are opportunities for Australia to gain access to the ASEAN Free Trade Area perha.ps through negotiating an arrangement between our CER arrangement with New Zealand on the one hand and

AFTA on the oth.er. That is for the future but it is an example of what we

might call sub regional economic policy which would be complementary to

the APEC initiative.

The Labor Party in government boasts it has achieved substaaatial success

in terms of econoraic engagement with Asia. One of the constant boasts is

that there has been an increase in Australian exports especia_lly of

elaborately transformed manufacture to Asia. For example, from 1991 to

1994 Australia's exports to East Asia grew from $30 billion to nea_rlv $39

That sounds fairly impressive.

This is, however, only half the story. Let us not forget that while

Australia's exports h.ave been increasing, so have everybody  else's ex-ports to Asia. The East Asian economies have been grow-Mg faster than any

other economies on earth and inevitably as they grow, they are sucking- in ixnports.

10

The test of Australia's success in exporting to its own region is not

whether our exports have increased - because everybody's exports have

increased to East Asia - but whether our share of East Asian markets has

grown.

The fact is, our share of those markets has actually declined. Between

1984 and 1992, our share of East Asian markets declined by around 20%.

In the same period, the United States' share of those markets declined by

8%, New Zealand's share remained around the same and the European

Union's increased by around 25%.

I mentioned earlier that our exports had grown. But they have not grown

well enough according to the Prime Minister's own benchmark. In 1992

Mr Keating said that "the potential increase in our exports by 1994 (to

Asia) is $13 billion".

Mr Keating set the benchmark. If we had fulfilled our potential then

according to him we would have increased our exports to Asia between

1992 and 1994 by $13 billion. The fact is under his leadership Australia

fell $8 billion short of his own benchmark as to what was reasonably

achievable over that period.

The reason we failed to live up to our potential was because of limits in

our capacity to manufacture, transport and ship efficiently. That is also

why we continue to have a major balance of payment problems. indeed the worst in the industrialised world.

In other words, while our exports increased to East Asia, they did not

increase at the same rate as exports from many other parts of the world,

not least the European Union.

11

What these figures underline is the importance for Australia of addressing

much more urgently than it has done, the serious questions of domestic

competitiveness.

There is no denying governments in Asia are used to dealing with the

Federal Labor Government in Australia. That is a consequence of having

been in power for thirteen years. But governments in Asia are pragmatic

and they understand that if the Australian public expel the Labor Party

from office and replace that government with a Coalition government, one

of the reasons they will have done so is that the Australian people have

been disappointed with the Government's record in areas such as the

balance of payments and creating the appropriately competitive domestic

environment.

Our economic partners within Asia are not impressed with our waterfront

and our shipping. They regard both as a joke.

Not only has Labor been relatively unsuccessful in maintaining market

share in East Asia, Australia's foreign investment pattern also has cot

taken advantage of apparent opportunities in our region.

The Labor Party would point to the increase in Australian investment in

ASEAN over recent years. There has indeed been an increase in

investment in ASEAN. Between 1980 and 1992, according to the

Government's own figures, Australia increased its investment in ASEA...N.

from $1.2 billion to around $3.5 billion.

But this is also only part of the story. Over that same period there was an

enormous increase in Australian foreign direct investment all around the

world. The fact is, that our investment has overwhelmingly not gone to Asia_ While there has been a threefold increase in Australian investment

in ASEAN, Australian investment in the United States and New Zealand

12

has increased twentyfold and Australian investment in the United

Kingdom - so unfashionable with the Prime Minister - has increased

twenty six fold.

Now to say that Australia has fully embraced Asia, is totally focussed on

Asia and is above all engaged with Asia, is simply not true. We have a

long way to go and the rhetoric of the Government whieh becomes more shrill and more passionate as every day of this election campaign passes,

is simply not supported by the facts.

We cannot of course tell Australian businesses where to invest; they will

invest where they believe they can get the best returns.

Good government policy in our region can, however, encourage joint

ventures and encourage investment opportunities for Australian

companies. The Labor Party cannot claim to have had a great deal of success in that respect.

4. Foreign Policy and the Public confidence

The final point I would like to make about Australia's relations with Asia is this: the Australian Government, whatever political complexion it may have, will be committed to engagement with Asia.

The challenge is to ensure that the Australian public are encouraged to

support this process.

The rhetoric of the Australian Government will mean nothing if the

Government's strategy does not have widespread community support.

13

In some of its actions in recent years, the Labor Party has undermined

public confidence in the stratev of engagement with Asia. I should like to

give you a couple of examples.

First, whilst we approved of the principle of signing 8, security treaty with

Indonesia, the underhand way this treaty was n.egotiated aroused

widespread suspicion and opposition in the Australian community. If the

Australian Government were serious about carrying the community with

it, it would have ensured that the community was not ambushed by a

security treaty with Indonesia but fully ta.ken into the Governraenes

confidence about the Governmenes plan.s it would have fully explained the

need for such a treaty to tliem.

Secondly, there have been a series of diplomatic incidents which have held

back rather than encouraged Australia's engagement with the region. The

abusive, offhand remark by Mr Keating that Dr Mahathir was

"rec.sikitrant" not only damaged otu- relationship, but in the end had a

much more serious consequence.

Because of Mr Keating's 'recalcitrant" remark, Australia's involvement in

the upcoming European Union/East Asian Summit to be held in Bangkok

on 1st and 2nd March was vetoed by the Malaysians. On the day

Australian.s go to the polls, the leaders of our region and the leaders oldie

European Union will gather together in the first historic summit between

the two sides. What is embarrassing for Mr Keating a.nd the Australian

Government generally, is that Australia will not participate at that most

important forum. The reason why we will not be present though is

because of the intemperate language used by Mr Keating.

The way Mr Evans as Foreign Minister double crossed. the Indonesian Governraent over the appointinent of General Mantiri as Indonesian

Ambassador to Australia svas a diplomatic debacle.

14

If Mr Evans had been concerned about the appointment and had believed

that the appointment would have actually damaged the bilateral

relationship because of the controversy it would cause in Australia, he

should have made sure behind the scenes that the appointment was

dropped. Instead, Mr Evans accepted the appointment and when the

appointment was made public there was a public uproar: as a result,

Mr Evans begged in dAily telephone calls to Mr Matas, the Indonesian

Foreign Minister, that the Indonesian Government withdraw the

nomination of General Mantni. This demeaning farce not only had an impact on our bilateral relations with. Indonesia, but also damaged the

overall perception of Australian sensitivity within its own region.

Mr Evans seems to have convinced a g-ullible Australian media that he has

some sort of special relationship with Mr Alatas. When asked on

9 July last year about the relationship between the Australian and

Indonesian Foreign Ministers, the then Indonesian Ambassador,

Mx Saban Siagian said "no comment". And when asked by the interviewer

"So there has been some strain in the last week to that relationship?",

Mr Siagia_n replied, "That's your word". In the same interview Mr Siagian

said that he felt Senator (now Mr) Evans "coped with too many problems",

that he had "too much on his plate".

I mention those things not to be in any way personally abusive of Mr

Evans who, in my experience, is on the whole a perfectly pleasant man.

He has never thrown anything at me. only called me a harlots I mention those things in order to emphasise that heav y  handed diplomacy

particularl y  at the bilateral level, by the Prime Minister and his Ministers

has often undermined the cause of closer integration with the region

rather than assisted it.

15

5. Conclusion

In conclusion, I think it is very important you understand how deeply

committed the Coalition is to continuing the process of engagement with

Asia. Someone said in an in interview that we would do it perfectly well

but with less pazzazz than Mr Keating and Mr Evans.

I think that is probably right. Mr Howard and I will do it with less pazzazz, which is, incidentally much more the Asian way. The bombastic, boasting approach, particularly of Mr Evans and Mr Keating, has in

many respects held back our engagement with the region rather thin  advanced it.

The performance of Mr Evans and Mr Keating in terms of relations with Asia reminds me of an old Malay proverb: "the turtle lays a thousand eggs

without anyone knowing; but when the hen lays an egg, the whole country

is informed". Well, I don't normally describe Mr Evans as a hen, but I think y ou will rind that under the next government, there will be plenty of eggs and less of the hen's shrill cry.

13

