

EOE

Thank you very much Dean, the Premier of South
Australia; to Martin Cameron, the State President of the South Australian
Division; and to my many State and federal Parliamentary colleagues; ladies
and gentlemen.

I should start by extending my grateful thanks
as Federal Parliamentary Leader of the Liberal Party for the absolutely
magnificent result turned in by the South Australian Division at the last
federal election.

I used to think it would be pretty good when
the Liberal Party held eight out of 14 seats. I then thought it was quite
remarkable that that rose to 10 in 1993, and it really was quite
extraordinary that it rose to 12 out of 14 at the last federal election. And
without any doubt, on a proportionate basis the strength of the Liberal
Party here in South Australia projected federally is greater than it is in
any other part of Australia. And I'm very, very grateful to the South
Australian Division, to you Martin, and to all of the other people who have
worked so very hard over the years to build the organisation here in South
Australia.

There are many remarkable things about what happened
on the 2nd of March. One of them, of course, is the geographic spread of the
result. Some of you may not know that outside of the capital cities - and
you include in that definition the Sydney-Newcastle-Wollongong (inaudible) -
outside of those areas our opponents do not hold one single seat in the
Federal Parliamentary Party, in the Federal Parliament, which is quite
remarkable. And if you think historically of the mining and industrial towns
of Australia - think of Newcastle and Wollongong, and Ipswich and Whyalla,
and Kalgoorlie and Broken Hill - it is only Newcastle and Wollongong now
that lie within Labor Party seats. So it is a very comprehensive expression
of support. And it is, in part, an expression of alienation particularly
from people outside the Sydney-Melbourne-Canberra triangle, and I'm very
conscious of that. And although I'm very proud to say that we won a lot of
seats in New South Wales and in Sydney, reversing a period of decline in
that part of Australia for the Liberal Party federally, I am particularly
conscious of the need for the Federal Government to be seen to be a
government for all Australians and a government for all parts of Australia
and not just a government pre-occupied with Canberra or with the
Canberra-Sydney-Melbourne triangle. And it is important in the decisions we
take and the relationship that we establish with the Australian people, that
we be seen in those terms.

I said on election night and I
repeat it here today that I regard, above everything else, that what
happened on the 2nd of March as being the conferring of an enormous
privilege on me and my colleagues. And to be in government is to recognise
that it's something that is a continuing gift of the people. It is not there
because of some kind of divine right; it is not there because of some kind
of inspired collective genius on our part; it is there because after
reflection the Australian people decided that we would do a better job than
the group of people we replaced. And it is our responsibility to keep our
feet on the ground, to maintain a proper sense of humility and dignity and
to understand that in a democracy, particularly a robustly and on occasions
cynical democracy such as Australia, it's important to maintain contact with
the Australian people.

Ladies and gentlemen, we set ourselves a
number of goals when we came into office. We inherited an economy which I
have described in other places as something like the "curate's egg." It is
good in parts. Along with most of the industrialised world we now enjoy very
low inflation. We have had rates of growth that are better than many. I must
say, I found the rate of growth recorded in the March quarter a little hard
to believe. It didn't seem to correspond with the anecdotal evidence that I
was getting around Australia. But I hope I'm wrong and I'm sure all of you
will hope on this occasion that I'm wrong too - and if the rate of growth is
really as strong as those figures indicated.

So we do have
fairly strong growth. We have fairly good price stability. We of course have
a stable political environment. We have a well educated workforce, and we
live cheek by jowl with the fastest growing economic region in the world.
Now, that's the good side of it. On the bad side we have a chronically bad
current account deficit. We were reminded last month and last week that in
May our current account deficit was over $2 billion and that's a problem
that's been with us now for a very long period of time. It is in fact just
over 10 years since my predecessor, then Treasurer, made his famous
declaration on the John Laws programme that Australia was in danger of
becoming a Banana Republic if it did not do something drastic about its
current account deficit.

Ten years went by and the current
account deficit problem remained, and it is still a very severe problem. We
also have a bigger than desirable budget deficit. Now there will be argument
in the community; there will be argument amongst professional economists,
there will be argument amongst business men and women, about what is the
appropriate stance of budget policy. But I think it is unarguable that that
deficit is too high. And one of the responsibilities that we have is to
bring about a significant reduction in that deficit. We have set ourselves
the aim of achieving an underlying balance over a period of two years. To do
that is quite a mammoth task, and I'm very conscious if there were certain
core commitments that I made to the Australian people at the last election
and I want to say to you very bluntly that I have no intention of earning
myself the reputation of being a Prime Minister who walks easily away from
electoral commitments.

It is important that we re-establish
trust between the public and the people who are elected to government. And
it's very important that when governments and political leaders say things
and say them seriously and say them deliberately and say them repeatedly,
that they are held accountable for those commitments. So we do face a
difficult balancing act in working towards our aim of reducing the budget
deficit and at the same time keeping faith in relation to the core
commitments that we made before the last election.

I want to
say to you and perhaps some amongst you who may wonder why it's necessary to
reduce the deficit, that we're not engaged in that as some kind of blind
ideological exercise. We want to do it because it will deliver real benefits
to the Australian economy. I have a sense ladies and gentlemen in which if
we can, over the next year or two, get the budget right and if we can
achieve progress in relation to labour market reform, further privatisation
and further progress with competitive policies - a la the 'Hilmer Report' -
then we do have the hope of going towards the turn of the century with the
Australian economy in as good a shape as it has been for years. Because the
signs around the world are not all bad. Our own region continues to grow
very strongly. The signs are that the Japanese economy, after a period of
sluggishness, is coming back and that's always very good news, particularly
for our commodity exports. The American economy continues to perform very
strongly. And the west seems to have entered a new period of price
stability, of anti inflation maturity, where central banks have been
generally quite successful in controlling monetary pressures that have led
to high inflation. Now, in those circumstances we would be crazy indeed if
we didn't attend to those things in our economy that need attending to. Some
parts of it are very good, other parts need some attention. The budget needs
attention and heaven knows...and this is, I suppose, the passion of my
political life for the last 10 years, doing something about our arthritic
industrial relations system on a national level. That certainly needs a lot
of attention.

But of all the things that I really have been
committed to over the years, none has been more emphatic than my belief that
of all the reforms we need for the Australian economy, fixing the labour
market is by far and away the most important. Good things have been done at
a State level here in South Australia, in Victoria and in Western Australia
and in Tasmania. But until the reforms are made at a national level you're
not really going to see the full benefits of it. We committed ourselves to
that, and I report to you today that all the legislation to give effect to
our commitment to reforming Australia's industrial relations system, all of
that legislation has gone through the House of Representatives. And if we
had control of the Senate it would now be law. By now Laurie Brereton's
stupid, job destroying unfair dismissal law would have been swept aside. You
would have had nationally a prohibition on compulsory unionism. You would
have had Australian workplace agreements without the compulsory injection
against the wishes of employees and employers of trade unions. You would
have had a restoration of the effective secondary boycott provisions of the
Trade Practices Act which operated very effectively for a period of about 17
years. You would have had all of those things if the legislation were not
now gathering dust in the Senate.

I have to say to you my
friends, it will be a very interesting moment of truth on the 20th of August
when the report of the Senate Committee on that legislation comes back, and
people will then know whether or not the Australian Democrats and the
Australian Labor Party are going to obstruct the issue above all issues on
which we obtained the mandate on the 2nd of March. I mean, if we didn't have
a mandate to reform the industrial relations system, that word should be
stricken forever from the English language so far as Australian politics is
concerned because we've talked about it, we advocated it, we disclosed in
detail what we were going to do and the people voted for us. And it is very
important. It's not an ideological binge. It's very important to small
business, and you know how important small business is in our scale of
priorities. And I was reflecting this morning as I put the finishing touches
to the Sir Thomas Playford Memorial oration that I'll give in the Adelaide
Town Hall tonight, that of the great goals that I've set my government in
its first three years in the economic area, the two things above all that I
want to achieve is a comprehensive reform of Australia's industrial
relations system and a lasting improvement in the conditions in which small
business operates in Australia.

Now, if after three years I can
look back and say that we have achieved our goals in those two areas alone -
there will be many other goals I'd want to achieve - I will believe that
that three year period in government has been truly useful and truly
successful.

This country over the last 10 years has seen a
number of important economic reforms. When they have been at the behest of
my political opponents, I've never been reluctant to support those reforms
or to give credit where credit is due. But the great unfinished piece of
economic business in Australia - the thing that really does have to be
tackled before anything else - is of course reforming our industrial
relations system. And I want to say to you again as strongly as I possibly
can, that fixing the industrial relations system remains our top economic
priority and we'll continue to prosecute the cause because we believe in the
long run that if that change is not made, if that reform is not
accomplished, the Australian economy will remain unnecessarily diminished
and enfeebled in the years ahead. And one of the other very important
commitments that we made straddled both the economic area and a non-economic
area. And that was our combined commitment to sell one-third of Telstra and
to use $1 billion out of the proceeds of that sale to fund the establishment
of the Natural Heritage Trust of Australia. And out of the Natural Heritage
Trust we intend to fund such desperately needed capital projects such as the
Murray-Darling restoration and all of the environmental projects that flow
from that. And this was an investment in what I might call bread and butter
ongoing environmental projects.

This is not the glitz of the
environment, these are the hard yards of environmental restoration; tackling
the problems of solidity, of soil erosion, of ocean outfall, of river
pollution. They are the sort of things that are very important for people
who live in Adelaide and elsewhere in South Australia. And the commitment of
my government to acting upon the Murray-Darling Commission recommendations
is very strong, but we need the resources from the sale of one-third of
Telstra. We can't finance it in any other way, we simply don't have the
resources available given the other commitments that we have. And that's
what we said before the 2nd of March and it remains the reality.

It seems a very strange thing to me, ladies and gentlemen, that a
political party, namely the Labor Party that could so compromise its history
and overturn its prior principles to sell the Commonwealth Bank - not
one-third of it, but 100% of it - finds it impossible to agree to a sale of
one-third of Telstra. I mean, I can remember Bob Hawke saying 10 years ago
when I advocated the privatisation of the Commonwealth Bank - and I've been
utterly consistent on that - and we voted for the privatisation of the
Commonwealth Bank...isn't it ironic, the former Labor Government would never
have got the privatisation of the Commonwealth Bank through the Senate if we
hadn't voted for it because the Democrats opposed it. And now you have the
situation - when we're trying to sell a third of Telstra, and with their
great lasting impressive political consistency, they're opposing that. And I
can remember 10 years ago Bob Hawke said that - when I advocated the sale of
the Commonwealth Bank - he said that it was absolutely outrageous, it was
akin to burning down the gum tree and that Ben Chifley would spin in his
grave if he knew that anybody was advocating the sale of the Commonwealth
Bank. Well of course nine years on, notwithstanding what Ben may or may not
have been doing, the Labor Party did complete the sale of the Commonwealth
Bank with our assistance and against the votes of the Australian Democrats.
So I have to say in relation to that as well, that is a very strong and
continuing commitment and it's a commitment that we intend to see to the
best of our abilities and capacities, this commitment that we intend, is
honoured.

Ladies and gentlemen, as I said a moment ago, we have
some very important goals so far as the economic future of this country is
concerned. The Government is not just bound up with sensible economics.
Government is a balance of pursuing and achieving economic goals and it's
also about pursuing and achieving other goals. It's about emphasising the
things that bind us together as Australians, rather than has happened too
often in the near past, focusing on those things that push us apart.

I've said on a number of occasions since the election that I think
one of the benefits of the change of government is that some of the
neo-McCarthyist tactics that we used to denigrate particular points of view
on sensitive issues, that some of those tactics have now been put behind us.
I think people do feel a little freer to speak their mind on difficult
issues and that is how it should be in a proper, mature, functioning
democracy.

I think we had far too much political correctness in
this country before the 2nd of March. And whilst I don't know if making that
remark gives you any kind of implied invitation to those who would use
intemperate, unbridled, prejudicial or unprincipled language. I think it is
the case that we had reached a situation in this country that it was
impossible to speak one's mind about certain subjects without some quite
unreasonable smears being put upon the person who did speak his or her mind.
And I have said that one of the important goals of the new government will
be to discharge its obligation to govern for the mainstream of the
Australian community.

By that I don't mean to denigrate or
criticise the role of minority groups or pressure groups in the Australian
community. In a free society any group of people, however large or small,
has the right to bind together and to put a case to the public and to put a
case to the Government. I don't criticise the minority groups for pressuring
governments. I criticise governments for needlessly caving in to that
minority group pressure. It is only natural that a group of people feeling
strongly about an issue will lobby a government. And on some occasions it
will be just a fireball for the Government to exceed to the wishes of that
minority group. On other occasions it will be to neglect the national
interest for the Government to do so.

Over the past few days
we've announced some changes in the structure of Australia's immigration
policy. They have been criticised by some. I suspect that they are widely
supportive in the community. We have done I think quite sensibly, something
that should have been done a while ago, and that is to begin to shift the
balance away from an undue reliance on the family reunion component of the
programme towards a greater reliance on skilled migration. We haven't
destroyed the family reunion component, it will still comprise slightly over
50%. We have honoured our commitments in relation to refugees in the
humanitarian programme. But we have placed a slightly greater emphasis on
English language skills. The policy remains absolutely non-discriminatory so
far as the racial or national origins of the migrants coming to this country
are concerned. But the changes do recognise that amongst people who come to
this country within the preferential family category, even after the three
years, unemployment rates are as high as 30 and 31 per cent in many of those
groups. And that is a state of affairs that we do not believe should be
allowed to go on completely unattended to and completely unchecked.

Ladies and gentlemen, there are many other things that I could speak
of today but time and your commitments will prevent it. Can I just draw
together what I've been trying to say to you in a few words. We were given
on the 2nd of March a huge vote. We were given the great privilege of
presiding over the leadership of the Government of this country. We took to
that election certain core commitments. They related to economic reform,
particularly industrial relations reform; they related to improving the
conditions for small business, and in the social area they centred around
improving and strengthening the role of the family unit in our community.
Four months on we have made a good deal of progress in implementing those
commitments. But final progress in many areas remains stalled in the Senate.
And it's important that that be understood and it's important that some of
the legislative constraints under which the new government is operating be
fully understood and absorbed, particularly by those who have been so kind
to support us over the last few years. I see the Australian economy as being
on the cusp of enormous opportunity for steady, sustainable, job producing
growth, provided - and it's a very important proviso - those areas of
weakness in the economy are addressed; the budget weakness, the structural
reform weakness particularly in the area of industrial relations.

Most importantly of all, I have tried over the last four months to
fulfil a style of government commitment that I gave to the Australian people
in the campaign, and that is that we would be a group of people who regarded
ourselves as not only governing for all Australians but a group of people
who regarded ourselves as being very much part of the Australian nation.
There is no sort of divine wisdom that resides in 15 people who sit around a
Cabinet table. They are a group of men and women who are endeavouring to do
a positive, good job for the future of the country. They need your continued
help. They need your continued advice. They need on occasions your criticism
when that criticism is justified. And it's very important that the channels
of communication remain open. It's very important we have occasions such as
this because it enables me to speak as frankly as I can about our plans,
where we think we've been and where we hope to go.

And finally
ladies and gentlemen, can I conclude by expressing my thanks to you for the
support and understanding I know that many of you gave to the Liberal Party
in the years in which it languished in Opposition. They were long,
uncomfortable, on occasions very frustrating and soul destroying. But it was
the support of people like you who kept us going, and it was the persistence
of many of us who believed that if you kept working, you kept punching your
way and you kept persisting, ultimately the wheel of political fortune would
turn. Well it turned in a big way and that made us very happy and we don't
intend to squander the opportunity and I'm very grateful indeed, more than
you will, I think, understand for the tremendous loyalty and support that
all of you have given us over such a very long period of time.

Thank you very much.

