MPS 42/97

'lip Ruddock, MP

Minister for Immigration & Multicultural Affairs

2. U./

HELPING FAMILIES. BOOSTING SMALL BUSINESS.  CREATING JOBS. ENCOURAGING SAVINGS.

Federal Budget 1997

IMMIGRATION BUDGET INITIATIVES

Significant enhancements to settlement services, initiatives to meet the needs of  business and additional cost recovery are the key budget features announced tonight  by the Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs, Philip Ruddock .

"The Government will introduce enhanced settlement services for refugee and  humanitarian entrants from the additional $20 .8 million pledged prior to the last  election," Mr Ruddock said.

The Refugee Resettlement Advisory Council will have a key role in advising the  Government on the most effective means of delivering the initiatives .

"English is one of the most important factors in the successful settlement of migrants  coming to Australia. The Government has a strong commitment to the hL:manitarian  program and will be allocating additional resources to English language tuition for these  entrants," Mr Ruddock said.

"In recognition of the circumstances under which humanitarian entrants arrive, the  Government will fund special programs for this group to better prepare them for the  allocated tuition provided by the Adult Migrant English Program ."

Around $500,000 will also be allocated to expand the role of the valuable Home Tutor  Scheme . Under the Scheme volunteers provide additional informal English tuition .

Responding to the concerns of business. specialist units will be set up in Departmental  offices to upgrade the service to business clients seeking the temporary or permanent  entry of overseas staff who have skills which are unavailable locally .

In line with Government policy for full cost recovery, Australian Citizenship application  fees will be increased from S80 to $120 and the Business Skills Charge will be  increased from $2,465 to $3 ,040 .

This will ensure that the cost of processing and entry is born by the applicant and/or  sponsors, rather than by the general community .

"These announcements reflect the Government's intention to improve the settlement  prospects of migrants, particularly refugee and humanitarian entrants, while boosting  public confidence through the policy of full cost recovery," Mr Ruddock said.

13 May 1997

Media Contact: Steve Ingram 06 277 7860 0419278715

