PRIME. MINISTER

TRANSCRIPT OF QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS  FOLLOWING THE PRIME MINISTER'S ADDRESS  TO THE AUSTRALIA SUMMIT  MELBOURNE CONVENTION CENTRE, 16 JUNE 1998

E&OE ......................................................................................................................... .

QUESTION:

Kelvin Histock from the Citizen's Media Group. Mr Howard, many people,  especially the fiscal economist luminary La Rouche, have been describing the reason  for the financial collapse has been due to the economic reforms you describe as being  necessary, but otherwise called austerity. And it's called for a new Bretton-Woods  conference to solve the crisis. Why do you continue to ride a dead horse Mr Howard?

PRIME MINISTER:

Can you just repeat the last bit. I didn't catch it I'm sorry, I just didn't hear it very  clearly. I was having trouble with the concept, I just couldn't quite understand it.

QUESTION:

Mr Howard, you were talking about economic reforms and the reason was described  that the economic reforms are actually the cause of the problem, are actually the  disease, not the solution. And I asked as to why Australia is still continuing to ride a  dead horse instead of carrying out the investment infrastructure development,  economic development that is really necessary to get Australia out of the present  crisis?

PRIME MINISTER:

Well, I don't agree with the basis of your question. I don't think the reform process,  as I understand your question to assert, I don't think the reform process is the cause of  the problem. I don't believe that we can go back to a Bretton-Woods style of

approach to global economic affairs. The character of the world has changed so  much, the advent of the information technology age, which is arguably having a  greater impact on world economies than any event since the industrialised revolution,  the rise of the very economies that are represented at this gathering so very  extensively, namely the economies of the Asia Pacific region. Taking all of those  factors into account, I do not believe that the solution lies in going back to an era of  greater and more rigid regulation. I don't pretend that every single element of  globalisation brings instantaneous joy to everybody who is affected by it, and it is  very important, as I said in my speech, to be sensitive to the impact of those people  who are certainly in transition period adversely affected by it. But I don't imagine  that there is an alternative, from a practical point of view, to the globalised economy  in which we are living because the forces which underpin it are irreversible and  unstoppable and those who would seek Canute-like to stop it, would end up inflicting  even greater damage through economic isolation on the populations that they seek to  service.

QUESTION:

Ian Robertson from the law firm, Holding Redlich, Prime Minister. Are you  concerned Prime Minister that the political events in the State of Queensland last  weekend may adversely impact on Australia's relationships with this region?

PRIME MINISTER:

No, I'm not. Arid the reason that I'm not is that Australia is recognised as an open,  democratic country which has a very robust parliamentary system. I've often spoken,  and we spoke last night with some of our guests at the Governors' dinner about the  importance of mutual respect in relations between the nations of the region. Arid  mutual respect means that on each side there's an acceptance of the political system of  the other. It means that as Prime Minister when I go to other countries, I don't give  them lectures on how to run their societies and their political systems, and equally,  other countries don't do that to Australia.

We respect, of course, some general benchmarks of international behaviour and  human rights which are very important to all ofus. We have a lot in common. Arid  Australia is a very vigorous democracy and it is inevitable in a vigorous democracy  that different points of view will be thrown up. Arid if anybody in this audience or  anybody in Australia imagines that the way to manage what is occurring is to sit on  the public expression of points of view and, in effect, say that particular groups in the  community shouldn't be allowed to express their point of view, I think they will only  end up promoting greater support within the Australian community for those points of  view.

What has to happen in relation to those events, as I did in my own speech today, is to  identify the damaging consequences to Australians, within Australia, of following  policies of inward-looking protectionist attitudes towards trade. It is folly for  anybody in the modern world to imagine that a great trading nation like Australia can

actually prosper by locking out imports, yet that is one of the economic policies being  followed by the alternative forces to which you've referred in your question, and I  demonstrated in my address the damage that would do to Australia.

2

The best way to deal with those forces is to explain in sympathetic understandable  terms to the people who are attracted to those forces, the damage that they would do  to their interests and to the collective Australian interest - that is far more likely to  persuade them not to follow those points of view than to talk in general terms about a  broader international picture, although that is tremendously important. I think the  people of our region understand that Australia is a democracy. They understand that  Australia has a great record of tolerance, that Australia has one of the most ethnically  diverse communities in the region, in the world, that Australia, for example, was  second to none in taking Indo-Chinese refugees on a per capita basis after the collapse  of the old South Vietnamese regime in the mid-1970s, that in the city in which I grew  up, Sydney, we have a marvellously vibrant Chinese community which makes a  tremendous contribution to our country.

Now, they are the facts, and nothing is going to alter that. Nothing is going to alter  the fact that Australia is a racially respectful country which values the contribution of  people as Australians from all parts of the world. They are the facts, and they are  givens and constants in Australian public life. Now, within that, there is going to be  debate about the pace of change, there is going to be debate about economic policy.  There's going to be the debate about the emphasis you put on this or that approach to  our cultural diversity. And that should be allowed. It shouldn't be stifled. I think one  of the mistakes you can make in a society is to in effect say that certain things ought  never to be talked about. All you do is allow the conspiracy theorists to run around  promoting their conspiracy theories. It is much better to be open, and to be open  against the background of the assertion that each man and woman in this country is  equal in the eyes of the law and in the eyes of society, and to those who believe in a  god, in the eyes of God. And if you proceed on that, then they are equal irrespective  of their ethnic background or the colour of their skin and they are valued according to  the contribution they make to our community. And they are all bound together by a  common bond of the future of this country. Now, if you conduct the debate against  that background, but you also say to the rest of the world, we are a democracy, and  people have a right to elect candidates to our parliament, and the people who don't

like those candidates, and who don't like that result, their responsibility is through the  democratic process to argue for a different result, not to run around and say that  somehow or other this or that group oughtn't to be allowed to be there in the first  place. All that will do is encourage that group to gather greater support.

I have enormous faith in the Australian democratic process. I believe in political  argument. I think there are some stupid propositions being put around to people who  are being exploited because of the economic vulnerability and sense of insecurity they  now feel and I think it is my obligation and the obligation of other people in public  life to go and talk to those people, not in a hectoring fashion. Don't smear them,  don't abuse them. Talk to them, listen to them, explain where if you chop off imports,  you would lose exports and lose even more jobs. That if you throw foreign

investment oHt of this country - my Treasurer use the example of McDonald's - you  might put at risk 55,000 jobs for young Australians. If you start doing those sorts of  things, you' 11 do great damage to the country.

That's the way to deal with this phenomenon, not by generalised pejorative put­ downs, but rather a calm assertation, or affirmation of the facts and I think if that

3

happens ... but can I say to the rest of the world, Australia is a democracy, and will  always be a democracy, and from time to time people will come upon the political  scene or put a point of view, and they'll attract some support. If it is valid and it is  worthwhile, well that support will endure. If it is not, over a period of time, it will  disappear and it is the responsibility of all of us in the political process to argue in an  honest fashion about the impact of those policies and if our arguments are good I have  great faith in the capacity of the Australian people to believe them.

My view is that this country has to go ahead with the process of economic reform in a  lot of areas, but it is also very important we understand the impact of change on our  societies, particularly on people in the more remote parts of our country. And I've  watched the difficulty in those communities, and when you think of the difficulties  through which the people of Indonesia and the people of Thailand, and the people of  Korea of past, of course their difficulties are even greater.

But being in Government in modem times is not easy no matter who it is, and what  side of the political fence you are, but in a democracy like Australia there is nothing  more powerful than that of a good idea, there's nothing more powerful than that of  simple, direct, lucid, political communication, and they are the tools to be used, not  pejorative put-downs.

4

