PRIME MINISTER  24 July 1998

TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER  THE HO P

ADDRESS TO THE CHINESE CHAMBER OF COMMERCE  GOLDENJUBILEECOFFEESHOPFORUM  HYATT REGENCY HOTEL, PERTH

E&OE ............................................................................................ .

Well, thank you very much, Dr Eric Tan, to Philip Ruddock, the Minister for  Immigration and Multicultural Affairs in the Federal Government, to Colin Barnett, to  Sir Charles Court, the forn1er Premier of Western Australia, Senator Alan Eggleston,  to my other Parliamentary colleagues, ifl have missed any of them, ladies and  gentlemen.

I am especially delighted to have the opportunity on this visit to Western Australia to  address the Chamber of Commerce. It's a timely opportunity. It's a timely occasion  and it is a chance to say a few things that are important to relations between Australia  and Australia's neighbours in the Asia Pacific region, and it's also an opportunity for  me to say something about the values that bind all of us together as Al!stralians,  irrespective of our racial or ethnic background.

I start by complementing the Chamber on the tremendous contribution that it's made  to the commercial and social vigour of the city of Perth. There has been, for a long  time, very close links between Western Australia and many of the nations of Asia.  And I know that during his time as Premier, Sir Charles Court fostered very close  links between Western Australia and the nations of Asia. And that tradition has been  carried on by the Coalition Government in power in Western Australia at present.

The investment that has flowed and the contribution that has been made as a result of  those links has played a very impressive part in building the economic strength of  ., Perth and the economic strength of Western Australia.

It's also an occasion to thank the people of Chinese descent who have come to  Australia from different parts of Asia for the contribution that they have made to the  Australian nation. It's an occasion for me, on behalf of all Australians, to mark the  enormous contribution of Chinese Australians to our nation. That is a contribution  that is felt in every walk of life. It is felt in commerce. It is felt in the professions. It

is felt in politics. It is felt in community life generally. And the bonds that have been  developed between Australians of different backgrounds is one of the important and  enduring values of the Australian community. And it is important at this time that  those values and those bonds be very forcefully and powerfully stated.

Australia has a very long record of openness and tolerance towards people who have  come to our shores from all around the world. In the years that immediately followed  World War II, the doors of Australia were thrown open wide to hundreds of  thousands, indeed millions, from different parts of Europe. But for a long time the  doors were not thrown open to people from Asia. And it was under the Prime  Ministership of Harold Holt who lead a Coalition Government in 1967 to formally  abandon what was known as the white Australia policy and from then on  progressively Australia adopted and embraced a non-discriminatory immigration  policy.

The level of immigration and the composition of the migrant intake to Australia will  always be a matter of legitimate debate. And there are strongly held views on both  sides of the argument as to whether Australia would benefit from, in present or  immediately foreseeable circumstances, a significant increase in the migrant intake.  And that is a debate that should be encouraged.

The Government that I lead has made a number of decisions since it came to power,  which it believes have been in the national interest to alter the intake with a greater  emphasis on skilled migration and a slightly lower emphasis on family reunion. And  we have also, because of our assessment of economic circumstances, induced a  reduction in the overall intake. Now there are those in the community who will  disagree with that. There are those in the community who will argue that it ought to  go further. And that is a matter of legitimate political debate in Australia.

But so far as I am concerned, and so far as the Government is concerned, we bring to  that debate a number of very important principles. The first of those principles is that  over the decades, particularly since World War II, migration has made an enormous  contribution to Australia. It has helped change Australia for the better, not for the  worse. It has helped make Australia a more outward looking, a morewelcoming, a  more interesting country. And perhaps the most valuable thing that I have observed  over the years is the way in which we have been able to absorb into Australia people  from something like 150 different countries with a remarkable degree of harmony.  And that has been one of the great Australian achievements. I can't think of a country  in the world that has done it more successfully. Nor can I think of a country in the  world that has been able to do it and in the process preserve a core set of Australian  values that maintain a long continuity of values connecting us now in the last years of  the 201h Century, with the early beginnings of the Australian federation almost 100  years ago.

So we have bring to that debate as a Government, our view that immigration has been  an enormous plus for Australia, and for Australia's development. And another  principle or another value that we bring to the debate about immigration in Australia  is that immigration in this country should be based firmly and absolutely on the  principle of non-discrimination. In other words, we will not choose people according  to their race, their ethnic or national origin. We do not prefer somebody because he or

2

she is of a particular ethnic background against somebody else who is of another  ethnic background. And I do want to make it very clear that the Government is firmly  and resolutely opposed to any change in the non-discriminatory character of our  immigration policy. It remains an important cornerstone, a core value of the approach  that we bring to immigration. We believe that Australia's links to the various parts of  the word have been enormously enhanced by the way in which we have been able to

absorb people from different parts of the world.

We are proud of our record of tolerance. But like all things that we hold dear, like all  values that are central to our being as a nation, the principle of tolerance and openness  is not something that can be taken for granted. There are some in our community who  would seek to foster division based on race and ethnic background. And it is the  obligation of all of us, whatever our political beliefs, to hold firm against those  attitudes. I believe they are minority attitudes. I believe they are attitudes that are  held in contempt by the overwhelming majority of the Australian community. And

they are certainly attitudes that are held in contempt by the members of the  Government I have the privilege of leading.

I have often spoken, ladies and gentlemen, within the context of other polices of the  Government, I have often spoken of the principal of mutual obligation. We have a  policy in relation to work for the dole, which speaks for the principal of mutual  obligation, that we as a civilised decent society have a belief that people who, through  not fault of their own, are not able to get work, should be supported by the  community, subject to certain principles and certain tests. But we say that in return

for that support, those people should be willing to put sometr.ing back into the  community if it is reasonable of us to ask them to do so. And that principle and that  policy which finds, the principles expressed through the policy of work for the dole,  of mutual obligation, has been quite well received within the Australian community.

And I often see, ladies and gentlemen, the interaction between people who come to  settle within Australia as being in another way the working out of that principal of  mutual obligation. We who live in Australia have an obligation of welcome, of  acceptance, of decency, of harmonious treatment and of tolerant understanding, of  people who come to our country. And in return, those who come have an obligation  to embrace along with all other Australians, whether they were born here or have  come from another nation, have an obligation to embrace, along with all other  Australians, the values that bind us together as Australians irrespective of their ethnic  background.

And I've had occasion, in other circumstances, to remark that the things that unite us  as Australians, are infinitely greater and more enduring than the things that divide us  or put us apart. And those things that unite us as Australians, are things of which we  should frequently remind ourselves. And they are things and values to which Chinese  ., Australians, along with Australians of other ethnic descents have made an enormous

contribution. They are the principles of tolerance and of fairness. A striding towards  an essentially classless, egalitarian society. A belief in individual effort and  individual liberty. A respect for the right of every Australian to treasure and to  practice and to mark his or her own cultural heritage consistent with their membership  of the broader Australian community.

3

Chinese Australians have made a particular contribution to our community. The  energy that they have displayed in commerce and in the professions, constantly draws  admiration from their fellow Australians. The contribution that they have made to the  bonds of family life is equally something that draws admiration from their fellow  Australians.

The Government has placed an enormous importance on the family unit. It's long  been my belief that as well as being the environment in which children can best be  raised to adulthood, united functioning families are the most effective social welfare  system that any nation has devised. And the contribution made by the Chinese in  particular, but not exclusively, to the strengthening of the family unit and the ideal of  the strength of the family unit within Australian society is enormously important.

So, ladies and gentlemen, on this 50th anniversary, ifI can put it that way, in meeting  terms of the establishment of this firm, I did want to say those few things about some  values that I regard as important, and some values that I regard as essential to the  continuity of the kind of tolerant, harmonious society in which we all believe. There  is no place within the modem Australia, for any semblance of racism or any  semblance of intolerance based on racial difference. There is no place within our  community for those who would argue that race or ethnic background should be a  determining factor in the way in which people are treated or the way in which people  are entitled to exercise their rights under the law.

I believe very strongly in a united Australian nation in which all people are equally  accountable under the same set of laws and from which all Australians, irrespective of  their background, are entitled to an equal dispensation of justice.

Before I conclude, I would like to say one or two things as well about the economic  circumstances of Australia, particularly in relation to the Asia Pacific region. It is  without any equivocation one of the proudest boasts of the Government that we have  been able to give to Australia a measure of protection through the building of  Australia's economic foundation which has meant that the worst effects of the Asian  economic downturn have not come to Australia in a way that might otherwise have  been the case if we had acted differently. ---

Over the last two and a quarter years, the Government has worked very hard to  strengthen the foundations of the Australian economy. We now have the lowest  inflation rate in the OECD area. We are projected to have probably the fastest  economic growth rate of the G7 nations in 1998 and possibly also 1999. Australia  now has the lowest interest rates that we have had for more than 30 years. And  whereas three years ago we had a budget deficit running at $10.5 billion a year, I am  very happy to say that Australia is now in surplus. Our levels of business investment  are strong and Australia is widely respected in international financial and economic  ·" forums. But very relevantly to the region, that strength has enabled Australia to play

a role in helping the countries of the region that are going through very difficult  economic times. Along with Japan, Australia is the only country which has  participated in each of the three international monetary fund bailouts of Indonesia,  Thailand and Korea respectively. And we have done that because it is in the long  term economic interests to do so. It is in Australia's interests that we have strong

4

economies in the region. It is in Australia's interests that we build those economies  up and help them during their hours of difficulty and need.

And when, as inevitably be the case, there is an economic resurgence in the Asian  Pacific region, because there will. I have enormous long-term confidence in the  economic strength of the Asian Pacific region. And when, inevitably the economic  resurgence comes, the contribution that Australia made in the hour of need of many of  those countries will be well and favourably remembered. We have not been a fair  weather friend. We have put our financial support where our political rhetoric has  been. And that contribution will be understood and it will be remembered.

The Government has endeavoured, in the two and a bit years that it has been in office  to further build and diversify the links that already existed with so many of the nations  in the region. And we've been particularly successful in improving Australia's  relations with China consistent with the maintenance of very good relations with other  parts of the region.

I am also very proud of the fact that through all the difficulties that Indonesia  experienced a few months ago and which continues to experience, Australia has  remained a very strong and faithful and reliable friend to that country and has  recognised the long-term importance of the bilateral relationship between our two  countries.

Japan, today, has chosen a new Prime Minister, the fom1er Foreign Minister, Mr  Obuchi. I want to take this opportunity of placing on public record my thanks to the  man that he will succeed, Mr Hashimoto, for the contribution that Mr Hashimoto  made to good relations between our two countries. He was a good friend of mine and  he was a good friend of Australia. But I look forward to cooperating with equal  warmth and closeness with the new Prime Minister of Japan, our best customer, our  most important trading relationship and a nation with whom Australia has so much to  share in the years to come.

When I became Prime Minister I said that I would continue the close relations  between Australia and the nations of the Asian Pacific region. Our emphasis has, of  necessity, been a little different from that of our predecessors. All governments do  things in their own way and they do them a little differently and they have different  impacts as time goes by. Without, in any way, weakening the links between Australia  and the Asia-Pacific region, I wanted to make sure that our economic links with  Europe and North America were as strong as they could possibly be. And I frequently  said that the Government has tried to follow a policy of 'Asia first' as distinct from  the policy of 'Asia only,' which sometimes, I think, was the impression given by the  policies pursued by our predecessors. And in maintaining those links and in  diversifying those links, we have been greatly aided by the contribution of so many  ., Australians of Asian descent within our community. And they have played a very

important role, on a people-to-people basis, in furthering our understanding of the  communities with which we wish to develop and diversify those linkages.

We spend an enormous amount of time in this country navel-gazing about what kind  of society we are. It seems that, on some occasions, that we engage in a form of  public fretting about what it really means to be an Australian. It always strikes me as

5

rather unnecessary and rather odd and rather unproductive. Because national identity,  in so many ways, is an instinctive thing. It's something that belongs to the emotions  rather than to the formal description. You don't write down what it means to be an  Australian. You feel what it means to be an Australian. You don't indulge some kind  of intellectual exercise in trying to enumerate Australian qualities and Australian  values, you practice them. And we're practicing one great Australian value here  tonight with such an enormously diverse audience, in terms of ethnic and racial  background, yet we are bound together by something that is far greater than that  diversity and that difference and that is a common love and a common commitment to  our nation.

Ladies and gentlemen, I congratulate the Chamber of Commerce. I congratulate the  forum on having made such a great contribution to the city of Perth, to the  understanding and the harmony that exists between people of different backgrounds  within the Australian community. I thank you for listening and I wish all of you  much happiness and much success for the future.

Thank you.

6

QUESTIONS & ANSWERS

QUESTION:

Prime Minister, I'm Wilson Wu, Chairman of the International Business Council of  Western Australia and also, happily, Vice President of the WA Chinese Chamber. In  my work I travelled in parts of Asia. There's no doubt, as an Australian myself now  and very proud to be one for the past 11 years, I came across a lot of business people  asking about the Hanson phenomenon. Now, I'm very proud to say that-we, in our  own - I should rightly point out - always tell our friends and business people abroad,  Australia is, indeed, a very tolerant society and, indeed, that is our hallmark. But,  regardless, we still have to confront this recent phenomenon in terms of, perhaps it's a  perception that maybe, just maybe, we're beginning to be seen or perceived by some

of our friends abroad as being beginning to go along maybe a different path by some  politics of divisiveness. So I'm asking, perhaps, as Prime Minister, you could give us  some advice how we, as Australians going abroad, can confront this in a more  positive role so that we can assist the Government, as well as in our own ways, make  this perception correct.

PRIME MINISTER:

Well, I'd be happy to try. There are a number of things you should say to those  people about Australia. The first thing that you should say is what you mentioned in  your question. And that is, Australia is a very harmonious, tolerant society. You  might remind them, for example that on a per-capita basis Australia took more  refugees from Indo-China in the 1970s than any nation on earth. You might remind  them of that. You might also remind them that Australia has a very open, liberal  democracy. We allow people to exercise freedom of speech in this country. We  allow people to run for office. We are proud of our robust democracy. We have a

free and open press. Sometimes it aggravates us, but it's infinitely better than the  alternative, which is a cowed or muzzled press. You should remind them of that.  You should also tell them that whilst some of the policies of the One Nation Party  seek to exploit differences based on race, which they undoubtedly do, that the great  bulk of the people who have voted for that party in Queensland have aone so for other  reasons. And I think it's very important, and I'm glad of the opportunity of such a  gathering as this to speak very directly and to speak very frankly, because unless we  have an understanding of what is happening we will get the messages wrong, not only  to the Australian community but we'll get the messages wrong overseas.

The principle thing on which One Nation is playing is economic insecurity and  bewilderment about change. But you have added to that an element of intolerance  and insensitivity and desire to exploit differences based on race. Whenever you refer  to people by a racial label you are running the risk of promoting hostility unless it is  done in the most benign and understandable of circumstances, as I might do tonight  by referring to people of Chinese background because this is the Chinese Chamber of  Commerce and it would be rather strange ifl didn't. It would be rather ill mannered  of me ifI didn't.

But the point I want to make to you, Wilson, is that the support base for the One  Nation Party is drawn, principally, from people who respond to a simplistic answer to

7

their difficulties. When you don't exercise power or hold office it's very easy to offer  an instantaneous solution to everyone's problems. It's very easy to say that the way  to improve Australia's rural economy is to keep out imports without being honest  enough to acknowledge that if Australia locks out imports from other countries, those  countries will lock out Australia's exports and that that would be very  counterproductive. Now, what I would counsel you to say, suggest you might say to  those people is, certainly, that we are a very tolerant country. You should say to them  that we are a country that the great majority of whose citizens have no truck with and  have no belief in and have no time for racism or intolerance based on raoe or ethnic  difference. You should also point out that Australia, like all other countries that are  open democracies, have experienced the rise from time to time, for a period of time,  of political parties whose doctrines are based on economic populism and simplistic  solutions. It's happened in other countries and there's no reason why it oughtn't  happen in Australia.

Those who ask me: how do you deal with One Nation. I reply by saying, you deal  with One Nation by reason, by argument, by fact, by commitment, by demonstration,  but most of all by demonstration, that the policies you espouse are better than any  alternative policies. The best way that the Government can deal with One Nation or,  indeed, any other political party - because I take the opportunity of saying that the  economic policies of One Nation are almost indistinguishable from those of the  Australian Labor Party. On most of the major economic issues of debate in Australia

at the present time, One Nation and the Labor Party are much closer than One Nation  is to the Liberal Party or to the National Party. There's a strange view running around  that they're closer to us on economic policy. They are much closer - I mean, Hanson  and Beazley are almost indistinguishable on major issues of economic policy. And I  think that's a point that ought to be made fairly strongly and fairly firmly whenever  the opportunity arises.

So, I'm sorry t0 have given a lengthy answer. But I think it's an important answer.  It's an important question and I'm glad you asked it. And I'm glad there's media here  to hear both the question and the answer. Because where else in the --you know,  there aren't many countries in the world where you can have this sort of exchange and  I think that's terrific and that's one of the good things about Australia--:- And one of the  things that you should tell your friends is that you can ask those sorts of questions in  Australia. You can ask them in front of the media. The Prime Minister's got to  answer in front of the media and the media can do what they like with both the  question and the answer which, undoubtedly, they will.

QUESTION:

Mr Prime Minister, my name is Katherine Tan. I have been in Australia for 22 years  and I am an Australian citizen. Ever since Pauline Hanson's maiden speech and her  "' One Nation scare-mongering and unsubstantiated accusation to the visible ethnic

migrant communities and the minority of marginal groups that there is strong  evidence of harassment to the individuals of this group. I, myself, have experienced  that only two weeks ago. My children were at a shopping centre and have been called  "chinks" and to go back to where they come from. My children, of course, were  devastated, very hurt and no matter how much I explain to them, they felt they'd been  very much victimised. I, on behalf of all the parents, all the mothers and parents of

8

those traumatised children, are appealing to you, the Prime Minister of Australia, to  advise us and tell us how are we going to address this issue and explain to our  traumatised children why they are being victimised?

PRIME MINISTER:

Well, ma'am, the answer that I give to your question is that I find, as I'm sure  everybody in this room finds, behaviour of that utterly unacceptable, totally intolerant  and completely out of kilter and inconsistent with the values that all of us hold very  dear as Australians.

Nobody has it within their capacity, by speech, by denunciation, by law, by single  gesture, to eradicate all strains of intolerance and all strains of discrimination within  the community. We do have it within our capacity to argue against that intolerance.  We do have it within our capacity to denounce it when it occurs. We do have it  within our capacity to argue, as I've tried to do tonight, the contribution that has been  made to Australia by people of Asian background and to emphasise the absolute and

unqualified commitment of the Government to the principles of tolerance and respect  for racial, ethnic and cultural difference within our community.

It's very important, as I said in answer to the earlier question, that when we're  criticising the policies of another political party, it's very important that we use fact  and we use effective argument. It's very, very important that we understand the  reason why some of these things should occur. Now, I have no doubt at all that there  are prejudiced, bigoted people within the Australian community. I know that. And I  can only begin to understand how incredibly hurtful and how insensitive that sort of  conduct must be.

And I can only say how sorry I am that your children were subjected to that and how  sorry I am, as a human being, whenever I hear of instances of intolerance and bigotry  practiced within the Australian community. And I take the opportunity to exhort all  Australians to do everything in their power, whenever they come across it, to fight  against it, to stamp it out, to denounce it and to condemn it. Because anything, any  conduct of that kind diminishes our Australian values and diminishesthe essential  decency and the essential principles of the Australian community.

The best thing that we can do, as a community, is to practice our values of tolerance  and, for all of us, to take the opportunity of denouncing intolerance whenever it  occurs. But when you're dealing with a party like One Nation you have to make  certain that the methods that are used to criticise and condemn it do not become  counterproductive. For example, we have witnessed in the past few weeks some  demonstrations which have not only been incredibly stupid, they have also been  incredibly violent and they, at all times, have been utterly counterproductive. I mean,  I might almost have imagined that some of the demonstrators were being paid to  demonstrate by supporters of One Nation. To see an 85 year old man's face bleeding  because an attempt was made by some of the demonstrators to prevent him attending

a hall to hear somebody that he'd travelled 30 miles to hear, is not very Australian and  it's not the sort of thing that any of us should feel comfortable about. We've got to  remember that if you use methods of violence to put your point of view across,  whatever the context, it is bound to backfire and it is bound to be counterproductive. \

9

Now, this is an issue that has to be confronted in a determined way, it has to be  confronted with commitment but it also has to be confronted intelligently. And if we  make the mistake of branding every person who might be attracted to One Nation as a  racist we will be doing ourselves a great disservice and we'll be delivering more  support into the arms of that political party. Twenty three per cent of the Queensland  population is not racist. But some people who support that party are and they are the  people who should be targeted with our condemnation and our wrath, not any of the  other people who were attracted to that party for a combination of other reasons. And  the way in which you persuade those people not to go down that path is to  demonstrate that we have a superior answer in policy terms and, importantly, in the  context of your question, to demonstrate how divisive, intolerant, bigoted behaviour is  utterly alien to what Australia stands for and all of the values that we hold in common  as Australians.

[Ends]

10

