

Â

MEDIA RELEASE

MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS

ALEXANDER DOWNER

AA98

30 November 1998

EMGARGOED UNTIL MIDNIGHT 30 NOVEMBER

Â

AUSTRALIAN FUNDING SUPPORT FOR

MIDDLE EAST PEACE AGREEMENT

Â

I am pleased to announce Australia will make a significant new commitment  
aimed at strengthening peace in the Middle East.

Â

The Australian Government has warmly welcomed the 
Wye River Memorandum signed on 23 October and applauds the commitment 
that both Israel and the Palestinians have demonstrated to building 
a just, secure, and comprehensive peace in the Middle East. We recognise 
the tremendous support President Clinton has provided to achieve this 
outcome.

Â

The international community has a role to play in 
supporting the rejuvenated process toward a permanent peace in this 
troubled region.

Â

At the invitation of President Clinton, the Australian 
Government is attending the Conference to support   Middle East Peace and Development  on 30 November. Australia 
will be represented by H.E. the Hon Andrew Peacock, A.C. , Australia’s 
Ambassador to the United States of America.

Â

Australia will provide $16 million over the next three 
years for development activities designed to strengthen the peace process. 
Of this pledge, just over $8 million will be allocated to the work of 
the United Nations Relief and Works Agency (UNRWA) which remains the 
primary agency for the delivery of international assistance in the region 
to Palestinians. UNRWA provides education, health and employment services 
to an estimated 3.4 million Palestinian refugees.

Â

Some $4.5 million will be provided to fund the activities 
of Australian non-government organisations (NGOs) in the fields of employment 
generation and health services. This will build on the support provided 
to six Australian NGOs that have been undertaking humanitarian activities 
in the region over the last three years.

Â

Nearly $3.5 million will be spent on assisting the 
agricultural and legal sectors. The agricultural program will transfer 
Australian skills and technology to help overcome major constraints 
facing agricultural development in the West Bank and Gaza. The anticipated 
legal assistance will strengthen legal infrastructure and help protect 
human rights.

Â

Media contacts:

Innes Willox (Minister’s Office) 026277 7500 / 0414 
206 890

Deborah Nesbitt (AusAID) 02 6206 4966/ 0417 683 767

Â

Â

jk

