

Â

Tolerating the Intolerable

Â

Chandran Kukathas

School of Politics

University College, UNSW

Australian Defence Force Academy

Â

Â

Lecture presented at the Senate Department

Parliament House, Canberra

24 July 1998

Â

Â

Â

Tolerating the Intolerable

Â

Dissension is  the great evil of mankind, and toleration is 
its only remedy -   Voltaire

Â

Presenting a lecture on the virtue of toleration anywhere, let alone 
in the chambers of the Australian Senate department, should strike most 
people as a peculiarly pointless kind of e xercise. Would anyone 
not in favour of toleration bother to turn up? (And what is the point 
of preaching to the converted?) Would anyone against it bother to listen? 
(And could such a person be converted?) In truth, it might not be easy 
to find anyone who openly professed intolerance. Almost everyone is 
in favour of tolerance; though of course, each will hasten to add, this 
does not mean that ‘anything goes’.

Â

It is the signal sent by this last phrase, ‘anything 
goes’, however, that tells us that the question of toleration remains 
a live issue rather than merely a popular platitude. Most of us are 
prepared, perhaps instinctively, to tolerate others as long as they 
don’t overstep the mark. But   only  as long as they don’t overstep that mark. As one protestor 
explained after a violent demonstration against a meeting of the One 
Nation Party, we don’t have to tolerate the intolerable.

Â

Toleration on these terms is easy. Yet the problem 
with this attitude is that it simply misses the point. Toleration was 
never meant to be easy. Toleration is a virtue precisely because it 
is not easy. And it is not easy because it requires us to admit, or 
accept, or put up with, or endure, or condone, or suffer, or permit, 
or indulge, or stomach, or swallow things we cannot abide, or bear, 
or stand, or countenance, or take. To tolerate is to put up with things 
(or people) we dislike or disapprove of -particularly when we are in 
a position to suppress them. This is why it is a difficult virtue; and 
also why it has fewer friends than many think. And this is why there 
is a case for making a case for toleration.

Â

So my purpose here is to try to put that case. Though 
before I do, it would be well to say a little about why this topic should 
be thought in any way apposite in a lecture series in which most of 
the speakers will be concerned with more practical political questions. 
It is appropriate because of our political circumstances: because of 
the times we live in. The fifty years since the 1948   Nationality and Citizenship Act,  which recognized Australian 
citizenship for the first time, have seen Australia undergo a profound 
social transformation. A country of predominantly British subjects in 
the immediate postwar years is now a nation of multicultural citizens. 
The dramatic nature of this change would be difficult to overstate. 
In one-and-a-half generations Australia has brought about a change in 
the ethnic and cultural composition of the nation which is equivalent 
in magnitude to that wrought in Canada over three generations, and in 
the United States over more than six. Australia was always multicultural 
in character; but it is now more diverse. And if diversity is the yardstick 
by which we measure multiculturalism, Australia is more multicultural 
than ever - and more than was anticipated, or even imagined, by its 
first citizens. In these circumstances, the obvious - indeed, inescapable 
- question is: can people who are so diverse co-exist in a single political 
society? And if so, how?

Â

There is no doubt that this question is being asked 
- and answered in various ways. It is implicit in public debates over 
multiculturalism and immigration; in discussions of Aboriginal affairs; 
and in the all-too-common debates about Australian identity. Many other 
questions are connected to this fundamental one: should we expect migrants 
to assimilate rather than hang on to their original cultures or traditions; 
should we reduce the level of immigration to Australia; should we try 
to control the cultural composition of our migrant intake? For some 
the question is, quite simply, how can we be one nation (to borrow one 
of Paul Keating’s many memorable phrases)?

Â

It is because all these questions matter, and are so pressing today, 
that the idea of toleration is a significant one. Can the notion of 
toleration provide us with any guidance in our efforts to address these 
various issues? I want to suggest that it can,  and that we should 
embrace the moral ideal of toleration; though I also want to suggest 
that this is more difficult to do even than many of the proponents of 
toleration have been willing to admit - since embracing toleration means 
accepting a good deal else.

Â

So, what is the case for toleration, and what would 
embracing it mean? The case for toleration rests on the fact that we 
are different and we disagree. We not only differ in appearance, in 
age, in ability, in wealth, and in our origins, but we also differ in 
outlooks. We live by different religions, abide by (or abhor) different 
practices, and value different ways of life. None of us thinks he is 
on the road to hell, though we are all often amazed at how many others 
are rushing by along it. Indeed, many of us are possessed by a desperate 
desire to stop these people, to turn them around, and to point them 
(or lead them) in the right direction. We have different ideas of what 
constitutes the good life; and we all too often want others to adopt 
our own. The Scottish philosopher, David Hume, put it very well when 
he remarked: ‘such is the nature of the human mind, that it always 
lays hold on every mind that approaches it; and as it is wonderfully 
fortified by an unanimity of sentiments, so is it shocked and disturbed 
by any contrariety. Hence the eagerness, which most people discover 
in a dispute; and hence their impatience of opposition, even in the 
most speculative and indifferent opinions.’  1  
In fact, he goes on to remark, this feature of our nature, ‘however 
frivolous it may appear, seems to have been the origin of all religious 
wars and divisions.’  2  
We are, to varying degrees, like the Mr Woodhouse of Jane Austen’s   Emma:  ‘His 
own stomach could bear nothing rich, and he could never believe other 
people to be different from himself. What was unwholesome to him, he 
regarded as unfit for anybody; and he had, therefore, earnestly tried 
to dissuade them from having any wedding cake at all; and when that 
proved vain, as earnestly tried to prevent anybody’s eating it. How 
can we possibly live with one another if such is our nature, and this 
is our condition?

Â

The answer lies in the idea of toleration. And this 
is, by and large, the answer we have come to adopt in many societies 
today. Voltaire answered his own question, ‘what is toleration’, 
with the reply: ‘It is the prerogative of humanity. We are all steeped 
in weakness and errors: let us forgive one another’s follies, it is 
the first law of nature.’  4  
Quite simply, when our differences are substantial, and irreconcileable, 
it makes sense to put them aside—particularly if we concede that we 
are all prone to make mistakes.

Â

Yet obvious as this may seem, this solution was ignored 
for centuries in the Europe wracked by religious wars. The persecution 
of Huguenots in France, (and of Catholics in England) demonstrated vividly 
that toleration was for a long time entirely neglected as a solution 
to the problem of dissension. Four hundred years ago the Edict of Nantes 
(1598) held out the promise of religious toleration for all Protestants 
in France when it granted the Reformed Churches the privilege of legal 
existence, and offered various guarantees to make this possible— including 
the guarantee that the Edict would never be revoked. ‘Never’, it 
turned out, meant until 1685, when the Edict was revoked in an act which 
has been described as marking the apogee of religious intolerance.    5  
The Revocation consolidated the various decrees of the Royal Council 
which had, over the previous several years, ‘reinterpreted’ and 
undermined the basic principles of the Edict. By then, the Huguenots 
- Protestants in Catholic France - had already begun to endure the ‘dragonades’: 
the policy of billeting of soldiers on Protestant households until their 
members converted to Catholicism. Denied the freedom of worship which 
was once theirs by right, the Huguenots were now also forbidden to leave 
France. Their fate was to be one of forcible assimilation - though the 
Crown saw things somewhat differently, since the ground for the revocation 
of the Edict had been that it had lost its purpose now that there were 
no longer any Protestants in France!  6

Â

Nonetheless, out of these centuries of intolerance, and of the devastating 
religious wars which marked them, emerged the first philosophical defences 
of toleration, and the social and political institutions which protected 
religious freedom and recognized  the importance of liberty of 
conscience. A part of the lesson learnt from the wars of religion was 
that intolerance was costly. The results of suppression were not peace 
or social cohesion but protracted warfare. Far better results were achieved 
by the institutionalising of toleration: in the form of greater freedoms 
of worship, and also in the necessary freedoms of speech and assembly.

Â

What the idea of toleration recognizes is that the 
fundamental feature of our nature- our propensity to differ and to disagree 
- is ineradicable. This is a condition which can be palliated, but not 
cured. And toleration is the right palliative, since it is a remedy 
which does not try to suppress our nature but seeks to work with it. 
If we must differ, let us at least agree to differ - no matter how different 
we may be; indeed, let us agree to disagree - no matter how disagreeable 
we may find one another. How difficult can this be?

Â

In 16th century France, and elsewhere in Europe, it 
proved very difficult. And it is worth noting some of the reasons why. 
Inclined though we generally are to think of ourselves as more educated, 
more enlightened, and generally altogether nicer, than our distant ancestors, 
I don’t think the explanation is that we are simply better people 
- or even much more tolerant people. Toleration was a solution that 
proved difficult to reach for more interesting, and instructive, reasons 
than these.

Â

One reason why it was difficult has to do with the aims and aspirations 
of the ruling powers. Despite the fact t hat the great controversies 
of the sixteenth century were religious controversies, and many of the 
debates over religious toleration were fought over matters of theology, 
the concerns which underpinned these disputes, particularly in England 
and France, were political ones. Ruling authorities were interested 
not so much in the niceties of Christian theology as in the problem 
of establishing and securing the borders of the emerging state, and 
settling the issue of the position of the church within it. To put it 
in another way, they were interested in the problem of national unity. 
The problem with religious toleration was that it would mean religious 
diversity. But in the Europe that was still a disparate collection of 
provinces, each with its own dialect, customs and legal system, the 
idea that national unity might survive without religious conformity 
was thought simply implausible. In France the Sun King (Louis XIV) at 
first tried to bring about religious uniformity by luring people into 
Catholicism - for example by rewarding those who recently converted 
from Protestantism by giving them a moratorium on their debts. But eventually 
the limited success this approach won brought about harsher measures 
of repression against those who refused to abjure. Yet the ultimate 
motivation, even if not justification, was political rather than religious: 
the search for political unity.

Â

Another reason, however, for the difficult birth of 
toleration was that it was not so evident that a policy of toleration 
would be costless. On the contrary, it was feared that it might be quite 
dangerous. As the historian, J.W.Allen, observed, there was at this 
time ‘a widespread belief that there must needs be some sense in which 
it is possible for governments to maintain true religion and suppress 
dangerous error; there was a belief that unity in religion was necessary 
to national unity and security; there was a sense that toleration of 
religious differences might lead to a disintegration of moral standards; 
there was also, of course, a tendency to see dissentients as morally 
perverse.’  7  While Thomas More might have considered it 
feasible in Utopia for it to be lawful for everyman to pursue his own 
religion, in the real world he feared that heretics would not simply 
preach religion but would pursue violence.  8  
This was not merely a religious or a moral question: it was a question 
of public order. And indeed, the toleration of sects could be a dangerous 
business, since many of the sects were not themselves tolerant. Anabaptists 
were persecuted, arguably, less because they were religious dissenters 
than because they were social revolutionaries. The Huguenots were a 
problem not simply because they were nonconformists in religion but 
because they were a powerful political party which was only partially 
a religious party. And one part of that party held strongly to the theory 
of political Calvinism - according to which the ruler was obliged to 
establish and maintain the true Calvinist faith, suppressing by force 
all heretics and idolaters.    9

Â

The obstacles to religious toleration emerging included, then, the 
aspirations of an aggrandizing state, bent upon national unity; and 
(possibly) the intolerance of those groups which sought the toleration 
they were themselves reluctant to give. In short;  there were 
too many persons, or interests, for whom the costs of toleration were 
simply intolerable.

Â

Now, all of this might seem very remote from Australia 
in the late 1990s; but in many ways it is not. Although we are in no 
important sense burdened by the religious controversies of 16th century 
Europe, we are confronted by an ethnic and cultural diversity which 
is no less significant - and, for many, troubling. And the options available 
to be considered in responding to this condition are also not so far 
away from those grappled with by the Europeans four hundred years ago: 
to suppress, to assimilate, to tolerate. As Lenin asked (stealing a 
line from Chernyshevsky) what is to be done?

Â

What has to be done, I suggest, is to reaffirm the 
importance of the institution, the practice, and the norm of toleration. 
But what needs to be explained now is why this is so, and what this 
in fact means in contemporary terms. We need in our public discussions 
to reaffirm the importance of toleration because there is a danger that, 
if we do not, we will forget or underappreciate the fact that what is 
most important about our society is that it is a free society. What 
toleration protects is freedom. In the sixteenth century its proponents 
were concerned, above all, with religious freedoms. Today, toleration 
protects or upholds our freedom to live by our own lights - according 
to different religious, ethnic or cultural traditions, or indeed according 
to no particular tradition at all (if this is truly possible). Because 
we are so inclined to tell others how to live-is there anyone out there 
who hasn’t been told by someone to avoid smoking or to lose a little 
weight? - we are all too likely to forget how much our institutions 
uphold the freedom to be different, whether in concert with others or 
alone.

Â

But what has to be done to make this less likely? 
Here I think we may have something to learn from the European experience. 
If toleration then was obstructed at once by the state’s preoccupation 
with national unity, and by the extravagant ambitions of religious sects, 
might it not be possible that these are precisely the obstacles that 
lie in our way now? I think it is - though these obstacles today take 
different forms. We are not living in times when the creation or establishing 
of a state is a serious concern; yet the modern variant of this obstacle 
to toleration is our preoccupation with social unity and national identity. 
We see this not only in the rhetoric of government but also in the continual 
raising of the ‘problem’ of Australian identity, and the incessant 
demands coming from all sides of politics for ‘Australianness’ to 
be protected. Above all, comes the exhortation, we must have unity. 
In the launching in February 1992 of the government’s policy statement, 
One Nation, the then Prime Minister, Paul Keating, argued that ‘all 
our efforts must go towards uniting the country’; that the ‘most 
successful societies are notable for their unity’; that the best policies 
were those which would ‘give us back our sense of purpose’; and 
that kind of Australia we seek is, above all, ‘An Australia which 
is more truly one nation’.  10

Â

I want to argue that all these sentiments, which are 
in no way peculiar to the rhetoric of the Labor Party, need to be regarded 
with far more scepticism than they have been accorded to date. More 
than this, for a number of reasons, we should look warily at those who 
peddle unity. For one thing, we should recognize how dangerous is the 
pursuit of unity when people disagree. Indeed, nothing is more divisive 
than the pursuit of unity - as the experience of the politics of the 
last eighteen months should have made unchallengeably clear. All too 
often, people calling for unity are interested in conformity - and to 
an ideal of their own devising.

Â

The most successful societies, to my mind, are free 
societies; and they are notable not for their unity but for their diversity. 
They do not put all their efforts into anything in particular but into 
many things. They do not have a sense of purpose because their people 
have many different purposes. And these people are not worried about 
being one nation because they recognize such notions for what they are: 
pieces of shameless rhetoric used by political elites to tell the population 
that they are at one with the people.

Â

The danger of this rhetoric lies not in its content - for it has none 
- but in the direction in which it leads. In the first instance it leads 
to the aspiration to shape and define national identity, for the idea 
of identity will quickly find its way to t he heart of the ideal 
of social unity. But identity politics is surely something to be avoided 
- as the history of the Balkans, with its endless quarrels about ethnic 
origin and territorial inheritances, clearly suggests. What is fairly 
obviously the case is that identity is neither natural, nor original, 
nor permanent; or even particularly enduring. The features which describe 
a Briton, or a Malaysian, or an Indian, or an Australian, cannot sensibly 
account for the variations across time and region. But too much talk 
of one nation tempts us to think, or believe others who say, that we 
can.

Â

This is a bad thing not simply because it is silly 
but also because it in turn tempts us to try to shape and control that 
identity. In our own context it inclines some people to tell us how 
to be Australians: what language we should speak, what neighbours we 
should seek out; and even what international cricket team we should 
barrack for. And it inclines others to try to make it harder for us 
to watch New Zealand soaps, or more expensive to buy non-Australian 
CDs: to protect a particular version of ‘Australianness’. It thoroughly 
disinclines people to simply mind their own business - which is surely 
a good part of what toleration is all about.

Â

In short, one major obstacle to toleration is nationalism. 
One reason why toleration was harder to achieve in the sixteenth century 
may be that a great deal of energy was being put into the establishing 
of modern states. In the lead-up to the Peace of Westphalia in 1648 
the political interests of the major powers lay in settling boundaries 
to carve out regions of territorial sovereignty. This made for a politics 
of exclusion: the issue was, who was in and who was out. Toleration, 
however, is a virtue of open societies, which are more comfortable with 
the movement of people -and goods - across boundaries. (A boundary, 
for those of you who need an explanation, was defined by Ambrose Bierce, 
as an imaginary line separating the imaginary rights of one people from 
the imaginary rights of another.  11 ) Toleration, in the end, 
is a quality more readily found in societies which are resistant to 
planning and control.

Â

Yet if the pursuit of national unity is an obstacle 
to toleration, it is only one. The other, no less important impediment 
is the conduct of sects or minorities in a society, and the attitudes 
they might evince. In the sixteenth century the fear prompted by religious 
minorities or dissidents was that they would foment public disorder: 
that their professed wish for toleration disguised less palatable aspirations. 
What we need to ask now is how much this might also be true of our modern 
minorities, or at least of the system which gives them succour.

Â

To some extent at least, I think this   is  a problem we face today. Some of the voices raised most 
loudly in the call for toleration have displayed the most pitiable lack 
of it themselves, shouting down those who disagree with them, and dealing 
violently with their supporters or listeners. The problem here is not 
simply that this is itself intolerant; it is also that it makes it more 
difficult to entrench the norm of toleration in public life. For toleration 
to work, people have to accept that what is tolerated is not simply 
those things they find bearable but those things they find insufferable. 
If this principle is not accepted, toleration loses any point: we do 
not need a principle of toleration to tell us to accept things we like; 
we only need one to tell us to put up with things we don’t. Just as 
the intolerance of sects in the sixteenth century made it difficult 
to introduce norms of toleration because they too often made their existence 
an issue of public order, so do groups today betray the cause of toleration 
by calling attention to themselves for disorder caused by their intolerant 
conduct.

Â

Yet the intolerant conduct of some groups is only one way—though 
a dramatic one—in which the working of groups in contemporary politics 
operates to hinder the cause of toleration. A more general problem may 
be simply the fact that groups—and here I mean e thnic groups 
in particular— operate as highly visible actors in the political process. 
This has quickly generated a perception in the community that public 
funds or resources more generally are being distributed on the basis 
of ethnicity. Apart from the fact that the use of public funding to 
court the so-called ‘ethnic vote’ runs the risk of spawning what 
Professor Jerzy Zubrzycki has called ‘entrenched low-level corruption 
in the political system’  12 , the problem is that such a 
practice does nothing to incline other Australians to regard members 
of ethnic communities with tolerance, leave aside affection. It is hard 
to look tolerantly, let alone fondly, on people you think are on the 
take. This is not intended as an indictment of ethnic elites, who have 
simply responded rationally to the incentives for rent-seeking offered 
to them. It is rather a criticism of the mainstream politicians who, 
for their own benefit, have designed these incentives. What makes this 
all the more frustrating is not only that there is no ethnic vote (since 
political loyalties in ethnic communities are divided just as they are 
in the rest of the community), but that the great majority of ethnics 
have no part in this process. They are pictured as members of political 
groups - sects - when they are really nothing other than private citizens 
who hail from different backgrounds and (sometimes) live by different 
traditions.

If this is so, then one of the obstacles to toleration 
is that aspect of contemporary multicultural policy which tends to entrench 
ethnic groups in political life. While some of what happens under that 
policy, such as helping children learn foreign languages, is commendable, 
other things, such as the funding of ethnic dance troupes and ethnic 
poetry are simply nonsensical; and indeed, some aspects of policy, such 
as the funding of ethnic councils are probably pernicious inasmuch as 
it operates simultaneously to inflate the status of ethnic leaders and 
lower the estimation of ethnic people in the wider community.

Â

Finally, we face a serious obstacle to toleration 
insofar as many of the advocates of toleration are quick to denounce 
all criticism of multiculturalism as anti-ethnic or racist, or at least 
motivated by bigotry or prejudice. This is most evident in the way in 
which assimilation has become a dirty word - something to be advocated 
at one’s peril. To be sure, in a free society no one should be forced 
to live according to traditions he finds alien - and there is surely 
plenty of space for us to go our own ways. Yet it is perhaps also worth 
noting that public policy which is hostile or indifferent to assimilation 
is no less problematic morally speaking. Ramesh Thakur made this point 
very well in arguing against the Canadian ideal of the ‘mosaic’ 
as compared with the American idea of society as a melting pot. Ultimately, 
he argued, the former demeans those immigrants who want to become members 
of society and not live out their days as ‘expatriates’. ‘ By 
being officially hostile to assimilation, Canada forces newcomers to 
be expatriates rather than immigrants. The mosaic becomes a subtle policy 
instrument in the hands of “true blood” Canadians for maintaining 
their distance from the new pretenders.’  13  
I do not think assimilation is the best policy. But we should be slower 
to denounce those who think it is.

Â

Moving toward a more tolerant society, if all this 
is true, would be accomplished sooner if we could find a way of getting 
rid of the categories of race and ethnicity from our legal and political 
practices. They are irrelevant, misleading, and dangerous. To date, 
none of the political parties have shown any inclination to do this. 
(One Nation has said that it wants to do this; but in my view it is 
being entirely disingenuous, because it keeps talking in the language 
of exclusion, and Australian national identity.) The challenge lies 
there for the taking.

Â

Yet if toleration is so hard, it might be objected, maybe this should 
give us pause. Maybe toleration is either not all it’s been cracked 
up to be; or is simply not feasible. Perhaps the conclusion to be drawn 
from all this should be another lesson altoge ther: that different 
people simply cannot coexist and we should not try to make them do so; 
or that it is impossible unless we commit ourselves to sharing some 
more substantial common values. Perhaps toleration simply isn’t enough 
because it suggests a lethargic acceptance of bad conditions? Let me 
conclude with some brief reflections on these objections.

Â

To the suggestion that different people cannot coexist 
I would say simply that history tells a different story. There are plenty 
of cases of peaceful coexistence of peoples of different traditions, 
just as there are distressingly many cases of people persecuting their 
own kind. Some, like Voltaire and Lord Acton, have argued that the prospects 
for freedom and peace are better when there is diversity. Voltaire put 
the matter with his customary bluntness when he observed: ‘if you 
have two religions in your midst they will cut each other’s throats; 
if you have thirty, they will live in peace.”    14

Â

Another thing that needs to be emphasised is that 
it is in no way true that tolerance demands no more than a willingness 
to suffer, and to put up with wickedness, or injustice, or incompetence. 
It is perfectly consistent with a critical spirit. Tolerance demands 
that we put up with difference and diversity, not criminality or irresponsibility.

Â

To the suggestion that what is needed is a commitment 
to some substantial values, however, I would say that this is asking 
too much. To ask people to share a core of significant beliefs and commitments 
you need either a small group of people, or very weak and undemanding 
commitments. The larger the society, the greater the tendency for beliefs 
to fragment. We simply tend to see the world differently. For this reason 
no religion has succeeded in expanding without diversifying its tenets. 
One of the easiest commitments to make, difficult though it is, as I 
have been insisting, is the commitment to toleration. And this, surely, 
is as plausible a basis for a workable social unity as any one might 
imagine or invent?

Â

For those who would still doubt this, I leave with 
you the words of Confucius: ‘Zizhang asked Confucius about humanity. 
The Master said: “Whoever would spread the five practices everywhere 
in the world would implement humanity.” “And what are these?” 
“Courtesy, good faith, diligence, generosity, and tolerance. Courtesy 
wards off insults; good faith inspires the trust of others; diligence 
ensures success; generosity confers authority upon others; tolerance 
wins all hearts.”  15

Â

Chandran Kukathas

School of Politics

Australian De fence Force Academy

Â

*Â I would like 
to thank Philippa Kelly and William Maley for their many helpful criticisms 
and suggestions in the preparation of this paper.

Â

FOOTNOTES:

Â

Â

3Â   Emma , 
St.Ives: Softback Preview, 1996, pp.  1  
3-15.

Â

4Â Voltaire, ‘Toleration’,   Philosophical Dictionary , p.387.

Â

5Â Elisabeth Labrousse,   Bayle,  trans. 
Denys Potts, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1983, p.  1 .

Â

Â

6Â It was in these 
circumstances that a large number of French Protestants (more than a 
quarter of a million), chose reluctantly to leave France and to settle  
in the various Protestant countries of northern Europe. The term ‘The 
Refuge’ came to be used to describe these people, and out of this 
usage came the word ‘refugee’, meaning ‘one who, owing to religious 
persecution or political troubles, seeks refuge in a foreign country’.

Â

7Â Allen, A History 
of Political Thought in the Sixteenth Century, London, Methuen, 1961, 
p.77.

Â

8Â See in particular 
More’s ‘The Dialogue concerning Heresies’, in Thomas More,   Utopia and Other 
Writings , selected and edited by James J. Greene and John P. 
Dolan, New York: Meridian Classic, 1967, pp.196-216.

Â

9Â See Allen, op.cit., p.303.

Â

10Â   One Nation , 
Speech by the Prime Minister, The Honourable P.J. Keating, MP, 26 February 
1992, Canberra: Australian Government Publishing Service, 1992, pp.15-16.

Â

Â

12Â Quoted in   The Canberra Times , 
30 June 1998, p.2: ‘Time to end ‘ethnic group grants’.

Â

13Â ‘From the 
Mosaic to the Melting Pot: Cross-National Reflections on Multiculturalism’, 
in C.Kukathas (ed.),   Multicultural Citizens: The Philosophy and Politics of Identity,  
Sydney: Centre for Independent Studies, 1993, pp., at p.131.

Â

14Â ‘Toleration’, p.390.

Â

15Â   The 
Analects of Confucius,  Translation and Notes by Simon Leys, New

York:Â Norton, 1997, ch.17.6, p.86 (with apologies for a small amendment).

