29 September 1998

PRIME MINISTER

TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER  THE HON JOHN HOWARD MP  ADDRESS TO MORNING TEA IN THE ELECTORATE OF RANKIN  WITH CANDIDATE CUONG BUI, BROWNS PLAINS, BRISBANE

E&OE ................................................................................................... .

Well thank you very much to Cuong, to my Parliamentary colleagues, John Herron,  Warwick Parer, David MacGibbon, to other Liberal candidates in this election, ladies and  gentlemen.

I am especially happy to be here in Rankin this morning. I'm happy to be here for the  most obvious of political reasons and that is that it is a seat that I believe the Liberal Party  can win on Saturday. It is a seat that comprises one of the fastest growing areas of  Australia, not least the fastest growing area in Queensland. And it is a seat which brings  together a cross-section, a mix of what is modem Australia. It brings together people  whose grandparents and great-grandparents were born in Australia and it also brings  together people who were born in other countries and have made Australia home.

And I'm very proud that the Liberal candidate in this electorate, Dr Cuong Bui, is such a  magnificent representation of the reality and the success of Australia over the last 20  years. He has achieved in the 23 years that I believe he's been in Australia, he has  achieved in that 23 years more than most achieve in a lifetime. He came to Australia as  an Inda-Chinese refugee. He came in 1975. He has made his home and his life, and his  family in this country. He has three degrees - one in Engineering and one in Medicine  and one also in Law. That is an astonishing combination. I mean I've heard of Law  Degrees and Economic Degrees, and Law Degrees and Commerce Degrees, and Arts and

Engineering, but to do Engineering, Medicine and Law it's a rare trifecta and he practices  as a doctor and gives great service to his fellow Australians.

So he is in every way a wonderful demonstration of how people can come to this country,  can work their heart out and they can achieve. And he's also a wonderful reminder of the  fact that this a tolerant country. Australia took more refugees from Inda-China on a per  capita basis than any nation on earth after the Vietnamese War and those who criticise

our record for tolerance and openness and humanity should bear that in mind. But his  success is also a reminder of the importance of all us working hard to preserve those  values of tolerance and openness and equal treatment. We should always be on guard  against people who would divide the community along racial lines. We should always  reject the categorisation of Australians into difference racial groups. We should  remember that we are all Australians together and whether you were born in this country  or not, once you become an Australian you have as much right as the next person to call  Australia home and this country belongs as much to Cuong Bui as it does to me, although  my grandparents and some of my great grandparents were born in Australia and that is  one of the great things about the unity of the Australian people.

My friends this election campaign is now coming to a very, very important climax and  the battle will be decided very much as areas such as this and I want as we enter the final  days of the campaign to draw together some of the elements of the choice that face the  Australian people. When I announced the election I said that the most important issue on  which the people should make their judgement was the issue of economic competence. I  said we should pose the question "who is better able to manage the Australian economy  as we pass into the 21st century - is it the Coalition that has turned a $10.5 billion deficit  into a surplus? Is it the Coalition which has delivered interest rate reductions on average  of $320 a month for the average Australian homebuyer? Is it the Coalition which has  reduced by almost one-third the Federal Government debt that we inherited from Mr  Beazley and Mr Keating? Is it the Coalition that has generated 320,000 jobs? Or is it the  Labor Party that concealed the $10.5 billion deficit - drove interest rates to post­ depression highs.

When Mr Beazley was the Minister for Employment drove unemployment in this country  to 11.2 per cent. Left us with an accumulated Federal Government debt of $95 billion  and remarkably is offering more of the same if it were to be re-elected on Saturday,  including a repeal of many of the industrial relations reforms that have been undertaken  by the Coalition and a restoration of the power and privileges of union bosses within the  Australian community.

Now that is the choice when you are looking at what we achieved in our two and a half  years in Government, and when you look at what the Labor Party did while it was in  power. But there's an even more important choice to be made when you fix your gaze to  the future. And that is that we have a plan for Australia's long term economic strength  and future. We are committed to taxation reform, not out of some ideological obsession,  we are committed to taxation reform because it will be good for Australia.

And it will be good for Australia for three reasons.

The first reason is that because under our tax plan all taxes paid on business inputs are  rebateable, businesses will enjoy a reduction in their cost burdens of operation of $10.5  billion a year and because exports are free of the GST, Australian exports will be $4.5  billion a year cheaper. And if you're enjoying those sort of cost reductions, we're going  to have more competitive businesses in this country. They will win more orders and they

will need to employ more people. I hear Mr Beazley going around talking about his job  creation plans. I have a $10.5 billion job creation plan because that is the amount of tax  that will be peeled away from the operations of every business in this country.

Let me give you an example : at the present time, anybody running a business these days  is likely to have a computer, or many of them will have a computer. At the moment you  pay, a businessman or woman will pay 22 per cent wholesale sales tax on a computer and  you don't get that 22 per cent back, it is simply embedded in the operating costs of your  business. Under our plan to start with you won't pay 22 per cent, you'll only pay 10, and  what is more is if you use the computer in your business you'll get a refund of the 10 per  cent from the taxman.

Now that is how I'm able to go the length and breadth of this country and look every  businessman and woman in the eye and say your costs are going to fall by $10.5 billion.  Because that experience is repeated all over the country and that is why it is a $10.5  billion job creation plan. So the first reason why our plan is good for Australia is that it  will reduce the costs of business, make them more competitive and therefore enable them  to employ more people.

The second reason why it is good for Australia is that our plan offers middle Australia  dramatic incentives to work harder. Under our plan the top marginal rate of income tax  for 81 per cent of Australians will be no more than 30 cents in the dollar. It won't be 43  cents in the dollar, or 47 cents in the dollar, it will be 30 cents in the dollar. And that is  81 per cent. You know 81 per cent of Australian wage and salaries earners earn less than  $50,000 a year. That is middle Australia writ large. That is where the great bulk of  Australians find their position. And under our plan if you are earning $50,000 a year or  less, your top marginal rate will be no more than 30 per cent. 30 cents in the dollar. Now  what that, and that applies, that's right across the board. There's no sort of mucking  around as there is with Labor's scheme as to whether you have so-called earned or  unearned income, where they discriminate against retired people and treat them as second  class citizens and at any given level of income they tax them more. There's none of that.

Ours is a simple cut through proposition that if you're earning up to $50,000 a year you  can never pay more than 30 cents in the dollar at the margin.

Now what that means is that if you're boss says to you, and you're earning $35,000 a  year, I want you to work another $10,000 or $15,000 a year overtime, you're going to say  yes. Because you won't lose half ofit to the tax man. You'll only lose 30 per cent ofit.  I mean you mightn't even want to lose that, but I mean the reality is you've got to get,  you've got to collect tax from somebody and 30 cents in the dollar is a terrific incentive  for middle Australia. So that's the second reason why our plan is good for Australia.

And the third reason why our plan is good for Australia is it really is a plan that will  deliver the basis of social justice programmes in this country. One of the interesting  things that I found about this campaign is that our tax changes are attacked because  they're meant, in the eyes of our critics, to hurt the welfare sector, to hurt the vulnerable  people in the community. That couldn't be more wrong because unless we change our

present tax system we are going to run out of resources, without dramatically increasing  personal income tax to provide, particularly with an aging population, to provide the  necessary flows of money to the States for schools, for police services, for hospitals and  other health facilities that the community needs.

You see under our plan all of the revenue from the GST is going to be dedicated to the  States, they will get every last dollar of it, and therefore they will have rising amounts of  revenue and they'll no longer to be able to say we want more money from Canberra so  we can build another school. We want more money from Canberra so we can provide  more police to look after our communities. They won't be able to do that and they'll  have the extra resources because the present indirect tax system is falling apart. The  present indirect tax system only covers 35 per cent of the economy; 65 per cent of it is  left untouched. The present indirect tax system is an uneven patchwork quilt which is  discriminates not only basis of logic but just on the logic of history and it's a product at a  time when the service sector of the Australian economy was virtually non-existent and  that is in the 1930s.

So ladies and gentlemen, they are the three reasons why our plan is good for Australia's  future, and why Australians will have a stronger and better economy if we can get the  opportunity after Saturday to implement that plan. It will make our businesses more  competitive and that will generate jobs; it will provide our people with more incentive to  work and it will deliver a steady and assured stream ofrevenue which is needed to  provide our social security systems, our schools, our police, our roads and our hospitals.

So ladies and gentlemen as we come into the final days of this election campaign that  choice is a very clear choice. You know what Labor was like. They had 13 years to fix  it. 13 years they had to fix it. They had 4,679 days I understand, 13 years works out in  my mathematics is basically correct, 4,675 days to fix and now they're going tell you,

having failed to fix it in 4,675 days we can do it all in a hundred. I don't think the  Australian public is going to believe that.

If you couldn't get unemployment down to 5 per cent in 13 years what hope have you got  of persuading the Australian public. What? Now four days out from the election that  hallelujah you've found the solution. I don't think you're going to be able to do that.

So ladies .and gentlemen, there is a very, very clear choice. We have not run away from  our national responsibility. It would have been so much easier to have coasted this  election campaign, run a totally negative campaign about the Labor Party, rested on our  record and said "re-elect us - don't put Labor back". But we weren't willing to do that.  I've never been more convinced in 24 years of public life that the programme I'm  supporting on this occasion is good for Australia. And I want the Australian community  on Saturday to call it for Australia, above everything else, because I want the Australian

community to vote for something that will strengthen us all by strengthening the nation.  We need a strong economy, we need in this sea of international economic turbulence to  stay with people who've demonstrated that they run the economy in difficult times. Can  you just imagine where Australia would now be if we had not fixed the budget deficit?

Can you imagine where Australia would now be ifwe hadn't set about those policies?  We would be weak and vulnerable and exposed to the turmoil and turbulence of the  Asian Pacific region.

So ladies and gentlemen I am delighted to be here to support Cuong. To recommend him  to everybody. He's been an outstandingly successful citizen of this country. He's given  so much, he's achieved so much, he's won so much respect and I would dearly value him  as a Parliamentary colleague. I hope he wins. I commend him to you to do all you can  over the next four days to get behind him and to elect him as the Federal Liberal member  for Rankin in the Australian Parliament.

Thank you very much.

[ ends]

