

Â

PRIME MINISTER

Â

TRANSCRIPT 
OF THE PRIME MINISTER

THE HON 
JOHN HOWARD MP

ADDRESS 
AT THE LAUNCH OF THE NATIONAL

MULTICULTURAL 
ADVISORY COUNCIL REPORT

AUSTRALIAN 
MULTICULTURALISM FOR A NEW CENTURY:

TOWARDS INCLUSIVENESS

MURAL HALL, PARLIAMENT HOUSE

5 May   1999

E&OE

Well thank you very much, Philip. To you and to Neville 
Roach, the Chairman, can I express very warm personal thanks. This is 
an ideal forum for me to record my immense appreciation and respect 
for the work that Philip Ruddock has done as the Minister for Immigration 
and Multicultural Affairs. Quite deservedly he enjoys a wide affection 
and respect, not only in the communities that this audience represents 
but also in the broader Australian community. He handles a portfolio, 
which is never free from day-to-day controversy and difficulty, with 
enormous sensitivity and skill. And I do want to record, quite unreservedly, 
my immense gratitude to you, Philip, for the fine work that you’ve 
done in the period of a little over three years. I know that everyone 
in this audience welcomed the return of the immigration portfolio to 
Cabinet after the last election. And Philip does bring a very strong 
voice in relation to those issues as well as, of course, contributing 
very constructively in the broader deliberations of the Government.

To you, Neville, can I say thank you very much. You’re 
a very busy man. You have a lot of other irons in the fire as well as 
your role as Chairman of the Council and I think you’ve done an outstanding 
job. And I want to say to all of the other members of the committee, 
thank you from the Government for the work that you’ve done. As Philip 
said, all of the detailed recommendations will be examined. I can say 
to you that the essential thrust and the main elements of the report 
are, of course, endorsed by the Government. Most importantly, what the 
Government endorses are the values that are expressed in the report.

What holds a nation together more than anything else 
are its common values. I share Philip Ruddock’s optimism. I share 
his positive note. The experiment that Australia represents, if I can 
call it that, of bringing together, in a quite unprecedented way people 
from the four corners of the earth and doing it consistently over a 
period of time and continuing to do it, both in a humanitarian way as 
well as in a nation-building way, as we again remind ourselves this 
week as we prepare to receive the first of the 4,000 refugees from Yugoslavia 
that will be received within our midst, that it really has been a quite 
remarkable experiment.

And Neville is right to use the adjective Australian 
before multicultural because what he’s really putting his finger on 
is that we have developed an Australian way of doing things. And, increasingly, 
not only in relation to settlement and other policies but also in other 
areas of public life and public policy, we are developing a quite unique 
Australian way of doing things. Not that there is anything strange about 
that. We’ve always found a particular Australian way of doing things. 
And one of the elements, one of the genius elements of the Australian 
story is the way in which we have been able to retain the good bits 
that have been contributed to Australian society by the various tributaries, 
cultural tributaries, that make up our nation and reject the bad bits.

Much of our society, of course, is heavily influenced 
by our British and other European heritage, by no means of course exclusively, 
and that’s an important part of the Australian history. But we’ve 
been very clever. We’ve taken the good bits and we’ve rejected the 
bad bits. A long time ago we decided to reject the class-consciousness 
that was part and parcel of much of our European heritage. We rejected 
that a long time ago. But we’ve retained the habits of civil discourse, 
of freedom of an open media and, of course, the rich cultural treasure 
that we have inherited from Europe.

When I addressed the Australian Unlimited Conference 
in Melbourne last night I spoke very optimistically about our country. 
I said that it occupied a special intersection of history, geography 
and culture and it really does. There’s no nation on earth that, in 
this part of the world, in the Asian Pacific region, that has such profound 
links with the nations of Europe, shares such values in common as we 
do with the nations of North America, has taken people from 140 source 
countries. And more recently, and certainly not exclusively, we’ve 
taken large numbers of people from the nations of the Asian Pacific 
region. And they have made an immense and beneficial and positive contribution 
to the modern Australia.

So with all of those linkages 
and occupying that very special intersection, as I call it, of history, 
geography and culture, we have an opportunity and a place in the world 
that no nation on this globe has or can possibly rival. But what we 
need of course   to convert that fortunate conjunction of history 
and geography and other circumstances, into an enduringly positive advantage 
for the Australian community is of course to maintain the values of 
which Neville spoke, and of which this report speaks. And they are the 
values of tolerance, the values of understanding, of respect for cultural 
difference, a sensitivity to ethnic diversity, an understanding that 
when people come to a country which however friendly it may be is nonetheless 
different and strange. There is a process of adjustment, and there is 
a process of understanding that is needed from those of us who were 
either born in this country, or have lived for a long time in this country.

Now we Australians have done it rather better than 
most. It doesn’t mean for a moment some new comers have not been subjected 
to bigotry, discrimination and intolerance. And like any country that 
has been in the general successful, we’ve had individual blemishes 
and dark spots and we have a collective responsibility on all occasions 
to stare down tendencies towards extremism within our community. And 
I do want to make it very plain on behalf of the Government, without 
ambiguity, that we stand totally and utterly and uncompromisingly opposed 
to any form of discrimination of any person in this country based on 
ethnic background, nationality, race, colour of skin, religious or political 
convictions. And it is a cornerstone of the Australian way that we resist 
bigotry and we resist intolerance.

I think we have come a long way in this country. 
I think the debt that we owe to the successive waves of migrants who 
have embraced the Australian way is incalculable. With exception of 
course to the indigenous people of our country which occupy a very special 
place in our history, we are all in one form or another immigrants or 
the children of immigrants. And that will continue to be the case. And 
in that way Australia is one of only a relatively small number of societies 
that can say that. And it gives us a special, I suppose understanding, 
of the difficulties, particularly for those of us and including many 
any in this audience who were not born in Australia, a special understanding 
of the difficulties of adjustment that people must encounter when they 
first settle in this nation.

And I believe that the principles espoused in this 
report encapsulate what most people think. We believe in treating people 
decently, we believe in the unity of the Australian nation above all 
else. But we respect and understand the fact that if you were born in 
another country you retain a special place in your heart for that country. 
And there is nothing that in my view that diminishes the wholeness of 
the Australian nation in that being fully recognised.

I think we have been very successful. Philip is right 
to refer to the cohesiveness that was retained at the time of the gulf 
war. I can understand the feelings of many people from the former Yugoslavia 
about events which are now occurring in that country. And I was sad 
that in some of the ANZAC Day marches the Serbian-Australian contingents 
felt unable to participate. But I was delighted that in many parts of 
Australia, including in Melbourne, they did. And that particular day 
which has such a special place of hallowed reverence in the Australian 
history and the Australian experience, above all celebrates respect 
for those who fought together and does not in any way seek to perpetuate 
hatreds in relations of those who fought in opposing armies so many 
years ago. It’s a day to celebrate sacrifice and valour together and 
not indeed to focus on different and past dissent.

But I think we have been very successful and the 
reason we’ve been very successful is that within the individual commitment 
and affection that people have to the culture and the land of their 
birth they have developed, and all of us have together, acquired a common 
overriding commitment to the values of the Australian nation. They are 
unique and special values. They’ve been contributed to from many sources, 
and they have over a period of time evolved into a distinctive and quite 
outstanding, and quite tolerant and humanitarian Australian culture. 
And I think the values espoused in this report resonate very well with 
the Australian experience. I have great pleasure in launching it. I 
warmly thank you Neville, and all the members of your committee for 
your work. I think it contributes greatly to the ongoing debate about 
the Australian story and the Australian identity. Thank you.

Â

Â

Â

jy 07051999

