

Media Release

Â

Senator Andrew Bartlett

Australian Democrats’ Immigration Spokesperson

Â

16 November 1999

99/624

Â

It won’t stop them

Boat people will not be stopped by temporary 
visas but genuine refugees will be hurt

Â

Those who work with asylum seekers and new migrants 
in Queensland have condemned new immigration regulations which would 
give refugees who applied on shore, temporary three year visas rather 
than permanent haven.

Â

A meeting yesterday attended by representatives from 
Amnesty, South Brisbane Community Legal Service, the Multicultural Development 
Association,, AUSTCARE, the Ethnic Communities Council of QLD, the Refugee 
Claimant Centre, and organised by the Australian Democrats, heard that 
the three year visa would worsen the plight of genuine refugees.

Â

Queensland Senator Andrew Bartlett, the Democrat’s 
immigration spokesperson, is urging Labor to support a motion to disallow 
the new regulations when Parliament resumes in late November.

Â

The meeting identified the likely impacts of the proposed 
three year refugee visas, including:

Â· Â Minimal impact on the numbers of boat people coming to Australia.

Â· Â Increasing costs in reassessing refugees who applied from 
on shore.

Â· Â In contravention of Australia’s obligations under the UN 
Refugee Convention.

Â· Â Ignores those asylum seekers for whom it is impossible to 
apply to Australia foreigner status from overseas.

Â· Â Would 
harm genuine refugees through increasing uncertainty and stress and 
delayed integration into the Australian community. In the long run this 
increases the costs of the refugee program

Â· Â Seriously 
restricts these refugees’ ability to sponsor immediate family despite 
the benefits of family reunification

Â· Â Would 
be another step towards temporary visas for all refugees following on 
from the introduction of temporary visas for the Kosovo and East Timor 
refugees.

Â

Senator Bartlett said, “‘There has been an over reaction to the 
increased numbers of boat people in the last year. The numbers go up 
and down as a result of world events, not Australia’s imm igration 
policy.

Â

“The numbers are not high when one considers the 
million of refugees in transit around the world. The vast majority who 
arrive in Australia illegally are not granted refugee status and are 
not able to stay.

Â

“Government action should focus on preventing people-smuggling 
schemes while recognising that for some refugees, such as those from 
Iraq, it is extremely. difficult to apply for refugee status through 
legal channels.”

Â

For interview contact

Senator Andrew Bartlett on 0418 743 789 or (07) 3252 
7101

Â

Â

rwÂ  1999-11-17Â  14:16

