MP - Independent Member for Calare

p-e---- me.--- --- -

22 November 1999

Am&em Supy~rts Crackdown on People Smuggling

Independent I-‘edel& Member for Cake Peter An&en will strongly support the   UovemmenVs attempts to deter people smugglhg, but has called for the Government to   take fiuther steps.

YJnder tile proposed laws OLU coastal authorities will be given increased powers to board,

chase and search suspect vessels and the visa rules for boat people will be tightened up,”   Mr bxiren said

“Holders of the proposed temporary refugee visa would not be entitled to permanent   protection in Australia, would not be able to bring their Gmily out later and would be   entitled to less generous access to welfare.

.Wb.ile we must be mkdfil of our international obligations with respect to   refbgecs,

we urgently need to do something to send a strong message to potential boat people,   thy A4ustralia isn’t easy to get into.

“In the pwt four months almost 1000 illegal immigraats   on 28 boats have arrived,

compared with TO people on 5 boats for the same period last year, and it will cost   $200 million this financial year locating, removing and detaining these people.

‘it must be remembered Lhe majority of boat arrivals are   in fact sent home, but this

cioesn ! receive the same media attention aa do arrivals.

Of 5600 boat arrivals in the past IO years, about 1750 remain in Australia,   Including the latest arrivals.

However, these figures suggest about 60% of boat arrivals are illegal immigrants   ~t.h no claim to refugee status. What’s more they ace jumping queues of legitimate   r&gee applicants. quite apart from the strain they are placing on our budget at a   LHTW wt now have unexpected obligations in East Timor.

‘Rather than a quick fix, we must look at the Ml range of long term measures that   art: needed to addruss this problem, because policies similar to these latest proposals   t’111eci to act xs a dismcentive to illegal immigrants from China when applied to   studerlrs granted sanc;tuary h the wake of Tiananmen Square.

“Such measures might include: seeking fkthm assistance from the Chinese and   Indonesian Governments to crack down on people smugglers

operating f?om these

countries; speeding up the processing time for refugee applications to Australia;   cstabhhing a greater Government presence, either physically or by Radio Australia   ln the counh-ies of‘ origin,” Mr Andren added

For Further Information; 02 6277 2341 or 0419612891(mobile)

