

Â

Bert Kelly Lecture series

Â

No 5

Sydney, June 23, 1999

A Critique 
of Cultural Protectionism

Imre Salusinszky

"Australian television 
will not look Australian until we have effective regulation requiring 
more local content, particularly more drama."Â   
("TV   -- Make It Australian" Committee booklet, 1989)

1. Introduction

It is an honour to contribute to a series of lectures 
named after Bert Kelly, who was one of the most courageous figures that 
our political culture has so far produced. Kelly dared to swim against 
one of the strongest currents running through our history and culture: 
protectionism. He not only succeeded -- he significantly weakened the 
current itself, influencing both the Whitlam Government in the 1970s, 
and the free-market thinkers of the 1980s and '90s. What Bert Kelly 
dared to suggest, outlandishly, was that it is possible to be an Australian, 
loyal and true, without necessarily believing that there should be lets 
and hindrances on the entry into Australia of foreign goods and manufactures.

The protectionist mindset that Bert Kelly was one 
of the first to challenge has many and deep historical sources in Australia: 
nationalism, a powerful trade union movement, republicanism, racism 
and fear of Asia -- everything, in fact, that we're talking about when 
we refer to the 1890s as a formative period in our history. Indeed, 
protectionism represents the oldest dreaming that white people have 
brought to this continent: the dreaming of a "fortress Australia", 
rendered safely impregnable to all influence from "foreigners" 
outside. In all major respects this is of course identical to the Hansonite 
dreaming of today -- how odd, then, that so many of the intellectuals 
and artists who like to grand-stand and moralise against Hanson should 
share this dreaming, at least so far as invoking government to protect 
their own endeavours from the "foreign" is concerned!

So pervasive is this protectionist dreaming that, 
even after it becomes clear that tariffs are a destructive force within 
our economy, even after it has been demonstrated that they reward special 
interests at the cost of the community as a whole, even after it is 
pointed out that their victims are not "foreign" workers but 
Australian workers in non-protected or export-oriented sectors, and 
even after the benefits of tariff reform have begun to flow through 
the economy, the protectionist mindset persists. That it does persist 
has been shown in recent times not only by the emergence of One Nation, 
but also, and more disturbingly, by signs of a counter-enlightenment 
within the ALP. But I believe that these are temporary setbacks, and 
that most Australians are now facing in the direction that, for all 
its difficulties and challenges, Bert Kelly recommended: outwards, and 
prepared to engage with the world.

But there is another area where this direction has 
not been squarely faced: that of culture, the media, and the arts. While 
I cannot possibly know what Bert Kelly would make of my remarks today, 
I very much hope that he would sympathise with my own suggestion, which 
is simply that it is also possible to be an Australian, loyal and true, 
without believing that there should be any lets and hindrances upon 
the entry of foreign culture into Australia -- whether in the form of 
printed books, films, recordings, live performances, or radio and television 
programs. That there are such lets and hindrances, in abundance, is 
puzzling, because it suggests that, while economic protectionism has 
lost much of its hold on the sympathies of Australians, what I will 
call "cultural protectionism" has not.

Investigating the relationship between these two 
forces -- economic and cultural protectionism -- is a large part of 
what I want to do tonight. I have divided my observations into two sections. 
First, I want to look at the relationship between economic and cultural 
protectionism, and to argue that, many suggestions to the contrary notwithstanding, 
they are not really different at all: cultural protectionism can be 
easily reduced to economic protectionism. It has the same sources, displays 
many of the same characteristics, and is driven by the same motives: 
principally, ethnophobia and greed. And it fails for the same reasons. 
In this area I have nothing particularly original to say, and have been 
guided by previous commentators, not least Ross Jones in Cut!, an excellent 
monograph published by the CIS in 1991.

In the second part of my talk, 
I want to address the most frequent claim that is put forward to recommend 
cultural protectionism, and to distinguish it from economic tariffs. 
This is the claim that there is something called "cultural identity" 
or "national   identity", which cultural protectionism is 
required to guard, and that the arts are central to the definition and 
expression of. (In economic terms, the identity argument is, in effect, 
a positive externality argument: the services that the cultural sector 
performs for our national identity benefit us all, but that sector cannot 
be compensated adequately for them through ordinary markets. Hence the 
need for anti-competitive measures like quotas, or limitations upon 
the entry of foreign performers, books, and CDs into Australia.) It 
is on the identity question that, as a professional literary critic, 
I believe that I do have some original contribution to make. What I 
will suggest is that the notion of "national identity" is 
not only riven with internal contradiction, but also implies a limited 
and unproductive view of the arts, and of their function in individual 
and social life. Once even the national identity carpet has been pulled 
out from under its feet, I do not believe that cultural protectionism 
can remain standing for long.

You will notice that my lecture attempts to bring 
together two distinct areas of study -- economics and literary criticism 
-- that previously have had no connection whatsoever, apart from both 
being on the nose with the general public.

2. Economic and cultural protectionism

In April last year, in the so-called Blue Sky case, 
the High Court of Australia decided that free trade agreements with 
New Zealand should take precedence over local content quotas, meaning 
that television programs originating in New Zealand could be counted 
for the purposes of those quotas. Immediately, workers in the film and 
television industry mobilised against the decision. They formed up into 
a new protectionist alliance calling itself "True Blue" (possibly 
unaware that the phrase itself is a cultural import, originally used 
in the 17th century to describe a type of staunch British conservative). 
A meeting in Melbourne, addressed by Blue Heelers star John Wood and 
Frontline's Alison Whyte, attracted wide publicity. The report in the 
Australian featured a large photo of Wood and Whyte, and quoted Wood 
as saying that, once free trade was used as a lever, the industry would 
be open to competition from producers such as Britain and the US as 
well. It also quoted Mac Gudgeon, president of the Australian Writers' 
Guild:

"I've heard Tim Fischer say that culture should 
be treated like any other product -- like shoes or wheat. Well, culture 
is not like shoes or wheat. Shoes pretty much are the same all over 
the world and so is wheat. Culture is identifiable. It's the stories 
of the people who live in a certain country."

The report in the Australian closed with these words: 
"The meeting in Melbourne yesterday urged people involved in the 
industry to lobby politicians to take control of the agenda."

Let me suggest that the kerfuffle we witnessed over 
the Blue Sky ruling is a kind of recurring scene in Australian cultural 
life; indeed, it is like what Freud called a "repetition scene" 
-- the site of a psychological blockage so deep and profound that it 
cannot be got past or broken through, only endlessly replayed. Of course, 
the characters may change, but the scene remains the same: if the issue 
is books, then the scene is acted out by prominent writers like Tom 
Keneally and Peter Carey; if it is CDs, then by prominent musicians 
like Peter Garrett and Tina Arena. And the fact that this scene is peopled 
with celebrity actors, writers, and musicians is what has gradually 
allowed cultural protectionism to accrue the aura of a vast, permanent 
telethon: you would no more oppose it than you would oppose spastic 
kiddies.

What is it, then, that this shifting cast of characters 
is actually protecting? Our culture, certainly -- or so they claim. 
But obviously their own livelihoods as well, which they are protecting 
from the pressure of international competition. More specifically, they 
are protecting a system of laws and regulations that insinuates itself 
into almost every area of intellectual and artistic endeavour in Australia. 
In commercial radio, 25% of all popular music broadcast must be Australian. 
In commercial television, at least 55% of all programs broadcast between 
6.00 am and midnight must be Australian, and, in addition, 50% of all 
children's programs must be Australian. At least 80% of all advertisements 
broadcast by a commercial television station in the course of a year 
must be Australian. There are strict limits on the use of foreign actors 
in Australia, and there have been various regulations designed to ensure 
that visiting musicians employ Australian support acts.

For decades there were laws 
banning the importation of foreign books where there was a copyright 
holder for those books operating locally. More recently, this has been 
watered down, so that a local publisher must produce its own edition 
within 30 days, or   else forfeit the protection of the ban. However, 
we are still reading novels by Don DeLillo and Philip Roth in expensive 
British editions, rather than in the cheaper, and original, US editions. 
The Government is now considering a report by the ACCC on the current 
situation with regard to parallel importation of books, but essentially 
it was, and remains, a system of intellectual censorship, supported 
by the very same people who denounce the Government's lamentable attempts 
to censor Lolita or the internet. Similar laws limiting the importation 
of CDs were repealed by the Howard Government last year, leading once 
again to our repetition scene -- and to an immediate and significant 
price reduction.

Because the protection from imports enjoyed by workers 
in other sectors of the economy has been gradually wound back over recent 
years, those defending cultural protectionism have been at pains to 
distinguish it from garden-variety protectionism. As Mr Gudgeon informs 
us, culture is not the same as shoes or wheat. (Though, until reading 
his remarks, I had not realised that Italian shoes, or Swiss watches, 
or German cars were identical with all other shoes and watches and cars, 
and bore no identifiable qualities or characteristics whatsoever.) But 
cultural protectionists were not always so keen to distinguish themselves 
from other protectionist causes -- not when those causes were still 
flourishing. Here is the "TV -- Make It Australian" Committee 
again, in 1970:

Without protection for industries essential to our 
economic balance, we could hardly be said to exist as a nation. We suggest 
that the cultural balance of Australia is equally important and that 
our national identity must be developed and safeguarded to the same 
extent as our economy.

Even today, hardline economic protectionists, such 
as One Nation and the Australian Democrats, are perfectly happy to identify 
cultural with economic protectionism, culture with wheat.

My view is that, in this regard at least, the hardline 
protectionists are being more honest than the special pleaders. When 
reform-minded politicians like Paul Keating and John Howard describe 
themselves as cultural nationalists, this again implies that cultural 
and economic protectionism are quite distinct areas. But this is not 
true at all -- they are better thought of as two sides of the same coin. 
For in cultural, just as in economic, protectionism, vested interests 
that happen to have the ear of government are sheltered from competition, 
at the expense of the community as a whole: this is what those interests 
mean when they threaten to "lobby politicians to take control of 
the agenda".

In addition, in what is a disturbing development 
indeed, hardline economic protectionists are now reforging links with 
cultural protectionism, and learning from its discourses. An article 
by Brendan Pearson in the Australian Financial Review last month explained 
how a range of producers, from Japanese rice-growers to EU beef farmers, 
are now claiming that their efforts, too, are central to the cultural 
identity of their regions, and should be protected from the effects 
of free-trade agreements and globalisation. We await news that our own 
cultural identity could not survive the eclipse of the Bonds y-front.

If we leave aside, for now, the argument about national 
identity, many of the arguments for cultural protectionism, as well 
as the strategies employed by it, have taken the same form as those 
for its economic first-cousin. A prominent example is the "infant 
industry" argument: protectionism is required to get the nascent 
Australian cultural industries up and running. The problem here is that 
the "infant industry" case only applies when a local producer 
can claim some comparative advantage, whereas these local producers 
claim a comparative disadvantage relative to overseas competitors with 
vastly larger local markets. Moreover, the infant industry argument, 
on its own logic, should lead to a progressive lowering of import restrictions 
as the industry grows in maturity and strength. In fact, as our publishing, 
film, music and television industries have gone from strength to strength, 
and even conquered overseas markets, the producers and workers in those 
industries have argued for more protection, not less.

Certainly, the argument for 
protection had already surfaced when these industries were still in 
their infancy. Here is an early advocate for quotas, independent television 
producer Hector Crawford, in 1959 -- concerned, not with a lack of Australian 
conten  t on early TV, but with a lack of the right content:

It is obvious that the Australian content is, in 
the main, made up of quizzes, panel shows, cookery demonstrations, sports, 
talks, interviews, news and weather, and amateur talent quests and so 
on. All of these do little to employ our creative and interpretative 
artists in the fields of music, drama, and other aspects of the arts, 
and nothing to inform the Australian people about their country, its 
history and traditions, and about their national life and common achievements.

Crawford, no doubt, had in mind dramas like his own 
company's Homicide and Division 4, and the way these programs informed 
Australians about their country -- or, at least, about the two or three 
Richmond back streets where all the car chases were filmed. But Crawford's 
remarks remind us that the real enemy singled out by cultural protectionism 
has less often been foreign culture than Australian sport: the rules 
have gone to endless lengths to prevent TV licensees from using sport 
-- which Australians love to watch, but which does not provide work 
for Australian actors -- to satisfy local content requirements. Under 
the old "points system" of the 1970s, a one-off drama screened 
late at night yielded ten times as many local content points as a live 
telecast of the AFL Grand Final. It would appear that the spectacle 
of Collingwood taking on Richmond at Victoria Park on a filthy July 
afternoon is not a fully Australian one -- or so the rules imply.

Closely related to the infant industry argument is 
the argument that says we wouldn't have a publishing/film/television/music/advertising 
industry without protectionism. Again, this is identical to the arguments 
for economic protectionism, but you don't have to be Hayek to point 
out that there are any number of industries we don't have that would 
thrive here instantly if only we banned imports -- at enormous cost 
to the rest of the economy. And the success of Australian cultural industries, 
both here and in overseas markets, surely suggests that they would survive 
in an open environment. Although I discount as nonsense the claim that 
these industries have a special connection to our supposed collective 
identity, they do have the advantage over other producers of understanding 
the special tastes and preferences of Australians: if they cannot survive 
independently even with that going for them, then they are hardly candidates 
for ongoing government support.

Protectionist doomsaying has nowhere been more pronounced 
than in the argument over parallel importation of music CDs, where the 
recording multinationals and their high-profile musicians have claimed 
that "piracy" would destroy the industry if retailers could 
import CDs from wherever they wished. Deregulation has not, so far, 
destroyed the Australian music industry, but the Australian Record Industry 
Association recently stage-managed a publicity event in which a year's 
worth of seized "pirated" CDs were put through a crusher. 
They didn't point out that these disks comprised less than one half 
of one percent of annual CD sales, or that most illegal disks are of 
local provenance. Perhaps they would have done better to deliver on 
at least some of the "local industry development" promises 
with which they bamboozled the Keating Government into maintaining their 
protective regime.

These varieties of doomsaying highlight the oddly 
contradictory position of the cultural nationalist in late 20th-century 
Australia: our culture is as good as anyone's...yet it needs to be protected 
from outside competition if it is to survive; our popular arts appeal 
directly to our national identity and aspirations...yet the interest 
in those arts by those who supposedly possess this identity, the Australian 
public, is not sufficient to guarantee their viability. Of course, claiming 
that their industry, and the employment it generates, would not exist 
without protection is precisely what producers and workers in these 
fields would say: it is precisely what auto manufacturers, or shoe manufacturers, 
say when protection in their own domains is threatened by reform.

So in claiming infant industry 
status, or that their industry couldn't exist without protection, the 
strategies employed by cultural producers have precisely mimicked those 
of producers in other protected industries. A related strategy shared 
by both lobbi  es is what I call the "moving goalpost" 
game. In this game, changes to the protective regime, hotly opposed 
by producers when they come into force, are subsequently claimed as 
sterling success stories, by those very producers, when more radical 
changes are mooted. The rule allowing parallel importation of books 
after 30 days, publishers claimed, would destroy the local industry. 
In fact, the local industry is fine, implying that further deregulation 
in the interests of consumers would be possible. But the publishers 
are now claiming that the 30-day rule was a splendid innovation, has 
achieved its aims, and should be left firmly in place. What was previously 
demonised is now wholeheartedly embraced.

Another tack taken by cultural protectionists who 
wish to distinguish their activities from economic protectionism, and 
its fate, has been to argue that the things they make are not products, 
in the usual sense, at all -- culture is not the same as shoes or wheat. 
"Culture" and "art" are certainly abstract nouns, 
but so are "mobility" and "sustenance". And just 
as mobility and sustenance are experienced through cars and foodstuffs, 
art and culture are experienced through things like books, videos, and 
CDs: products that are manufactured, distributed, marketed, and retailed 
in the usual way.

There is a related argument that the notion of the 
"market" itself, and everything that derives from it, is inapplicable 
to cultural exchange. But why so? The market was not invented at the 
University of Chicago in 1975: it is simply a word for the oldest and 
most traditional form of human exchange, one so deeply imbued in our 
culture that even our 7-day week is based upon it. The consumers of 
culture do not have unlimited time or money, and must choose between 
what is available, what is competing for their attention and patronage, 
like all other consumers. And if you don't think poets, to choose one 
example, exhibit fiercely competitive behaviour, you've never met one: 
we hear a lot about an "arts community", but talk to them 
in the pub and they hate each another's guts.

Likewise, cultural producers 
have attacked Government regulatory agencies like the ACCC and its predecessors, 
and the dreaded economic rationalists in charge of them, for even attempting 
to apply competition policy   principles to their activities. These agencies are, 
apparently, like storm troopers, vandalising and sacking a world of 
fine arts and ideas of which they could have no appreciation. (Interestingly 
there has never been the same problem with the regulatory agencies that 
dole out protection.) After teaching in the humanities in Australia 
for nearly 20 years, my reply would go like this. Who has better served 
the culture of the book, say, in this country: those who have tried 
to make it accessible to more Australians, more cheaply and more quickly, 
or those who have sought to prevent this so as to protect their own 
incomes? If it were down to me, for his efforts on behalf of the cause 
of literature in Australia -- not the cause of writers and publishers, 
but the cause of literature -- Professor Fels would receive a special 
Miles Franklin.

One argument I have heard recently to justify limits 
on "parallel importation" of books and CDs and distinguish 
these limits from tariffs is an argument based on individual property 
rights: Australian writers and musicians releasing books and CDs here 
could be undercut by cheaper US editions of their own work; so they 
can only protect their own property rights through territorial copyright 
arrangements. But how far down the mercantile chain can any producer 
hope to control the fate of their own product, once it has been sold? 
And what about another issue of rights: the right of consumers and retailers 
to purchase legal editions of books and CDs from whomever they wish? 
In any event, if Australian writers wish to milk their Australian readers 
dry, erecting international trade barriers is a very roundabout way 
of doing it: there is nothing whatever to stop them simply contracting 
different release dates with their Australian and overseas publishers.

Finally, no account of the 
link between cultural and economic protectionism could be complete without 
mentioning the role of trades unions. Indeed, the understandable desire 
of the union movement to guarantee the employment and incomes of its 
members, toge  ther with the racism that marks at least the first 
half-century or so of its history, illustrates again the dual motivation 
lying behind all protectionism. I have no doubt that the longstanding 
commitment of the Australian labour movement to protectionism leads 
back in a straight line to that movement's early fear, hatred, and denigration 
of non-white immigrant workers.

Unions, especially Actors' Equity, have been the 
strongest boosters of cultural protection. This suggests that, in reality, 
this is an industrial rather than a cultural issue, but to forestall 
that conclusion the unions have been eager to present themselves as 
acting altruistically, in the interests of the whole nation, as the 
guardians of its identity. Only last week, on a panel at the Sydney 
Film Festival, representatives from the Australian Screen Directors 
Guild voiced their concern over the promotion of Sydney as a centre 
for international film production. Said Guild president Stephen Wallace: 
"The local industry is about culture and identity. When the Americans 
come here it's about money and jobs -- that's all it's about. It's not 
about culture and identity." Yet Guild representatives complained 
to the same meeting that, because these films are not Australian productions, 
"the money mostly goes back to Hollywood". And they warned 
of Australian crews on such films turning into "Mexicans with mobiles". 
It must be a happy coincidence for these people that their altruistic 
arguments about identity also happen to turn out to be arguments about 
the remuneration of their members!

If you look at the agreements that Equity, for example, 
has struck with theatrical producers over the decades, limiting their 
rights to hire overseas actors, you will find that there is always an 
interesting financial footnote: foreign actors can be hired, but only 
if the Australian cast and crew on the relevant production are paid 
penalty rates. It seems that our precious identity can be diluted, but 
at a price. Perhaps the unions should be seen less as the guardians 
of our identity than as its toll-keepers.

3. Art, Culture, and National Identity

But what, precisely, are they collecting a toll on? 
The notion of national identity has gradually loomed larger and larger 
in our debates, largely, I think, because of the influence of the republican 
movement, which uses it constantly but, like everyone else, unreflectively. 
Because it serves various political interests, I think national or cultural 
identity has escaped serious examination, particularly of its historical 
origins, which are very much connected with the rise of European fascism 
in the first half of the 20th century, and in fascism's concern with 
identity-polluting forces such as the Jew, the gypsy, the cosmopolitan 
intellectual, and so on. If the idea of national identity survives in 
Australia today largely devoid of its fascist connotations, I still 
think dangers from that direction remain locked within it: specifically, 
danger of erecting criteria beyond mere citizenship for establishing 
who is a "true" Australian and who is not.

Nobody can deny that there are things that are identifiably 
Australian -- I already mentioned a filthy Melbourne afternoon in July 
-- but cultural and national identity is not about those things. Since 
only people could carry a cultural or national identity forward, it 
must inhere in some aspect of the self, perhaps like Jung's idea of 
a collective unconscious. But really it strikes me as being more akin 
to an ideology: a body of ideas that serves to perpetuate a particular 
power structure, but that passes itself off as universal, natural, "common 
sense". If national identity is ideological, it will also be contestable, 
and will be contested mainly by those who feel that it places them on 
the margins of social reality. Australian culture has produced a succession 
of figures designed to represent the true or dinkum Australian: the 
bushman, the digger, the larrikin, and so on. None of these figures 
have been to any degree demographically representative, and it is a 
fine question whether they have achieved anything beyond advancing certain 
political and commercial interests, and making anyone who is not white, 
working-class, heterosexual, Anglo, and male feel that they are only 
compromised Australians. All versions of national identity have, to 
my mind, about as much interest, and as much dialectical purchase, as 
a bumper-sticker I have seen around Sydney lately: "Real Aussies 
Drive Utes".

If a national identity is 
merely an ideology, I question whether we should think of the arts as 
being in its service. The notion that art simply serves ideology is 
a Marxist idea, but it is not by any means the only idea about art. 
There are a range of mor  e liberal notions that would have art exploring, 
for instance, personal or individual questions that concern people at 
a deeper level than their ideological conditioning. It is this view 
of art, I think, that David Malouf was talking about when he complained 
that we in Australia are too used to talking about national identity, 
and not used enough to talking about individual identity.

Or there is another idea, particularly prominent 
in the liberal-humanist criticism of the 1940s and 1950s, and pushed 
rather to the outer by the rise of Marxism in he academy, that literature 
explores trans-ideological issues: the things that join all humanity 
and all nations together, not the things that distinguish them. For 
example, there are clearly connections between the myths of people around 
the world that transcend their national or ideological differences. 
This view was once branded as "dehistoricising" by marxisant 
critics, but it shows every sign of making a comeback.

The consequences of thinking of art as expressing 
a national identity are much more serious for the high arts than for 
the popular arts. It is unquestionable that Crocodile Dundee trades 
in cliches about the Australian identity, and does so amusingly. But 
that is assuredly not what Voss, or An Imaginary Life, or Oscar and 
Lucinda, or The Plains, or Eucalyptus are doing. If you want mechanisms 
to support the high arts in Australia, through grants to writers or 
tax concessions to consumers and so on, then have that argument. Only 
don't try and support them through protectionist mechanisms based on 
a notion of national identity that is absurdly reductive when applied 
to them.

The national identity argument is as absurd at the 
level of the individual consumer as it is at the level of the individual 
work of art. Senator Natasha Stott Despoja defended the ban on legal 
foreign CDs by arguing that the local music industry reflects our "ways 
and values". But Midnight Oil does not reflect my ways and values 
at all: it reflects something very like the opposite of them. They cannot 
force me to supplement their already huge incomes by making me buy their 
dreadful albums, why should they be allowed to do it through protectionism?

If arguments for protection based on national identity 
make an absurd simplification of the high arts, it is hard to see them 
as anything but paternalistic when applied to the popular. Since the 
national identity can only exist inside individuals, why would special 
measures be needed to protect popular arts that appealed it? Wouldn't 
Australians flock to precisely those arts? If, when presented with the 
choice, they flock to, say, American films instead of Australian ones, 
have they got their own identity wrong? Do they need regulators to tell 
them what their own identity really is?Â   
From the traditional liberal-humanist perspective that I mentioned earlier, 
art is about something very like the opposite of expressing a national 
identity: it is about what connects people across all times and cultures. 
The nature of Western art moves it in the opposite direction to national 
identity, for it is ferociously eclectic, grabbing from all cultures 
and traditions whatever suits its purposes and inner logic. In fact, 
isn't the whole point about art the engagement it forces us into with 
what is different, other, and strange? When Australian preschoolers 
at their Christmas concerts sing about a kookaburra in a gum tree, their 
teachers are reinforcing a harmless version of the protectionist attitude: 
surely receiving a partridge in a pear-tree from one's true love would 
make no more literal sense to an English child than to an Australian 
one? I have an interest in modern American popular and folk music, particularly 
the work of Bob Dylan, who does come close to expressing my ways and 
values even though, strangely, he is not an Australian national (a fact 
for which I have paid dearly over the last 30 years). Here is critic 
Robert Cantwell describing what later became of the "folk revival" 
that spawned Dylan and Joan Baez in the early 1960s:

What began in Cambridge, Massachusetts, 
with the Kweskin Jug Band in the mid-1960s continued in the decades 
that followed in a proliferation of distinctive musical kinds, including 
New England contradance music, Cajun music, oldtime, blues, Klezmer, 
Irish   caeli, until a profusion of eclectic folk styles 
from Latin America, urban Africa, Soweto, Indonesia, eastern Europe, 
and the Middle East absorbed the folk revival in the nineties into an 
ongoing process of musical incorporation and globalization.

Attempting to regulate this magpie quality of art 
so as to preserve a national identity is akin to the cultural cleansing 
that horrifies us in the hands of Iranian Ayatollahs and Serbian war-lords. 
Perhaps our own protectionists should reflect on just how similar to 
Ayatollahs they can sometimes sound. Patricia Edgar, the hyper-protectionist 
head of the Australian Children's Television Foundation, told a conference 
in Manila a couple of years ago that she supported moves in Malaysia 
to ban Barbie dolls, which she said were inappropriate for Asian children. 
She also told the conference that the proliferation of children's television 
originating in the United States was "culturally subversive" 
and "sinister", particularly as "the exaltation of the 
rights of the individual over the common social good is gaining more 
and more support in the US".

Personally I cannot see why the presence of Sesame 
Street on Australian screens should seem any more "sinister" 
than the presence of Bananas in Pyjamas on American ones: in fact, I 
would have thought it was splendid that children in the two countries 
can enjoy each other's programs. Perhaps what Ms Edgar really wants 
is for the part of Big Bird to be taken by an emu. In the aftermath 
of the Blue Sky case, two writers I admire, R.J. Stove and P.P. McGuinness, 
pointed out the particular lunacy of this kind of cultural exclusivism 
when applied to cognate cultures like Australia and New Zealand. But 
I would have thought that American cultural exchange with Australia, 
too, was of the least troubling or extraordinary kind, given that, Ms 
Edgar notwithstanding, Australians and Americans share a similar set 
of values, and given that "America" is really nothing anyway 
but a name for the most profligate mix-'n'-match of different cultural 
strands that has ever existed. Besides, Australians have voted with 
their feet to the effect that, if they do have something called a cultural 
identity, then one aspect of that identity is a fierce enjoyment of 
films, music, and television originating from the United States. If 
this discountenances their cultural betters, then so be it.

Perhaps, instead of listening endlessly to the commissars 
and Ayatollahs on this question, we should listen instead to someone 
who has suffered conspicuously at their hands. Here is Salman Rushdie, 
writing recently on the anti-globalisation forces that want to preserve 
"the Indian-ness of India, the French-ness of France":

Do cultures actually exist as separate, pure, defensible 
entities? Is not melange, adulteration, impurity, pick 'n' mix at the 
heart of the idea of the modern, and hasn't it been that way for most 
of this all-shook-up century? Doesn't the idea of pure cultures, in 
urgent need of being kept free from alien contamination, lead us inexorably 
towards apartheid, toward ethnic cleansing, towards the gas chamber?

4. Conclusions and Suggestions

There is one further similarity between economic 
and cultural protectionism: they debilitate the very activities that 
they are meant to promote. Protectionism is like a running sore, draining 
energy away from the main game. Like our manufacturers in the era of 
economic protection, our cultural producers always look to their patron, 
the government, when things go badly, not to their own performance (hardly 
surprising, given that they have never functioned in a fully competitive 
environment). So if there is not enough Australian drama on television, 
enough Australian music on radio, enough Australian fiction being published, 
or enough box-office success for Australian films, the blame is always 
sheeted home to the current regime of quotas and import restrictions; 
it is never the fact that the music, the drama, the fiction, or the 
films may not be of sufficient quality.

The prospects for cultural 
liberalisation do not seem strong. Protectionism has always been able 
to rely on an unholy alliance of the far right and the far left, as 
we saw in the debate on CD import deregulation, where the two strongest 
parliamentary voice  s raised against the move were those of Natasha Stott 
Despoja and Pauline Hanson: a sophomore and a moron. The Labor Party 
is in full reverse thrust on the issue, as it is on many others: Mr 
Beazley has vowed to overturn the CD decision and, in addition, refuse 
visas to "foreign" musical performers who do not undertake 
to tour with an Australian support-act. Illiberalism carried to a whole 
new level!

The Howard Government has also been true to form 
on this issue, showing that it wants to be a liberal government, but 
is not quite sure how. The CD decision achieved more for the cause of 
art in Australia, at a stroke, than all of Paul Keating's diligent stroking 
of "the yarts", so loyally repaid at election time. But a 
recent, disastrous rise in the Australian music quota for radio was 
hailed by Senator Alston as a triumph. Clearly, the test will come with 
the Government's response to the new ACCC report on the book market. 
The Government should do what I strongly suspect the report recommends, 
and repeal the 30-day import ban immediately. It will have enormous 
trouble getting such a move past the war-lords and Ayatollahs in the 
Senate, but cultural and intellectual freedom are causes well worth 
fighting for.

Liberal-minded Australians need to do two things. 
First, we need to turn the public's attention away from the imaginary 
terrors of Captain Hook, waving his cutlass and threatening us all with 
the plank unless we buy his pirated Korean CDs, and towards the real, 
practical costs of cultural protectionism: the cost to consumers, to 
students and educators, to broadcasting licensees, and to the taxpayer, 
who must fund the bureaucracies that patrol the increasingly notional 
borders of our culture. We need to point to things like the dramatic 
fall in book prices that attended import deregulation in the UK. As 
a teacher in the humanities, I know very well that the exorbitant cost 
of books in Australia, and the delays in the arrival of foreign books, 
have been a blight on teaching and research. Are these not forms of 
culture worth protecting?

More important, liberals need to get off the back 
foot in public discussion of culture and the arts. What is there to 
be defensive about -- weren't they once called the "liberal arts"? 
We have ceded far too much ground to the Marxists -- who no longer exist 
anywhere but in literary and cultural studies -- as well as to the rednecks 
and Blinky Bills who cannot see art apart from their own nationalist 
fantasies. We surely have more productive visions for the arts than 
these. Until recently the protectionist cause has been promoted by apparently 
sophisticated and well-meaning types: writers, musos, actors, publishers, 
writers, and so on. But the rise of the Hanson phenomenon, in which 
economic and cultural protectionism are so closely and obviously linked, 
provides us with the perfect opportunity to press our counter-vision 
forward.

The internationalisation of the Australian economy 
over the last 20 years has improved the material prosperity of Australians. 
If this reformist spirit can now be applied to the cultural domain, 
over the protests of vested interests, then the imaginative and intellectual 
prosperity of Australians will be similarly enhanced. And if the free 
and uninhibited exchange of goods and services among the people of the 
world is a fine ideal, then the free exchange of culture -- of ideas, 
stories, sounds, and images -- is surely an even finer one. Â

Â

About the Author:  Â  
 Imre Salusinszky   was born in Budapest in 1955; his family came to 
Australia as refugees following the anti-Soviet uprising in 1956. He 
was educated at Melbourne High School, the University of Melbourne (where 
he co-edited Farrago), and Oxford. Since 1988 he has taught at the University 
of Newcastle, where he is now Associate Professor in English. His most 
recent publication is the Oxford Book of Australian Essays. Since 1994, 
like Bert Kelly before him, Imre has contributed a weekly column to 
the Australian Financial Review, in which he has taken repeated swipes 
at the enemies of economic and cultural liberalisation.

