

Â

Media Release

The Hon Philip Ruddock, MP

Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs

Â

MPS 139/99

Â

New Powers 
to Combat People Smuggling

The Minister for Immigration 
and Multicultural Affairs, Philip Ruddock, today introduced to Parliament 
a bord  er protection bill that would see tough new measures 
introduced to combat people smuggling into Australia by sea.

Mr Ruddock said the Border Protection Legislation 
Amendment Bill was part of a package announced by the Prime Minister's 
Coastal Surveillance Task Force in June. He said the bill would, for 
the first time, give officers of front line border agencies such as 
DIMA and Customs, the power to enforce Australia's border strategies 
in international waters.

"The Bill would give our officers new powers 
to board, search and detain vessels in international waters they suspect 
are involved in people smuggling," said Mr Ruddock.

"At the moment, our officers are constrained 
by the 12 mile rule, which means they are unable to investigate any 
vessel that lies beyond our own territorial waters.

"This year we have seen at least three Chinese 
vessels attempt to exploit this loophole in our border policing. In 
what is emerging as a new modus operandi, vessels have been able to 
avoid detection by sailing through international waters east of Papua 
New Guinea.

"The vessels have then stayed in international 
waters while waiting for speedboats to arrive and ferry their human 
cargo ashore before returning to China.

"The new legislation would allow us to crack 
down on increasingly sophisticated people smugglers like these, by ensuring 
they are not beyond the reach of Australia's domestic law.

"In 1998-99 we saw unauthorised boat arrivals 
jump to 926 people, up from 157 people in 1997-98. In this calendar 
year alone there have been 50 boats carrying 1,272 people."

Mr Ruddock said other new powers proposed in the 
Bill included:

"The Government has responded 
quickly and unequivocally to the growing criminal activity of people 
smuggling. This Bill further enhances Australia's ability to combat 
people smuggling operations," Mr Rudd  ock concluded.

Wednesday 22 September 1999Â   
Media inquiries: Susan Sare (02) 6277 7860 or 0407 415 797

Â

Â

Â

jyÂ  1999-09-24Â  09:57

