Doorstop Interview

Â

Con Sciacca - Shadow Minister for Immigration

Â

Subject: Kosovars

Â

Transcript - Parliament House, Canberra - 10 April 2000

Â

E & OE - Proof Only

Â

SCIACCA: Ladies and Gentleman, I've got Michael 
Danby with me today who is the co-patron of the Bandiana Safe Haven 
and he's been talking to these people.

Â

I guess today we are seeing just another example 
of the lack of compassion of this Government. The fact is that they're 
suffering from some kind of compassion deficit disorder.

Â

The reality is that we now have something like 
270 Kosovars in Australia. 170 of them are as of last night regarded 
as being illegals. Now, these people are people who only some months 
ago we invited here as our guests.

Â

Now, sure, the letter of the law says that as 
and from last night they are no longer legal immigrants here and are 
no longer in possession of visas, but they are still our guests who 
only eleven months ago, we asked to come here.

Â

These are people who only some months ago the 
Prime Minister, the Minister for Immigration and myself welcomed with 
open arms and in fact shed tears over them as Mascot Airport, and all 
of the sudden now, they are saying that they should be sent to detention 
centres in Woomera or Curtin.

Â

The fact is that the Labor Party believes that 
these people should be treated with some genuineness of spirit, if you 
like, that we should treat them in a flexible way. The Minister has 
said that 100 of them have been invited to apply for Protection Visas. 
There are about 170 more who are refusing to go for whatever reason. 
The reasons must be reasons of fear of persecution.

Â

One seventeen year old girl only 2 or 3 days 
ago attempted suicide. They must be frightened of something.

Â

I say to the Minister, allow all of these people 
to make an individual application for a Protection Visa onshore - treat 
them on a case by case basis and if they are genuine allow them to stay. 
If not well then they go back.

Â

In addition to that we are saying don't treat 
them the same as every other illegal that comes in by boat who are the 
victims of people smugglers. Treat them with some compassion, some respect 
and keep them, for instance, in Bandiana, call it a temporary detention 
centre if you like but treat them differently, as a special case which 
is what they are.

Â

JOURNALIST: This is a change of stance though, 
isn't it, for the Labor Party, didn't you sign up on the Bills saying 
they would only be here for a specified period of time? It's now time 
for them to go home, isn't it?

Â

SCIACCA: From the word "go" the Labor 
Party has made it clear that we would support Operation Safe Haven, 
which by the way has cost the Australian taxpayer, one hundred million 
dollars. We foreshadowed - you didn't need to be a genius to work out 
that at the end of the operation when it was time for them to go - that 
there would be at least some of them who would not want to go, for whatever 
reason.

Â

The Labor Party, the Opposition Leader and myself 
have consistently said that when that time arose we should treat these 
people with some compassion, with some respect and some flexibility. 
That time has arisen.

Â

Can I say to you that there is no question that 
whatever the Government is doing is quite legal in accordance with the 
terms of the Safe Haven legislation. There is no question of that and 
I am not being critical of them for that. What I am saying is sometimes 
with a situation as unique as this, we should show some compassion and 
we should show some flexibility. Which I don't think the Minister is 
- the Minister is saying "That's the law. They're out. That's it."

Â

JOURNALIST: Mr Ruddock says that indeed he has 
reviewed each and every one of the cases. What do you say to that?

Â

SCIACCA: Well, what I understand is the position 
is that in about December he asked them to put their case. He then went 
through them supposedly individually and decided that around 100 of 
them would be asked to make Protection Visa applications. He made that 
decision I suspect on the information that he had. Now it is not as 
exacting and not as detailed as an actual application for refugee status 
under a Protection Visa Application.

Â

I am simply saying to the Minister; give the 
Department more resources, get them to expedite the processing of visa 
applications. Keep them at Bandiana, don't bundle them all off to Woomera 
and Port Hedland and Curtin where they will be with the illegal immigrants 
who have not been our guests but have come here quite illegally.

Â

If the Protection Visa applications are found 
to be genuine and you can discuss it further - you can check it further 
- get your Department officials to check back in Kosovo, whether it 
is safe to go back -if the applicants have a well founded fear, then 
let them stay.

Â

JOURNALIST: But hasn't that happened, the UNHCR 
advised the Government in this respect. So clearly the advice coming 
from Kosovar is that it is a safe place to be.

Â

SCIACCA: Well, the position is that there is 
a report from the UNHCR here in Australia which is some 2 or 3 weeks 
old which says that basically it is safe for them to return. I know 
that is what the Minister is using as a reason to be so tough, because 
he thinks that he's got a cover.

Â

The reality is that Madam Ogato has said on at 
least one occasion since then that it is not as safe as has been stated 
and this obviously just hasn't filtered through to the Australian authorities. 
The reality is that these people are here, they are scared to the point 
that one of them even tried to commit suicide. The fact is there must 
be a reason why they do not want to go back, it's not just that they 
would love to stay here because it's a great place.

Â

JOURNALIST: Mr Danby, one suicide attempt thus 
far, you know these people, do you think we'll see more of those?

Â

DANBY: I certainly hope not, but they are very 
scared about the security situation in Kosovo, it has deteriorated a 
lot in the last couple of weeks. There are meant to be 6000 police on 
the ground in Kosovo and there only 300 deployed. I think the Minister's 
in a position where the situation in Kosovo is causing fear amongst 
the people remaining here and they've got very substantial grounds, 
as the Shadow Minister says, for being afraid of going back home.

Â

SCIACCA: Can I say that all I am asking of this 
Minister is two things. First of all, give these people who you have 
designated as illegal immigrants a fair go - an Australian type fair 
go. Let them make applications. If they are not found to be genuine, 
okay then they can go. Also treat them differently then if they were 
straight out illegal immigrants that have come in either by boat or 
air.

Â

These are our guests and it is hard to equate 
the actions of the Prime Minister and the Minister for Immigration when 
they first arrived with what they are doing now, in saying "we 
are going to throw you in a detention centre, because you are no longer 
welcome".

Â

I think that the Australian public is feeling 
something for these Kosovars. The least the Minister can do is show 
a little heart and give them this opportunity to prove themselves as 
genuine refugees. If they can't, well not even the Labor Party will 
be able to help them after that.

Â

JOURNALIST: Mr Ruddock is no doubt going to say 
that later today that it's going to cost even more for Australia to 
keep these Kosovars here, but in fact, many of them have been working 
while here and now their work rights are being removed.

Â

SCIACCA: The Prime Minister was the person who 
pushed this through Cabinet in the beginning when we all agreed to this 
Operation Kosovar. It has cost the Australian public on the Government's 
own figures one hundred million dollars. That's a lot of money, yet 
they speak of the extra expense that will be incurred if we give them 
a fair go. I can't see the reason for that. If we've spent that much 
money in showing that we are good international citizens, doing the 
right thing, then I cannot see why we couldn't give another 2 or 3 month 
extension to this very small number of people. We are talking a very 
small number of people, if you put them at a Penrith v. Brisbane football 
match they wouldn't even be seen, they wouldn't take up 2 rows.

Â

The Government needs to show a bit of heart and 
forget the bottom dollar. Show a little heart.

Â

JOURNALIST: In terms of keeping them in Bandiana, 
have you heard the reports this morning that there are 10-15 people 
missing from there now? Do you accept that might be the reason the Government 
wants to have them in the Detention Centres.

Â

SCIACCA: Well, naturally people are going to 
be frightened. I understand that they have got guards there but this 
may mean that they have to tighten security. But the fact is I don't 
think the Australian public believes that these people who have suffered 
so much trauma in their lives should now be forced to go from one place 
to another. I don't think we should subject them to moving yet again 
to Woomera or Port Hedland. Tighten security at Bandiana if you have 
to because there will always be a few who try to abscond. It justs shows 
how frightened these people really are.

Â

ENDS

Â

Authorised by Geoff Walsh, 19 National Circuit, 
Barton ACT 2600.

Â

