About| Contact | Support Us | People | Policies | Parliament |Media|News| Campaigns | Members | Search

ACT | NSW | NT | QLD | SA | TAS | VIC | WA | ECODEMS

Media Releases

Senator Andrew Bartlett Senator for Queensland Australian Democrats spokesperson for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs

Press Release Dated: 23 Oct 2000 Press Release Number: 00/654 Portfolio: Immigration and Multicultural Affairs

Democrats back ACOSS on refugees The Australian Democrats have backed calls by the Australian Council of Social Services and the Ethnic Communities Councils to reinstate essential settlement services to refugees on Temporary Entry Permits.

Senator Andrew Bartlett, the Democrats’ immigration spokesperson, accused the Federal Immigration Minister of depriving refugees of humanitarian aid.

“The Immigration Minister is prepared to let genuine refugees live on the streets,” said Senator Bartlett.

“The Government doesn’t want these refugees to successfully build new lives in Australia. The Coalition wants to portray them as criminals that Australia must be protected from.

“The Government has whipped up widespread hostility towards refugees. They have fanned fear in the broader community by using terms like ‘invasion’ to describe the entry of a few thousand people a year.

“Denying refugees English language classes is a pretty pathetic way to look tough on illegal immigration,” said Senator Bartlett.

Minister Ruddock has said that the states are not expected to provide accommodation, health or language services to genuine refugees on temporary visas when they are released into the community.

“There are also reports from community and state government organisations that the Immigration Department has written asking them not to provide assistance to refugees on temporary visas,” said Senator Bartlett.

“The Coalition's approach will lead to refugees being unable to access basic assistance to build a life in the Australian community,” said Senator Bartlett.

“It is not in the community's interests to condemn refugees to a life of poverty, with inadequate or no accommodation or education and extreme difficulty in accessing employment.”

Australia has a moral responsibility to provide haven for genuine refugees and not send people back to persecution or death,” concluded Senator Bartlett.



Top | Email Authorised by: Jim Downey, 10 Brisbane Avenue, Barton ACT 2604. Copyright Â© 2000 Australian Democrats

http://www.democrats.org.au/media/display.htm Last modified: Thu, 18 May 2000 13:51:26 Today: Mon, 23 Oct 2000 13:38:01

