Senator Kay Patterson Parliamentary Secretary to the Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs

Media Release

10 November 2000

Priority Access to Telephone Interpreting for Private Doctors A new Doctors' Priority Line could help save lives in remote areas by providing faster telephone interpreting for private doctors treating patients from a non-English speaking background, Parliamentary Secretary to the Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs, Senator Kay Patterson said today.

The new Doctor's Priority Line - 1300 131 450 - is designed to meet better private doctors' needs, particularly in remote and regional areas.

"The service is available to all private doctors across Australia who use the fee-free, Telephone Interpreting service to provide medical services or consultations under Medicare to non-English speaking migrants and refugees," Senator Patterson said.

The service is provided by the Translating and Interpreting Service (TIS) of the Department of Immigration and Multicultural Affairs.

"Private doctor's calls on the dedicated line will be given priority by TIS operators and attended to faster. A telephone interpreter will be arranged immediately or will be booked for a later appointment if required by the doctor".

"The service is free of charge, and is available 24 hours a day, 7 days a week, anywhere in Australia for the cost of a local call. It provides easy access to a national pool of interpreters - not just those available in the doctor's area - a significant improvement in delivering medical services in remote and regional areas.

The initiative was launched at the Annual General Meeting of the Dandenong District Division of General Practice in Melbourne last night.

Senator Patterson strongly encouraged private doctors to use the Priority Line and provide feedback on their experience to the Department for possible future enhancements.

Media enquiries: Louise Ahern (02) 6277 3800

[Media Release Index] [Home Page]   [Minister]   [Department]

Â© Commonwealth of Australia 2000 Last modified: 10 November 2000

