Multiculturalism And Harmony: Building A New Future Con Sciacca - Shadow Minister for Immigration

Federation Of Ethnic Communities Councils Of Australia 21st Annual Conference - Fremantle, WA - 11 November 2000

Printer friendly page

Check Against Delivery

Introduction

Thank you for the opportunity to again address your conference particularly given that this is most probably the last one before the next federal election.

In my address last year I raised a number of issues as to what I believed FECCA's role should be and you will no doubt remember that I appealed to you to refocus on those activities which over many years made it such an influential organisation.

My comments at the time certainly caused some controversy, but I would like to believe that they encouraged FECCA to become more pro-active and today, just over a year later, I am heartened by your performance.

I want to congratulate you on your efforts and the manner in which you have expressed your views impartially on a number of issues. I have read all your press statements and taken note of your public comments on issues ranging from refugees to mandatory sentencing and from detention centres to the budget.

Having said that, I will now make some comments on important issues that have arisen in the immigration portfolio since last year's conference.

Wedge Politics

As you may know from parliamentary debates and our occasional clashes, Mr Ruddock and I have tended to agree on many areas of portfolio management.

However, during this past year I have noticed the government hardening its views considerably, deliberately choosing to use immigration and multicultural issues as tools for cheap political purposes.

Week after week as I sit in Parliament at Question Time I have to listen to the Minister answer prepared question from his own backbench, otherwise known in political circles as 'Dorothy Dixers'.

Minister Ruddock uses these opportunities to demonise refugees, asylum seekers and safe haven visa holders in the eyes of the Australian public.

He has denounced many genuine refugees as ungrateful exploiters of Australia's generosity, abusing the services provided to them by charities or languishing on social security at the expense of the taxpayer.

Alternatively he has attacked aged migrant parents trying to join their Australian relatives with tales of how many billions of dollars they would cost the Australian taxpayer and what little contribution they make to our society.

Just this past week in Parliament, in another 'Dorothy Dixer' he has resurrected the issue of removing appeals to higher courts of Law in immigration matters.

In classic wedge politics style, he criticised appellants for allegedly exploiting the Courts and thus costing the taxpayer millions of dollars, in an attempt to gather public support for the abolition of judicial review of migration decisions. He then again attacked the Opposition for refusing to support his legislation to achieve this purpose.

Make no mistake - this is a deliberate strategy by the Howard Government to appeal to those in the community who still subscribe to the anti immigration policies advocated by Pauline Hanson's One Nation Party.

The reality is that no one benefits from these tactics. Not those being attacked, as they often incur the anger of the majority in the short term, but neither those who do the attacking, as people eventually grow weary and cynical of political games.

This Government and this Minister have chosen to forgo policy development and social responsibility in favour of populist political game playing. They should stop playing wedge politics and consider the long-term damage their actions could cause to the very fabric of our society.

A favourable opinion poll or a few cheap grabs in a newspaper are not worth damaging the cultural and racial harmony that exists in our Country.

Temporary Protection Visas and Refugee Settlement

Under the Howard Government, our international reputation has suffered and our commitment to humanitarianism and global aid has been diluted. Over the last four years a raft of policies have been introduced aimed at reducing Australia's commitment to refugee and humanitarian efforts.

A perfect example of the Government's thinking in this area is its management of settlement services for those people who are granted temporary refugees status following their release from Australia's Immigration Detention Centres.

A recent publication by the Department of Immigration titled 'Refugee and Humanitarian Issues: Australia's Response' acknowledges that initial experiences and early access to essential services determines the successful settlement of refugees.

Such acknowledgment is very significant as asylum seekers who are granted protection, either permanent or temporary undergo major upheaval. Often they are victims of torture and trauma and always require assistance to adjust to a new way of life in a foreign land.

While those granted permanent protection under Australia's and United Nation's refugee

criteria have access to all settlement services provided by the Federal Government, those granted temporary protection under the same criteria are unable to access many essential and basic services.

It is important to remember that those asylum seekers granted temporary protection, have satisfied the UNHCR criteria for refugee status as adopted by over 130 countries. The only difference is that they have entered Australia by illegal means, often employing the services of people smugglers in their attempts to flee from persecution.

Temporary protection visa holders (TPV's) are currently denied access to English language classes, job search networks and accommodation assistance as well as those services normally provided by organisations such as Migrant Resource Centres.

While supporting restrictions for TPV's, in an attempt to make Australia a less attractive destination for people smugglers and their victims, Labor believes that the denial of basic services will only force refugees to rely on handouts from charities, welfare groups or in the most desperate instances, perhaps even turn to the black economy and crime for survival.

Another undesirable by-product of these restrictive Government policies against TPV's is the enormous burden they place on charity organisations, welfare groups and State Governments, as the refugees are often dumped on them at short notice.

Their stark choice is to either fund the refugee services themselves out of already meagre budgets, as most have opted to do, or allow the development of an underclass of refugees, unable to successfully re-establish their lives, gain employment and become productive members of their new communities.

The Minister and his department have received complaints and representations from most State Premiers, welfare and ethnic community organisations across Australia, pleading for him to provide adequate settlement support and warning that failure to do so would have serious social consequences.

While such representations have so far fallen on deaf ears, Labor has decided that once in government, it will re-instate basic service delivery and ensure that the highest level of settlement, employment and counselling services are provided.

This will ensure that these lawful residents are given the opportunity to make worthwhile and real contributions to their new communities by gaining employment, and not relying on social security or handouts to survive.

Australia has in the past benefited from the contribution made by those people fleeing oppressive regimes and uncertain futures - we only need to look as far as some of our most successful and celebrated citizens to realise the worth of refugees.

Labor recognises this and is committed to implementing humanitarian programs that seek to strike a balance between the need to deter despicable activities such as people smuggling and the promotion of the rights of refugees and asylum seekers.

I believe that it is the role of leaders to lead from the front and by example - not to undermine and demonise those who are vulnerable or disadvantaged. It is irresponsible for this government and this Minister to continually promote a negative agenda designed to appeal to some people's basest prejudices.

Aged Parent Visas

Another issue that has polarised opinions in the immigration portfolio has been the topic of aged parent visas and the Howard Government's handling of this issue.

Currently there is a queue of approximately 20,000 aged parents and aged dependent relatives, sponsored by their Australian children and grandchildren waiting to migrate to Australia.

All 20,000 have paid at least $1000 in non-refundable application fees and at least three to four thousand of them have paid the full package of social security bonds and health levies, totalling some $8000 per couple - it is usually couples, such as a grandmother and grandfather, trying to migrate.

While I believe in providing reasonable expectations to people and in return receiving reasonable contributions, in the case of aged parents' migration, the government has essentially chosen to abrogate its responsibilities and ignore both these concepts.

When the Coalition won Government in 1996, Minister Ruddock set the intake of aged parents to around 2500 per year. While this was a decrease from previous years, it still represented a reasonable and manageable level.

Subsequently, the Government decided to establish a new category of aged parent visas accessible only to those wealthy enough to afford it, including a doubling of the health levies and assurances of support leading to a cost of some $17,000 per couple.

With no choice or compromise offered, this new visa class was defeated in the Senate, not before however, in a fit of pique, Minister Ruddock made good on a threat and reduced the intake to a paltry 500 places per year, thus creating a 40 year waiting list.

To my surprise, not long after the defeat of this regulation, a Bill was introduced in an attempt to fulfil a budget promise to Treasury to generate revenue of $150 million over 4 years.

The Minister touted this unrealistic figure as a revenue item in the 2000-2001 budget and based it on the assumption of an approximate take up rate of 4000 people over four program years at $64,0000 per couple.

Under this re-incarnation, the figure for an aged parent couple wanting to migrate to Australia increased from $17,000 to $64,000.

Again, Labor and the Democrats opposed the Bill.

Nowhere in the Minister's rhetoric was there a mention of the stability older migrants provide their young families in Australia; the assistance with childcare, and the feeling of unity and solidity which comes from having loved ones nearby. His arguments focused solely on the negative impact aged relatives would have on taxpayers.

It is ironic in a way that a Coalition Government that prides itself on its family values and on its belief of the family as the basic unit of society should in fact resort to demonising the very people it supposedly celebrates.

Likewise, it is ironic that a Coalition Government that denounces queue jumpers should resort to introducing laws that effectively legislate in their favour as long as they can afford to pay $64,000.

Permanent vs temporary skilled migration

Labor believes in a robust permanent immigration program that is designed to benefit Australia in the long term - not provide temporary solutions.

Labor does not subscribe to recent comments made by the Minister for Immigration stating that a traditional permanent immigration program is anachronistic and that to compete with other nations in attracting quality, skilled migrants, especially in areas such as information technology, a system of temporary migration is more appropriate.

The rationale for his so-called 'dotcom rethink' seems based solely upon the narrow premise of individual and corporate opportunism with little or no regard for the long-term benefits of a robust, permanent migration program, or for the long-term skills training needs of Australians.

Temporary skilled migration is valuable and often necessary in a modern, fast moving economy. Importing skills albeit temporarily, provides an injection of talent, experience and dynamism that can only benefit Australia and Australians in the long term.

However, temporary migration must be considered as part of a balanced overall migration program, and while it goes some of the way towards fulfilling skilled shortages, by no means should it be considered the spearhead of a new migration revolution.

Surely our objective must be to attract migrants to this Country who will make a lasting commitment to the Nation and who will live, work and retire here permanently.

While the government's latest thoughts on immigration policy may seem useful in furthering debate in this vital area, they only amount to yet another attempt to pander to the middle ground on what has always been, and will always be a controversial area of public policy.

At best, such comments amount to a band-aid or short-term response to those expressing concerns from both sides of the immigration debate.

Accepting the challenges of a globalised world should not mean abrogating our training responsibilities towards the Australian workforce and our obligation to properly train our youth. Creating new markets and training Australian workers will always remain the key to competing on a global scale and furthering the concept of a knowledge nation.

To my mind, adapting to and succeeding in a global economy means first and foremost developing and nurturing a permanent and highly skilled base of Australian workers, who choose to call Australia home.

Skilled permanent migration can play a crucial role in ensuring this scenario becomes a reality, especially if the government of the day provides worthwhile incentives for these people to resettle away from the major metropolitan centres and commits itself to providing appropriate regional infrastructure and industry development.

The Government keeps saying that there is not an endless queue of skilled migrants waiting

to come to Australia.

Whilst undoubtedly this is correct it is more a reflection of the culture that this Government has encouraged over the last four years rather than a lack of eligible skilled applicants. Would-be skilled immigrants no longer see us as the welcoming country we once were.

A distinct lack of marketing Australia as an immigration destination; complex immigration procedures and restrictions; and an unfriendly attitude to would-be migrants in many of Australia's overseas posts have lead to us becoming the country of third or fourth choice for many people.

Multiculturalism

I believe the main reason Australia has been subjected to the anti-immigration and anti-refugee sentiments of the Hanson era occurred because of a lack of leadership and a failure by the Howard Government to institute an appropriate response to the One Nation onslaught from 1996 to 1998.

The abolition of the Office of Multicultural Affairs, under the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet rates foremost in my mind as one of the reasons the Government's criticism of One Nation's policies was lukewarm at best and a silent endorsement at worst.

The Office of Multicultural Affairs provided a high level conduit to the opinions and concerns of a culturally diverse Australia, at a level that could not be ignored.

To remove such an organisation signalled a softening in the Government's multicultural agenda and provided a outlet to those activists whose aim was to destabilise, deceive and attempt to spark emotions amongst Australians that I believe do not come naturally - racism and cultural disharmony.

The Howard Government's failure to reinstate the Office of Multicultural Affairs in its second term of Government was further testimony to its lack of commitment to a culturally diverse Australia.

I believe the Howard Government still feels that there are plenty of votes to be gained by not completely embracing cultural diversity and failing to stamp out the last remnants of One Nation's legacy.

Labor in Government will end the uncertainty as a matter of priority and will re-establish the Office of Multicultural Affairs.

Conclusion

I want to conclude by saying that while I have co-operated with the Minister on many occasions over the past two years, I am concerned about the culture that is present within the Department of Immigration.

Labor believes in maintaining the integrity of the migration program as much as the Government - We detest loopholes, rorts and those taking advantage of our system.

Labor also believes in being responsible with taxpayers money - newly arrived migrants have not contributed financially and should not take for granted benefits to which Australian

citizens are automatically entitled.

However, we believe the culture and the focus of the Department should be redirected from one of absolute compliance to one of flexibility and compassion.

If I become your Minister after the next federal election, I intend to give decision-makers more scope to be flexible in their assessment of individual immigration cases and to temper formality with compassion when dealing with all immigration applications.

I don't believe in binding decision-makers to inflexible guidelines that ignore their years of professional experience and insight, as is the current practice under this Government.

The Howard Government's meanness of spirit and frugality has infiltrated the immigration portfolio. It will take a Labor Government to revive Australia's proud history as an immigrant nation, which welcomes the invaluable contribution migrants and refugees have made and continue to make to our growth and prosperity.

Thank you for your invitation and I hope to be with you next year, perhaps in a different capacity.

Authorised by Geoff Walsh, 19 National Circuit, Barton ACT 2600.

