1

The Centenary of Federation: Beyond the Celebrations



By Paul Keating  1 December 2000  1901 Centre  University of Technology

Paul Keating is a former Prime Minister of Australia



My thanks to the University of Technology Sydney for this invitation to take part in the  debate about what the Centenary of Federation means for the Australian people.

When I declined to join the great trek of present and former leaders to London earlier in  the year I said I would prefer to make my contribution here in Australia, so I am glad to  have this opportunity to do it.

The commemoration of the Centenary of Federation is obviously a time for us to  celebrate our history, but I hope it will also be a time to celebrate our historians. Without  historians, we stand on a trackless plain, unsure of where we have come from, less sure  of where we might go. Helen Irving and the 1901 Centre here at UTS, together with their  network of colleagues around the country, have done a wonderful job in helping to give  us a better map of our national experience and I congratulate them for it.

Although we seem to have heard more commentary about the Sydney Olympics than  about any other single event of my adult life, let me begin this speech by adding some  reflections of my own.

The Games gave Australians a chance to look at ourselves, and we liked what we saw.

We saw in the opening and closing ceremonies many reflections of ourselves.

Mexican waves and the joy of sharing the sentiments with each other; of being there  together, the presentation of Australia as most of us recognise it; the horsemen, our  diversity and multiculturalism, rural Australia and its centrality in our affairs, the truly  special place of our indigenous people, the hope of the little white girl and the black  elder, the trust in which a genuine reconciliation must be rooted; and in short, the  greatest arts show we have ever staged.

The Olympics gave expression to how central the arts are and need to be. The medium  that draws out the nation’s soul allowing us to know ourselves and better understand  what makes us tick. Whether it be the Tin Symphony or the celebration of the land and  sea or the aboriginal heritage in dance and chant or Men at Work - those Olympic  themes. Slaked of those resonances we are but a nation of individuals and not the  society we have become.

If Australia has learned one lesson from the Olympics, and there are many, it might be  that when our arts are vibrant, so too are we.

We went to the Olympics in celebration of sport. For the pageant: to see the world’s best;  to see our best; to give them our support.

We remember individual medal performances. Cathy Freeman’s 400 metres, Grant  Hackett’s 1500. And not just the icon events, the many others. But perhaps above all  else, we remember what the Olympics meant to us as a people. How the themes of  those ceremonies rang a chord in us and gave us something that put into context the  truly valiant ambitions of our young sportsmen and women. It made their dedication  seem more to us than their winning or breaking another record.

By no means all the things we discovered about ourselves during the Olympics were  new. They reflected to a large extent our national image of ourselves. But it was good to

2

get the jolt of surprise that said 'It's not just myth but reality.'

But, despite the success of the Games, I left Homebush on the night of the closing  ceremony uncertain whether I had just seen the beginning of something new or the  concluding fireworks of the period of reform and ambition in Australia in the 1980s and  '90s, from which the Games had sprung.

We'll get an important clue to the answer from the Centenary of Federation. The way we  commemorate and celebrate these events over the next twelve months will tell us a great  deal about Australia in the first years of the 21st century.

I’m not arguing for academic seminars at the expense of celebrations and I’m not arguing  against reflections on the past or recognition of the achievements of Australians over this  century. We've come a long way over the past hundred years. We have built a strong  economy, a vibrant culture and a vigorous democracy.

We are a better country by far after a century of federation than we were in 1901. We are  more tolerant, more diverse, more equitable and more outward looking. More Australians  - women, immigrants, indigenous Australians - have the opportunity to participate in our  national life, and do so, than was possible even 25 years ago. These are mighty  achievements.

But if all we get out of the Centenary of Federation is a community wallow in the national  hot tub of nostalgia, it will confirm our entry into a period of national decline. We need to  go beyond the celebrations and to use the event to think about where we should be  heading over the next hundred years. To use this centenary for the same purpose as the  act of federation was itself used, to imagine something bigger and better; something  which points the way, which lays out a roadmap and which lifts our hearts as we go.

If there is one important message I should like people to take tonight it is that Australia  has no time to wait. The world won’t do us the courtesy of allowing us a national time-out  while we pat ourselves on the back and tell ourselves what a wonderful country we have  made.

The challenges Australia faces are no less daunting than were those which faced the  pioneers of federation a century ago. More so, in most respects. The end of the bipolar  certainties of the Cold War and the transforming changes wrought by the information  revolution and economic globalisation have made Australia's external environment more  competitive than we have ever known.

Unlike our ancestors we have no patron to look after us.

No imperial preferences to guarantee us markets. No Royal Navy to steam to our rescue  in time of trouble. No massive population to give us unearned weight in the international  system. No voice to speak up for us in the world unless we do it ourselves. Unlike New  Zealand, we have no Australia to buffer us from strategic complexity.

When it comes down to it, the only things we can rely on are our own ingenuity, dexterity,  cleverness, and our goodwill towards others. We need to use them for all we are worth.

We've probably overdosed on debates about globalisation recently but that’s because it  is so central to our understanding of the sort of world we now live in.

Globalisation is the great glacier which is slowly, powerfully but inexorably reshaping the  international landscape.

And despite the tremulous cries of those who hope it will halt in its tracks or melt before it  reaches us, it will not. At least not short of the calamitous prospect of global war.

I don’t mean by this that governments are powerless pawns of economic forces. Any  government can resist globalisation by hunkering down and closing up; finding some  isolated valley in which to shelter. North Korea has tried it. The only result will be lower

3

growth and poorer living standards.

None of this is to argue that we don’t need vigorous debate about how we should deal  with globalisation. Any force this big will have all sorts of dangerous and unintended  consequences. Some members of the community will lose from the changes and must  be helped along. Impacts like the volatile money flows which scarified Asia have to be  managed better.

But the process of globalisation won’t stop pushing onwards. This is because:

The technologies that facilitate globalisation - that is, digital technology and cheap  communications - aren’t going to slow down. We've only begun to skim the surface of the  social and economic changes that optical fibre technology and cheap, fast internet-enabled devices will bring.

The developing countries, especially in Asia, are not going to give up their hard-won  efforts to integrate themselves into the global economy. Asia has had problems, but even  the worst-affected country, Indonesia, which suffered a 15 per cent decline in its GDP in  a single year, is still much better off than it was before it began opening up.

As for Australia, the global terms of trade aren’t going to suddenly flow back in the  direction of commodity producers. So even if we wanted to, we can never again rely on  export wealth generated by our farmers and miners to pay for the preservation of tariff  walls to protect our manufacturing and services sectors from competition. We’re in the  international game for keeps.

In the way we look at the world and the challenges of globalisation, the Australian  community seems to divide into four main groups. These divisions cut across traditional  political categories.

The first group - the Hansonists at the extreme end - want to isolate both the economy  and the society from the outside world. Their economic agenda is to rebuild the tariff  walls, their social one to keep out the foreigners and to return to a mythical golden age of  Australian values.

The second group - S11 at its extreme end - wants to internationalise social issues but  nationalise the economy. They oppose ‘globalisation’ in its economic manifestation - free  international trade, multinational corporations - but are perfectly comfortable supporting  extra-territorial claims for human rights or environmental action.

A third group believes the reverse. Parts of the Business Council of Australia and many  conservatives would find a home here. They are all in favour of internationalising the  economy, giving free rein to the free market, but they are damned if they think foreigners  and international bodies like the UN should have anything to say about social policies  here in Australia.

A fourth group - and it’s obviously the one to which I belong - believes that for a country  like Australia, with a small population tucked away in a corner of the Asia-Pacific,  economic openness, social inclusiveness and engagement with the outside world is the  only way in which we can hope to prosper in the world. The only approach that will give  us both the economic growth, the social confidence and the physical security to survive  over the next century.

I begin with the proposition that nothing is more important to a country than the way it  thinks about itself. In other words, the commonly shared model of what its national  values and priorities are. Everything else, including economic growth, flows from that.

The act of federation was an act of imagining by the men and women who fought for it;  that the people of this country could be something larger than we were. They changed  the way Australians thought about themselves.

I believe that a similar act of imagining is needed again, and it needs again to

4

encompass a vision of enlargement. Inside Australia, we must move further along the  road of becoming one country and one economy and, outside it, an integral part of the  region around us.

We must become One Nation. One of the many reasons for my distaste for Pauline  Hanson is her hijacking and distorting of this excellent phrase. Now that her ragtag  operation is falling apart, I want to claim it back.

In July 1993, while Mrs. Hanson was still living quietly in Ipswich, I made a speech in  Corowa, commemorating the centenary of the conference there which revived the  movement to federation. I said:

For all our disparity, including the great gulf between rural and urban, there is in the end  a collective Australian experience which should unite us. Nationally, we have shared in  the triumphs - in sport, in the arts, in industry and science. But the greatest by far is the  creation over the years of one of the great multicultural societies, and surely the very  best place in the world to live. And we have done this substantially because our effort in  the last century has generally been towards including all Australians in Australia’s wealth.

This is a loose federation on a vast and varied continent whose population is immensely  diverse in origin and culture. These factors can encourage division or fragmentation -  they can encourage jealousy and rivalry between states, between cities, between the  urban population and the people in the country. There is always that tendency, latent or  real. But the great majority of Australians understand, as the founders of Federation  understood, that we work much better when we work as one nation.

That was, I believe, another reason for our enjoyment of the Olympic Games. We gained  enormous satisfaction from seeing ourselves as one people, no matter where we came  from originally, no matter where we lived in the country, no matter what we did for a  living.



You remember how enthusiastically the crowds sang 'I am, you are, we are Australian'.  And they believed it. That itself was a big achievement of a century of federation. But it  also has implications for what we should do in the future.

Any vision of national enlargement has to deal with those things that were described by  Mr. Howard and his colleagues as 'distractions' when I was raising them. It's amazing  how preoccupied he and his colleagues have been by exactly the same 'distractions'.  And the reason, of course, is that they were never distractions at all. No matter what your  attitude to issues like indigenous rights or national symbols, they are an essential part of  the way we think about ourselves.

I could only reflect upon how much more we would have rejoiced in it all if the Olympics  had been opened by our own president and our winning athletes had been draped in a  flag that was ours. Without the Union Jack advertising its presence like a tattered  maker’s label.

The Republic is the easiest of these issues to deal with in some ways. We all know it's  coming and all opinion polls say that most of us want it. We need a head of state who is  an unambiguous symbol of ourselves and not of anyone else.

As I've often said, this is not because of what the Republic or the flag say to others,  important though that is, but of what they say to us, about us.

Kim Beazley’s promise of a plebiscite asking the simple question 'Should Australia  become a Republic?' is the way forward. We can then debate the modalities. When we  do, I will be arguing as strongly as possible for the preservation of the Westminster  system of a Cabinet headed by a Prime Minister and drawn from the Parliament rather  than a popularly elected head of state - but that is an argument to come.

The challenge of reconciliation with indigenous Australians continues to weigh heavily on

5

us. I'm enormously encouraged by the wide acceptance of this challenge, across the  political spectrum. The issue has been the subject of a long, grinding debate, with the  government dragging the chain at every point, whether in the disgraceful decision to  legislate away the rights of aboriginal people given in the Wik decision or in the refusal to  make the simple gesture that all state parliaments have made, and say sorry.

Indigenous problems are deep and entrenched. They have many causes. Some of them,  as Noel Pearson has been saying, are for indigenous people themselves to address.  That is a debate that will take place most effectively within the indigenous community .  But it is just crass sloganeering to claim the recognition of wrongs done to Aborigines  and Torres Strait Islanders in the past represents a 'black armband' view of history. It’s  simply to recognise the truth. We can’t change it but we can recognise it.

Another looming constitutional problem for the nation is the long-term impact on our  democracy of the provisions of section 24 of the constitution, which provides that the  House of Representatives will always be as nearly as possible twice the size of the  Senate.

This nexus means that every time the House of Representatives gets new members  because of natural growth in the population, the Senate will also grow in numbers. As it  does so, the number of votes needed to secure a quota for representation will fall.

The result will be that the balance of power will increasingly fall to ever smaller and more  unrepresentative minority and single issue parties, parties and individuals who will be  able to shape national policy powerfully while representing no more than the fringe of  national thinking.

This is not a recipe for good government and it is not a good recipe for improving the  standing of the political system generally.

The Senate does not operate now in the way the founders of the constitution imagined it  would, that is as a body representing the states. Senators vote along party lines, not as  representatives of Victoria or Queensland or Western Australia.

We either have to break the constitutional nexus between the two houses, or if that is  impossible, move away from elections at large - by establishing regional electorates for  Senators within the state, a change that would not require change to the constitution.  The aim has to be to make the election of Senators as representative as possible; where  a clear majority is needed to secure election.

Senators who secure a primary vote of something like five per cent or less, and who wait  to be topped up in the distribution are kidding themselves and us with it.

Constitutional reformers in Australia have often fallen victim to that most insidious and  fatuous of slogans: If it ain’t broke, don’t fix it. That's a highly dangerous approach for  Australia to take. Most things don’t break. They just wear out, or cease doing what they  are meant to do as well as they once did. Our national approach in the 21st century  ought to be much more 'If it’s not performing as effectively as it can, then change it.’

The States are a problem for the country in more ways than one.

If you were drawing up a blueprint for the nation from scratch, you would surely have  smaller sub-national divisions operating under the federal level that better reflected  natural regional divisions. But we have to work within the framework we’ve got. I accept  the fact that the states are an unchangeable part of Australian constitutional  arrangements. I don’t think they are the best possible way of organising the nation, but I  wouldn’t waste much energy trying to change the current structure. We do need,  however, to get the three levels of government working more effectively to create an  efficient national economy.

We don’t have it now, and Mr Howard's government has been more concerned with  buttressing the role of the states than looking at the needs of the nation as a whole. In

6

the Tory view of things the states represent a bulwark against national enlargement of a  kind the Commonwealth Government and the High Court can foster. The Liberals work  on the law of averages. With six states they have at least an even chance on six  occasions every three or four years, to thwart progressive policy outcomes whenever or  whilstever a Labor government may be in office at the Commonwealth level. They see it  as six chances for them to throw a spanner in the project of national enlargement. They  would rather pay the GST money to the States and watch them blow it than they would  pilot the Commonwealth to the point of natural authority and management of our island  continent. Funding the States to grow their realm is an express part of modern  conservative dogma.

There are only 20 million of us. Is the idea of running a national economy really such  anathema? Doing things nationally?

It's a question to which we need a fast answer. On 14 May 1986, when I warned that  Australia was in danger of becoming a banana republic the dollar stood at 71.24 cents to  the US dollar. That was 20 cents higher than its recent levels.

It is now at an all-time low. Why does the world think we are worth less than we used to  be? Why is our national economy and our personal wealth being both qualitatively and  quantitatively valued down in world terms?

There is a strange complacency about the predicament of the dollar now. The general  view seems to be, first, that the foolish money markets have got it all wrong and that  recovery will come when they realise that the Australian economy is fundamentally  strong, secondly, that it’s really the strength of the US dollar rather than the weakness of  the Australian dollar that we are seeing and that, third, in any case, a low dollar is good  for our exporters.

There is some truth in all these arguments. Money markets are certainly not always wise.  The great strength of the US economy in recent years is whipping the USdollar to new  highs at the expense of most other currencies. And the whole point of a floating  exchange rate is to let the currency move so that the economy may adjust. We saw the  danger of the other approach during the Asian economic crisis, when pegged exchange  rates caused Asian countries such problems.

But the dilemma for us is that the Australian dollar has not just sunk against the US  dollar. It is doing badly against almost everyone else.

With Australia growing faster than the United States throughout the 1990s, Australia,  along with the United States, should have been marked up. Instead we have been  marked down with a gaggle of other countries whose macroeconomic performance  doesn’t get near to ours.

We have had a great decade of growth. Not only have we on average grown more  strongly than the US, which has been doing exceptionally well, we have also been  growing in a different way. For the first time in several decades, we have been able to  sustain low inflation. And for the first time in several decades, we have been able to  sustain high productivity growth - higher, on average, than the US has been able to  achieve over the same period. Now I don’t want to be partisan about this, but this miracle  performance did not start in 1996. It started at the beginning of the decade, it has  continued ever since, and in my view it is undoubtedly due to the great and difficult  reforms we made to the Australian economy in the eighties and the early nineties. By  these I mean the float of the currency, deregulation of finance, tariff cuts, the use of the  Accord to reduce inflation and increase employment, the switch to enterprise bargaining  at the beginning of the nineties and inflation targeting by the Reserve Bank from 1994.  They were all reforms designed as I said at the time to open the place up, and they  worked. I recall speaking to the then EPAC forum as Treasurer in early 1991, and saying  then that we had designed our policies to produce a long upswing which would be  characterised by low inflation and high productivity growth, and that is exactly what  happened. We had low inflation from 1991, and we had the beginning of our high

7

productivity growth in the same year, and both have continued ever since.

So we addressed two of the big problems in our economic performance. But there was  one great issue which remained from the eighties and continued to be problem for us in  the nineties, and is, I think, still a problem for us today. It is a problem that results directly  from globalisation, because it is a problem which can only exist in a world of free capital  flows. This is the current account deficit, which looked at from the other side is the same  thing as the gap between what we invest in Australia, and what we save.

Year by year we have been investing more than we save, and as a result, year by year,  we have been adding to our foreign liabilities. I think we have been investing wisely over  the last decade, and we have increased our ability to handle foreign debt. But I think we  can see in the very cheap Australian dollar some of the consequences of this growing  weight of foreign liabilities.

In recent years we have been relying on foreign borrowing by Australian banks to sustain  our capital inflow, and I think we have begun to see a fading appetite for Australian dollar  debt in offshore markets. This is one big reason the Australian dollar is cheap, and it is  telling us that we should be mindful of the need to sharply slow the growth of Australian  dollar debt offshore.

These are circumstances in which Australia should be aiming for a substantial trade  surplus. If we can achieve a trade surplus of just one per cent of GDP, for example, we  can cut our current account deficit to three per cent of GDP. This is a very significant  number, because with a current account deficit of three per cent of GDP our foreign  liabilities would not be growing faster than our national product, and the capital inflow  required to sustain the deficit would be almost entirely met by equity investment rather  than debt.

So this is a very important and desirable goal, but I want to ask you this. Have you heard  anything from the Treasurer or the Prime Minister or any other member of the Cabinet  which suggests it is an important or desirable goal? Even a reference to it? Have you  seen any hint of national leadership on this issue? Have you seen any suggestion that  we have here a government which has the imagination, the courage and the vision to  build on the gains of the eighties and nineties? To do something in its own right to arrest  the growth of our foreign liabilities in the new decade?

Its true that the last four years the federal government has run a general government  underlying surplus which over the four years accumulates to two per cent of GDP. The  underlying cash surplus is roughly equivalent to the government’s contribution to national  saving, and as I said the current account deficit measures the shortfall in our national  saving compared to our national investment. With a current account deficit which is still  well over four per cent of GDP we ought to be running a large Commonwealth fiscal  surplus. But we should certainly not be taken in by this surplus. After all, we are now in  the tenth year of an economic expansion. A government has to try hard, very hard in fact,  not to have a surplus after nine and a half years of uninterrupted economic growth. And  while two per cent is a useful contribution to national saving, it is less than half the  accumulated surplus of 4.2 per cent of GDP Labor built up in successive budgets over  the four years to 1990-1991, when we were also fighting a blowout in the current account  deficit.

And while the government has achieved a very moderate surplus, it has set us a long  way back in national saving in other important ways. When I left office we had a plan in  place to take supernannuation contributions to 15 per cent of all wages and salaries. Half  of the increase over nine per cent was to come from the government, and half from  employees. Another six per cent of total wages and salaries into super is equal to  something like three per cent of GDP - a good deal of which would be a net increase to  national saving.

One of the most ideological and reckless things the Howard government did on coming  to office was to scrap Labor’s six per cent addition to the nine per cent Superannuation  Guarantee Charge. In various transmutations the money which was earmarked for the

8

government’s contribution to the super of every employee in this country ended up as net  income tax cuts designed to sweeten the pill of the GST. In other words, it was blown in  order to help a change in the tax mix which I confidently predict will have no discernible  impact on our economic performance at all. The GST was always a second order  economic issue.

But if national saving was three per cent higher today, we would have a current account  deficit at half of the level we had last year, and we would not need to be issuing new debt  overseas to finance it. We would have addressed and met the great remaining problem  which looms over the economic future of Australia. The last of Australia’s great economic  vulnerabilities.

This is effectively the Treasurer’s only major task. In May 1986 I used the Banana  Republic episode to warn the electorate of our longer term vulnerabilities. The then  government used that community authority to make the most sweeping economic  changes since the war. This government now has to do the same thing. To draw down  the authority flowing from the exchange rate warnings and use it to deal with national  savings and the current account.

If it does not, if it does the electorally `smart’ thing and turns a blind eye and if perchance  it were to stay in office; the debt and liabilities may well go supercritical. The nation will  be left in an enormous hole from which it will have great trouble emerging. It would then  be left to another government to deal with, similar to the macroeconomic and structural  shambles that was left to Labor to deal with in 1983.

I should like to also say a few things about social policy. This is important in a discussion  about federation. For at the time, the one thing that Labor and the Deakinites had in  common was a commitment to the social contract - a private enterprise economy with  imaginative and compassionate social underpinnings.

Over the last four and a half years, the conservatives have kept all the things which were  handed to business by Labor as part of a balanced society. A high profit share, a low  corporate tax rate, dividend imputation etc. Yet on the other hand, the balancing social  aspects of Labor’s policies are being gradually whittled away.

The scuttling of Working Nation, the windbacks in education and the collapse of R&D  represent a massive disinvestment in the country’s future.

A fully employed inclusive society invested with education, opportunity and creativity is  the only model we can have faith in. A model that promotes division and unequal  opportunity or where we have an untrained or poorly trained workforce focussed on old  economy pursuits cannot give us the future that the new age holds out.

We cannot afford Thatcherism by stealth. Where the benefits of a prolonged period of  growth are turned over to half the people, consolidating inequity and inopportunity. Two  nations, no society. This would be a dreadful betrayal of the federation past and future. A  golden age for some, something of a bronze age for the remainder.

Britain and New Zealand give the example and Australians should take note!

As I said earlier, it will be harder for Australia to make its way in today's globalised, inter-dependent world than it was for us in 1901.

Back then, we knew where we fitted into the international scheme. Imperial policy was  our policy. To the cheers of the crowd during the first Commonwealth election campaign  Edmund Barton said 'there could be no foreign policy of the Commonwealth. The foreign  policy belonged to the Empire. Australians could not affect that policy except by such  representations as they could make to the Imperial Government.'

Now, we are alone. The alliance with the United States is important to us, but it is no life-raft. The US Congress cannot make our foreign policy, and we would be foolish to want it  to. If we are to get this part of an enlarging vision right, we have to stop thinking of

9

ourselves as the 'Orphan in the Pacific', as David Malouf memorably put it, and find  ourselves at home here. Our future lies in this area; in East Asia and the Asia Pacific.  That's where our economic growth will come from, and where our security must be  found.

The Second World War made that clear to us. And although we have taken some  detours recently, engagement with Asia remains the grandest undertaking we face in the  first decades of this century.

We are already one of the region's natural integrators, providing the raw materials,  agricultural products and increasingly the services which drive economic growth in East  Asia. But we also need to be a regional integrator in a foreign policy sense as well. In the  recent past we were. We must be again. Our future depends on helping to construct the  region's institutions. The grim reality is that unless we are a policy maker, we end up a  policy taker.

We just cannot afford to have ten years on with Asia and then ten years off. APEC, as  we saw again in Brunei, is drifting. We have lost management of the large economic and  strategic issues inherent in the APEC agenda. And Australia is not a member of the  ASEAN plus three grouping which brings Southeast Asia, Japan, China and Korea  together. Pointedly, we have been left out.

In the area of regional security, the ASEAN Regional Forum has not lived up to early  hopes for it, but Australia will not be part of the new security architecture being pushed  by the United States in Northeast Asia.

We have not been invited to join the proposed new Asian Monetary Fund.

The Government's hopes for closer relations between the ASEAN Free Trade Area and  Australia and New Zealand were embarrassingly dashed and a new free trade link  between the ASEANs, China, Japan and Korea is being floated. But not with us.

In other words, we are being turned away from the region's decision-making structures,  and the strategic consequences for us will be profound.

Let me say something about Indonesia, because that may be the relationship upon which  we need to work hardest.

The disintegration of the Australian relationship with Indonesia has been the most  disastrous piece of Australian diplomacy since Robert Menzies backed the wrong  argument in Vietnam.

At what should have been a defining new moment for Australia-Indonesia relations, with  the advent of a new democratic government, we've managed to plunge into a thirty year  low.

This did not need to happen. It was not the inevitable result of a choice for Australia  between helping to stop violence in East Timor and good relations with the new forces in  Jakarta. John Howard has claimed that 'it was quite impossible to avoid a period of  tension - especially at the government level - with Indonesia'.

I say that it was not. That it came because of this government's constant preference for  perceived domestic advantage over national interest, and the manner in which the policy  was implemented - the triumphalism, the lack of any government counter to the wilder  effluxes of jingoism coming through the Australian media, the wilful failure to expend any  political capital in defence of the relationship. By no means all the fault for the  deterioration of the relationship lies on the side of the Australian government, but that is  the only part of it we can do anything about.

There has been an unspoken change in Australia's policy towards Indonesia recently.  You won't find it in any speech by the government, but it will be found by the historians in  thirty years time when the classified policy papers of this government are available. It is

10

the view that Indonesia can be put on hold. That we can let it all blow by, that there is  nothing to be done, that the doing of it doesn’t matter so much, and that in any case the  Australian people are suspicious of Indonesia and don’t want anything done.

I disagree with this assessment fundamentally.

On West Papua the government has to be prepared to articulate clearly what the  Indonesia relationship means to us and why it is important. Why it is in Australia's  national interest that Indonesia remain a unified state. It has to shape the opinion and not  leave it to correspondents with a bad case of mission creep.

The challenge of engagement with the region is not just, or even primarily, a matter for  governments, however. As with Federation, it begins with a change in the way we think  about ourselves.

The change will take place primarily in people-to-people contact, in schools and  universities, in growing business contacts, in closer sporting ties, in endless different  contacts that will each leave its own thin layer of greater familiarity to build the  relationship between Australia and the region more strongly.

But engagement does require government support. Alexander Downer tried to draw a  distinction earlier in the year between what he termed 'practical regionalism', which he  favoured and which seemed to mean making a buck out of the place, and 'emotional'  regionalism which, by implication, was what colleagues like Gareth Evans and I, had  been after, and which well-bred South Australians found discomfiting. Like their approval  of ‘practical reconciliation’ with our indigenes.

You’ve always got to be worried when you hear the world 'practical' from this  government. It’s like an anti-matter particle which obliterates the noun it’s meant to  describe.

In my experience, practical goals on this scale, whether they involve reconciliation with  Aborigines or engagement with the region, cannot be reached without a commitment of  the emotions - of the heart as well as the head.

But there is one issue to which the current government has returned to the position of the  founding fathers and that is immigration. Immigration was a large part of the federation  argument. Deakin said nothing was more important to Australia than keeping other  people out and he was the most liberal of the founders. The government’s hysterical tone  towards refugees and asylum seekers returns to this theme and probably informs much  of its current attitude to Asia.

This important subject requires a change of policy.

It's not that I believe Australia should be fair game for anyone who manages to turn up  here. We need to keep control. But there has long been an inbuilt tension in Australian  approaches, between the idea that the policy is basically about patrolling the perimeter to  keep people out and the recognition that we need to attract good immigrants who are  doing us a service by helping to develop the country.

It's the latter that has to prevail. Immigration will continue to be a vital ingredient in  Australia’s national development and while televised pictures of asylum-seekers in  camps in the middle of the desert might deter a few queue jumpers from setting out by  boat from southern China or the Middle East, such images do us much more damage in  sending a message to skilled young people the world over, that this is a country which is  suspicious of foreigners. Like everything else in a globalised world, the competition for  immigrants is becoming more intense. We are now competing with many other countries,  including traditional sources of emigration like Ireland, to attract the best people.

Let me say finally that if I had to pick one thing that I would most like to come from the  celebrations of the Centenary of Federation, it would be that we finally stop regarding  ourselves as a young country. The image of youth is persistent in our culture. It stems

11

from those allegorical 19th century illustrations of Australian children clustering around  the skirts of Britannia, but it continues to shape our view of Australia today.

The national anthem has it quite wrong, however. Far from being 'young and free', we  are old and free.

An old country, obviously. The oldest continent on earth and one whose ancient  landscape has shaped our economy and our national character. One that taught us not  to take too much for granted, to look to each other, to value space and the sense of  personal freedom that comes with it. And an old democracy which is the basis of the  Australian contract to which we are all party.

The only sense in which we are young is that white people came to this country just four  of my own lifetimes ago. But we then quickly made ourselves one of the oldest  democracies in the world. This country had secret ballots, universal male suffrage, (apart  from indigenous Australians), and votes for women well before most of the rest of the  world. We've been governing ourselves for a long time, and we do it well.

It is important that we understand this. So long as we persist in hiding behind the  imagery of national adolescence we provide ourselves excuses for not taking full  responsibility for our national life.

The great fear of isolation and abandonment which has shaped so much of Australian  history fades when you regard yourself as fully grown. At the age of a hundred, we can  surely permit ourselves confidence in our judgment about ourselves and in our capacity  to do what must be done.

If is the Centenary of Federation helps us to do that, we will truly have had much to  celebrate.

This is the full text of former prime minister Paul Keating's speech for the 1901 Centre at  the University of Technology, Sydney last night.



