



MEDIA RELEASE

MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS - ALEXANDER DOWNER



FA 24 - 30 March 2000



Government to Review UN Treaty Committees

The Federal Government will undertake a whole-of-government review of the operation of the United Nations treaty committee system as it affects Australia.

Since 1996, the Government has actively promoted reforms to the UN treaty body system. Notwithstanding that our efforts have attracted support from a good range of countries including, Canada, New Zealand, and Norway there has been little apparent change in the way the treaty committees operate.

The burdensome reporting requirements imposed by these committees have become too great for most member states. More often than not, Governments are overdue with reports and often committees consider them years after they are lodged. In many cases, there is an over-emphasis on non-governmental submissions. This has led to a growing perception that the committees are pursuing political agendas rather than fulfilling their 'expert' objectives.

In this context, the Government was appalled at the blatantly political and partisan approach taken by the UN's Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination (CERD) when it examined Australia's periodic reports in Geneva last week. The Government approached the meeting seriously and in good faith, submitted detailed reporting on Australia's performance under the relevant Convention and fielded a strong delegation, led by the Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs, Mr Ruddock.

The Committee's response was disappointing in the extreme. It largely ignored the significant progress made in Australia across the spectrum of indigenous issues. The Committee's observations are little more than a polemical attack on the Government's indigenous policies. They are based on an uncritical acceptance of the claims of domestic political lobbies and take little account of the considered reports submitted by the Government.

The CERD Committee's political approach is also demonstrated by its reference to Australia's obligations under the UN Refugee Convention - a subject well outside its mandate.

The Cabinet has determined that it would now be appropriate to review how Australia participates in the UN treaty committee system.

Media Enquiries: Innes Willox (02) 6277 7500





