PROCEEDINGS OF THE ANNUAL  CONFERENCE OF GREEK STUDIES

FLINDERS UNIVERSITY JUNE 2000

Greek Research in Australia

Editors

Elizabeth Close  Michael Tsianikas  George Frazis

Department of Languages - Modern Greek  The Flinders University of South Australia

200 1

Greeks in Australian Politics  South Australian Parliamentarians of  Greek Descent

Procopis Louca

Hence it is evident that the state is a creation of nature, and that man is  by nature a political animal (Aristotle, The Politics)

Greeks are historically renowned for their enthusiastic embrace of pol-  itics and political life. You only have to turn on SBS television at break-  fast time to view the latest instalment of the news from Athens regard-  ing, say, religious affiliation being indicated on Greek identity cards, to  witness tens of thousands of Greek citizens descending to the streets to  give voice to their political opinions. It is as normal for Greeks to rally

on the streets and wave a flag or banner of protest for whichever cause  takes their fancy as it is for Australians to back their favourite Aussie  Rules football team on the weekend. It is of little surprise to see Greek  immigrants actively participate in the nations and communities to which  they have emigrated. This is evident throughout Australia (Theophanous,

1988:23 1-33; Dimitreas, 1998: 184-86) and is not a new phenomenon.  Greeks in the diaspora have actively participated in the political life of  their adopted nations for centuries.  This study deals with the State of South Australia and its elected state  and federal representatives of Greek and Greek-Cypriot descent. The pe-  riod that is the main focus of the study is the period between the election

of the Federal Labor Government in 1972 and the Liberalmational  Coalition Government in power in 2000. It is during this time that people

'188

GREEKS IN AUSTRALIAN POLITICS

of Greek heritage began to be elected to South Australian and Australian  legislatures. It also represents a peak period of involvement by members  of the Hellenic (Greek and Greek-Cypriot) immigrant communities in  Australian political life. This study seeks to identify some of the cultural,

historical and political influences that have brought Greek Australians  to participate in Australian politics.  There has been little study of Greeks in Australian politics to date. The  main contribution is the chapter by Theophanous (Theophanous,

1988:23 1-44) which focuses on politics in inner Melbourne. The lack of  study in this area provides fertile ground for collection of primary ma-  terials and the opportunity to compile a work which will shed some light  on why and how Greeks participate in politics in Australia.

This paper introduces part of an ongoing study that began in March  2000. The primary focus is on Senator Nick Bolkus of the Australian  Labor Party as information relating to the Senator represents a large part  of the data collected to date. There is also an introduction to another  member of parliament of Hellenic background, the Liberal member for

Colton, Mr Steve Condous MP. There is discussion of the influence of  identity, discrimination and racism on political activism and of issues that  impact directly on the Greek Australian community, most significantly  the Cyprus and Macedonian issues. Historically these are the issues that  have dominated outward expression of political involvement by the  Hellenic Australian communities. Such political involvement is motivated  by a number of influences, including political developments in Greece

and Cyprus (Taylor, 1994:2; Dimitreas, 1998:2 18-30). This paper is an  examination of the effects and influence of Hellenic ethnicity on the mem-  bers of parliament and the political process.  The South Australian Hellenic background population is compara-  tively small in comparison with that of Victoria and New South Wales, but

it has also been a successful area for the emergence of Greek Australian  politicans. In the Australian Census of 1996, South Australia had 12,645  people born in Greece, representing 4.4% of the total of overseas born. The  generally accepted figure of total Greek background including second

189

PROCOPIS LOUCA

Member

Senator Nick Bolkus

generation as defined by the Australian Bureau of Statistics as having at  least one Greek born parent is estimated as 35,000 (DIMA, 2000: 1). A  generally accepted total Greek background (if we also include Cyprus  born and second generation). is estimated to be approximately 55,000

(DIMA, 2000:2). This represents about 3 per cent of the total South  Australian population.  There are currently four elected members of parliament in South  Australia of Hellenic descent, in both the state and commonwealth par-

liaments. They are of first and second-generation migrant families and  participate in a broad spectrum of Australian politics. They are (in order  of election):

Party Parliament Year elected

Australian Labor Senate (Federal) 1980

party

Mr Steve Condous MP Liberal Party of House of Assembly 1993

Australia (State)

Mr Tom Koutsantonis MP

Hon Nick Xenophon MLC

My study draws on data from primary and secondary material and in-  cludes interviews with the members of parliament, examination of  English and Greek language media, and statistical and electoral data.  It appears that an election cannot be called in South Australia with-  out at least some Hellenic Australians throwing their hats into the ring.  During the South Australian local government elections held in May 2000  for example, one mayor of Hellenic descent and fourteen local councillors  were elected. Six other unsuccessful Greek background mayoral candi-  dates and seven unsuccessful local council candidates and up to four other

Australian Labor House of Assembly 1997

Party (State)

Independent (No- Legislative Council 1997

Pokies Campaign) (State)

190

GREEKS IN AUSTRALIAN POLITICS

candidates who may have been of Greek descent but could not be veri-  fied also participated in the election (LGA, 2000).  Senator the Honourable Nick Bolkus is a second generation Australian  whose parents migrated from the island of Kastellorizo in the 1920s and

settled in South Australia. Born on 17 July 1950 in Adelaide he studied  law at the University of Adelaide, then practised as a lawyer and later  worked for Senator the Honourable Reg Bishop, Postmaster General in  the Whitlam Labor Government and Labor Minister Clyde Cameron, the  Member for Hindmarsh. Bolkus also later worked for Senator Ron Elstob

as a Research Officer (Rust, 198 1).  At the time of his election Bolkus claimed membership of the  Consumers Association of SA, the Greek Orthodox Community Inc and  the West Adelaide Football Club (Rust, 198 1). He unsuccessfully contested  the State Assembly seat of Torrens in 1975 and the Senate in 1977. His  unsuccessful campaign in Torrens (a near win) led to his being preselected

for the ALP Senate team. He utilised campaign material in the Greek lan-  guage including letters of introduction and how to vote cards (Appendices  A and B). He was unsuccessful in his first attempt to be elected to the  Senate, when he was placed at number three on the ALP Senate ticket (two  ALP candidates were elected), but was preselected to a winnable position

on the ALP Senate ticket in 1980. He took his seat in 198 1, in accordance  with the commencement requirements for senators (Rust, 198 1).  Senator Bolkus is one of the most senior and longest serving office  holders of all Hellenic background Parliamentarians in Australia, hav-  ing served for over 8 years as a minister in both the Hawke and Keating  ALP Governments (Abraham, 1988). He was Minister for Consumer  Affairs and Minister Assisting the Treasurer for Prices from 1988-90,  Minister for Administrative Services 1990-93 and Minister for  Immigration and Ethnic Affairs 1993-96. In Opposition, he has been

Shadow Attorney General and Shadow Minister for Justice, as well as  Shadow Minister for the Environment and Heritage since 20 October  1998. He is also the figurehead for the South Australian branch of one  of the ALP’S largest factions, the Progressive Left, known in South

191

PROCOPIS LOUCA

Australia as the “Bolkus Left” (Lloyd, 1994).  Senator Bolkus, once described as the “Wog from Waymouth Street”  (Lloyd, 1994), was raised in culturally diverse inner city Adelaide. He at-  tended Sturt Street Primary School and Adelaide High School, before com-  mencing law at the University of Adelaide. His parents migrated to  Australia prior to the mass Greek migration following World War 11. They  met and married in South Australia. Senator Bolkus grew up in a nation

largely unaccustomed to cultural diversity, but surrounded by fellow Greek  and other immigrants who lived in the working class quarters of central  Adelaide. This environment and “the need to redirect government programs  to target the powerless and the poor” (Lloyd, 1994) helped shape the young

Bolkus and direct him to the path that ultimately led him to politics.  He joined the Australian Labor Party when he was 15, and began to  attend meetings of the Thebarton sub-branch. He was surrounded at that  time by many key figures in the ALP including Mick Young, Clyde

Cameron and John Bannon. At university, Bolkus was president of one  of the first Greek Australian university student clubs, the Australian Greek  University Association (AGUA) and was active in the embryonic  National Union of Greek Australian Students (having represented the

Adelaide University club at a national conference). He graduated in law  in 197 1, practising law for only a short time before seeking employment  in politics working in Canberra for ministers Cameron and Bishop  (Baker, 1979).

Bolkus was instrumental in organising Greek participation in the  South Australian ALP (Baker, 1979). Letters of thanks to Bolkus in 1972  from Premier Don Dunstan for “bringing together the Labor supporters  in the Greek community” (Dunstan, 1972) and from New South Wales  Premier Neville Wran in 1977 expressing his thanks to Bolkus for co-  ordinating a campaign meeting at the Olympic Hall in Franklin Street  (Wran, 1977), demonstrate that Bolkus was widely identified as an im-  portant organiser of the Greek community for the ALP. Records of a

“Greek Party - Norwood ALP” held on 12 February 1976 provide an ad-  ditional insight into Bolkus’ role in coordinating Greek involvement in

I92

GREEKS IN AUSTRALIAN POLITICS

South Australian politics. Bolkus is listed in the record as a main contact,  in addition to several prominent figures in the Greek community, such  as John Andrea, Mike Angelakis and Father Marinakis (Nonvood ALP,  1976). Bolkus’ involvement can be broadly viewed as part of an active  process of recruiting to the ALP and encouraging Greek Australians to  vote for Labor (Baker, 1979). Other documents illustrate Bolkus’ ex-

tensive involvement in the movement “Australian Greeks for Labor”  which deliberately targeted the Greek community vote (Australian  Greeks for Labor, 1972).  In seeking to further explore the influence of Bolkus’ ethnicity in his

involvement in politics I sought to establish key indicators of self-identi-  fication. The first interview conducted with Senator Bolkus explored ques-  tions of cultural or ethnic self-identification. Bolkus stated that: “My Greek  culture has emerged the more I have grown” (Interview, 2000: 1). To illustrate

an increased measure of his self-identification as a Hellene, Bolkus used  as a gauge the number of Greek music compact discs that he possessed:  “When I was Administrative Services Minister (some 10 years ago) I did-  n’t even have one Greek CD at home, might have had one or two presents  but now I have more Greek music than any other at home. It has been a  real explosion of awareness of it (Greek culture)” (Interview, 2000: 1).

The issue of identity seems a central motivating source for Bolkus.  On his cultural identity he said, “It is the blood in your background that  motivates you. I always see myself as a Greek, I’ve always realised that  I have come from the one side of the tracks and that I was not going to  be accepted on the other side”. He also added that he believed that it is

a benefit to “straddle cultures” (Interview, 2000: 1).  B o h s  says he grew up with a “chip on the shoulder that people have”  and he mused that maybe this was part of his psyche. He further explained  this by saying that his ethnicity provided both positive and negative out-

comes. “To be of non-Anglo background can actually give people a focus  on you, especially when you need to represent the diversity of the elec-  torate, though the wrong side of the tracks comes into it not just for non-  English speakers but also the Irish as well, I think they have the same sort

193

PROCOPIS LOUCA

of chip” (Interview, 2000: 1). Thus he draws a parallel between his own  experience as a Greek Australian and the experiences of many Irish  Australians, who were also drawn in large numbers to the Labor move-  ment. In his words: “If you realise that they are not going to love you as

an equal, you think well why do I want to crave their respect and sup-  port, and it makes you feel freer” (Interview, 2000: 1). Looking back, he  saw his dual identity as a bonus: “Over the years I have come to appre-  ciate that it is actually a benefit to be able to straddle cultures, to pick

the best out of each”. He said that this gave him the ability to identify  the aspects in other cultures, that he “could enjoy and appreciate”  (Interview, 2000: 1).  Discrimination and racism are also a significant factor in Bolkus’ ex-  perience, both before and during his career in politics. He said of racism,

“it is subtle, all pervasive and you get it daily in this job” (Interview,  2000: 1). To illustrate this “subtle racism”, he gave the example that if he  were to travel to Greece (as a minister or member of parliament), then that  would “not be acceptable to the electorate” (Interview, 2000: 1) because he

felt that there was a political cost due to his Greek background in this sit-  uation. Bolkus then said that, “if [Senator] Robert Hill (an Anglo-  Australian) was to go to London every Christmas, then that is OK. If I go  to Hong Kong or wherever, it is still not as acceptable” (Interview,

2000: 1). To further illustrate the so-called racist element, he explained that  when he was Immigration Minister, he would get letters almost daily, telling  him “to go back to where he came from”. Bolkus laughed when he re-  counted that the “trouble was that they could never work out where it was,

I was sent back to Iraq, Turkey, to Greece, to Lebanon and Italy”  (Interview, 2000: 1).  The cover of an internal publication of the Australian parliament dis-  plays a cartoon caricature of Bolkus, depicted as Zorba the Greek, danc-

ing with a bottle of ouzo nearby (Appendix C). Former ALP Minister  Mick Young is credited with giving him the nickname Zorba; a “name-  plate to be proud of’, claims Bolkus (House Magazine, 1983:3).  On his involvement in the broader Greek Australian community,

194

GREEKS IN AUSTRALIAN POLITICS

Bolkus’ initial response was that he could “remember the day of the split  in the churches”, an experience he describes as “horrific”. This was a  reference to the division between the Greek Orthodox Archdiocese and  the Greek Community. He said that he had never held any formal posi-  tions in the community other than involvement in SEKA (The Justice for

Cyprus Coordinating Committee) (Interview, 2000: 1). Asked to identify  what specific assistance he had received from the Greek Australian com-  munity Senator Bolkus identified individuals such as Mr Con Marinos,  Mr Bill Konstas, and groups such as the Greek Orthodox Community of

South Australia Inc and the Community Parish of St Anthony in the inner  Northern suburbs. He also identified prominent Adelaide developer  Gerry Karidis, unionist Nick Alexandridis and Mr Takis Lavithis as ad-  ditional sources of support (Interview, 2000: 1).

When questioned about the role of Greek background members in the  ALP he said that this had not been an issue at the time of his pre-selec-  tion because unions had 90% of the vote of the State Party branch and  therefore controlled the preselection process. He said securing preselec-

tion to a winnable position on the ALP senate ticket was “not easy”. He  had the support of Mick Young (then state and national Secretary of the  ALP) “who could see the value in [Bolkus] campaigning in the migrant  communities in the eastern states as a federal member”. He does however

admit to encountering racism at that time from some elements within the  Party and union movement (Interview, 2000: 1). He recounts how in one  instance he overcame this discrimination from a Union official by finding  common ground with a discussion about a local football club. Regarding  his ministerial portfolio responsibilities and their interaction with his eth-  nicity in serving as a minister with particular responsibility for immigra-  tion and multiculturalism, Bolkus said that he had enormous “contextual  problems” in the Department of Immigration. He explained by saying: “to  the [Pauline] Hanson [One Nation] type constituency it was like putting  the pyromaniac in charge of the fire station” (Interview, 2000: 1).

This led to discussion with Bolkus on the so-called “Macedonian  question”. The issue emerged strongly in Australia at a time when he was

195

PROCOPIS LOUCA

Minister for Immigration and came to the boil as a major political issue  in 1994. Bolkus was one of the central political figures in the debate and  bore the brunt of attacks both physical and political. (Stewart & Jinman,  1994; Frith & Foreshaw, 1994:) The “Macedonian issue” surrounds the  nomenclature, and use of symbols by the Former Yugoslav Republic of  Macedonia (FYROM). lt is an issue that has caused much concern not only  to the Greek Australians and the FYROM Australians but has also entered  the political discourse of the broader Australian community (Stewart,

1994). Bolkus said of the Macedonian issue that he believed “the Greek  Community asked from Labor then, more than they were getting from the  Greek government”. When asked why this was the case he said, “I think  the reason for that was [former Victorian Liberal Premier] Kennett. Kennett  just exploited the issue very irresponsibly” (Interview, 2000: 1).

Senator Bolkus said that this was a difficult time for him as a minister,  noting that as Immigration Minister he had many other difficulties be-  sides the Macedonian issue: illegal immigration, boat people, introduc-  tion of a new Immigration Act. He described the Department of

Immigration as “a real mess”. He said the Macedonian problem was not  the biggest issue he faced then, although it may have appeared to be the  case. He said he was “abused by the Greeks on the steps of Parliament  here and then assaulted by the Slavs in Wollongong”. He said that he

“copped the initial reaction from the Greeks” (Interview, 2000: 1) in re-  sponse to the decision by the then Labor Government to use the term Slav-  Macedonians as a descriptive term in Government business for FYROM  Australians (Taylor, 1994).

Bolkus said:

Cabinet decided that we don’t embrace the name Slav-Macedonians be-  cause that would set up another bushfire. We go to a meeting with the  Greek lobby and [Prime Minister] Paul [Keating] and [Foreign Minister]  Gareth [Evans] said “Right oh, Slav-Macedonians, that sounds all right  to us” (Interview, 2000: 1).

Bolkus claims that he got blamed by the Greek Australians who thought  of him as a “traitor” for his Government’s recognition of FYROM, and

196

GREEKS IN AUSTRALIAN POLITICS

by the FYROM Australians for the Keating/Evans decision (Stewart,  1994). He said that the irony is that during this time he had contact with  the Prime Minister of Greece and the Greek Foreign Affairs Department  and that they were very appreciative and supportive of what was going

on in Australia and the line the Australian government was taking.  Bolkus said that he actually received messages of thanks from Greece.  Senator Bolkus retains his belief that “the Liberal [Party of Australia]  Greeks led the way on the [Macedonian] issue. We forget that about 30%

of the Greeks in Australia were hardline royalists” (Interview, 2000: 1).  An indication that Bolkus does not believe the Greek community has uni-  versally supported the ALP, despite many commentators claiming the con-  trary (Stewart & Jinman, 1994).

In a statement to the Greek community of Australia in the midst of the  vast protests, Bolkus said of Australia’s recognition of the FYROM “how  can one demand Australia be more Greek than Greece?” (Bolkus 1994:2)  He also stated:

The [Greek] community must not be manipulated by those cynical in-  dividuals who are actively encouraging divisions both within and out-  side the community’s ranks, for their own political motives.. . The  promises various state [Liberal] leaders have made to the Greek com-  munity are meaningless. They are nothing but divisive posturing. And

given that state government departments run by the likes of Jeff Kennett  recognize not merely the name Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia  but the name “Macedonia” when referring to languages and in their de-  livery of services, are they not grossly hypocritical? (Bolkus 1994: 3)

To Bolkus, the agenda on the issue was set by Kennett and his Greek sup-  porters in the Liberal party across Australia. A type of “wedge politics”  was played which sought to polarise the Greek community, in the con-  text of the quest for electoral success.

The voting tendencies of Greek Australians were influenced by the  fact that during the period of mass migration (1946-1975), Greece had  three distinct systems of government: constitutional monarchy; a right-  wing junta; and democracy. The Greek Australian community is often

197

PROCOPIS LOUCA

considered as a homogenous voting unit. Bolkus reminds us that just like  all cultural groups in Australia there is a diversity of political views in  the Greek community. Many Greeks migrated not only for economic  refuge, but also for political ffeedom, following the destructive and di-  visive Greek civil war and the civil conflicts in Cyprus. Not all Hellenic  migrants supported the ALP, as in the opinion of some of them it was as-

sociated with socialist ideologies. Any assumption that the ALP had uni-  versal or vast majority support would deny the very differences in  Hellenic political opinion that precipitated the civil war and the colonels’  junta. When the Greek migrants arrived in Australia with their single suit-

case of material possessions, they also brought with them the baggage  of their political and philosophical beliefs.  As in other community groups a change in socio-economic status also  tends to alter voting preference and party identification. This is reflected  by the belief that there has been a gradual increase of support of the

Liberal Party by Greeks in Australia over time. Dimitreas concludes that  “time in Australia, however, has been shown to be significantly associ-  ated with upward social mobility, together with a change in political party  affiliation” (Dimitreas, 1998:25 1). He further claims that Greeks are re-

verting to their pre-migration party affiliations, which he says are gen-  erally to support right wing parties (Dimitreas, 1998:25 1).  The Macedonian and Cyprus issues were not the only occasions on  which Bolkus’ political role intersected with his ethnicity. Claims in 1984  that the Australian intelligence organisation (ASIO) had approached mem-  bers of the Greek community in South Australia to act as agents for the

organisation were made by Bolkus. There were also allegations that AS10  has conducted spying operations on members of the Greek community  (Bildstien, 1984).  Interestingly the two biggest issues Bolkus foresees for the Greek  Australian community are the issues of ageing and youth unemployment.  He is also optimistic about the future and believes that Australia will ride  out the current mood of discriminatory “Hansonism”. He cites the cur-  rent trend towards globalisation as an opportunity because he believes

GREEKS IN AUSTRALIAN POLITICS

that multiculturalism will be widely seen as one of Australia’s biggest  assets (Interview, 2000: 1).  Steve Condous MP was elected to the House of Assembly of the  Parliament of South Australia as the first Hellenic background repre-  sentative from the Liberal Party in the state. He provides an interesting  contrast to Senator Bolkus, and although also an Australian born mem-  ber he is descended from parents who migrated from the island of  Kastellorizo to Australia earlier than Senator Bolkus’ family. He is a di-  rector of his own health food distribution company and briefly studied  pharmacy at University (“as was expected from the family”) before leav-

ing to assist his family during his father’s illness (Savvas, 1991).  Mr Condous was born in 1935 and first entered public life in 1948. He  was elected Australia’s first Lord Mayor of Hellenic background in May  1987. Condous claims that he was “elected (Lord Mayor) because of the

Greek vote” (Interview, 2000:2). Condous said, “I would never have been  elected Lord Mayor if it was not for the humbling support of the Greeks”  (Interview, 2000:2). He was a member of the Adelaide City Council from  1948-93. Elected in 1993 to the state seat of Colton as a member of the  Liberal Party of South Australia, Condous held the seat with a 4.1% buffer

(Appendix D). An electoral boundaries redistribution (as required under  South Australian Statutes) however has seen that margin fall to 0.9%.  Condous has announced that he will not be seeking to contest the next elec-  tion (due prior to April 2002). He is currently Parliamentary Secretary to  the Premier on Multicultural and Ethnic Affairs,

Condous said he could have joined either side of politics (ALP or  Liberal) “but the Liberals asked first” (Interview, 2000:2). He joined the  Liberal Party, only shortly before he was preselected for the Western  beachside seat of Colton. In hindsight, Condous stated that he probably  would have preferred to stay in local government, rather than move to  the next tier of Australian governance, as he felt that he was more ef-

fective on Council.  When asked how he found the involvement of Hellenic background  people in politics, Condous said he believes that “young Greeks make

199

PROCOPIS LOUCA

policy decisions and switch between parties” (Interview, 2000:2). Of  Greek Australian participation in the Liberal Party he noted that they are  active “not so much in the party or branch level. They are involved in  fundraising mainly” (Interview, 2000:2). Condous indicated that he has  been approached by “some young Greek people” seeking to get involved  in the Liberal Party (Interview, 2000:2).

On racism and discrimination, Mr Condous has stated that he is “ter-  rified” that Australia could return to the attitudes he encountered in the  1950s, when, he claims, he was repeatedly bashed and called “dago”  (derogatory slang for foreigner) because of his Greek background

(Crabb, 1998). In denouncing Pauline Hanson’s One Nation Party he said:

At seven years of age, I saw my father being spat at in the streets and being  called a “dago”. I grew up only 5001-11 from here in an area that was called  the working-class ghetto of Adelaide. I went to school at Sturt St [Primary  School], and I was abused daily, both physically and verbally, and I’d come  home with my shirts torn and bloodied because I’d been in a fight because

I couldn’t stand what I was being called (Crabb, 1998).

Condous feels that one of the biggest issues confronting the Greek  Australian community in the future is the “lack of attendance at church  and community club functions”. In his business dealings he said that he  is disappointed over the lack of Greeks on the Adelaide City Council  (Interview, 2000:2).

From the data collected to date it is becoming evident that elected  Members feel that their Hellenic background has played at least some role  in securing their positions as elected representatives and it certainly in-  fluences their political life. They are not reluctant to be proud of their her-  itage, which while sometimes causing them to be the target of racially  prejudiced sentiments, is not something they claim they have had to deny

in order to succeed. Political activism has been important for them to en-  sure that they are recognised as Australians whose concerns lie here. They  strongly reject the notion of ethnic tokenism. The two politicians pre-  sented in this paper are in stark contrast to each other in terms of gen-  eration, political ideology and the paths taken to enter Parliament. The

200

GREEKS IN AUSTRALIAN POLITICS

common thread that unites them is the concept of their “Greekness” or  Hellenic inheritance. Both are patriotic Australians, and yet strongly cel-  ebrate their background.  When the passions of the Greek Australian electorate were heightened,

such as during the peak time of interest in the issue of the Yugoslav re-  public of Macedonia during the early 1990s, the Greek background politi-  cians were placed in a difficult situation. For example, as a Minister,  Senator Bolkus was caught between his conflicting responsibilities as a

senior Minister with particular responsibility for ethnic issues, his iden-  tity as a Hellenic Australian, and his position as an elected Australian  politician. The incongruous result was that the Minister’s political  stance placed him at times at odds with the majority position of the Greek

Australian community. He was sinner and saint, victim and protagonist  in a political and policy battle between divided communities and nations.  The intersection of ethnicity and politics provides a unique dy-  namic to the experience of Hellenic background. Bolkus and Condous  both have a strong and passionate sense of their identity as Australians,  but are increasingly comfortable with their ethnic inheritance. Juggling  the interests of diverse migrant and non-migrant constituencies, in ad-

dition to the demands of real or perceived representation sought by the  Greek community, raises several issues for these parliamentarians.  Neither wants to be seen as “the member for Greece”, both have expe-  rienced the barbs of racism and discrimination and this is reflected in their

attitudes, and may well act as an inspiration for higher achievement in  politics. Motivated by a desire to serve their communities and use the  power of government to shape and change society and combat injustice,  they are never far from their Hellenic Australian heritage.

Hellenic Australians have become involved in Australian politics, mo-  tivated by a number of personal factors, which are not dissimilar to those  of the general community. They are however united and influenced by  a shared experience represented by their ethnicity. The notion of iden-  tity, the sense of justice leading them to rally against racism and dis-  crimination, and a strong sense of community are important common ex-  periences. The desire to promote and preserve Hellenism is universal.

201

PROCOPIS LOUCA

A p e n d i x  A  Bolkus, Nick. Letter to electors "Nick Bolkus - The ALP'S man in  Torrens" (in Greek). North Adelaide, June (?) 1975.

202

n m  QA UJH(DIZETE TO  f I A  THN BOYAH

BILLARD, 8.

BOUtUS, N.  COUMBE. J. W. H.

YOMOQETIKO I R N l A   - .- GROUP A FOSTER, I#. K. g Y;?iJ: BLEVINS, F. T. CORNWALL, J. R. SUMNER, C. J. HEMMINGS, T. H. GROUP B GROUP C OqOUP D CAMERON, M. E gc:::;,:: B GROVES. C. W. MINES. J. ADAMSON, P. 0 GROUP E HILL. C. M. g : : : .  : . : ,  GILFILUN, G. J ROBERTS. J. M. STORY. C. R. MNGOCK, G .  L. GROUP F I GROUP G I GROUP n I WJP JAMES. L F. ....-... I 1 MORRIS. R H 1- I GROUP I 9 MI1LER.A. C. lo Kl 0 w

PROCOPIS LOUCA

Cover illustration, Nick Bolkus: The House Magazine 13 September  1983.

204

GREEKS IN AUSTRALIAN POLITICS

Appendix D  Electoral Advertisement for Steve Condous in EAAHNIKA NEA - Greek  N e u s ,  9 December 1993

205

PROCOPIS LOUCA

Bibliography

Abraham, 1988  Matthew Abraham, “Bolkus set to enter Hawke ministry”. The  Advertiser. 10 February.

ALP, 1975  Australian Labor Party South Australian Branch - Election  Material, ‘‘IKlZ @A YHQICETE TO EPrATIKO KOMMA EIC  TORRENS”. Adelaide: Con Print.

Australian Greeks for Labor, 1972  Draft letter to SA Greeks prepared for Don Dunstan during the pre-  Federal election period.

Tony Baker, ‘“Win Greeks Back’ plan for Labor”. The News. 23  March.

Baker, 1979

Bildstien, 1984  Craig Bildstien, “SA Greeks ‘wanted as AS10 spies”’. The News.  14 February.

Nick Bolkus, “Nick Bolkus - The ALP’S man in Torrens” [in  Greek]. Letter to electors. Adelaide.

Bolkus, 1975

Bolkus, 1994  Nick Bolkus, “Message to the Greek Community of Australia from  Nick Bolkus”. Press statement. 8 March. Camberra.

Crabb, 1998  Annabel Crabb, “Childhood Torment of the Greek Boy who be-  came Lord Mayor - They spat on me and called me dago”. The  Advertiser. 4 November.

“Multicultural Australia - The Greece Born Community.”  Department of Immigration and Multicultural Affairs. Canberra:

DIMA, 2000:l

206

GREEKS IN AUSTRALIAN POLITICS

Commonwealth of Australia.

“Multicultural Australia - Cyprus Born Community.” Department  of Immigration and Multicultural Affairs. Canberra: Common-  wealth of Australia.

Yiannis E. Dimitreas, “Whitlam and Beyond”. In Transplanting the  Agora - Hellenic Settlement in Australia: 2 1 1-3 8. Sydney: Allen  and Unwin.

Don Dunstan, Premier of South Australia, Letter to Mr. N.  Bolkus. 8 December. Adelaide.

Joshua Frith and Jennifer Foreshaw, “Macedonian protestors  punch Bolkus”. The Australian. 11 April.

The House Magazine. Eds Rod Chambers and Ken Randall. 13  September. Canberra: Press Gallery.

Procopis Louca, Interview with Senator Nick Bolkus. 27 March  (audio tape).

Procopis Louca, Interview with Mr Steve Condous MP. 13 April  (audio tape).

Local Government Association of South Australia Inc. (online)  URL:http://www.lga.sa.gov.au/elections (accessed 15 June 2000).

Paul Lloyd, “The ‘wog’ from Waymouth St”. The Advertiser. 15  October.  Norwood ALP, 1976  “Greek Party - Norwood ALP, 12 February.” Handwritten plan-

ning document.

DIMA, 2000:2

Dimitreas, 1998

Dunstan, 1972

Frith & Foreshaw, 1994

House Magazine, 1983

Interview, 2000: 1

Interview, 2000:2

LGA, 2000

Lloyd, 1994

207

PROCOPIS LOUCA

Rust, 1981  Bill Rust, “The case of the out of work senator”. The Advertiser.  4 April.

Savvas, 1991  Michael Savvas, “Adelaidean Greeks: Steve Condous”. New  Dialogue supplement to EAAHNIKA NEA. 4 & 20 July.

Cameron Stewart, “Minister attacks Greek hostility”. The  Australian. 4 March.

Stewart, 1994

Stewart & Jinman, 1994  Cameron Stewart and Richard Jinman, “Macedonians tarnished by  violence - Bolkus”. The Australian. 12 April.

Leonne Taylor, “Meeting of PM, Greek Leaders eases tensions”.  The Australian. 11 March.

Taylor, 1994

Theophanous, 1988  The0 Theophanous, “The Changing Nature of Greek Involvement  in Australian Politics”. In Afstraliotes Hellenes: Greeks in  Australia ed. A Kapardis and A. Tamis: 23 1-44. Melbourne: River

Seine Press.

Wran, 1977  Neville Wran, Premier of New South Wales, Letter to Mr. N.  Bolkus. 8 December. Sydney.

208

