Senator Andrew Bartlett

Australian Democrats’ immigration spokesperson

Babies and pregnant women the hidden victims

of Australia’s heartless immigration program

That pregnant women are still being deported and their babies are still dying because of   Australian immigration practices, should be a source of great shame to Minister Philip   Ruddock, according to the Australian Democrats.

Democrats’ Immigration spokesperson, Senator Andrew Bartlett, said that one month after a Senate   inquiry recommended changes to Australia’s immigration program, pregnant women and women with   small children are still being deported to hazardous conditions.

“The Immigration Minister has learnt nothing from the case of the Chinese woman who was returned to   face a forced abortion when 8 months pregnant. Pregnant women are still being deported to dangerous   situations and babies are still dying,” Senator Bartlett said.

“One of the Kososvar refugees who is 7 months pregnant is likely to be deported soon despite having   family ties in Australia, while another Kosovar refugee deported from Australia in April, had her baby   prematurely and the child died in July.

“The cases of the pregnant Kosovar women who were forced to return to unsafe conditions and have   had their babies die or are still threatened with deportation are particularly abhorrent, since these people   did not enter illegally, they were invited here under the Safe Haven program.”

Senator Bartlett initiated the Senate inquiry into Australia’s immigration procedures, which took over a   year, producing a 400 page report and many unanimous recommendations from the cross party   committee.

The Committee recommended that as a matter of urgency, a protocol on the ‘fitness to travel’ of   pregnant women (especially those in later stages) be developed, in respect of removals from Australia.

The Committee also recommended that pregnant women subject to removal, should be given special   consideration by the Minister to remain in Australia until after the birth to ensure that no pregnant   women are returned in circumstances where there is a risk.

“The evidence outlined in the report shows the Minister and his Department are not using their powers   to protect refugees, but to get them out of Australia as quickly and quietly as possible irrelevant of the   consequences,” Senator Bartlett said.

Amnesty International and the Brisbane Refugee Claimants’ Support Centre is hosting a ‘Refugee   Action’ information day in Brisbane tomorrow (Sunday 23 July).

For interview, Senator Bartlett on 0418 743 789

http://www.democrats.org.au

