Australian Labor Party   National ALP

Kim Beazley - Doorstop - Election Campaign, Polls, ALP Policies, PM's Visit To WA, VIP Fleet, Industrial Relations, John Aquilina http://www.alp.org.au/media/0401/kbmcwa110401.html

Thursday, 12 April 2001

Kim Beazley - Doorstop Interview Subjects: Election Campaign, Polls, ALP Policies, PM's Visit To WA, VIP Fleet, Industrial Relations, John Aquilina

Transcript - Perth - 11 April 2001

E & OE - PROOF ONLY

JOURNALIST: Are you running out of puff?

BEAZLEY: I'm having a ball, but you know the problem with John Howard is that he is always thinking about himself, he is not thinking about the rest of the country. You know when I have said that this election campaign is too long, I'm not worried about me fighting it, I'm an Opposition Leader, I've been at it for five years, I'm gnarled and battle hardened, I'm fine. I'm worried about business, I worried about the confidence of consumers, when there is an election in the air, confidence almost invariably goes off, investment decisions are stalled. Now John Howard was unwise enough at the beginning of this year to call a campaign on, and he subjected ordinary businesses and consumers therefore to a twelve hiatus period. He needs that full twelve months because he wants to back flip with pike, that is obvious but there is no respect for him in the community with him doing that. So I am totally cheerful about running through a twelve month campaign, but my concern is for the businesses and families that are affected by that.

JOURNALSIT: What about Mr Howard's claims that this in fact is not an election campaign?

BEAZLEY: Then he shouldn't have said what he said back in January this year.

He is running scared, that is true, there is no doubt about that and his back flips have lost him all respect in terms of his economic management. It is quite extraordinary the way the gap between the two political parties has closed on that front. But who worries about that anyway, they were just polls. People are doing real things, businessmen are making real decisions about investment and they are putting them on hold because John Howard's lose lips have put us in the middle of an election campaign.

JOURNALIST: Do you think the Prime Minister and the Treasurer should be

Back

concentrating perhaps on their own electorates before they run around the country?

BEAZLEY: Well I'm not going on the basis that I have got any confidence at all about the outcome at the end of this year. Governments are always the top dogs if you like in an election campaign. You can see that he is prepared on any element of the budget at all to overthrow any position he has ever held before, and throw out red herrings to try to win. Now in that set of circumstances, as Opposition Leader you have to be realistic, Governments in Australia usually win, but he doesn't deserve to win and a lot of people in this country are beginning to think that.

JOURNALIST: But there is also a poll out that shows that both that Mr Howard and Mr Costello would lose their seats.

BEAZLEY: Well I'm not sure that they completely show that, it showed that they are under pressure in their own constituencies and that is consistent with a swing generally, but polls are polls, they come and go during the course of an election year, it's the underpinning feelings of the people which count at the end of the day and we have got to be careful about in politics that we don't simply skate across the surface as we put out argument and counter argument and this is what is really happening to ordinary Australians in their daily lives. And they're under pressure and our concerns must be for them.

JOURNALIST: If it weren't for an election campaign do you think Mr Howard would be in W.A.?

BEAZLEY: I don't think there is a remotest possibility he would be in W.A. if it wasn't for an election campaign, because visits to W.A. are few and far between. He doesn't like the Western Australian Liberals and that is one of the not very many things I agree with him on, I think that they are a bit of a problem too, and he better not like turning up in town with the Western Australian Liberals, but he doesn't like turning up in town at all. In those circumstances it has to be an election campaign that drags him here.

JOURNALIST: What about his claims that you're scared of maybe being asked to put up a policy?

BEAZLEY: Well, go to my website Mr Howard. You will see 64 policies there and be a bit grateful. I mean he's been pinching policy after policy from the Labor Party as he does his backflips. Be it on the BAS, be it on petrol, be it on the role of benchmark adjustments for public schools, be it on beer. I can't put out policy fast enough for him to pinch.

JOURNALIST: You've heard a bit about ... this morning in Western Australia, pensioners, even people upset about boat people. There's a million issues in Western Australia at the moment.

BEAZLEY: There are a lot of issues. Those pensioner issues, I've got to say are universal, there's a perception out there, a correct perception, that business and the elderly have taken the king-hits in relation to the GST. So I wasn't a bit surprised to get questions on that. On the question of boat people and immigration, I think more and more Australians are seeing that that component of our defence policy, which goes to the creation of a Coast Guard is

the sensible way to go. Now Minister Reith was out there saying that this is not possible. Nothing is ever possible for this bunch, until they backflip to do it. I expect a backflip on that front as well.

JOURNALIST: Mr Beazley can I ask you about the Government's ... incident involving a Falcon jet on its way to Karratha this morning, it had an emergency return to Perth this morning with Wilson Tuckey on board.

BEAZLEY: That fleet is pretty old, it does need replacement and we support replacements for those aircrafts. As they are replaced though, you do need to be careful, that they are replaced in a way which is certainly not luxurious. We basically need a serviceable VIP fleet that does the job of getting people safely from A to B. That's what we need and as we go through the replacement program, which is underway at the moment, then that needs to be the watchword.

JOURNALIST: You must be concerned, are you, about the safety and reliability of those aircraft at the moment?

BEAZLEY: Well I have been on VIP aircraft and they are maintained well by the RAAF. They do the very best they can with it. I've been in a number of incidents that are associated with the VIP fleet and you always have those at the back of your mind, but you also don't want to overstate it. They fly safely and they do the best they can, but they're aircraft now that have been heavily utilised and they have been around for a while, and some of them have been around for a very long time and the time has come to replace them. They should be replaced. It should be done modestly.

JOURNALIST: Mr Beazley, with a Labor State Government in place now we are seeing a re-emergence of arguments on building sites (inaudible) CFMEU, no ticket, no start - is this evolving at a nation level?

BEAZLEY: No, because I think what many Australians understand is this. The key problem with industrial relations is not the odd rogue ... the key problem is fairness and a fair umpire and at the Federal level the umpire has been gutted. Now what Australians want is value in awards, fairness in the workplace, fairer outcomes to themselves. Many have the view now as they see the workforce increasingly casualised that they see pressures coming on the full-time workforce to work unpaid overtime. And it's all part of the decline in living standards for the average Australian. Those are the real issues in industrial relations, not the old, albeit lamentable case, of an argument on a building site.

JOURNALIST: But would you advise someone like Geoff Gallop to take a hard line on issues like that, insisting on a unionised workforce on a building site?

BEAZLEY: Geoff Gallop has to run his own race on that front, in dealing with the issues of building sites. But I tell you this, in industrial relations there's a much broader problem than that. There's a problem of fairness, equitable outcomes. It's a problem of real choice. Now this Government has made no secret of the fact that it has sought actively to undermine the position of the ordinary Australian worker, now I'm not asking for anything more than those, anything more than those. An equal go, for those who sell their labour and for those who employ labour. That's what we're about. Right now if you look at the

overall performance of Australia, at the Federal level I'm talking about here, if you're on AWAs and you're an operative, you are $100 a week worse off than if you've got a decent flexible enterprise bargain organised on a collective basis. That's not Kim Beazley or John Howard talking, that's the Australian Bureau of Statistics. If you're elsewhere in the workplace, you're going to find that you are increasingly likely to be casualised. And that means you've got problems, relating to finance for your housing, you've got basic living standards problems. We have gone back a long way in this country in the living standards areas, and part of the reason that has been the case has been that this Government has tipped the balance from being a fair balance to being an unfair balance for the ordinary average Aussie.

JOURNALIST: Would you have a strict ... intimidation...

BEAZLEY: Look I don't regard that as an unimportant issue for people who are actually on building sites. But I tend to find that on building sites there are ... people are being intimidated, there are unions on building sites and there's an argument from people who are trying to pursue a contrary course. Both arguments are as old as the hills, but an argument that is not as old as the hills is the unfairness of the industrial relations system over the last 5 years. Now I'm not in favour of intimidation any where at any time. Anywhere at any time. But I'm also going to keep my mind focussed on the main issue in industrial relations. And the main issue in industrial relations now is fairness.

JOURNALIST: The NSW Parents and Citizens Committee said that John Aquilina acted a bit rashly by bringing up in Parliament the other day, about the 15 year-old pupil's diary ... that his comments sort of undermined ... addressing the situation. What would be your comment?

BEAZLEY: You're always damned if you do and damned if you don't in this business. I mean I suppose what John Aquilina was trying to do was trying to be realistic about the issues that confront those who have to manage schools these days and we live in a global village when it comes to communications and anything going on anywhere else in the world tends to be picked up by fertile minds back here. And I guess what John Aquilina is trying to do is to show, and one would hope that that is the case too, that the school system in NSW is on top of this. I suspect that what John Aquilina thought he was doing was giving assurance to parents that they are on top on these things. Now I don't know enough about the case or the circumstances to comment further than that, except to know that I know that John Aquilina is a man of good word and he would be operating in his judgement and that's to the best interests of the kids in the system.

Ends

Back

Authorised by Geoff Walsh, 19 National Circuit, Barton ACT 2600.

Home | Action | News | Policy | People | About

