DVA 122 Monday 13 August 2001

This Week In History - Our Wartime Heritage

Issued by the Minister for Veterans’ Affairs, Bruce Scott, to foster awareness of Australia’s wartime history and heritage during the Centenary of Federation.

17-22 August

18 August: The 35th anniversary of the Battle of Long Tan, probably the most famous Australian engagement of the Vietnam War. On 18 August 1966, 125 men of D Company, 6th Battalion Royal Australian Regiment, were ambushed by a force of up to 3000 enemy troops in a rubber plantation near the village of Long Tan. With support from artillery at the Australian Task Force base at Nui Dat and with ammunition dropped in by RAAF helicopters, D Company defied overwhelming odds to hold its position until a relief force could reach them. D Company losses included 17 killed and 19 wounded, one-third of its total strength. Total Australian losses were 17 killed, one died of wounds and 24 wounded. It is estimated the attacking North Vietnam force lost at least 245 and as many as 500 men during the battle. D Company 6RAR was awarded a US Presidential Unit Citation for its gallantry at Long Tan.

Today, the anniversary of the Battle of Long Tan marks Vietnam Veterans’ Day, honouring the service of all Australians in Vietnam.

18 August 1971: The Australian Government announced plans to withdraw Australian forces from Vietnam.

19 August 1914: Australia made its first deployment of World War I, sending an expeditionary force to capture German-occupied islands in the Pacific. HMAS Berrima sailed from Sydney and met up with HMAS Australia and Melbourne off Rabaul. Action at Rabaul claimed the first Australian lives of WWI, when a force of naval reservists was ambushed near Kakabaul. The Australians landed reinforcements and by late September had forced the surrender of the German authorities on Rabaul. New Ireland, the Admiralties, Bougainville and the German Solomons were occupied by October.

21 August 1915: The last major fighting of the Gallipoli campaign took place at Hill 60. The Allied operation was aimed at strengthening the corridor that connected the newly-landed British force at Suvla Bay with the beach-head at Anzac Cove. On 21 August, a force including men of the Australian 4th Brigade under the then Brigadier-General John Monash managed to gain part of Hill 60. An attempt the following day to push to the top of the Hill went badly, with heavy casualties among the troops of the 18th Battalion, many of whom were new arrivals at Gallipoli.

On 27 August a fresh assault was made, followed by three days of fighting in which the final objective was taken, lost and retaken several times. During this battle, 2nd Lieutenant Hugo Throssell of the 10th Light Horse Regiment, originally from Northam, WA, won the Victoria Cross. Despite being severely wounded during a counterattack, Lieutenant Throssell refused to leave his post or to obtain medical assistance until all danger was passed. He then had his wounds dressed and returned to the firing-line until he was ordered out of action by his Medical Officer. Lieutenant Throssell’s citation reported that his valour lifted the spirits of his men and saved the situation at a critical time.

Media Contact: Mark Croxford (02) 6277 7820 or 0408 645 787



[Return to DVA media release index]

