Australian Labor Party   National ALP   Back

Simon Crean - Doorstop - Charter of Budget Honesty, Banking, Caretaker Government http://www.alp.org.au//media/1001/scmcvic081001.html Tuesday, 09 October 2001

Doorstop Interview

Simon Crean - Shadow Treasurer

Subjects: Charter of Budget Honesty, Banking, Caretaker Government

Transcript - Melbourne, Victoria - 8 October 2001

E & OE - PROOF ONLY

CREAN: Today we're announcing proposals by which we bring genuine honesty back into the Budget processes -in the processes whilst we are in government, but also we are going further. Because what we are also announcing today is that we are using Access Economics to cost all of our election proposals. Every proposal that we put forward will have a Budget impact on it and it will have been verified by Access Economics. Access Economics are well known for their rigour, their integrity, their impartiality, and that's why we have used them.

So the challenge today to Mr Costello is threefold. Firstly, match Labor's commitment: every proposal that is put forward by the government has to have a Budget impact attached to it. Not for example, like the announcement they put out on Friday for Capital Gains Tax rollover which had no Budget costings; not like the announcement last week for air marshals that had no Budget costing. We need to know the Budget impact of all measures - we're prepared to do it, we challenge the government to match us. The second thing that we're calling for from Peter Costello and the government is that any material released by the Treasurer in relation to the Budget position be signed off by the Treasury, not cooked up in the Treasurer's office. We don't want a repeat of the fiasco during the last federal election when the Treasurer's office released costings that it subsequently transpired had been cooked up in his office. The third thing we challenge the government to do is to agree to adopt the measures in Kim Beazley's Plan For Genuine Budget Honesty. That is an amendment to the Charter of Budget Honesty to include in the Budget papers an independent report from the Taxation Commissioner identifying material threats to the tax base. Secondly, a system of continuance fiscal disclosure, so that on a monthly basis, all decision taken by government have their impact on the Budget detailed - not like the current circumstances where we only hear of that impact in the mid-year economic forecasts or in the Budget. Third, a preparedness to actually count the GST as a Commonwealth tax, which they don't do at the moment. Having created the tax they now want to treat it as an orphan. It needs to be counted as a Commonwealth tax, because when included we find this is the highest taxing government in Australia's history. Fourth, we want the restoration of detailed outlays information in the papers, and fifth, we want the publication of the structural balance in the Budget papers. So, the challenge today to the government is to match Labor's

commitment to restore genuine Budget honesty, not only in the Budget process, but during the election campaign.

JOURNALIST: Is this an attempt to try and improve public opinion of ALP management of the economy?

CREAN: Labor's commitment is always to make commitments only that can be afforded and to not make commitments in the circumstances as we understand them that drive the Budget into deficit. We won't be making any spending commitments that take us into deficit. The question though is, we have been calling for months now for the government to release earlier the state of the books. We haven't had a response from the government on that. We therefore made the judgement we couldn't wait and weren't prepared to wait. We're prepared to have our costings tested, we're prepared to have them out through the rigour that's necessary to establish our credentials and that's why we've gone to Access.

JOURNALIST: Who will be responsible for the monthly fiscal disclosure?

CREAN: The Treasury.

JOURNALIST: And what is your guarantee that will happen every month that Labor is in power?

CREAN: In circumstances in which decision have been taken in that month, that had an impact on the Budgetary position. If no decisions were taken in that month, you wouldn't need it in those circumstances. But what we have been subjected to - the backflips on beer, the backflips on petrol, the backflips on the pensioners, the extension of the First Homebuyers Scheme - these were all announcements made by the government with no statement at the time of cost, and no impact in terms of the Budget. We had to wait for the mid-year economic forecasts in relation to decision made between the Budget of the previous year and in the lead up to November. We had to wait for the Budget to find out the impact of these initiatives.

JOURNALIST: Have you costed this policy?

CREAN: The costing of this policy has been done itself by Access and is contained in the document.

JOURNALIST: The detailed outlays information. Is there a system of information that you would base that on?

CREAN: Yes, it's the breakdown of departments and functions that used to enable a comparison from year to year with what was being done in particular programs. To some extent, this was rectified in the last Budget, but we still believe this is an area that needs to be gone further with.

JOURNALIST: What year was the last one that you believe this was satisfactory?

CREAN: In the Budget of last year, not this year, there was no capacity with the movement to the accruals-based accounting method. There was no ability to make the comparisons between the programs. We called at that time for them to restore the basis for comparison within departments and within programs. There was some partial correction of that in the May Budget.

JOURNALIST: What would you expect to see the state of the books?

CREAN: Under the Charter of Budget Honesty it is now up the Secretaries of Finance and Treasury. Their requirement is to bring it out within 10 days of the writs being issued. That's 10 days from now.

We would argue that the election was in fact called last Friday and that therefore they should have been in preparation. We hope they were. We hope that we don't have to wait the full 10 days and obviously the sooner the documentation is brought out the better. There was no hindrance on the government asking the joint secretaries to produce that state of the books when we called for it, when they actually were other than in caretaker mode, but they resisted that call continuously. During the last election, from memory, the statement was brought out on the Monday following the writ - that is seven days. We've got no indication as to when it is likely to come out, only the continuing requirement it be within the 10 days.

I think it is terribly important in the context of the issue surrounding the debates - where the statements are not issued in a way in which we can have the opportunity to go through the detail of them, the debate next Sunday, if the Prime Minister has his way - will go ahead without either party being able to comment on the state of the books. That's an unsatisfactory position in terms of accountability, in terms of electoral and campaigning promises.

JOURNALIST: Do you have any idea what the state of the books may be like?

CREAN: No, we've been operating in the development of our proposals to date on the figures that came out in the May Budget. We said, and I repeat the point again, we're not going to make any promises that we can't fund and therefore we're not going to put out the dollar details associated with our proposals until we know what the state of the books are - signed off by the Treasury, not cooked up in the Treasurer's office as happened last election.

JOURNALIST: You've ruled out Budget deficits, but is that entirely appropriate given that the world economy is turning down. The Australian economy may well follow. How can you rule out deficits in every case? Surely they are appropriate some time?

CREAN: We're committed to the Budget being in balance of the course of the economic cycle. There is nothing in terms of information that we have to date that suggests that it needs to go into deficit.

JOURNALIST: Do you agree the economy is weakening though?

CREAN: The economy has already weakened. The economy has slowed from a growth rate in excess of four per cent prior to the GST, to 1.4 per cent. That's why we've seen the big decline in jobs - some 90,000 full-time jobs gone since the GST came in. The government points to the success of its program in the housing sector, but all that's done is to bring the housing sector back to where it was before the GST mugged it. So it's claiming credit for rebuilding the housing sector which it had flattened by the GST. The problem looking forward of course is the impact that the synchronised downturn in the rest of the world is going to have. Clearly that is going to have an impact on our exports, it could have an impact on confidence. But significantly the growth that we've been experiencing has been driven by consumption - government and private. Investment has been flat ahead of the world downturn, exports have contributed positively, but the prospect of that continuing is under significant question mark.

JOURNALIST: Does that mean we could expect deficits?

CREAN: We are committed to ensuring that the Budget remains in balance over the course of the economic cycle. There is nothing at the moment that suggests that we need to go into deficit.

JOURNALIST: So if the economic cycle is good there's a surplus, if it's bad there's a deficit.

CREAN: The golden rule means that, it's keeping the Budget in balance over the course of the cycle.

That's something that we have bipartisan agreement on. It's what the Budget papers say, it's what we adhere to. We are not departing from.

JOURNALIST: Can I ask you about your comments on banks? Mr Beazley has made some comments about keeping rural branches open and other sort of social charters. Are you going to be releasing more details on that and will the four pillars policy be maintained going forward?

CREAN: Yes, the four pillars policy will be maintained. I can assure you of that and yes, we will be making a more detailed policy on banking policy later in the campaign.

JOURNALIST: What about foreign takeovers of any of the four pillars. Will they be allowed?

CREAN: We'll be making a statement in relation to banking policy later in the campaign, but the four pillars is the component that will not change, and that too, I might say, seems to have bipartisan support.

JOURNALIST: I was just wondering what your definition of caretaker mode is given the current misunderstanding?

CREAN: Caretaker mode means that if significant decisions binding future governments are involved in the decision-making process, there has to be consultation with us.

JOURNALIST: It's not just consultation?

CREAN: There has to be consultation and agreement?

JOURNALIST: But not consensus necessarily?

CREAN: No, there has to be agreement, that's the caretaker principle that there has to be consultation and agreement. But let's get the commitment to the consultation process first. I am sure in the national interest Labor will always make the right decision. We've indicated in relation to the fight against terror that we are at one with the government and we've supported in the parliament legislative reform in terms of illegal asylum seekers.

JOURNALIST: Mr Howard has said he will consult, but not necessarily get consensus.

CREAN: Well, this is John Howard being at his usual tricky best. He is required to consult, and consultation doesn't simply mean telling people what they are going to do and not expect to hear a response and hear alternative points of view. The requirement to consult means there has to be broad agreement about the direction to be pursued.

Ends Authorised by Geoff Walsh, 19 National Circuit, Barton ACT 2600.

