1/6

Transcript

John Anderson Acting Prime Minister Minister for Transport and Regional Services

Parliament House, Canberra 11th September 2001

Ansett, court decision on asylum seekers.

Well, in relation to matters aviation we continue to work very hard with everything we can to keep Ansett flying as long as possible. To secure the best possible outcome for it.

I want to make it very plain there’s a little bit of re-invention of reality going on around the place. This is not a problem that was made in Australia by the Government or by anybody else in Australia. It is a problem that springs from what has happened to Ansett under the management of Air New Zealand. We’ve always accepted that Ansett was in real need of recapitalisation and that that was a matter of very, very great importance. Indeed I think it ought to be recognised that we’ve always said that publicly and you might also be interested to know that while we put up an alternative proposal, we asked for it to be fully evaluated and developed in tandem with the recapitalisation recommendations that Air New Zealand themselves had put on the table.

The position from Ansett, as stated by them and by Air New Zealand, plainly remain a matter of very real concern. They certainly put that to us in very blunt terms from about mid-August on, seeking from us support for their plan for recapitalisation. And I stayed in close contact with the New Zealand Minister for Finance, Dr Cullen. He indicated to me that having looked at both of the options as developed by Mr Cameron through the process they set up that they believed that they would have to go with the Singapore investment because there was no trigger for Singapore, if you like, to disengage and invest directly in Ansett as we’d proposed.

We indicated to them that we understood that was the case. That recapitalisation was an urgent matter and we proceeded on the basis that a decision would be made at that stage, in time as requested by Air New Zealand for their third of September deadline. Now that deadline approached, the New Zealand Government through Minister Cullen expressed immense frustration to me that they were unable to ascertain precisely what final detail their strategic plan took. Then last week stories started to emerge that the situation was even more serious. On Thursday they issued that very reassuring statement to the New Zealand stock exchange. Saturday night, as I understand it, the Board was told that the situation had deteriorated rapidly, that Singapore no longer wanted to be involved and a recapitalisation of both of the parties - I was informed of that on Sunday morning and as you know we’ve been working overtime since then to seek to work our way through this.

I just want to emphasise again. Let’s put a stop to this nonsense that somehow this a problem created in Australia, or exacerbated by actions in Australia. That is not right and we have

2/6

always sought actively an adequate recapitalisation of Ansett because that’s what they’ve said, repeatedly, sometimes in very blunt language, that they need and they obviously lobbied for their preferred approach when it became obvious that that was what the New Zealand Government wanted to do, we indicated that we would support them in that.

Now in relation to the extraordinary developments this afternoon on the Manoora and the judgement of the Federal Court, can I say I find it utterly astonishing that the Labor Party now tells us they will support the appeal. They will even contemplate a retrospective legislation to make the judgement irrelevant. The fact is that their refusal to pass the Border Control Act when we had advice, and we understand that they believed what we were doing was quite lawful, has made this delay, the added cost, the added use of resources necessary, they now tell us that they’d like to engage in retrospective leadership and solve the problem by passing legislation next week. I just find that - well I just say this - you can’t have retrospective leadership, it doesn’t work.

How confident are you that Qantas will want to take part of Ansett’s operations?

John Anderson. Oh, I think there’s a fair chance that they’ll be interested in parts of it. Now, they and Virgin Blue have been working extraordinarily hard today. We’ve continued to get updates, we’ve continued to approach other people that might be interested. We’ve continued to develop plans particularly for the regionals and I just want to reassure people that we’ll leave no stone unturned. We are very conscious of the jobs. We’re very conscious of the needs of the travelling public. We believe it’s very important that the board of Air New Zealand, where home responsibility for this lies, needs to accept that they simply cannot walk away from our interests, they cannot simply make this our problem. They have to work with us and with their customers to do everything possible, recognising the gravity of the situation to meet the needs of people moving around and also those approaching an uncertain job future.

…to lift the foreign ownership caps on Qantas to help resolve the problem?

John Anderson. Oh look, that is not an issue that’s being raised at this point in time and not one that I want to canvas just now thank you very much.

Mr Anderson could you explain when you first knew about Ansett’s troubles given their reports that you were hand delivered a letter on August 14 and how do you respond to Peter Beattie’s claim that you’re in the pocket of Qantas and that this Government was refusing to listen to what Ansett had to say?

John Anderson. Mr Beattie’s claims are just the wildest political rhetoric you’ve ever heard. There’s no substance to them whatever. Now, can I just again reiterate, we’ve always known that Ansett’s problems were serious. They came to see me quite early in the piece. They explained

3/6

to me that the problems were serious. Well, I’ve always said that we recognise the urgency of recapitalisation and it is certainly true that from around mid-August they started to explain to us in very blunt terms that the need was becoming urgent. We resolved that while we certainly had, you know, a proposal that we’d wanted properly investigated that the needs of Ansett were such that when we were advised that the New Zealand Government - attractive as it found the idea of the Qantas-Air New Zealand on one hand, Singapore-Ansett on the other -that they couldn’t see a trigger for it and that they wanted to proceed with the other option. We accepted that that was the right way to go. And as I say, the sense of urgency was always framed around the explanation to us that they would need to have certainty by the third of September.

Now the New Zealand Government have expressed their frustration on a number of things today, including if you like the level of disclosure from the Board and a lot more about that will emerge over the next few days. But our priority at the moment is to deal with the crisis in hand. Again, let me emphasise, I don’t know why Australians would want to fit us up with a problem which is not of Australian making.

Who are the other airlines you are talking to?

John Anderson. All of them frankly, any of them.

What role will Virgin Blue play?

John Anderson. Look it’s impossible to tell at this stage, but they obviously have a real interest and there is a lot of very hard work going on there. But we can’t know what proposals will come up or whether there, basically it’ll be a thumbs up or a thumbs down, and whether they think they can make it work. We don’t know that yet. We’ll know sometime late tomorrow.

Singapore Airlines involved in these discussions?

John Anderson. Singapore Airlines have retreated to working with Brierley and the New Zealand Government and put Air New Zealand back together. And as I say we are very concerned that Air New Zealand recognise their responsibilities to us and to the Australian interests as well.

What’s the word on the Government’s appeal against Justice North’s decision?

John Anderson. Well we are appealing and we’ll move to that straight away and it’s astonishing that Labor now tell us that they’ll support that and they’d even consider retrospective legislation to make the judgement irrelevant. Well they could have short-circuited all of this by supporting the

4/6

Border Control Act and they’re trying to something that’s an impossibility - engaging in retrospective leadership.

Looking at it now, wouldn’t it have been just as cheap to bring these asylum seekers onto Australian shores?

John Anderson. There are some very important principles here that the Government is in pursuit of as you well recognise. Now we have in place procedures in this country for coping for immigration and refugee demand and we seek to play our role responsibly internationally. But we have to ensure that there is a proper process of processing these people and then we engage in the burden sharing arrangements that we are committed to and which we fully support. But plainly we have to send a signal that we’re not going to be some sort of soft touch that can be taken for a ride and …

Has it been worth the cost?

Well I believe that the cost, I have to say, is considerably increased by Labor’s dithering and lack of leadership and they need to make up their mind now whether they’re going to continue that.

What happens to the people on board the Manoora?

John Anderson. Well we’re working that through right now and I can’t comment on that.

Are you looking on plans to land them in Queensland or up north?

John Anderson. No, no comment to make on that matter at the moment.

Is the ship changing course at all?

John Anderson. I’m not commenting on that.

What’s the Government’s reaction to Virgin Blue’s submission that it would be willing to buy ten planes but it wants some commitment from the Government on competition safeguards?

John Anderson. Look both will have to be looked at; the comment I’d make on that. As I said last night, depending on the nature of the proposal that comes forward there will be real competition issues involved. Let me make this broader point - the aviation market in Australia’s been

5/6

growing very, very rapidly, around 8 per cent - a very rapid rate indeed. No-one can deny there are going to real competition issues arising out of this. There already are, you’ve had one commercial outfit, or a couple of commercial outfits showing they can take advantage of a competitive environment and a couple finding one way or another that they haven’t been able to - but in the environment of a rapidly growing aviation sector, you know, and there are some parallels of what happened in Canada here for better or for worse, there’s no doubt in my mind that we will be able to re-establish a competitive aviation industry with more jobs and more opportunities for the travelling public.

If Ansett goes into voluntary administration or into receivership how will you ensure that the airline keeps flying?

John Anderson. Well those are the issues that we are looking at now and they are very serious issues. There are now easy answers. We are seeking the best advice that we can possibly get and we are seeking to be - remembering that we will not appoint - again let me go back to this, this is not a problem that was made in Australia. We’ve got to recognise that we won’t be the ones who appoint such a process.

Are you confident that Ansett will be flying in a week’s time?

John Anderson. We’re doing everything we can to secure the best outcome that we can and we’re certainly looking to the Board of Air New Zealand to help us work through this very difficult process, not simply walk away from this.

Is trans-Tasman aviation policy under review at the moment?

John Anderson. Well it is in the sense that we’ve had a number of requests, well a request from Virgin Blue amongst others, to enter that market, and of course, they’re not Australian registered. So we’ve got some issues to work through.

What does the court’s decision about the initial legal opinion given to the Government that it had acted legally in boarding the Tampa?

John Anderson. Well, they dispute our view, but we’re going to appeal.

Do you regret not accepting Labor’s offer of Tampa specific?

6/6

John Anderson. Well they would have left us in a position where we would not been able to cope with and deal with adequately subsequent arrivals.

Inaudible

John Anderson. Because that’s a matter that the Government is at the moment considering.

Just for consumers, can you shed any light on this Singapore Airlines document saying that prices could rise for up to 30 per cent and I assume that a price cap isn’t an option? How much do you think prices will rise by?

John Anderson. Well, can I just say to you really that is in the realm of wild speculation. We don’t know what the construction will look like. But let me just reiterate again, we’re in the business of providing the most competitive outcome we can. It may be that some concessions or changes will have to be made, there may have to be some caps imposed, there may have to be some ground rules spelt out (on prices?) …. Yes there may have to be. I don’t know, I can’t give you a definitive answer because we don’t know what proposals might emerge and what decisions we might look at.

Are you saying that the boat may continue on its path regardless of ….(inaudible)

John Anderson. I am simply saying to you that I have no comment to make on that matter at this point in time.

When will the appeal be lodged?

John Anderson. Well as quickly as we can.

Mr Anderson, for people who have Ansett tickets for the next few days and across the weekend, what’s your advice to them, what are you saying to them?

John Anderson. Look all I can say at this stage is that we’re doing everything we can and again I emphasise that we expect the Board of Air New Zealand to help us resolve the difficulties and the uncertainties that may be facing their customers over the next few days.

ends

