130901_media conf_Ansett.doc

Transcript

John Anderson Acting Prime Minister Minister for Transport and Regional Services

Parliament House, Canberra 13th September 2001

US attack; Asylum seekers; Ansett

I think it should be clear to those responsible now for the attacks in the United States that their actions formed not only an attack on the United States and its citizens but against all people around the world who value freedom and the rule of law.

And of course, that includes Australia.

What has happened as we all know is outrageous. But as we contemplate it today I think Australians have every right to feel very angry indeed. We now know that we’ve lost three Australians. Details will not be released until their families are happy to talk about it. We know too that at this stage there are something over 75 Australians unaccounted for. And so it is that I again say that the Australian Government will participate in whatever action is needed internationally, as we seek internationally to isolate those who would engage in these acts and to ensure that their chances of perpetrating them again are minimised.

We’re doing everything we can to contact those Australians whose whereabouts have not yet been established. The Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade’s hotline remains open. There have been around 15,000 contacts as I understand it. Can I say to I think very importantly, I welcome those statements by leaders of Australian community groups condemning the attacks and calling for calm. We are a nation noted for harmony and for decent treatment of one another and for not presuming inappropriate motivation or action on the part of others in the lack of evidence to the contrary, or to that effect. So I do endorse those calls very strongly.

I know that everyone would join with me in expressing our sympathies to those who know now that they have lost members of their family. At a personal level I certainly do so. We had a Memorial Service here in Canberra yesterday, which the Prime Minister has indicated that he would like to extend next week to a larger memorial service. It would be my proposal that concurrent with that, the nation’s religious leaders conduct a day of prayer and that places of worship across our cities, our towns and our villages be thrown open - and that those leaders in the spiritual dimension of our nation’s life encourage us to think through the battle between good and evil, and justice and mercy and fairness and tolerance. These are times when we ought to be thinking about those things individually and as a nation.

A couple of other matters. In relation to the boat people, we will hear of course from the Federal Court some time this morning. I just want to say again that we will seek to put beyond any doubt in the Parliament next week our capacity to deal with these matters and we trust that Mr Beazley will ensure that he doesn’t blunder again.

2

Let me just say that we’re now waiting the announcement in New Zealand of Air New Zealand’s financials, they’re about half an hour away.

This morning Michael Cullen, the Minister for Finance over there, has released a statement which says that they have signed a heads of agreement with Air New Zealand as they seek to save Air New Zealand itself in isolation from Ansett. Astonishingly, that MOU talks about a further $150 million injection of funding from both BIL and from Singapore, a commitment of $550 million from the New Zealand Government, but all of it still subject to due diligence over the next four to six weeks and agreement by the banks.

In other words, even at this point, there is still no clear picture of the true financial position that that board has managed to put the outfit into. Now I just say to you, this is, to put it mildly, extremely frustrating. Shareholders themselves were unaware of the true picture and the impact on families, and on the travelling public in this nation is potentially enormous.

Now we continue to work extraordinarily hard. The voluntary administrators will be giving us a picture later this morning. But I have to say to you that grave as we’ve known that it is, it looks extremely serious indeed and I’m not quite certain what we are going to be told. And again I remind you that this is something that is worse than anyone was led to believe. Evidently members of the board themselves were not in a position to know how bad things were.

Do you know if those three Australians are tourists or people who worked there?

John Anderson. Look I don’t want - until their families say a little more about it - but one was conducting work, another was a woman from Sydney and the third a younger person. I really think until their families feel free to talk about it I’d rather not say any more.

If the US decides on some sort of retaliation ……. (inaudible)?

John Anderson. We’ve said that we will in principle stand with the rest of the civilised world in tackling this issue, if you like, in taking the battle right up to those who would confront in such an outrageous and indecent way our own decency and our own tolerance, then we in principle will seek to support that.

inaudible

John Anderson. Well we won’t be aiming to take innocent lives. We’ll be aiming to identify those who are responsible for this and aiming to ensure that they are not in a position to perpetrate it again.

3

Mr Anderson, NATO has decided that this invokes the NATO treaty,  where if one’s attacked then they’re all attacked. Will this invoke the ANZUS treaty as well?

John Anderson. Laurie, I think the reality is that the NSC may well have to consider that matter during the course of the day.

Will you announce the decision?

John Anderson. Yes.

On the issue of Ansett you’ve enunciated some frustration. Where is that frustration lying from, according to you.

John Anderson. Well the fact that - look let me get this clear, we always understood that Ansett had a problem. That they needed to be recapitalised to get the modern aircraft they needed to carry on into the future. And I just reiterate - let there be no mistake - there’s been no stalling of a decision-making process by what has happened in this country. We certainly put up an alternative proposal. In retrospect I have to say to you that the recapitalisation plan that was before us, I think would have fallen over as soon as due diligence was undertaken. I think that’s the reality that we’re now looking at. You stop and consider it.

But I have to say to you, that we were certainly being told that the two companies could not be disentangled. We were told that they were deeply enmeshed - we always worked on that basis. And we worked on the basis that they were saying to us they had a recapitalisation plan that would pull them through and secure their future and let them recapitalise and buy their new aircraft and so forth. That is a million miles from what we are now learning.

If the New Zealand Government from what you say, is willing to put in half a billion dollars to save New Zealand jobs, why won’t the Australian Government put any money into help save Australian jobs?

John Anderson. Ansett belong to a New Zealand company for a start. For a second, I have to say to you, I don’t know whether it is salvageable. I don’t know what is the point you say you’re going to use taxpayers’ money to try to save something that is not salvageable. We don’t know that yet. But in principle I just state to you we’re not going to go down that road of buying an airline company. We’re not going to do that. But I am saying to you that we’re working with a voluntary administrator and we’ve certainly had an indication from the major creditors that they will seek to cooperate - that’s good news - I’ll be talking shortly to the unions. And we’ll do everything we can, but I have to say to you, just read it, just read it.

4

So has the New Zealand Government led you down the garden path?

John Anderson. No, look I’m not going to point arrows at the New Zealand Government. Understand, they put in place what I thought was a good process. They found a highly competent person to develop the two streams which both countries were interested in. I can reveal to you now that it became reasonably obvious early on that because SIA was not going to take up what amounted to us clearly indicating that we would welcome direct investment in Ansett, so they put more work into their proposal. But as they did so, as they rightly if you like, did a government form of due diligence — let’s get to the bottom of this, is this going to work, is it going to be appropriate — the answers weren’t there. That’s what delayed this.

Mr Anderson, in reports yesterday that Gary Toomey resigned from many of the Ansett companies as early as August 24. Were you aware of it and are you concerned?

John Anderson. I’m not commenting on that matter at this stage.

Mr Anderson, it is clear that Ansett’s been a victim of neglect by it’s owners for the last, well almost, well over a decade. What lessons are there for the Government about approving foreign takeovers of Australian companies in key industries?

John Anderson. Well I think - can I make the point that generally speaking those who believe in reform say that the marketplace is the place to drive reform. I think you’d agree with that. You know, that owners driven by commercial realities in a competitive place are usually the places, the best places to ensure that a business operates efficiently, gets its service levels up to scratch, makes certain that it’s matching an outdoing, trying to outdo the competitors. Can I say to you that that is obviously not happened here and that is a very great tragedy indeed.

You’re saying, you’re suggesting that there’s been withholding of important information here so is there the need for some sort of corporate investigation? Are we talking about charges or any of that at this stage?

John Anderson. Look I’m not going to go down that road at this stage. Now, I just say to you that plainly the situation that has emerged in recent days, from Sunday on in particular, when for the first time I was told that they not only would be separating but they would be letting one part of it sink. I mean, really this tells you that they are struggling very hard now to preserve the original part of the company - the parent company. In that time, since then, what has emerged is that even now we are waiting for the figures to be released publicly and then you’ll all be able to digest them. I don’t know, I don’t know any more than you do, except that they’re going to be a long way away from what we were led to believe.

5

What does this say about the Government investment processes…….. (inaudible)?

John Anderson. Hang on, this is a foreign company. We don’t have the investigative processes….

Did you investigate this properly at the time?

John Anderson. Look they were prepared to pay to good money, it was the best offer on the table. What do you then say to the owners - “No, you can’t accept the best offer”?

But it’s obviously a key industry for Australia.

John Anderson. Well I simply say to you that at that time they put forward a substantial offer. We were very keen to see somebody love Ansett and seek to take it forward and get it onto the best possible commercial footing because as you yourself said it hadn’t been loved for a long time. And that was our hope and there was somebody there was obviously very keen to get it. One would have thought that a company like that - and Air New Zealand didn’t have a bad reputation, it was a pretty respected little airline - one would have thought they might have driven it in a competitive sense very hard and very fast and unfortunately that hasn’t happened.

ends

