Human Rights and Equality for Women in the 21st Century

Address by Professor Alice Erh-Soon Tay, President of the Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission

'Australian Women Speak' Conference 27-28 August 2001, Canberra

Thank you for the invitation to be with you today.

Before I start, let me acknowledge the traditional owners and custodians of this land on which we are now standing - the Ngunawal people.

The theme of this Conference - Human Rights and Equality for Women in the 21st Century - is rich fare for any time of the day. It calls for speculation about the future and assessment of the past; it invites fresh perspectives and challenges the imagination; it asks for re-examination of motives and goals.

Let us begin with a quick trot through history, take a look into the past for an understanding of the complexity of the human response to the issues of human rights and the equality of women.

In the 13th century, the good Thomas Aquinas pronounced women "defective and misbegotten", the product of a defective male seed.

In 1405, in the Book of the City of Ladies, Christine de Pizan, poet and moralist at the French Court, thought otherwise and said so: If men had stronger bodies, women had freer and sharper minds - if only they were educated.

Concern about equality between men and women and the recognition of women's rights, is clearly not a new invention.

Creator of the Civil Law system, the only body of law capable of challenging the Common Law in its complexity and subtlety, a hero of mine, Napoleon Bonaparte at the height of his military might, drafted a programme for the education of young French ladies . This programme, without a single qualification, sharply distinguished education for women from that for men, an education which would do nothing to open any doors save those into the kitchen and the bedroom.

For a hundred years, starting about 1837, national and international suffragette movements agitated for the vote. Some, like New Zealand and Australia, won it in 1893 and 1902 respectively, though Aboriginal women had to wait until 1968; others, only in the second half of the 20th century. Switzerland gave women the federal franchise following a referendum in 1971! And some cantons have still to do so.

High among intellectual women who have left significant marks on women's rights and equality was Mary Wollstonecroft who advocated them in her book A Vindication of the Rights of Women in 1792. In the 1850s, Harriet Taylor and John Stuart Mill in the 1850s jointly and separately put forward powerful arguments in the cause of equality.

At the beginning of the 20th century, Rosa Luxemburg, an early socialist in the feminist mode, insisted: "The emancipation of the human race will see the emancipation of women - to enter into a true partnership with men. We need to work to transform values … [to] maximise the potential of both men and women and enhance the quality of their lives and their families' lives".

At about the same time, Alexandra M Kollontai, a principal Marxist revolutionary publicist writing in the early decades of the 20th century, complained in her book, Women's Labour in Economic

HREOC Website: Speeches

http://www.humanrights.gov.au/about_the_commission/speeches_president/equality_for_women.html (1 of 5) [17/07/2002 11:38:15]

Development, that "the 19th century feminists naively attempted to transfer the struggle for women's equal rights from the firm basis of class relationships into the realm of the struggle between the sexes. The result was a distorted caricature. Where they might have assured themselves of success and gained the support of men in their own class, they lost both by proclaiming at every juncture, heedless of appropriateness, those one-sided feminist catchwords which urged equal rights for women, instead of putting forward the demands common to their class which would by themselves have resulted in a claim for women's rights." Justice Michael Kirby says much the same thing a few days ago when giving the Lesbia Harford Oration in Melbourne: Changes in work hours for women [to enable women barristers to both work and have families] will only come about with changes affecting men.

For their trouble, Blutige Rosa as she was known, Bloody Rosa, ended up floating in the muddy waters of the lake in the Tiergarten of Berlin, while Mme Kollantai, an early sexual libertarian, made the Russian Bolskeviks, Victorian in their values and attitudes, blush. Uncomfortable with her exploits, they consigned her to an ambassadorship in Sweden where her freedom of expression would not be so remarkable. But both these very intelligent, politically involved and sensitive women were right, in their days and in ours. The emancipation of all human kind would of itself emancipate both men and women from the artificial constraints of bourgeois life that create social distinctions between the sexes.

One hundred and forty-five years ago, a march through the streets of New York by a group of women to protest against abysmal pay and working conditions made March 8 henceforth the universally recognised International Women's Day. In 1908, 15,000 women marching through New York demanding better pay, shorter hours, voting rights and an end to child labour, adopted the slogan "Bread and Roses", bread symbolising economic security and roses a better quality of life. Ninety-five years ago, an International Women's Day march in St Petersburg of female textile workers calling for "Bread and Peace", led to the Bolshevik Revolution which ended the long Romanov dynasty and inaugurated the socialist transformation of which Rosa Luxemburg and Mme Kollantai had so much to say.

A few days ago, Ms Germaine Greer was reported singing peaens of praise to Aboriginal structures of empowerment of women and urging non-Indigenous women to learn from their Aboriginal sisters a more holistic, non-materialist mode of life.

This quick trot through time reminds us that perceptions about equality have varied enormously. It was sometimes seen as innately unachievable or even not to be attempted; sometimes as a flawed logic or ideology that can be easily corrected given the will or a political revolution; sometimes, it is the result of a fundamental socio-economic (read class) distinction that will disappear with the abolition of the economic conditions that give them nourishment. This historical excursus also brings out the variety of foci that women's rights and equality have taken: some claims are very specific - as for, literally, bread; some are universalist demands -political rights; some are derived from ideological perspectives targetting economic, biological and cultural causes; some carry proposals for direct and others for indirect solutions, etc.

The single, simplified moral to be extracted from all this is: there was - and there still is - no single, simple, claim for or against recognising and implementing equality or human rights for women. Only social conditions determined, and will continue to determine, the form and format of demands.

The recognition of women's rights is the culmination of not just decades, but centuries, of cultural development and influence. But the second half of the 20th century saw that movement take a broad and universalist step forward. For the 21st century, we must recognise that women's issues and their social contexts have become even more diverse and subtle, and "equality between men and women", now more than ever before, cannot be seen as having one simplistic one-size-fits all solution.

In some senses, we can say, together with the Virginia Slim advertisement, Women, you have come a long way. But have we come far enough?

HREOC Website: Speeches

http://www.humanrights.gov.au/about_the_commission/speeches_president/equality_for_women.html (2 of 5) [17/07/2002 11:38:15]

Statistics suggest still not: Not when women make up 70% of the world's poor; 60% of the world's illiterate and over 80% of the world's refugees; when they work, in countries considered models of economic success, 14 and 16 hours a day in sweat shops, six or seven days a week, for 40% of male pay. In Ms Greer's idyllic community of Aboriginal women, we learn from the 1996 census that a mere 22% of Indigenous women obtained a post-school qualification compared with 36% of women in the total population (itself not a statistic to boast about) and that Indigenous men fare not much better at 26% (Cwlth OSW, 1999, p.69); employment rates for Indigenous women stand at 20% that of the general population; life expectancy at birth for Indigenous Australians to be 56.9 years for males and 61.7 years for females compared with 75.1 years for other males and 81.1 years for females. Low-birth weight babies, stillbirths and neonatal deaths are all about twice as common among births to Indigenous mothers than among births to other mothers. Of course, it can be argued, as I am sure Ms Greer would, that such figures refer to situations created by foreign intrusions into an inherently better structured community. But we live in and act on the world that is, not the world we wish we could be in. I, for one, prefer, indeed value, for all the imperfections of the human world, the society of my fellow beings to that of even my very own geese.

Let us return to another theme I have hinted at: That of Bread and Roses and Bread and Peace, which are much the same thing.

In all advanced industrial societies and some developing ones, the Bread part of the equation has been incrementally fulfilled: women in those lucky countries have had formal civil and political rights; access to tertiary education and to most professions and vocational employment; they can own and dispose of property in their own name; etc. In 1948, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights made the first statement of a truly universal character recognising a set of indivisible human rights applicable to men and women of all races, religion, creed, and pressed the nations of the world to recognise, respect and promote these rights. Adopted without dissent, the Declaration marked the start of a significant social and cultural shift, and the decades that followed saw important progress for Australian women, as for the women of many other countries, especially in relation to economic advancement.

Unarguably, the greatest development in the articulation of women's rights came in the 1970s, with the development of the Convention on the Elimination of all Forms of Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW). As you all know, Australian women played a crucial role in the development of that Convention. Adopted by the United Nations in 1979, CEDAW is a clear and unambiguous statement of the rights of women around the globe. It prohibits discrimination on the grounds of sex, marital status, pregnancy and maternity. It provides women with the right to participate equally within the political, social, economic and cultural life of their country. And it obliges governments to take specific and positive steps to secure and protect the rights of women. In 1995, at the Fourth World Conference on Women, 40,000 participants attended to formulate strategies and plans For Action, Development and Peace. The ball that has been set rolling has not stopped.

Australia signed the Convention in July 1980 and ratified it three years later. The passage of the federal Sex Discrimination Act in 1984, giving domestic effect to the Convention, was yet another milestone for Australian women.

That the legislation was passed was, in itself, a victory.

It was one of the longest and most passionately debated Bills to go before the federal Parliament. Objections included that it defied nature, that it would destroy the family and push women into the workforce against their will - even that Shakespeare and the Bible would need to be rewritten to remove sexist language.

Well, some 17 years on and still the sky has not fallen in on Australian society.

The Sex Discrimination Act continues to successfully provide legal guidance, education and redress for thousands. Internationally, the Act is held in high regard and provides a model for many nations

HREOC Website: Speeches

http://www.humanrights.gov.au/about_the_commission/speeches_president/equality_for_women.html (3 of 5) [17/07/2002 11:38:15]

initiating similar legislation.

It would appear, however, that there are some in Australia today who would be more comfortable with a return to a previous time in our past and who firmly believe the Act, and other legislation like it, 'rot the fabric of society'.

But the regular stream of complaints that cross my desk indicates otherwise - it tells me that we have the legislation for good reasons. The volume and the nature of complaints that I receive show the Act is essential in addressing discrimination on the basis of sex, marital status, pregnancy and potential pregnancy.

We have come a long way so far on an extraordinary journey.

But I would suggest that, as we stride into a new century, we need a deeper cultural change if we are going to progress further to achieve not just full equality, but also quality of life.

We also need to deepen our thinking if we are going to successfully grapple with the challenges at hand.

The time has come to shift our focus from purely economic concerns and to recognise the importance of cultural growth and quality of life.

Despite our many achievements, we still have much in common with the 15,000 women who marched through the streets of New York on International Women's Day in 1908 with their slogan of 'Bread and Roses'. I want to talk about Roses, a better quality of life. I do this with some humility and hesistancy. No one knows more than a philosopher how difficult it is to quantify quality, how we justify one set of preferences against another.

The need for material "betterment", while not to be neglected, requires no special emphasis these days - such betterment is pursued by more and more people, more and more of the time. The need for taking stock of our moral and intellectual life, of our values, our principles, aims and capacities to feel and understand, now demands greater attention. For these qualities too, are part of women's quality of life.

If we are to have roses as well as bread, we must recover a more complete picture of culture and its innumerable connections with our full humanity. A culture rich in contrasting values; one that recognises the full range of human potentials; one in which each diverse human gift will find a fitting place. As the famous line of a Russian children's poem says: "one needs all kinds of mothers" -raznii mamii nyzhdnii. Life provides many experiences.

What does this mean for women struggling with multiple roles and wrestling with competing demands, in conditions of sweeping changes, in a seamlessly shifting world?

Any particular woman, like any particular person, belongs "essentially" not to one social group but to many. She will have many, often competing and conflicting, loyalties, needs and characteristics.

Women are often presented as constituting one single group rather than many groups of women with a great deal of diversity and difference amongst them. Differences are not merely cosmetic or superficial. There is a clear need to challenge this misleading and unhelpful, artificial unity of women's experience. Women simply do not constitute such a group. To see women solely as the oppressed victims is an illustration of a blatant distortion which denies our histories and cultures and greatly underrate our ongoing contributions to economic, social and cultural life. Alliances and divisions of class, religion, sexuality, history, ideological differences, etc are ever present, significant and interesting. "Gender", "race" and "class" are not static categories or fixed factors, but rather dynamic social processes in which everyone is located - they give rise to interactions between different parts of the self, different paths of choice and different forms of oppression.

Identity itself is not a static concept. As we grapple with the issue of identity as expressed in religion, nationalism, racism, ethnicity and gender, it can be difficult to unravel the many strands, even within oneself. Each of us has multiple identities within us. Identity does not stem only from being women. It comes from ethnicity, from

HREOC Website: Speeches

http://www.humanrights.gov.au/about_the_commission/speeches_president/equality_for_women.html (4 of 5) [17/07/2002 11:38:15]

politics, from religion, from family. It is important to allow for these multiple experiences and expressions of our identity because it enables us to challenge the stereotypes of who we are as women.

Put simply, we need to acknowledge, confront meaningfully, respect and represent women's difference, from each other as much as from men, not deny or minimise it.

We live in the best of times and the worst of times, in an age of increased moral sensitivity and in an age of strident self-assertion, both national and individual, and frequent moral savagery. We have seen the dismantling of taboos and limitation on thought and action, coupled with a loss of intellectual force and cultural confidence. We are in short, in an age of fragmentation, confusion and uncertainty in spite of our material power and benefits.

Discrimination does not always happen in neat little categories. We need to be mindful of the myriad of factors that impact on the lives of women and restrict their opportunities to participate in society -their racial or ethnic background, their disability, their age, their sexual orientation, just to name a few. As Aristotle urges about doing Justice, Treat like cases alike and unlike cases differently, according to their differences, with equality between the sexes, we must address different needs differently and same needs equally. We must take time to think through what equality really looks like.

We might also consider the words of Aung San Suu Kyi:

The quintessential revolution is that of the spirit, born of an intellectual conviction of the need for change in mental attitudes and values. Without a revolution of the spirit, the forces that produced the iniquities of the old order would continue to be operative, posing a constant threat to the process of reform and regeneration.

I trust this 'revolution of the spirit' will help inspire us all in our work. THANK YOU.

Â© Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission. Last updated 1 December 2001 Your comments and feedback are welcome. Email us at: webfeedback@humanrights.gov.au



HREOC Website: Speeches

http://www.humanrights.gov.au/about_the_commission/speeches_president/equality_for_women.html (5 of 5) [17/07/2002 11:38:15]

