Department of Defence Speech

19/06/2001 Departmental 190601/01



Linking Australia to the World

‘Linking Australia to the World’* BASED ON AN ADDRESS BY

ALLAN HAWKE

SECRETARY

DEPARTMENT OF DEFENCE

TO THE

IPAA CONFERENCE

CENTENARY OF THE

AUSTRALIAN PUBLIC SERVICE 19 JUNE 2001

* I’m indebted to my colleague Hugh White for his work on this

paper.

Well, what a century the 20th turned out to be! I wonder how they would they have felt, the founders of our Federation on 1 January 1901, if they had been granted a glimpse of the next 100 years?

Over 100,000 war dead. Over twenty-five years of foreign wars. Direct attack on our shores, and the threat of invasion. Collapse of the British Empire. The rise of Asia.

I suspect they would have been quite taken aback at what was to come.

We survived it all, be we achieved much more than simply that. If they could see us now, I think they would be surprised at just how well we have come through it all.

From White Australia to a proudly multicultural and multiracial society. Egalitarian from the start - equality of opportunity becoming part of the lexicon later in the Century. From a colony dependent on the mother country to strategic self-reliance with the self confidence to make an active contribution to the security of our region. Among the world’s great trading nations.

Even the most optimistic of the founding fathers would not be dissatisfied at what we have realised - and what we have become.

In the turbulent 20th Century, linking Australia to the world was not an easy task. Today is an occasion for celebration - an occasion to indulge in a little patting on the back - rather than one for soul searching or capitulating to the cultural cringe that seems to affect us so profoundly.

This week is an opportunity to recognise, salute and commemorate our predecessors in the Commonwealth Public Service - their 100 years of achievement; 100 years of contribution to Australia and her national interests.

Linking Australia to the World was, of course, one of the most important reasons for federation. The founding fathers - they were all men - recognised that there was an urgent need to provide a more cogent and forceful means for Australia to shape its international environment than could be achieved by the six colonies working separately and often at cross-purposes - quite unlike today’s Premiers’ Conferences!

Foreign affairs, defence, and immigration are among the clearest and least contested provisions in our Constitution.

Australia’s first federal Government had a clear and urgent set of tasks before them. It got on with the job immediately. One of the first acts of the new Commonwealth Government was to send a secret agent to the New Hebrides to report on what the French were up to. Another was to write to London arguing that the French should be asked to hand over Kerguelen to Australia - I’m sure you all know where that is! The Immigration Act was one of the first pieces of legislation passed by the Commonwealth Parliament.

As they got down to business, successive Commonwealth Governments faced two substantial difficulties. The first was a bewilderingly complex international situation. These complexities were caused most fundamentally by the decline of British power - relative to other European powers, to America and to Japan. Federation was, in part, a response to a prescient sense that Britain could no longer protect Australia’s interests.

At the very same time, however, Australia continued to see itself as integrally tied to and guided by Britain, especially in the conduct of international affairs. Those ties had both practical and emotional bases. There was accordingly, from the outset, an unresolved tension at the heart of our international approach. The history of our first century has been, in many ways, a reflection of our efforts to escape or resolve these tensions.

The second major problem was the lack of many parts of the machinery necessary to develop international policy and conduct international affairs.

In the development of military policy in the narrower sense - the administration of our defence forces - the new Federal Government could draw on the expertise built up in the pre-federation defence establishments of the states.

Within a few years, Australia had an integrated national army based on compulsory military service, a navy under national control, and the exciting beginnings of a military aviation capability. That work was done well.

One can only gaze in awe at the ability of Australia to respond to the call in 1914. Official notification of the prospect of war from London was received on 29 July. On 2 August, the first stage of mobilisation was ordered. The lead elements of the first AIF embarked in the last week of September - less than eight weeks later!

This was due primarily to the achievement of that remarkable first generation of Australian Army officers who made such an impact on Australia’s name and fortune in both the First and Second World Wars. The story of my military colleagues is closely interwoven with that of the civilian public service, but that is not my subject today.

However good our early defence administration may have been; in the development of high strategic policy and broader foreign policy the Commonwealth had to start from scratch. It would be fair to say that the start was slow.



As has occasionally happened since, the talents of Ministers had to make up for the deficiencies in the machinery of the public service. Ministers seemed not to feel the need for much support, perhaps because they were not too sure of their own roles, caught as they were uneasily in the constitutional cleft stick which saw the Commonwealth Government responsible for Australia’s foreign relationships, but still subordinate to decision making in London on most substantive issues.

For most of the first 50 years, the development of a coherent strategic and

foreign policy making structure in the Commonwealth Government languished. We had no foreign representation - except in London, which of course was not ‘foreign’. Ministers, when called upon to address international issues, relied mostly on their own instincts, and on the views of interested observers outside Government.

Some individuals came to the fore over this early period: Edmund Piesse, who headed the Pacific Branch in the early 1920’s, made a determined effort to understand Australia’s regional security environment. Sir Fredrick Shedden began his long career in Defence policy and administration in 1910, rising to the First Division as Permanent Head of the Defence Department where he served from 1937 to 1956 - 19 years at the helm. Those were the days!

In the late 1930’s, under Shedden, the Defence Department did much to prepare Australia for the coming war, for example by a major effort to build up our industrial infrastructure. And, at the same time, Ministers started the long process of building up Australia’s foreign service by posting official representatives to regional countries.

But it took the cataclysm of the Second World War itself to focus Australian Ministers on the need to build national strategic and foreign policy making machinery, and to develop a fully-fledged foreign service.

The fall of Singapore; the turn to America; the pressures of wartime policy making; the huge changes in our region and beyond with the rapid end of colonialism; and the exciting work of building a new world order based on international institutions such as the United Nations and Bretton Woods affected our response. All these meant Australia had to build its own strategic and foreign policy machinery, and fast. The end of imperial trade arrangements also meant a much more complex trading environment for Australia.

Looking back, one can only marvel at how the times brought forth the people. Allan Watt, Paul Hasluck, Arthur Tange, Jim Plimsoll, John Burton….. . They laid the foundations that have helped shape Australia’s strategic, foreign and trade policies ever since: the UN, ANZUS, the Colombo Plan, the relationship with Japan, and close engagement with our regional neighbours. And they laid the foundations of our foreign and strategic policymaking machinery, our modern intelligence capabilities, and our diplomatic service.



At the same time, one of the most profound developments in Australia’s linkages with the world was underway with the revolution in our immigration policy. Large scale planned migration really commenced in Australia at the end of World War II.

In Europe, millions of people were stranded outside their homelands. Australia was suffering from a desperate shortage of labour and there was increasing recognition and acceptance that population growth was essential for our future.

Formal and informal migration agreements between Australia and a range of European countries followed - including the United Kingdom, the Netherlands,

Poland, Italy, Germany, Turkey and Greece.

Since 1945, some 5.9 million people have come to Australia as new settlers and our population has almost tripled - rising from 7 million to around 19 million. Australia today has migrants from more than 170 countries and nearly one in four Australians were born overseas.

That paved the way for an even bigger change in our immigration policy and our whole national outlook - abandonment of the White Australia policy.

And, of course, our trade diplomacy was reoriented and revitalised as we sought to win new markets in the emerging post-war global economy.

Looking back, the late forties and fifties were periods of extraordinary achievement in Australia’s international linkages. It was also the time in which our modern public service really came into being.

In the process, the great public servants of those days set the ‘tone’ for those who, over the ensuing half-century, served government in promoting Australia’s security, prosperity, values and interests abroad. It’s worth trying to capture that tone in a few words.

First, of course, has been a rigorous tradition of loyalty to the elected government of the day. Over the past 50 years, immigration, foreign and defence policies have sometimes been highly politically contentious, and even socially divisive, in Australia. But governments have always been able to rely on impartial apolitical advice on the most sensitive issues, and scrupulous implementation of their decisions.

Second, there has been a sustained tradition of professionalism: high standards of expertise in the assessment of international developments and formulation of options for Government consideration.

Australians have become expert in the art and craft of bilateral and multilateral diplomacy. The same is true in immigration. Australia has had one of the best-planned, best-managed migration and settlement programs in the world. We are still regarded as a world leader in many areas of immigration policy and procedures. Many countries look to us for guidance on how to deal with future immigration and population problems.

Third, in serving Governments and national interests, Australian public servants have always tended to take a broad view of the issues. They have recognised that Australia must seek to make its place in the world as part of a wider international community.

So we have always placed a high emphasis on making a solid contribution to the big international issues of the day: disarmament, peacekeeping, development assistance, disaster relief and human rights. Australian officials have played a leading role in the development of multilateral forums and mechanisms to address such concerns, and in working bilaterally to promote successful outcomes. We have developed a well earned reputation for punching above our weight on the world stage.

Fourth, we have showed significant courage and determination - often working in very tough and inhospitable conditions. I would like to pay particular tribute here to the record of my colleagues in the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade, and Ausaid. The diplomatic career stereotype conjures up pictures of the high life in the glittering and cosmopolitan capitals of Europe and America. The reality for most of our diplomats has been very different; isolation in tiny places like Kiribati, discomfort and worse in places like Lagos, personal danger in many places, even as close as Port Moresby.

Our diplomats often end up on the frontline of regional and international crises -our mission in Iraq during the Gulf War, for example, or the superb conduct of our diplomats and other embassy staff in Jakarta and Dili during the dark and difficult days of the East Timor crisis. Some of our diplomats have heard more shots fired in anger during their career than many of our soldiers.

In the half-century since these institutions started to develop their modern form, they have supported Australian Governments in facing many new and difficult problems. That has meant acquiring new skills and developing new approaches to supplement the traditional skills and attributes I have outlined above.

One key area has been the development of civilian strategic policy expertise. As Australia moved to a self-reliant defence posture in the early and mid 1970’s, it became apparent that Governments would need more sustained and systematic advice about the development of our armed forces, and about the use of those forces in serving our national interests. At Sir Arthur Tange’s Memorial Service a few weeks ago, I had the honour of speaking about the great contribution he made to the development of Australia’s foreign and defence policies.

In the 1970’s Tange deliberately set out to attract to Defence highly talented people who would lay the intellectual and conceptual foundations which continue to underpin Australia’s strategic policies to this day. He recognised that civilian expertise in the higher reaches of strategic policy was an essential component of a self-reliant national defence capability.

A second important new area has been the development of policies and skills to respond to new pressures in our immigration program. An example of this was Australia’s response to the end of the conflict in Indo-China a quarter of a century ago which created a people-movement crisis. Australia was at the fore in addressing this problem. A swift policy response at the time reflected Australia’s acknowledgment of its responsibilities towards the people of the former South Vietnam.

In the early 1990s, Australia’s refugee and humanitarian intake was adjusted to take account of widespread political reforms and associated improvements in human rights in Eastern Europe as well as the implementation of the comprehensive plan of action in Cambodia. With two-thirds of the refugee and displaced populations of concern to the UNHCR located in Africa and the Middle East, Australian migration planning accordingly adjusted numbers from these regions.

More recently, Australia’s response to the humanitarian crises in Kosovo and East Timor was extraordinary. Nearly 6000 Kosovars and East Timorese arrived in Australia between May and September 1999 - the largest evacuations of their type in Australia’s history. The rapid and effective action taken by Australia in response to these international events reflects the flexibility and capability of the APS.

Another key area has been the development of expertise in arms control disarmament issues, as successive governments have sought to improve the global security environment though helping to limit the spread of weapons of mass destruction. DFAT and Defence have worked closely together to develop world-class capacities to address the technical, legal and political challenges to arms control. In the process they have made a major contribution to peace and stability.

A third area of developing expertise has been the environment. From the Antarctic Treaty negotiations of the 1980’s through to the complex issues of global warming and greenhouse gas emissions of today, Australian diplomats and scientists have developed innovative and effective approaches to some of the world’s most intractable problems. Their approach has been to combine the best technical and scientific analysis with a keen understanding of the political and diplomatic modalities and realities.

Finally, we have needed to meet the challenges of globalisation. Like every country, and like many other parts of Government, the management of Australia’s international engagements has been - and continues to be -profoundly shaped by the forces of globalisation. The concepts of national sovereignty are being redefined; the scope of international cooperation widened; and the day to day impact of international events on Australia greatly amplified. Globalisation means that the Government is required to maintain its interests around the world to engage in key issues of importance to Australia.

For example, policies have been re-focused in the past five years to facilitate the entry of an increased number of skilled migrants who have the ability to advance Australia’s economy. Australia’s migration program today recognises that business globalisation, arising from increased international trade and investment, and the creation of new and growing markets for young skilled workers in sectors such as information and communications technology, has led to more and more people moving temporarily around the world. Many other developed countries are, of course, also seeking skilled people from overseas to fill labour market shortages and to help address ageing and declining populations resulting from rapidly declining fertility rates. These points illustrate the direct linkage between geo-political shifts, relative changes in domestic and international economic circumstances, and Australian immigration policy.

I want to turn now to some challenges.

As institutions, I think we must address three key issues if we are to continue to offer Ministers the quality of support they have a right to expect.

First, we must harness the opportunities of IT to improve the way we develop

and deliver our products. This has been a major theme now for over a decade, but the steps we have taken so far are only the beginning.

Second, we must meet the challenge of growing the market for public policy ideas. Management of Australia’s international affairs has become a specialist’ business and the public sector has tended to develop a monopoly of expertise. That has not always been good for Government, and it is not good in the long term for us. We will all do better if we can benefit from competition. Ministers are keen to see alternative sources of input bloom. We need to help make that happen, and at the same time respond effectively to the competition that produces.

Third, we need to keep attracting our share of the best and brightest into this fascinating, rewarding but demanding area of public life. The Arthur Tanges and Jim Plimsolls, the Bill Pritchetts and Paul Dibbs of the future are out there somewhere.

But, we face unprecedented competition to attract them to work for Government. It’s not only, or even mostly, a matter of money. It’s more a matter of burgeoning opportunity. Fifty and even thirty years ago, a bright young Australian keen to lead a cosmopolitan life would find Government service the most obvious, and in many ways the only option. Today Australian economists, bankers, lawyers, management consultants, IT experts and almost every other profession can work pretty much wherever they want. We have less to offer today that can’t be matched by other employers.

That means we must focus more on what makes us special - that something extra that sets our work apart from others. That is, of course, the endless adventure of taking a direct and active part in advising government and of shaping Australia’s relationships with the rest of the world.

It is hard to separate our feelings about what that means, from our feelings for our country. Being Australians, overt proclamations of patriotism do not come easily. But service to our country is not an abstract concept or an empty slogan to those of us who have the privilege to work with Government. It’s the warp and weft of our working week.

And on the positive side, we have a wonderfully talented and diverse pool of talent to work on. The APS is increasingly becoming a microcosm of Australian society which, in turn, has been influenced significantly by migration.

Our successors over the next century will have at least as much to chew on as we have had.

We can hope that, after the horrors of the 20th century, the next 100 years will see less war and less upheaval. We can be confident that Australia enters the 21st Century with a much clearer idea of our national responsibilities and interests than we had in those first confused decades of lingering dependence. And we can be certain that the fear and xenophobia that motivated our first immigration policies has given way to an openness to new influences and peoples who will continue to strengthen and enrich our country.

New challenges will be there - are here already - to take the place of the old ones. Our prosperity will need to be won in an increasingly complex and competitive international marketplace. Our environment will need to be protected from new threats. Our borders will need to be managed in the face of unprecedented movements of people. And our responsibilities and interests in the peace and security of our region will need to be upheld.

If Linking Australia to the World was one of the major concerns of the founding fathers as they took up the reins of the first federal government one hundred years ago, it remains just as much a priority for the Governments and people of Australia today. I’m confident and optimistic that the Commonwealth Public Service will continue to have a major part to play in helping Government meet them.

Issued by Public Affairs and Corporate Communication, Department of Defence, Canberra, ACT, 2600 Media releases area available by email if you register at the Defence Media Centre at www.defence.gov.au

[ Defence Home ] [ back to top ]

