Speech

DR DAVID KEMP, MP

Minister for Education, Training and Youth Affairs

TRANSCRIPT OF THE

CLOSING ADDRESS OF THE NATIONAL YOUTH ROUNDTABLE 2001

Thank you very much Liam. What a remarkable day it's been. I've had the opportunity to sit through all but one, I regret to say, of the major group presentations. They have covered an extraordinary range of issues and topics.

We've heard about literacy, entertainment, its relationship to crime. We've heard about the engagement of students and disengagement in schooling. We've heard about sustainability, commercial utilisation of native wildlife, flora and fauna. We've heard about just recently misconceptions of rural life.

There's almost no aspect of Australian life that we have not heard addressed and discussed in some way today. I think every major Australian institution, families, communities, governments, voluntary organisations have been put under the microscope. They've been examined for what they can do and might do and what they're perhaps not doing at the present time.

Through all of these presentations, which have given I believe a very powerful message, there has been I think, a vision of an Australia that isn't here yet but might be.

There's the hope and the expectation in all these young people that Australia can be even a much better country than it is today. I think we all know that we're immensely fortunate to live in one of the world's remarkable democracies.

As the Prime Minister said in question time today, we're one of eight or nine countries in the world that accept refugees. We're a country that is a haven for people who want to live lives of freedom and dignity and yet we're all, also, conscious of the fact that there's a lot more that can be done to improve this country

- that Australia is nowhere near the potential.

And the message that I think has come through so powerfully today from all the young people who've addressed us and made their presentations to us, is that young people themselves have an enormous amount to contribute to achieving this vision of Australia. That we can have an Australia where young people in distress are cared for -- where they live in communities that are concerned about their future.

That there are people - communities who will listen to them and hear what they have to say and respond to that, so that as these young people move through into the various stages of adulthood, they will know already that they are contributing to building up an even more remarkable society.

And I think those of us who have heard them perhaps wish that we could return in 50 years time and see the Australia that these young people have built. It won't be an Australia without problems. I don't think anyone's succeeded in creating a human society without problems.

But it's almost certainly going to be an Australia where education is more adapted to the needs of the young people who experience it. Where young people are regarded as natural participants in any community consultation. Where the specific health needs of young people are understood and addressed.

Where the entertainment needs of young people are seen as being a real and genuine part of their lives and not just something that's frivolous and on the side and that we don't have to think about very much.

I'm sure that my Parliamentary colleagues have all been as impressed as I've been by the presentations today. I want to thank them very much for their attendance here at these presentations I've recognised members of Parliament from all political parties and all political persuasions and philosophies and probably the messages that have been given by the young people have appealed in different ways to different members of Parliament, because they represent the span of the Australian community, as does the National Youth Roundtable.

I know that there are members of Parliament who haven't been able to be here today for one reason or another and I think as the young people of the Roundtable who were in question time will realise, there are a number of other large and immediate issues which are occupying the attention of many people in the Parliament at the present time.

But despite that, many of those people who are very deeply concerned about these issues have been here at this Roundtable. I hoped that all the members of the Roundtable have felt that this has been a really worthwhile experience for them.

When you applied, put up your hand to be a member of the Roundtable I'm sure that you didn't fully realise just what it would involve and you made a decision based on a certain amount of trust that somehow or other you wouldn't be asked to do unreasonable things. But perhaps you didn't realise just how much you would be

asked to do. And could I say on behalf of the Parliament how greatly we appreciate your willingness to make the effort and to spend the time to go back to your communities, think deeply about these issues to think how you could communicate your concerns and recommendations to us and come back here and give us today what you have provided.

You've honoured the Parliament by your willingness to make that effort. You've said that you think that this is a worthwhile process and that the Parliamentary system we have is worth giving a bit of attention to and it's worth trying to talk to the people who try to run Australian Government. And I can assure you that all the Ministers and Parliamentary Secretaries who have taken part have greatly valued what you've offered.

I want to particularly thank my Parliamentary Secretary Trish Worth who's had an enormous role in my portfolio in relation to youth affairs and a number of the programs that she's been responsible for have been programs that have sought to address issues which have been raised with us today.

Issues of youth homelessness, the JPET program is one that we're particularly proud of. It clearly is only a contribution to addressing a much larger and complex problem. The Green Corps is one which has sought to involve young people in a very practical and active way in expressing their concern for the Australian environment and making a real contribution to preserving that environment.

My department runs some very major entertainment programs - the Rock Eisteddfod, the Clock Eisteddfod, the Battle of the Bands.

I think a rise out of the appreciation that some very valid things were said today about the important role that well organised entertainment activities can have and these of course are part or so of our anti-drug strategy - getting across the message to young people about the kind of youth they can live that will guarantee them the best adulthood in the years ahead.

The recommendations that you've made and the ideas will be carried forward by me to all the relevant ministers. We'll circulate the material that has been developed through these sessions - your reports. I think it would be an excellent idea to transcribe these presentations and make them generally available to the community.

I will take them forward to the Ministerial Council for the Ministers of Employment, Education, Training and Youth Affairs. I'll specifically draw attention to my State colleagues any issues that you've raised which, it seems to me, are important to be addressed by State Governments.

I'll discuses with Ian Mcdonald how we're going to communicate some of the very important messages here today for Australian local governments.

As I heard quite a number of the recommendations I asked my department to consider what we could do to implement some of these and some are possible for us to say today that we're prepared to take some action on and I'd like to just

mention a few of those.

The fact that I mention some shouldn't in any way imply that action on others wouldn't be taken. But there are some that just seem very easy to act on in the short term. For example, I was very impressed by the presentation by the education group, particularly the presentation and research that Adam Cooper had done and Nicole Turner on their work on bullying and on engagement of students.

And I'd just like to say today that I think that both of those are areas where we can immediately take some action. Because engagement is such a major issue, it's going to flow on in many ways. But it does seem to me that it is a very powerful concept, because after all, how do we evaluate the success of our schools?

And surely their capacity to engage students is one very important measure of their success. There are some schools I know around Australia which have achieved extraordinary levels of student engagement. The picture is not in any sense a uniform picture.

It is possible for my department to investigate best practice in student engagement -to report on schools which are actually achieving many of the things that Adam was talking about and the students that he interviewed were concerned about.

It is practical for us to do something more to communicate how bullying in schools can be effectively addressed. I know all my State colleagues want to address that issue.

We've already produced material that has been circulated to every school in Australia about bullying.

But there were suggestions made today for example, about how young people in schools can be an important part of the solution to bullying in the school environment - as they can be an important part of the solution to racism and it is possible to involve young people and we will do what we can through our means and through our links with education systems and with schools to see that those ideas are properly transmitted and picked up where they can have an effect.

This year the Commonwealth launched a body called the Enterprise and Career Education Foundation, which is specifically designed to encourage VET programs in schools - Vocational Education and Training. It has an important role in encouraging hands-on activity in the workplace as part of the school curriculum.

We are seeing significant changes and I can't tell you how heartened I am by the very positive comments that have been made in the presentations today about the worth of those programs and the contribution that they are making for young people. Again there's much more that can be done.

The suggestion was made that volunteer organisations in communities should be more actively linked with schools. We can do that through the Enterprise and Career Education Foundation.

That Foundation doesn't just have to deal with employers of commercial enterprises. It can deal with volunteer organisations and because the Roundtable has made that suggestion, we'll instruct the Foundation as best we can, certainly strongly advise it, to engage in its work the volunteer organisations in the community.

We know that volunteer organisations have got a critically important role to play with young people and I would like to acknowledge in these closing remarks the fact that we have so many representatives here from volunteer organisations working with young people.

It's wonderful that they have made the effort to be here and to listen to these presentations and I'm sure that they'll take away from today many of the messages that we've all heard and be thinking very hard about how they can best build on the very good comments and analyses and advice that we've received.

I was very interested in Yin Paradies’ paper about the important elements of successful youth development and the idea of developing life skills and empowerment programs for young Indigenous people.

And I'm very pleased to report that Senator Vanstone, the Minister for Family and Community Services has asked her department to work with Yin to develop his ideas for a life skills empowerment program for Indigenous youth.

[applause]

Fionna Lawson proposed greater mentor support for young people experiencing difficulties with literacy and numeracy. And I'll look to see what we can do to include mentoring in the new guidelines for the new Apprenticeship Access Program which is a very flexible program designed to help young people who are at risk, make it through to a successful next step in education and training. Like the members of the Roundtable it seems that mentoring has a huge amount to offer. One of the greatest obstacles to it, is the rigidity of our institutions and institutional reform is probably going to be significant in making the most of the mentoring capacity that's there in the community.

But I believe that the new Apprenticeships Access Program can indeed effectively incorporate the concept of mentoring and we’ll do that.

Kiarna Adams produced a draft booklet to encourage young Indigenous people to pursue careers in the health field. I think that this booklet is clearly one that is providing valuable information and so I've asked my department to support the further development and preparation and publishing and distribution of this booklet on a wider scale. And I believe we can build on it.

[applause]

Now there are many other wonderful suggestions. I don't think I heard a presentation today that didn't make me think and that really at the end I think is the

significant role of the Roundtable.

I mean we haven't asked members of the Roundtable to come to Canberra as experts in policy making. We've asked young people to share their experience with us and to tell us what conclusions they've drawn from that experience.

And I believe the members of the Youth Roundtable have performed that task magnificently. It's been a very moving and inspiring day.

This is one of the great days to be a minister, particularly a Minister for Education and Youth Affairs, because you can learn so much. And these young people have informed us and taught us a lot about what it means to be a young person in Australia at the beginning of the 21st century.

And on your behalf I would like to thank them. I would like to wish them well for the future. While this is not the - this is the formal end of the Roundtable, it is not the end of their involvement with their ideas and with the Government, because we will be seeking to do what we can to further support you in bringing your dreams to reality.

In the end it's up to you. It's very much in your hands what happens to your ideas, whether your dreams are fulfilled, whether the Australia that you are living in and are going to bring up your families in and enjoy in the years and decades ahead is the Australia as you want it to be. It's up to you members of the Youth Roundtable. Good luck for the future. Thank you.

[applause]



Return to the Top of the Page

contact details  |  search  |  publications  |  site map  | subscribe

the source  |  career information | education network australia (EdNA)   australian education international | prime minister's web site

Any comments or queries should be sent to: wwweditor@detya.gov.au

This page was last updated on Friday, 21 September 2001 Department of Education, Training and Youth Affairs Copyright Â© Commonwealth of Australia DETYA Web Site Privacy Statement Disclaimer

