http://www.democrats.org.au

Senator Andrew Bartlett Australian Democrats’ Immigration Spokesperson

23 August 2001  MEDIA RELEASE                          01/495

Ruddock condemned by his actions Minister Ruddock’s pre-emptive strike at the Commonwealth Ombudsman’s report on the self-immolation of a refugee does nothing to quell the community’s growing disquiet at his mismanagement of the refugee issue, the Australian Democrats said today.

Senator Andrew Bartlett, the Australian Democrats spokesperson for Immigration said, “Minister Ruddock shouldn’t be surprised to find himself under attack again; he is condemned by his actions.”

“The Minister’s handling of Mr Kayani’s matter was deplorable. He had the opportunity to show leadership and compassion, but instead he once again demonstrated his lack of humanity.

“Minister Ruddock could have waived health requirements to allow Mr Kayani’s wife and three daughters to travel to Australia, but this was rejected on the grounds that one of his daughters had a mild form of cerebral palsy, which could have required ongoing health management.”

Senator Bartlett said, “It is clear that the Ombudsman’s Report is highly critical of the Minister and his Department.

“Ombudsman, Ron McLeod, accuses the Immigration Department of bias, ineptitude, unfairness and a lack of compassion, and recommends that the health requirements for family members should be no different from those for the person who makes the application - this would be a major step forward in humanising our processing of asylum seekers.”

“The Ombudsman also recommends a review of regulations to make it easier and faster for families to join family members with refugee status.

“All these recommendations would serve to reduce the anguish and despair experienced by so many of Australia’s asylum seekers,” said Senator Bartlett.

“But despite the continual criticisms levelled against Minister Ruddock, in regards to his treatment of refugees and asylum seekers, it seems he is impervious to community concerns and incapable of accepting any blame; his response to this and other matters is always attack is the best defence,” concluded Senator Bartlett.   ENDS

For interview: Senator Bartlett on 0418 743 789 or (02) 6277 3406

