THE WORLD AFTER 11 SEPTEMBER: IN DEFENCE OF OPTIMISM



Remarks by Gareth Evans, President of the International Crisis Group and Former Foreign Minister of Australia, to The Pilgrims of the United States, New York, 13 November 2001



Thank you for giving me the pleasure of speaking to you, and thanks in particular to your President Henry Luce III for inviting me. I know that Hank has a little bit of a soft spot for Australians -  and a wonderful collection of our best contemporary artists to prove it (I know, because I’ve been in his lavatory) -  but I’m touched and amazed in equal proportions that he should have been prepared to let such a blueblood organisation slum it with a former Minister from the Labor Party.



Australians, as you possibly know, have a congenital disposition to look on the bright side of things. Probably it’s a matter of necessity:



q              necessary when your origins lie not in a shipload of God-fearing pilgrims bravely seeking  freedom in the new world, but a bunch of thieves, pimps, prostitutes and worse being most involuntarily transported from the old world to a new kind of gaol;



q              necessary when you’re 12 000  miles from anywhere that the Pilgrims of New York or their forebears would  no doubt regard as the centres of civilisation, and your closest neighbour is New Zealand (with all due respect to your recent guest Jim Bolger) ; and



q              necessary when your Prime Minister (who has just won his third term in office with a  campaign strategy that would have made Huey Long blush) has the kind of charisma that makes my old colleague Warren Christopher look like a rock star.



But it hasn’t been easy even for Australians to look on the bright side of things since 11 September. Like everyone else in the world, we recoiled in horror at what we saw on television screens, and mourned your dead as if they were our own, as some of them indeed were.  The magnitude of what happened is really still only sinking in: more men, women and children were killed by terrorist acts on that single bright blue morning than in Ireland and Israel combined over the last fifty years.



As always, it’s the small things that get to you. In my case it was two of them. First, a few days after the attack, walking among all those flyers posted  in Union Square, crying out for the missing - hoping without  hope, but hoping against hope nonetheless, that the loved one was still alive -  when I saw one which could have been, and I thought for a moment  was,  the face of my own 25 year old daughter,

THE WORLD AFTER 11 SEPTEMBER

http://www.garethevans.dynamite.com.au/speechtexts/Pilgrims_World_After_11_September_13xi01GEfinal.htm (1 of 6) [10/04/2002 3:43:04]

sassy, beautiful, with all her life still ahead of her.



Then a week or two later, on another visit, when I was walking around lower Manhattan, a block or two from Wall Street, for some reason I felt compelled to run my finger through the half-inch-think layer of concrete dust that had accumulated on the window ledge outside a deli, and  the enormity of it all struck me acutely: how could that million tons  or more of concrete in the Trade Centre have been pulverised down to this?  If this is what happened to poured, reinforced concrete, how much could have been left of those incinerated and crushed in the ruins?



It hasn’t been easy coping with the economic and financial consequences of this either, in the United States, and everywhere else as well. Consumer confidence has collapsed, investment is not happening, trade is falling away, the tourism and travel sectors are on their knees, productivity is sliding backward as inventory management systems fall apart, the stock market is reeling, unemployment is skyrocketing, and recovery seems a long way away. Not all of this can be directly attributed to 11 September, but a huge amount of it can.



So with all that gloom, what could there possibly be to cheer about, or be optimistic about, in the world as we find it after 11 September? Actually quite a lot, when you stop to think about it.  Without any pretensions to rival David Letterman, let me give you my  list of 10 things that seem to me at least to be changes for the good since 11 September - from my own perspective as a regular visitor to this city and this country, from someone who has had a lifetime passionate in global affairs, and from someone whose present overwhelming preoccupation, as President and CEO of the International Crisis Group, is the prevention and containment of deadly conflict.



First, the civility that you now find on the streets of New York . This is - as you all know better than me - a brash, tough, swaggering, in your face, me-me kind of town. I’m not suggesting that Manhattan turned overnight into a kind of hippy commune, but there is as you move around a new kind of courtesy and consideration for others that is genuinely noticeable. You would have to be a supreme optimist to think this will last forever, but it’s nice while it does - and maybe New Yorkers will actually get to like it.



Second, the way that excess has become unfashionable.   The conspicuous consumption bubble of the 1990s seems to have well and  truly burst, with a great many people in this country, as well as the West generally,  having second thoughts after 911 about whether the things that really matter in life are all the material badges of success - as distinct from home, family, personal relationships and deeper values. What we are also perhaps seeing is the beginning of  a glimmer of recognition that maybe it’s not all that good idea to be showing it off so much in a wider world where per capita income in the world’s richest country is 100 times higher than the poorest, as compared to a ratio of just 9 to 1 a century ago; where in a number of places not just relative but absolute levels of poverty are growing as well. [Andrew Mack, IHT, 9 November 2001];  and where around half the world’s 6 billion people are struggling to survive on

THE WORLD AFTER 11 SEPTEMBER

http://www.garethevans.dynamite.com.au/speechtexts/Pilgrims_World_After_11_September_13xi01GEfinal.htm (2 of 6) [10/04/2002 3:43:05]

less than $2 a day, and have never seen a personal computer or even made a telephone call [Strobe Talbott, Foreign Policy, Nov-Dec 2001].



Third, the end of American disconnectedness  with the rest of the world.   11 September shattered any illusion that the two-ocean cocoon in which the US has felt so sheltered for so long was any longer a protection for the heartland. And with that recognition has come a much greater recognition, psychologically, across the nation and not just among policy makers (who I don’t think ever really believed it), that isolationism - switching off from the rest of the world’s problems and just focusing on our own - is just not an option for this country.



The world is a highly connected place these days, as every highbrow study and lowbrow piece of journalism keeps telling us, and dirty little wars in faraway places that may not seem to be anyone’s business here - and political and economic and social and cultural grievances that noone wants to have to even think about in the West - have shown themselves to be capable of generating, directly or indirectly,  the most catastrophic damage here. The impact on us here of instability and conflict in faraway corners of the world has been obvious enough for years if anyone had wanted to look in the spread of narcotics trafficking and other international crime, in the spread of disease like AIDS, in spillover environmental disasters, and  in mass movements of the refugees and displaced . And, as nobody now needs reminding, it’s there with international terrorism. What 911 has done is force everyone to face up to the reality of international connectedness, and to take policy action accordingly.



The fourth point follows logically from the third:



Fourth, the greater embrace of multilateralism in foreign policy .  US foreign policy has usually been more accurately described as unilateralist than isolationist. At least at senior levels, it has been recognised that America can’t insulate itself from the impact of the world’s problems. But more often than not  the belief seems to have been that in solving those problems, at least as they affected the US, America didn’t really need much help from anyone else. And it certainly didn’t need to enmesh itself in tiresome and restrictive treaty obligations on climate change, biological weapons, small arms, the new international criminal court …



While this approach was obvious for the world to see in George W’s Foreign Policy Mark I  (the one prevailing from January to 10 September this year), things were not really all that different under either Bush Senior or the Clinton Administration, as I can testify from eight years as Foreign Minister of one of their favorite countries. Little guys depend on cooperative give-and-take relationships much more than great big guys think they need to, and getting the occasional bunch of roses doesn’t quite make up for being snubbed at all the big dances...



THE WORLD AFTER 11 SEPTEMBER

http://www.garethevans.dynamite.com.au/speechtexts/Pilgrims_World_After_11_September_13xi01GEfinal.htm (3 of 6) [10/04/2002 3:43:05]

After 911 the realisation has dawned in a major way that there are a whole bunch of inter-related problems that no country in the world, not even the US, can solve all by itself -  building sustainable defences against international terrorism means not only mounting punitive military action (which needs, at the very least, bases and overflight rights in other countries), but intelligence cooperation, money trail cooperation, public diplomacy cooperation (what used to be indelicately called propaganda) and cooperation in addressing root cause grievances through effective development assistance and conflict resolution diplomacy.



If the multilateralist approach the US is very effectively adopting at the moment in the war against terrorism - and which it’s going to have to maintain there for a long time to come - can start filtering out into other areas of foreign policy, the US is going to win more genuinely appreciative friends around the world than it’s had for a long time, and that will very much work to this country’s long term interests both in security and economic terms.



Fifth, the disappearance of some of the more mindless opposition to globalisation .  It’s not  just the distance to the Persian Gulf, and the likely inhospitability of the hosts on arrival, that have taken the sting out of the demonstrations at the current WTO Conference in Doha - it’s also I think the sobering impact of 911, and a better perspective on what really does and doesn’t justify extreme opposition.   We will know in the next 24 hours whether governments themselves have risen to the challenge of producing a constructive outcome, but the debate and the press coverage have for once at least  been on the main issues - getting a win-win outcome on trade liberalisation - rather than on the multiple side issues of environment protection, labour standards and human rights generally, all of which are important in their own right but should be addressed  through mechanisms other than trade negotiations.



Sixth, a better US relationship with Russia .  President Putin’s alacrity in responding to 911 with policy support across a wide front (intelligence cooperation, air corridors, support for basing in Central Asia) may have been opportunistic -  motivated by a desire to get some cover for Chechnya, hold some lines on missile policy and get some help for the Russian economy. But it’s certainly breathed new warmth and content into a relationship that certainly needed both, and could lead to some real benefits - not least getting a real policy partnership going in resolving the remaining problems in the Balkans. Among the unthinkable things that have now become thinkable is Russia’s admission to NATO - although Russia could of course end up taking the rather sophisticated Groucho Marx view that it wouldn’t want to belong to a club that was prepared to have it as a member…



Seventh, a  better US relationship with China . Even more extraordinary than the US-Russia love-in has been the rapprochement in Washington-Beijing relations, a remarkable turnaround from the deep freeze relationship  - with the spy plane affair as the nadir - just a few months ago, which Bush Foreign Policy Mark I seemed determined to create and maintain. China, again, has its own motives for wanting to be cooperative on terrorism - with its anxiety about Islamist extremism in its western border zones , but the thaw is in everyone’s interest.  And I say that with particularly deep feeling as someone whose foreign policy life has been concentrated in the Asia Pacific reason, and dedicated in particular to forging a

THE WORLD AFTER 11 SEPTEMBER

http://www.garethevans.dynamite.com.au/speechtexts/Pilgrims_World_After_11_September_13xi01GEfinal.htm (4 of 6) [10/04/2002 3:43:05]

workable set of relationships around the region with China.



Eighth, new thinking on US  relations with the Islamic world.    11 September has broken a series of logjams  in diplomatic relations with key countries of the Islamic world - including Iran and Pakistan, the support of both of whom  has been and will remain crucial not only in dealing with the Taliban’s harbouring of al-Qaida, but in building a new regime in Afghanistan that will not be as bad for both Afghanis and the world as those who have gone before it.  There are encouraging signs that relations with Iran might be at last on their way back to some kind of normality, and that Pakistan  - whose combination of nuclear capability  and unstable military government has meant that it has to be taken very seriously indeed - might at last be consolidating, as a government and a nation, around the moderate middle.



There has also been some encouraging sign of new thinking in the US administration, brought into focus by 911 and the need to address some of the root causes of terrorism, about the viability of continued reflex support for Saudi Arabia and all the other Arab non-democracies and anti-democracies that the Cold War and our Mid-East oil dependence taught us to love.  There are some policy perils in greater democratisation - not least the likely emergence, as in Algeria, of fundamentalist Islamist parties as those with the greatest popular following - but maybe not as many as in the indefinite prolongation of the status quo: we didn’t need bin Laden to tell us that hostility is building up in the Arab streets against a number of established regimes who have been delivering neither basic political and other freedoms nor economic prosperity to their people.



Ninth, the possibility of forward movement on the Israel-Palestine issue.   Of all the areas for optimism generated by 911 that I have identified, this has to be the flimsiest. It’s not possible to be very optimistic about anything with the Palestinian leadership as rudderless as it usually seems to be, and with the present  Israeli leadership all too clear in its determination to steer anything resembling a viable peace plan straight on to the rocks.



But the need for the US to win moderate Arab support for the war on terrorism has led to some useful signs that it wants to play a role back in the field and not in the bleachers, that it is prepared recognise the absolute legitimacy  not only of the Israelis’ but also the Palestinians’ claim to have a viable state of their own, and that it is prepared to be tough about some of Mr Sharon’s more egregious successes.  That role for the US is an absolutely indispensable precondition to dragging the present awful situation in Israel, Gaza and the West Bank back on track, and it’s good that it’s starting to be played.



Tenth, a renewed strengthening of the US-Britain relationship.  One of the most cheering things about the whole deeply depressing 911 affair to a Pilgrims audience must have been the way that Britain so quickly and surefootedly and uncompromisingly positioned itself after 11 September as the US’s major ally, willing to not only contribute military support but to carry a great deal of the diplomatic water as

THE WORLD AFTER 11 SEPTEMBER

http://www.garethevans.dynamite.com.au/speechtexts/Pilgrims_World_After_11_September_13xi01GEfinal.htm (5 of 6) [10/04/2002 3:43:05]

well. Tony Blair in his full-flight evangelical mode can be a bit of an acquired taste at times, but it must have been heartening to think that he didn’t just turn it for his political soulmate Bill Clinton, and really did care about  America and the values that Britons (and others of us in the British tradition)  share with it.



The British philosopher Isaiah Berlin, in a recently turned up manuscript just published in the New York Review of Books described  “the most valuable - or one of the most valuable - elements in the British tradition” as being “the relative freedom from political, racial, religious fanaticism and monomania”,  and its nice to be reminded in the present environment just how relevant and important to our sanity and well being as an international community those values are.



I’ve tried to make a case for deriving at least a little good cheer from the aftermath of events which themselves had nothing but horror about them.   It’s the fate of optimists to be constantly disappointed by the real world, and it may be that many of the developments I have mentioned will prove all too unhappily transitory.



But it’s the nature of optimists to bounce back, and that’s an important dynamic in the world out there. Optimism can be self-fulfilling, and if it leads you to take risks - hoping always that some good will come from disturbing the status quo - then just occasionally  it might work.



It was after all a pretty extreme brand of optimism that led the original Pilgrims to embark on their voyage to the new world -  though I guess that if they knew it might all lead to Jerry Falwell and Pat Robertson they might have turned right back again. But it’s that kind of optimism, and that kind of faith in the ultimate power of good to triumph over evil that the US and the world needs right now.

THE WORLD AFTER 11 SEPTEMBER

http://www.garethevans.dynamite.com.au/speechtexts/Pilgrims_World_After_11_September_13xi01GEfinal.htm (6 of 6) [10/04/2002 3:43:05]

