

Minister asks Australians about Managing Migration MPS 151/2001

The Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs, Philip Ruddock, launched his annual consultations on the 2002-03 migration and humanitarian programs in Sydney today.

"The consultations will give Australians the opportunity to have their say on the migrant intake for the coming financial year," Mr Ruddock said.

"Australia and many other countries are at a cross roads in migration history. For the past 50 years, Governments have decided who can come and join their nation based on social, economic and humanitarian factors.

"Events in recent times now raise the danger that organised smuggling rings could decide a significant proportion of our intake, but that is an outcome the Government cannot accept.

"The Government has long-term strategies to deal with the problem of unauthorised arrivals including legislation changes; international cooperation; effective application processing, and active law enforcement and intelligence.

"We will still continue to promote the value of our planned migration and humanitarian programs and continue to refine these programs. This is what my consultations are all about.

"There is a wide range of views on population and immigration and that is to be expected in a vigorous parliamentary democracy like ours, but the Government believes it is important to help inform those views as well as listen to the community," Mr Ruddock said.

The Minister's consultation process includes:

a discussion paper raising issues on the size and composition of Australia's Migration and Humanitarian Programs; ●￻￻￻

a range of public meetings in capital cities and regional centres including Ballarat, Ballina, Kalgoorlie, Townsville, Launceston and Mt Gambier; ●￻￻￻

seeking written submissions from the Australian community; and ●￻￻￻

inviting discussion on migration issues on an on-line discussion forum. ●￻￻￻

During the consultation process, the Minister will hold meetings with State, Territory and local governments, business and industry groups, unions, environmental bodies, welfare organisations, refugee agencies, and representatives of Australia's migrant communities.

The meetings provide an ideal forum for all Australians to contribute their ideas and provides the Government with community views on issues regarding refugee resettlement and other humanitarian and general migration issues.

10 September 2001 Media Inquiries: Steve Ingram (02) 6277 7860

Editors note: The discussion paper on the 2002-03 Migration and Humanitarian Programs along with other information on the consultations, is available on the Minister's website at http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/consultations.

Media Release Index



