www.pm.gov.au

28 September 2001

TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER THE HON JOHN HOWARD MP ADDRESS AT DICKSON COMMUNITY MORNING TEA ARANA HILLS, BRISBANE.

Subjects: government achievements; asylum seekers; terrorist events in the US; economy; Peter Dutton - Liberal candidate for Dickson

E&OE…………………………………………………………………………………...

Thank you very much Peter, Senator George Brandis, Mrs Penny Edwards, ladies and gentlemen.

As Peter said this is not the first time I’ve come to the electorate of Dickson to speak on his behalf and to ask the people of this area of Brisbane as I do this morning to support him as your federal member of Parliament when the election is held.  And just on the question of when the election is going to be held I can promise you one thing.  There will not be an early election.  It is in fact constitutionally impossible now to have an early election because the government’s three year term runs out next Wednesday.  And it’s a bit hard to have an early election when your three years runs out next Wednesday.  In fact you may be interested to know those of you who follow some of the fine detail of  politics that this… the Parliament that rose last night in Canberra sat more days than any federal parliament in Australia since the Parliament of 1946 - 1949 when Ben Chifley was the Prime Minister of Australia.  So anyone who says that  we’re, when we do go we’re going early really wants to do a little bit of political history study to get an understanding of what really does happen in this country.

But ladies and gentlemen there will be an election soon and the people of this electorate as indeed the people of Australia will need to make a choice and I can’t be more delighted about the quality of the Liberal Party standard bearer here in the seat of Dickson than I am about Peter Dutton and I really do wish him well.  I think he is an excellent energetic young candidate who understands the area, has worked very hard, has had in his relative youthfulness, I say only relative because he is a year or two younger than I.  In his relative youthfulness he has packed quite a bit of experience in and I think he’ll make a wonderful representative and in making your choice you really do need to take into account the measure of local commitment of the competing candidates.

PRIME MINISTER

2

But you also need  to recognise that when you cast a vote in a local election you are also voting for the leader of the country and you are voting for the government of the country. And you have to ask yourselves what kind of leadership, what kind of attitude, what kind of capacity to take decisions in difficult times this country needs.

We’ve been in government for five and a half years and there have been a number of occasions during that five and a half years when the government has faced some very difficult decisions.  And our responses to those decisions have always been well thought out.  They have always been decisive.  And most importantly of all they have always been designed to put Australia’s interest first.  Because that is what the Australian people want.  And when you look back at the decision we took on uniform gun laws, a decision that was not universally popular particularly in some of the country areas that traditionally supported our side of politics.  But it was in Australia’s interest that that decision be taken.

When we took the decision we did to introduce a new taxation system - that was very unpopular at the beginning and people were very critical of it.  Our opponents thought that that would be enough to guarantee them, in a very negative way, victory at the next election. And it still remains in the eyes of some people an object of criticism.  But it was something that was in Australia’s interests to be done.  We are like all other nations, a nation whose age profile is growing older and we therefore have to find a growing source of revenue that will enable us to pay for the growing number of services that we will need for an ageing population.  And without a broad based indirect tax, without a goods and services tax it simply isn’t possible for us to provide that revenue base.  So it was putting Australia’s interests first rather than our own political interests first that led us to commit ourselves to the introduction of a new taxation system.  And if we had our time over again we would not have changed our position in relation to taxation reform.

And when we had to take a decision to say to the former government in Indonesia that the right thing to do in relation to East Timor was for a United Nations sanctioned intervention to occur we knew that that would cause a strain between Australia and Indonesia.  But it was in Australia’s interests that we protect a small vulnerable defenceless country many of whose citizens had helped Australian soldiers during World War II in some of the darkest days of that conflict.  And once again it was a question of putting Australia’s interests first.

And over the last couple of months the Government has taken a very strong stand, not against refugees - this country takes more refugees on a per head basis than any country in the world other than Canada - other than Canada.  There are only eight or nine countries in the world that take refugees and Australia is one of them and we are the second most generous. What we are saying is that we are not prepared to allow the borders of this country to be crossed and violated in a disorderly, illegal, indiscriminate fashion.

Every country has the right to control its borders. Every country must exert that right. And this is an issue I predict will grow in the consciousness of governments around the world in the months ahead rather than diminish.  What we said in relation to those asylum seekers, and we have no way of knowing that they are all asylum seekers, we don’t know. I’m not saying they’re not, I’m not saying they’re are. We do not know. And that is why we have the right to establish a mechanism whereby we can ascertain their true status and then having done so they can be dealt with in accordance with the international principles of refugee resettlement. And Australia has been a generous contributor to that process and we remain a generous contributor to that process.

3

So that is why we took the action we did in relation to the Tampa. It is why we excised Christmas Island and Ashmore Reef and Cocos Island from the migration zone so that people by getting a mere foothold there could not establish an entitlement to some kind of refugee status in Australia and that of course is why we have been trying for several years to amend the law to make it harder for people by tying their applications up in the courts to stay here indefinitely even though in the end they don’t establish a refugee status.  Now we’ve blocked by others in the Senate - by the Labor Party and others in the Senate - right up until the last couple of days. Right up until the last couple of days.

And then right on the death they said oh know we’ll let it go through and then under their breath they say of course if we win the election we’ll change it all again.  Now what kind of cynicism is that? I mean we have had a clear position on this. Our opponents have gone from one side of the street to the other. Flip flop and a reflip. I mean it just is not a serious way for the alternative government to function in relation to something that’s so important.  And it will be important in the months ahead. We maintain our position.  We continue to take refugees. We have taken people from 140 different countries in the world. No country in the world has been more successful in taking people from different parts of the world than Australia.  No country has peacefully settled them. No country has been more tolerant and more open and I want it always to be that way.

And it’s very important in the context of the terrible events that occurred in the Untied States on the 11th of September, and the obvious link between those acts of murder and terror and certain terrorist organisations that have associations and origins on the extremes of Islam, it’s very important we understand that there are Australians of Islamic faith, there are Australians of Arab background amongst us who are as entitled as you and I are to the comfort and the protection of the democracy of this country. It’s very important at a time like this we hold the hands metaphorically and otherwise of those in our number who are of the Islamic faith. Hundreds of people, Americans of Islamic faith died in the World Trade Centre and it’s important that we remember that.

It’s also important that we don’t get carried away with some of the alarmed stories about an American response being in effect a clash between the Christians and the Jews on the one side and the Islamics on the other. Can I remind you that, something that’s overlooked, that when allied forces - the Americans and NATO forces - intervened in the war in Bosnia and the war in Kosovo, it was in fact the case of a group of nominally Christian nations intervening against another nominally Christian nation to protect minority populations, both of which were of the Islamic faith.  So that was a case of if you like of Christian nations disagreeing with other Christian nations in defence of a minority of people of the Islamic faith. And the sort of things that those terrorists sought to destroy were tolerance and openness and freedom and a respect for people’s different conscientious views and we will not honour their memory if we allow any of that bigotry to intrude into our daily lives here in Australia.

Ladies and gentlemen, the outlook for this country before the 11th of September, the economic outlook was very positive. It was strong, we had every indication that economic growth would continue.  Our interest rates were lower, our inflation was lower, our budget was in a strong position.  Inevitably what’s happened in America has reduced people’s confidence. The airline industry in the United States is in a difficult state. People are more reluctant to fly. It’s had an impact on their tourist industry. But I have a great belief that the

4

American economy is so resilient and so fundamentally strong it will come back. But in the meantime the downturn that will be caused by some of the loss of confidence and loss of activity, that is going to be felt around the world.

Fortunately Australia is in a stronger position to handle it than most. Because we have a budget that’s in surplus, because we have low interest rates and low inflation, and because we have a low current account deficit, because our trade account has been so good. Because of all of those things we’ve got a bit of economic fat on our bones which is going to help us ride through the difficulty. But it will be harder economically and more difficult than would have been the case.  But I don’t think it’s something that can’t be managed and managed well. But it will, if I may say so, require hands at the helm who know how to manage an economy, who managed the Australian economy through the downturn of 1997, who believe that it’s better to have your budget in the black rather than in the red, a group of people who over the last five-and-a-half years have worked together to pay off almost $60 billion of the $96 billion federal government debt this country had in March of 1996. In other words at a time when there’ll be some pressure because of non-economic events, be some pressure on economic management, on the Australian economy, it’s very important that we stick with a government that has got a proven track record of good economic management.

Now if you want all of those things, and that’s a matter for you in the nature of the great democratic system. It’s a wonderful thing democracy.  Parliament ends. We go out and we campaign for a few weeks. People turn up one Saturday at their local polling booth, they cast their vote and if they decide there’s going to be a change of government it happens peacefully. The side that loses is pretty cranky and drowns its sorrows. The side that wins is buoyant and has the odd celebratory drink.  There are numerous post mortems.  But the world doesn’t fall apart does it. We don’t shoot each other, we don’t punch each other up, we get a bit cranky, but that’s it.  And isn’t that a wonderful thing that this country has. And it’s that in a way that’s under assault by terrorists. It’s the capacity to do those sort of things and do them in peace and freedom that we have to fight to defend and preserve.

So I hope on that Saturday not too long from now you’ll wander down to your polling booth and you’ll, you know, put number one for him.  Just once. I know you might be tempted but don’t do it more than once. We want it to count.  And encourage all of your friends to do it and he’ll make a great local member. And of equal importance if you want to have a strong stable secure government with a proven track record at a time of considerable and unexpected difficulty can I say the present government is the one that deserves your support.

Thank you.

[Ends]

