Australian Labor Party   National ALP   Back

Kim Beazley - Doorstop - Parliament's Day Of Mourning, Ansett, Border Protection Legislation //media/0901/kbmcact170901.html Tuesday, 18 September 2001

Kim Beazley - Doorstop Interview Subjects: Parliament's Day Of Mourning, Ansett, Border Protection Legislation

Transcript - Parliament House, Canberra - 17 September 2001

E & OE - PROOF ONLY

BEAZLEY: Yesterday was a day of national mourning. Today will be a day of mourning in this Parliament as we have, firstly, a service and then a Parliamentary condolence motion. It will give us in Parliament an opportunity to express our deepest condolences and fellow feelings with those in the United States, here and elsewhere, who have lost loved ones in the horrific incidents of last week. It will be an opportunity to recommit ourselves to civilised decent standards of behaviour. It will be an opportunity to commit ourselves to developing the means to defend the world and defend our communities against these vicious acts. This is going to be, I hope, a day of national unity in this Parliament.

JOURNALIST: Mr Beazley, is the $10 levy on all airline tickets, is that something that the Labor Party will support if it ends up coming into effect?

BEAZLEY: There is only one group of workers so far that has got 100 per cent of their entitlements and they worked for [Stan] Howard's company. Nobody else has. That will not be changed by either of the pieces of legislation that the Howard Government will put into Parliament on the Ansett workers and all Australian workers and their entitlements. Australian workers are entitled to all their entitlements, and so are Ansett workers. We have said about this Bill, dealing with the $10 levy, if at the end of the day that's the only way to get some benefits, then we won't block it. But, frankly, it's a pathetic response. It's another tax that comes in on top of the GST, that comes in on top of noise taxes. It's a tax at a time when the tourism industry is going to be taking an awesome beating and is, from that point of view, completely unnecessary. They have all the money to assist with getting an Ansett operation of sorts going again and to pay out full workers' entitlements from the proceeds of the sale of Sydney Airport. That should be delayed, that sale, but eventually it will come through. Those resources ought to be utilised for this, not a war chest for the Liberal Party in an election campaign.

JOURNALIST: Should the New Zealand Government fund those entitlements?

BEAZLEY: I believe that Air New Zealand has full responsibility in that regard. We will be pursuing that as well. The responsibility is also there with the Australian Government. They have shamefully

neglected their obligations to get on top of this issue at times when they were warned.

JOURNALIST: The Government has flagged that it may re-introduce the Border Protection legislation -blocked by Labor and the Democrats in the Senate a couple of weeks ago. Will you support it now if it's put up again?

BEAZLEY: We have said to the Government that we are prepared in a bipartisan way to solve these problems. We believe in strong border protection. It is, after all, the Labor Party who introduced mandatory detention for people who entered illegally into Australia. That was us. We are for strong border protection. We're also for laws that work. We're also for laws, too, that do not have at their underpinnings more authority for public officials than would be there for a soldier in wartime or a policeman pursuing an armed burglar. We think there needs to be good laws, not panic stricken laws. We stand there ready in a bipartisan way to respond to the offer. Indeed, a bipartisanship offered by the Acting Prime Minister when John Howard was away.

JOURNALIST: Is the Prime Minister right when we says…boat people, the terrorist attack in the US high light how dangerous boat people can be who come into our shores?

BEAZLEY: I don't think the Prime Minister said that because, certainly, Peter Reith yesterday seemed to indicate that there was no link. In all the briefings I have had from the Government there is no linkage between the two. That's not to say that you don't need good border protection legislation. You need to preserve the integrity of the migration program. But we know from these terrible incidents, the terrorists arrive by plane, at airports. We need good security there. They arrive with superb documentation. They arrive, apparently, with the appropriate permits, work permits and the like, for training programs or anything else that they enter into. We're not dealing here with raggedness. We're dealing here with very high levels of sophistication. That's why we need an effective global response to it and why we need effective laws to deal with the most likely points of entry and the most likely mode of operation of terrorists that may come into Australian society. Fortunately, I think, we have been blessedly free of that so far.

JOURNALIST: What about removing Christmas Island and the Ashmore Reef from our migration zone? Will Labor support that?

BEAZLEY: We await the legislation. We have said that we've got a disposition to be supportive but where are the bills? How long is it now since they announced it? About a week ago. The Government has got to recognise that these things need to be solved on a national basis and not simply by panic stricken manoeuvres out there in the period immediately prior to an election after they've done nothing about it for years prior to this point.

JOURNALIST: Don't you also stand, though, to look wishy washy on it? You may support ticket tax, you may not. You may support border protection, you may not. You may support the excise…

BEAZLEY: What are you talking about? I said that if at the end of the day all there is a ticket tax we'll support it.

JOURNALIST: If you're so opposed to, why don't you come out against it?

BEAZLEY: Use your commonsense. We want to get 100 per cent of the benefits for Ansett workers. What do we do? We get into that Parliament and we fight for it. If at the end of the day that's all there is

then we let that through. But wouldn't we look a wishy washy, useless bunch if all we did was just simply give a tick to Government legislation that doesn't provide workers with 100 per cent of their entitlement. What a worthless, wishy-washy Opposition we would be if we didn't stick up for workers' rights on workers' entitlements. If you expect me to go into that Parliament and simply, without attempting to get the workers the rights that they're entitled to and just tick through anything on Government, you can think again. As far as I'm concerned - I'm here working for the Australian workers and the Australian community - that when a company goes down, they get 100 per cent of their entitlements. I'm not here just to trail along after a Government who militantly refuses to do that. Now, if at the end of the day, that's all we can get out of the Government, we're an Opposition, we're not the Government, we'll let it through. But don't expect me not to fight.

JOURNALIST: But leaving it as a last resort, they can hold you to that as a position.

BEAZLEY: Of course we'll let it through in the end if that's the best that we can get out of them. And then we'll run on something different when the election comes around. But don't expect me to go into Parliament and just simply say, 'Oh, that's all there is'.

JOURNALIST: Mr Beazley, the prospect of union action against Air New Zealand. What do you think of that?

BEAZLEY: Air New Zealand has got some massive responsibilities in this regard. Air New Zealand is responsible in the first instance for those workers' entitlements. Air New Zealand should pay for them, there is no question about that. I am absolutely infuriated by a Government that has let this situation drift to this point and in the end is left without answers, including answers on how they actually get an airline like Ansett into the air again. We're not just dealing with some airline that sort of drifted in on the back of open competition. We're dealing with an airline that lies at the heart and soul of the Australian aviation industry, the Australian tourism industry. To simply surrender to the nation that it's all over and what we've got to do is carve off bits and pieces and do the best we can, I think is an hopeless outcome.

JOURNALIST: …cuts…?

BEAZLEY: Unions will make their own determination on what they do about protecting their entitlements. I don't go out there encouraging strikes, blockages or anything else. I'm not the person who suffers as a result of them, or takes on board the legal consequences of participating. What I can do is fight for those workers to get their entitlements out of Air New Zealand, to get their entitlements anyway. That's what I'm on about. We've had a weak Government, off the game - and still off the game as far as the workers' entitlements are concerned. This is a Government with an attitude on everything and a solution to nothing.

JOURNALIST: The Government is also talking about protecting Ansett entitlements. What about those workers who are working for companies contracted to Ansett?

BEAZLEY: Wouldn't it have been good if they'd let our Bill through two years ago, if they'd supported our position that protected workers' entitlements? As you rightly point out, there are more than just the 17,000 Ansett workers at risk here. There are many, many more.

JOURNALIST: Would you seek to broaden any legislation?

BEAZLEY: When we get a chance, on being elected to office, we'll put in place a bill that protects

everybody's entitlements.

JOURNALIST: But agreeing to do more workers' entitlements, the Government, I mean, have they taken a bit of the wind out of your sails in the lead-up to the election?

BEAZLEY: All that is, is yet another panic stricken move. All it is is legislation that still does not bring workers, Australian workers, in to the ambit of the workers who were in Stan Howard's company, or the company of which he was chairman. They've still not got there. What we are doing is classic, effective opposition. We are there forcing the Government, more and more, to confront the reality of its position. I think we've done a pretty darn good job - and we'll go on doing it. But I'm afraid to say I do not believe that this Government, no matter what changes they make, will put in place an adequate piece of legislation - adequately supported by the people who ought to be supporting it, not the taxpayer, but the employers who owe the entitlements in the first place. We're going to keep fighting on that. I very much doubt whether this Government, unfortunately, will do the thing that would take the wind out of the sails - like implement our policy.

Ends Authorised by Geoff Walsh, 19 National Circuit, Barton ACT 2600.

