

News Room

Improvements in Immigration Detention MPS 093/2001

An update presented to a Senate Estimates committee highlights progress in implementing recommendations from the Flood report on immigration detention facilities, the Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs, Philip Ruddock, said today.

"While many improvements noted in the update handed to the committee today result from Flood report recommendations, others have been underway for some time," Mr Ruddock said.

"A memorandum of understanding (MOU) between my department and Family and Youth Services in South Australia is close to being finalised while negotiations on an MOU with the South Australian Police are underway.

"The MOUs will form the basis of other agreements with health, welfare and police departments in other states and will clearly define the role of these agencies within the detention environment.

"This is just the tip of the iceberg in terms of upgrades in the detention environment. While I welcomed the Flood report and its recommendations, much of what has and is being done was already being undertaken as part of my department's ongoing development plans."

Other developments include:

Significant reduction in processing times - 80 per cent of asylum seekers receive primary decisions within 15 weeks with some in as little as four to six weeks. ❍￻￻￻

Improved physical environment at Woomera - including erection of more shaded areas, additional volleyball, soccer and basketball facilities. Landscaping has commenced including new plants, additional outdoor recreational areas, children's

❍￻￻￻

playgrounds, flower and vegetable gardens.

The trial of alternative detention arrangements for some women and children in the Woomera township to begin shortly. ❍￻￻￻

More long-term ACM staff at Woomera. ❍￻￻￻ ACM training program for new officers has been subject to external evaluation. A specific DIMA component covering such things as immigration detention standards with particular emphasis on dignity, cultural sensitivity and managing difficult

behaviour has been included and is being revised and updated.

❍￻￻￻

Improved ACM records management procedures. ❍￻￻￻ Deputy Centre Business Managers in place at reception and processing centres. ❍￻￻￻ Review of Immigration Detention Standards being undertaken. ❍￻￻￻ Restructuring of Departmental detention areas to enhance monitoring of incident

reporting and analysis. ❍￻￻￻

"I will continue to ensure that the recommendations of the Flood report are addressed.

"However on top of that, my department will also continue its program of improvements to ensure that facilities used to detain people while their claims to remain in Australia are assessed, are appropriate," Mr Ruddock said.

9 July 2001 Media Contact: Steve Ingram (02) 6277 7860

Media Release Index



