Philip Ruddock MP  MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AND INDIGENOUS  AFFAIRS

Transcripts

Media conference with Mr Ruddock Parliament House, 10 December

Minister: Well I'm obviously very disappointed that the Senate has seen fit to reject the Bill, that's purpose was to excise from the  Migration Zone, the areas of the Coral Sea Islands, the Torres Straight Islands, the Islands off the north of Australia.

The arguments against it are quite specious. The only argument I've heard is that to excise the islands will only encourage  people to come to the mainland.

To have them not excised, means that all of those islands are just as attractive as reaching the mainland for anybody who  seeks to access Australia as an unauthorised boat arrival. And the difficulty of course is, that if you have people that are being  trafficked and the intention is to take them say to the Pacific, it is more likely that they will be passing islands on route. Tthe  potential for vessels to be damaged so that people have to be landed on islands is increased. The importance of having the  areas excised from the Migration Zone is that we can then handle potential detainees, by having them processed either under  the Pacific Solution or on Christmas Island.

The advantage of being able to do that is that you have people processed more quickly. You have less opportunity for legal  appeals and you are able therefore to reduce very significantly incentives that people who are involved in people smuggling,  see in being able to bring people this way. It's another I think, example of the way in which the Labor Party has been trying to  send signals that we are winding back on our measures to effectively protect our borders.

Question: Will this change the way that you handle things at all?

Minister: Well obviously I have to give consideration to what should happen if the eventuality arises that we are faced with boats, and it  presents a range of complications that are unnecessary. It probably means at the very least that if a vessel were seeking to  access Australia and we became aware that its intention was to try and access Australia, that if we weren't able for safety  reasons to return it to Indonesia, we would probably have to look at ensuring that it is landed at one of the places that had been  excised.

But the important point that I would make is that we know that excision has been important in minimising costs. We know  that the Pacific Solution has been an important part of the range of measures that we have implemented that has been  successful in preventing unauthorised boat arrival attempts. Yesterday was 12 months to the day since we last saw a vessel  land either on the Australian mainland (in fact it's much earlier that that happened, I think the last time was about September),  or on one of our Territories. That landing was at Cocos Island so it has been 12 months. The measures that we have taken have

worked, they've demonstrably worked, but this denies us the capacity to be more effective in the range of measures that we  have protecting Australia's borders.

Question: ……………. legislation back in the Senate in it's current form?

Minister: Well look, that's an issue you will look at six months down the track and we will see what happens at the time.

Question: Minister, has the Government been involved in encouraging sabotage of people smuggling vessels leaving Indonesia as has  been claimed by Labor calling for an inquiry into the matter?

Minister: Not that I am aware of. Look the only point I would make is that we have of course been very active in working with  Indonesian officials to ensure that if people are intending to get on boats, there is interruption of those activities. But any  activities in which Australians are involved in has to occur in accordance with our law and I am not aware of any sabotage and  anything that would put peoples lives at risk, I don't believe that would be something Australian officials would be involved  in.

Question: You talk about encouraging the boats to go to places that are excised. Does that mean that you'll send the Navy boats out to  herd them in that direction?

Minister: Well look, at the point which people evidence an intention to access Australia, you have to ask yourself a number of questions  and the questions are can you secure the vessel in such a way as to return it? That would be the preferred situation. If you  can't, you have to look at how you can handle it effectively and in the national interest in the way which is most safe for those  people who might otherwise be at risk.

Question: The East Timor people who have been in Australia are now starting to make personal submissions to you…

Minister: Are they?

Question: Well that's what I have been told. Have you received any and have you made a decision about any? Apparently that's  …………

Minister: Well I have made decisions and I have made decisions in what I call the black as distinct from the white cases. I am not going  to comment on the grey cases because I have to look at those case by case. But I have made it clear that if there are substantial  Australian connections, such as an East Timorese has married an Australian as an Australian spouse, it would be churlish to  require them to go back when it is possible to allow them by intervention to remain in Australia. I mean that is a clear example  of where I would intervene. But, equally…

Question: …and have you?

Minister: Yes I have. But equally… look I'll just say that happened some time ago… but equally there are situations which it seems to  be obvious that you would expect somebody to return, I mean if somebody has been for many years safe and secure and  supported by Australian taxpayers… is young… been given opportunities… has been relieved of the risk that their fellow men  and women who stayed behind had suffered, I don't think it's unreasonable if they have no ongoing need for protection to ask  that they go home.

So, if people are found not to be refugees and it's demonstrably clear that it is safe and secure for them to be home and they  have no substantial Australian connections, I would expect them to go home.

Question: Are there moves to return detainees on Christmas Island that rioted over the weekend and how are they being housed?

Minister: Well, in tents and the women and children are in the Medical Centre. But let me just say that the position is equally clear.  Once it is determined that a person has no lawful entitlement to remain in Australia, our obligation is to remove them as  quickly as possible and we would meet that obligation.

Question: Does that mean in the next few days?

Minister: That means that they are legally able to do it.

Question: And what extent do you think this does increase the likelihood of another boat arriving soon in Australia?

Minister: Well look, what I think it does is it leaves us more vulnerable, I'm not going to try and estimate, but I do warn the Australian  community that the refusal to allow this Bill makes our task more difficult and if we do end up with boat arrivals and I hope  we don't, but if we do, the responsibility will clearly be with those who have apposed the measure.

Thanks very much.



