JULIA GILLARD M.P. Shadow Minister for Population & Immigration

MEDIA RELEASE

31st Jan 2002

RESOLUTION OF WOOMERA PROTESTS

Labor welcomes the resolution of the Woomera protests and that asylum seekers are no longer hunger striking or involved in acts of self-harm

Labor was the first to call for independent experts to resolve the Woomera crisis and it is the work of such experts that has brought the protest to an end.

Labor congratulates the Independent Detention Advisory Committee (‘IDAC’) on its work in resolving the crisis.  Labor consistently offered this group its full support.

Labor believes that detention centres should not be shrouded in secrecy and objected to the treatment of media at Woomera.  IDAC should now be empowered by Minister Ruddock to publicly report on its future work on conditions in detention centres and detention policy.

Labor remains prepared to work with the Government and IDAC to get children out from behind razor wire, to stream detainees to separate troublemakers and to find a long term and lasting solution to dealing with asylum seekers.

For further information contact Julia Gillard on 0417 361 637

WOOMERA TIMELINE

Mon 21/01/02 Labor calls on the Minister to allow independent experts in to Woomera to deal with the escalating protests.

Tue 22/01/02 Minister Ruddock responds to this call by arranging for the IDAC to visit Woomera.

Wed 23/01/02 IDAC visits Woomera.

Thu 24/01/02 IDAC reports to Minister Ruddock.  Labor called for this reporting process to be an open one. Ruddock accepts the IDAC recommendation to recommence the processing of Afghan refugee claims.

Fri 25/01/02 IDAC returns to Woomera and further negotiations occur with asylum seekers.

Sat 26/01/02 - Australia Day Opposition Leader Simon Crean calls for the release of children from immigration detention centres and for greater streaming of detainees. Ruddock denounces the proposal as having the potential to create a new “Stolen Generation” and says that an alternate detention model trial at Woomera for women and children had not been a success.

An asylum seeker at Woomera jumps into razor wire and security guard is injured. The media is forced back and an ABC journalist is arrested.

Mon 28/01/02 Ruddock softens his stance on detention of children, indicating that the alternate detention model trial program for the release of women and children may be expanded.

Wed 30/01/02 Simon Crean calls on the Howard Government to implement IDAC recommendations to stream detainees and consider mothballing of Woomera.  IDAC returns to Woomera and achieves a settlement of the standoff.

