LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION

TRANSCRIPT OF DOORSTOP - PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA, 4TH JUNE 2002.

E & OE - PROOF ONLY

Subjects:  Anti terrorism legislation, International Criminal Court; Party                  reform

CREAN: I welcome the apparent back down by the Government in relation to its anti-terrorism bills.  This is legislation that should’ve been through the Parliament ages ago.  I wrote to the Prime Minister more then six weeks ago proposing amendments that could’ve seen that legislation passed in the Parliament.  It can still be passed in the Parliament tomorrow if those amendments are adopted.

But the Government was too proud to accept the propositions being put forward by Labor.  That has been forced into changes because of a revolt in its own Party room.  We await the announcement of the Government in relation to this legislation but we welcome the fact that the Government recognises that its previous legislation was flawed and that the direction that Labor has been suggesting provides the basis for a solution.

But this is a Government that has its eye off the ball.  It’s only ever forced to do things when it gets into a crisis and this together, with its approach on the International Criminal Court, is another example of a Government in crisis management.

JOURNALIST: If the power to proscribe is still in the even in the more limited form, will the ALP support it?

CREAN: We will look at the amendments.  Our view is that proscription is not the appropriate course and we understand that there has been a significant back down by the Government in relation to proscription. But let us look at the detail that they put forward and we’ll make a judgement then.

But we believe the effort should be in targeting and defining terrorists.  They should be the people, not just outlawed, but smashed.  It needs to be very

2

tough legislation to get them but not to hurt innocent people.  And that’s the difficulty with a broad proscription power, which gives absolute discretion to the Attorney-General.

JOURNALIST: If the legislation does meet those requirements in broad, then you’re saying Labor would definitely support it?

CREAN: I’m saying that Labor will support legislation tomorrow that reflects its amendments.  We have given this serious and considered attention.  If the Government is not proposing to adopt all of Labor’s amendments, let’s look at what they’re putting forward and we will determine our position thereafter.

JOURNALIST: So this isn’t an all or nothing situation then?

CREAN: This is a situation in which the Government, if it had have been prepared to talk to us from the outset, could have had a resolution much before now.  I mean, here we are almost nine months after September the 11th, the Government told us it was going to be tough against the terrorists but it hasn’t got legislation that can even pass its Party room let alone the Parliament.

So let’s have a look at what they’re proposing but I’m saying to you Labor would pass, tomorrow, legislation if it reflected the amendments that I wrote to the Prime Minister about back in May.

JOURNALIST: On the International Criminal Court are you not concerned about possible exposure for ADF personal?

CREAN: What I’m concerned about is the dithering by the Government in relation to it.  It went to the last election saying it was going to join.  It told the international fora that it was going to join.  And now, because it’s got a Backbench revolt, it doesn’t know what it’s doing.  This is a Government that has got no direction and no capacity and it reflects again the lack of a real agenda.  And when there’s no agenda the troops revolt.

JOURNALIST: Just on the Federal Court, were you satisfied with Mr Ruddock’s explanation to the court this morning?

CREAN: I think it was appropriate for Mr Ruddock to explain himself and apologise to the Court.  I think that they were intemperate remarks on his part.  But the fact still remains that the Government’s solutions to asylum seekers still represent flawed policy and I again urge Mr Ruddock, in his spirit of reconciliation, to sit down with us and work towards a lasting solution in relation to asylum seekers.  A solution that ensures that we are tough on border protection but compassionate about the way in which we treat people.

3

JOURNALIST: Do you believe that what he said amounts to an apology?

CREAN: Well, I haven’t seen the precise words.  I only heard what he had to say in Question Time in the Parliament today.  The fact that he has seen the need to explain himself to the Court would suggest that he himself knows that he stepped over the mark with his statements last week.

JOURNALIST: On your leadership, Senator Campbell says the Party should take another look in 12 months.

CREAN: Look George is all right, don’t worry about George.  The only divisions at the moment are in the Government.  They are divided on Telstra, they are divided on the ICC, they are divided on maternity leave, they are divided in relation to the terrorism bills and they have had a Party meeting today that could not even conclude.  The only divisions in this Parliament at the moment are in the Coalition side.

JOURNALIST: You took plenty of hits in Parliament again today on Party reform and mandatory detention.  Are you confident that your backbenchers are completely behind you, no nervous Nellies there?

CREAN: Absolutely, and the Caucus was rock solid today and that is an important thing to understand.  I’ve indicated to the Caucus that of course we have to widen the agenda in terms of Party reform and policy reform.  And I reminded them of the important announcements that we have made so far in terms of policy changes.  I’ve also pointed the direction in terms of Party reform to clean up the rolls.  I urge the Prime Minister to do the same.  Because the pre-selection in the Seat of Ryan had people who lived outside the country voting in their pre-selection.

So we will continue to progress it.  The fact that these issues have been raised on the other side is of no concern to me at all.  They don’t determine our position.  The fact that we are going through a process of reform and modernisation is the worry to them.

JOURNALIST: It’s making it harder for you though, to set your agenda when you are such an easy target for them.

CREAN: Well, I don’t agree.  I mean, if it hadn’t had been for the concern of 60:40 I don’t think any of you would have read the speech that I made on Friday at the Conference.  I don’t think any of you would have been asking questions about our other policy settings.  I am absolutely comfortable with defending the direction that I’m going on.  But what I want people to do is to understand that it isn’t just the issue of 60:40 and 50:50, there is a suite of policy measures and there will be a range of organisational reforms.  I want to modernise the Party, I want to take the show forward, I want to lift our primary vote and with the direction I am setting we will achieve that goal.

4

JOURNALIST: Doesn’t that comment from Senator Campbell indicate though some concern about your leadership?

CREAN: There is no problem with George at all.  Don’t get too upset by what you read or try to read into what people say.  The Caucus is united.  The only divisions in this Parliament are in the Coalition side and on a range of policies and on a range of options in terms of John Howard’s succession.  When John Howard completes his Contiki tour for the over 60s, when he finds a country that he still hasn’t visited and adds it on, then, I think that those in the Coalition ranks will be looking for the successor.  But when you have got circumstances in which none of the above are liked better than Peter Costello and Tony Abbott, I’m feeling pretty comfortable.

JOURNALIST: ….reading …ambiguous …issue?

CREAN: I am committed to producing 50:50 but if you read what George says he says the issue has to widen beyond it, I agree.  That’s what I told the Caucus today, it’s what I told the Queensland Conference on Friday, it’s what I’m committed to delivering.

Why do you think it is that all those policy initiatives have been out there announced by me?  And I have used Party conferences to promote them. So it is not a question of being stuck on just 50:50 it’s a question of that being an important part of a much wider agenda.  An agenda that the Caucus supports and we will continue to promote.

Ends.

