Sir Edward Wemy Dunlop Awards

The University of Melbourne, 6 February 2002

In his gracious letter informing Margaret and me that we had been   jointly awarded the 2001 Dunlop Asia Medal. Sir Ninian described your committee’s   decision as “unusual but splendid”. I concur and would add, at least in respect of the   partner, thoroughly appropriate.

The medal is awarded in recognition of long-term commitment to   improving Australia-Asia relations and enhancing the quality of life in the region. In   no commitment during nearly 60 years together have we shared deeper hopes and   closer endeavours than in our visits to India, Indonesia, China and Japan and the   islands between.

We have even shared the perils. It is barely a quarter of a century since   Margaret and I had to evacuate our hotel room at 4 a.m. during the great earthquake in   Tianjin. The Age published a Nicholson cartoon depicting us shivering in our bed. not   even wrapped in a sheepskin rug. The caption was: ‘Did the earth move for you,   dear?’ The good citizens of Melbourne were appalled by the vulgarity. The Age   mischievously published their letters and messages of protest alongside my cable   requesting the original.

Margaret and I are especially honoured to be joined in this Award with   the name and memory of Sir Edward Dunlop. Again, it is the appropriateness which   is so gratifying. Weary Dunlop’s place in the hearts of his countrymen and women   was earned first by his selflessness and self-sacrifice as a doctor and a prisoner-of-war   during the war against Japan. This medal, however, commemorates his post-war   work in building friendships and re-building relationships throughout Asia, not least   with Japan itself. It is impossible to overstate the importance of Australia’s post-war

reconciliation with Japan; and it is impossible to overstate the importance of men like   Weary Dunlop in achieving that reconciliation. He could speak with unimpeachable   moral authority.

We usually choose to forget that the United States gave us the ANZUS   Treaty as a solatium for its soft Treaty of Peace with Japan in 195 1. Amnesia is even   more complete about the nature of Australian opposition to the Peace Treaty, not least   in the ranks of the Australian Labor Party. I quote Volume One ofFnci?zg Ivo~*fh. A

Century ofAustralian Engagement With Asia, edited by David Goldsworthy and just   published by Melbourne University Press and the Department of Foreign Affairs and   Trade. On page 226 Roderic Pitty discusses the Peace Treaty debate in the House of   Representatives in February 1952. exactly 50 years ago:

2

Les Haylen was one qf several Labor speakers whose opposition to trade with   Japan was linked with anxiety that the Peace Treaty ‘will writefinis to the   experiment which has been called White Australia. ’ For Haylen ‘the point of   the matter is that tfwe are to preserve this white bastion in the Pact& wze

must be realistic to the point   qf cruel& and not be,fantastical@ generous. ’

“We must be realistic to the point of cruelty”. Where have I heard that sort of thing   recently? Haylen was a better playwright than politician. Somebody seems to be   dusting off his 50-year-old scripts. Alexander Downer senior, another prisoner of   war, crossed the floor to vote against the Peace Treaty.

From the viewpoint of the United States, of course, the Japanese Peace   Treaty was essentially a deck-clearing operation, made urgent by the war in Korea.   Nevertheless, our relations with Japan remain the outstanding post-war example of   adherence to American initiatives, American concerns and, let it be said, American   foresight and generosity bringing great benefits to Australia.

Australia ratified the Treaty of Peace with Japan on 10 April 1952. I   was elected to the Parliament seven months later. In August 1957 John McEwen   tabled the Agreement on Commerce with Japan and H.V. Evatt moved an amendment   expressing disapproval of the Agreement. Many years later McEwen told me that, in   preparing an assault on my credibility, he had looked up what I had to say on the 1957   motion. To his surprise he found that I had not spoken.

In his invitation to us Sir Ninian said that Asialink would like to   present our Medal on 11 December 2001 but, if this date was not suitable, we could   discuss an alternative date. I was committed to give an address in December at   University College, London, on the restitution of the Parthenon Sculptures. I trust   that to-day has been as suitable for all of you as it is for the two of us.

American and Australian parallel policies have not been so   commendable and consistent on China as on Japan. My service in the Pacific War   ended as the navigator of the only British Empire aircraft stationed in the Philippines.   I learned the geography and topography of Australia’s neighbours. I realised the   fragility of the Atlantic empires in our region.

In August 1954 I became the first member of the Parliament to urge   Australian recognition of the Government in China:

The current Australian policy is to sa”y . . . not only that the Communist   Government in China is not, and should not be, the government of that country   but also that the Nationalist Government in Formosa is, and should be, the   government

qf China. We must realise that the government installed in   Formosa has no chance qf ever again becoming the government qf China   unless it is enabled to do so as a result qf a third world war.

If I had addressed you last December I could not have spoken on China   with as much knowledge as I can to-day. The 197 1 Cabinet papers, just released   under the 30-year rule, show that in February 1955 R.G. Menzies expressed views   similar to the views I had expressed in August 1954. I quote from a Cabinet

3

submission on 9 February 197 1 by William McMahon, Minister for Foreign Affairs in   the Gorton Government, with the title ‘Australian policy towards the People’s   Republic of China 1949-70’:

In one other respect, Australian policy has consistently, diverged.fiom United   States policy, namely towards the Nationalist-held ojfihore islands   (principalt’v Quemo.y and Matsu). The islands have been regarded-for all   their allegedpsychological value to the ROC - as logically forming part

qf the

mainland and as a particularly dangerous trip-wire.for active United States   military involvement against Peking.

in 1955, Prime Minister Menzies dismissed them as “not worth a great war”,   and in that year, as well as earlier and later, the Government urged restraint   on the Americans and expressed concern about the United States tendency. to   draft into wider military obligations to the ROC which could involve the

United States, and possibly) Australia, in war over these islands.

Australia ‘s immediate objective in the early and middle 1950 ‘s ulas to find a   means by which the Nationalists could withdraw from the islands and the   Americans disentangle themselves uithout seriously afecting anti-Communist   morale in Taiwan and the rest ofAsia; in short, as A4r Menzies told the

Commonwealth Prime Ministers ’ meeting in London in February, 1955, ‘to   get a sheet of water between the two opposing sides ‘,

197 1 was the year when the Deputy Prime Minister, Doug Anthony,   declared that the Country Party would never sell its soul for a mess of pottage, by   which he meant wheat sales to China; that B.A. Santamaria denounced me as the   Manchurian candidate after my first visit to Beijing in July; that McMahon said that   Zhou Enlai had played me like a trout in the Great Hall of the People; and that   President Nixon announced that he too would go to China following

Henry Kissinger’s secret meeting with Zhou Enlai four days after my very public one.   Cabinet decided that ‘our diplomatic policy should not deviate from that of the United   States’ and, specifically, ‘that no steps should be taken in the direction of or leading   towards recognition of Peking.’

Our Vietnam commitment was sold at home wholly in terms of   resistance to ‘the downward thrust of China between the Indian and Pacific Oceans’.   As Nixon withdrew from Vietnam and drew towards China the Australian   Government was left floundering. As late as September 197 1, Australia supported the   United States in the last failed bid to keep Taiwan as the representative of China in the

United Nations. On 26 October, I said in the House of Representatives:

IfAustralia is now to have relations with China . . . she will have to jollow the   United Nations; she will have to recognise the Government of the People ‘s   Republic of China as the sole legal Government of China . . . If we are to   pursue a dialogue with the People ‘s Republic and

if we are to normalise our

relations with Peking, we must now do so on the terms overwhelmingly   accorded by the United Nations, including most of those countries in the   Commonwealth, in our region and in Europe with which we have been   associated. Let us do it with as good grace as we can.

4

The McMahon Government’s failure to adopt this approach delayed   Australia’s recognition of one China and the transfer of our Embassy from Taipei to   Beijing until the election of my government in December 1972. The real obstacle was   not McMahon’s incompetence, as commentators glibly asserted this January, but the   deadweight of 23 years of Australian and U.S. policy. The policy was blighted by   DLP blackmail. It was not the first time, nor the last, that domestic pressures shaped   Australian policy on China. (McMahon’s old colleagues should acknowledge that he   was sponsored by two powerful Liberal supporters. Sir Ian Potter was his best man in   December 1965 and Sir Frank Packer was his backer before and after he replaced   John Gorton.)

I stress the contractual nature of our relations with China and the   importance that China places on the mutual honouring of contracts. How else can we   explain Beijing’s acceptance of Britain’s Hong Kong lease to the last hour and its   replacement with the ‘One China, two systems’ arrangement for the 50 years after

1997? Further, the massive penetration of American capital into China’s economy   proceeds by a series of individual contracts guaranteed only by continuing compliance   with the over-arching contract, the recognition of One China.

Jimmy Carter was elected four years after I was and established   diplomatic relations with China six years after I did. In our relations with China and   the United States, Australia must always insist upon honouring the premise and the   promise on which all our relations with China have been based since 1972. We must   resist any policy which purports to make Australia choose between China and the   United States. We must resist any policy which purports to make Australian Chinese   choose between Taiwan and China.

We should seek to extend the concept of contractual obligations across   the range of international affairs. In this age of globalisation the most secure,   consistent and constructive principle for individual States and the community of   nations is to honour contracts, adhere to international conventions and uphold   covenants. Without this principle and its active pursuit, our professions about free   trade, human rights and self-determination wither in a welter of moral confusion, self-

serving selectivity and hypocrisy. To be specific, there are four human rights   conventions relevant to current events in Australia. They are the 195 1 Convention on   the Status of Refugees, the 1954 Convention on the Status of Stateless Persons, the   196 1 Convention on the Reduction of Statelessness and the 1967 Protocol on the

Status of Refugees. Coalition Governments in 1954 acceded to the 1951 convention   with reservations and in 1967 and 197 1 withdrew the reservations. In 1973 the new   New Zealand and Australian Labor Governments acceded to the 1967 Protocol and   the 1954 and 196 1 Conventions. If subsequent Australian Governments had worked   in our region to achieve a wider membership, implementation and modemisation of   the instruments on refugees and if the major Australian parties had promoted within

Australia a proper understanding of our covenanted obligations, we would not be   trapped in our present untenable, costly and brutal arrangements.

Nearly forty years ago, shortly after the French veto on Britain’s first   application to join the European Economic Community, I said in the Roy Milne   Lecture of July 1963:

The captains and kings of Europe have departedfrom our area.

Britain is

being drawn closer and closer to Europe. Forces very largely outside our   control are forcing us into a fundamental re-examination qf our position as an   isolated and European community. We are being driven rapidly to making   adjustments from the familiar European world to an unfamiliar @o-Asian   world.

In a period of our nation’s affairs when I am less confident than at any time in the past   30 years that Australia is progressing purposefully towards that objective, I am   nevertheless encouraged by the knowledge that, within the great University of   Melbourne, the Asialink Centre exists to advance the objective, to support sustained,   constructive relationships between Australia and Asia and to counter the raucous and   rancorous voices of fear, hate and ignorance. That is the chief reason among many   why Margaret and I are honoured to accept the 2001 Dunlop Asia Medal. If we   cannot wear it simultaneously, we shall certainly treasure it jointly and severally, and   do so with immense pride.

