21 May 2002 — Transcript Of Australia's Coalition Against Terrorism Update

TIM BLOOMFIELD: Good morning, ladies and gentlemen. Thanks very much for coming for the continuation of the briefings on the Coalition Against Terrorism.

Today it'll be Lieutenant Colonel David Tyler. And I hope you're a little bit warmer in here than you perhaps were outside. Lieutenant Colonel Tyler.

LIEUTENANT COLONEL DAVID TYLER:  Thanks, Tim, and good morning everyone. We'll start, as we always do, with maritime operations. H^Ll4S Manoora, Newcastle and Canberra continue maritime interception operations in the Persian Gulf. The ships conducted a total of four compliant boardings in the past week. Total

non-compliant boardings for this deployment are 12. And total compliant boardings 64.

HILIAS Newcastle made a scheduled port visit to Dubai during the week, with

Manoora now in port for replenishment of stores and supplies.

Land operations continue in Afghanistan. Australian Special Forces elements are continuing in their main task, which is to provide reconnaissance support to coalition activities.  At this stage Operation Condor is still underway, and we'll provide a brief when the operation is completed, unless of course any major incident occurs in which case we'll brief as necessary.

i can confirm that there have been no Australian casualties or contacts since we last briefed you. No Australian personnel have been affected by the gastrointestinal illness, which struck the British Field Hospital at Bagram Air Base last week.

Air operations. The Royal Australian Air Force FA-18 detachment, previously located in Diego Garcia, is returning to Australia. I think you probably all know that.

The aircraft and personnel will be welcomed home today when they arrive at their home base of RAAF Williamtown near Newcastle.

The detachment deployed to Diego Garcia in November last year. The personnel returning now deployed in February this year after a rotation of that first

contingent. And I take another opportunity to restate that the FA- I 8s did not at any

stage operate over Afghanistan, in spite of the recent media report to that effect.

The aircraft were returned to Australia by flight in stages, with support for refuelling from Australian and US airware refuelling aircraft.

Meanwhile in Kyrgyzstan, the RAAF air-to-air refuelling element continued flying operations this week. The Australian contingent in fact reached a significant milestone when the total fuel offloaded to Coalition fighters exceeded one million pounds, so that's just under half a million litres.

Australian tankers are refuelling French Mirage and US FA-18s over Afghanistan. Now, whilst operations continue in the air, training on the ground for Australian personnel remains a priority. And this week members of the contingent participated in a large casualty exercise, on the flight line at Manas Air Base, as part of their regular training and readiness.

That concludes my briefing. The next one is planned for next Tuesday, which is the 28 ` ' May. And any significant events, of course, will be briefed in the meantime. I'm happy now to take your questions.

QUESTION:  Are you able to give us a bit of a broader picture of what the situation is in Afghanistan now, in terms of, 'Oh, we've got a new civil administration there. Australia's starting looking at returning asylum seekers there'. Where does the rule of law pervade? What cities are actually under the control of the new civil administration in the coalition and what cities are still under control of Taliban, that

sort of thing? Are we facing a united organised, you know, fighting group? Or are we facing bands of bandits, that sort of thing?

LIEUTENANT COLONEL DAVID TYLER: 1 think - I don't - I think the operation Coalition Against Terrorism has, to a very large extent, destroyed that coordinated network of Taliban and al Qaeda. There's no doubt about that. So while

it's difficult to assess what we're actuall y  left with, but it is I think, from all reports, not a large coordinated force remaining. But there's still a fair bit of work to be done.

I don't really have any information. I can't - ['iii not in a position to give you a

briefing on what towns or cities are controlled by whom. And I'm not sure where you'd get that frankly at this point.

But what I can, if I can paint a bit of a picture about the environment in Afghanistan in general terms. As you know, Afghanistan is a tribal warrior society with a number of different factions. And all of the men just about carry weapons. It's just as you and I might carry mobile phones. And, interestingly enough, they

sometimes use those weapons for communications. So they might fire into the air at various times. So it's a tricky and complex environment.

But our Special Forces people are extremely well trained to deal with that sort of situation, and they're well equipped and they're able to operate effectively in a very complex environment.

QUESTION: Would it be possible at the next briefing perhaps to give us a little bit more information on what Afghanistan is actually like today?

LIEUTENANT COLONEL DAVID TYLER:  Yeah, look, we might see if we can do that. We'll need to take some advice from other sources. But, y eah, we'll take that on notice and see what we can do.

QUESTION:  Can you give us a bit more of an idea, with the illness that's struck down the British troops, are Australians affected by the quarantine area? Or is that restricting what they're able to do in Bagrarn or where they're able to go or that kind of thing?

LIEUTENANT COLONEL DAVID TYLER:  Not really, no. You're aware that there was a gastrointestinal illness which struck down some members of the British field hospital there, and I think a couple have to be evacuated. Our people have not

shown any symptoms of it, nor have any of' them been in contact with those British troops affected. But the medical authorities there are obviously keeping a pretty close eye on ever y body  who has been in that region. But so far it hasn't - it's not affecting as at ail.

QUESTION: Have they had testing or anything to...

LIEUTENANT COLONEL DAVID TYLER:  No, there's been no testing required. They're monitoring very carefully for any symptoms. And should they appear, then the appropriate medical action will be taken.

QUESTION: Have they managed to pin down what's causing the illness?

LIEUTENANT COLONEL DAVID TYLER:  No, no, the last I heard they had identified - and I can't quite remember the name of it - but we can actually - we can give you the name of that disease.

QUESTION: [Inaudible]

LIEUTENANT COLONEL DAVID TYLER:  No, I think there's - they did say schigella earlier, but I believe they may have identified another bacterium. But we can perhaps look into that for you and give that to you.

QUESTION: If you don't know the source of that, how will you prevent any Australian troops from coming into contact with it?

LIEUTENANT COLONEL DAVID TYLER: Well, we're preventing them from coming into contact with those who are affected. And the medical prevent teams there on the ground will be trying to track the source of it.

QUESTION: Is there just the one aircraft returning home to Newcastle today?

LIEUTENANT COLONEL DAVID TYLER: No, I think there are four? I think the four aircraft are coming back.

QUESTION: All the same type?

LIEUTENANT COLONEL DAVID TYLER: Yes, FA-18, yep.

QUESTION:  Regarding the Operation Condor, you said earlier that there'd be a

brief at the end of the operation, but there seems to have been totally conflicting information given out about that operation. The [indistinct] had originally said that there had been on-going engagements after the initial ambushing of our troops. And then subsequently I saw another [indistinct] with the British saying that there hadn't been any further engagements. What is the actual situation there?

LIEUTENANT COLONEL DAVID TYLER: Well, it's as we briefed last week, and I don't intend to go through the entire thing again. There are transcripts available.

QUESTION:  I'm talking after our - following those ambushes, there seems to have been a fair bit of confusion over what's been actually happening. So I don't want you to go through the detail of the ambushes to us, but from Friday onwards what's your understanding?

LIEUTENANT COLONEL DAVID TYLER:  Well, the difficulty, Mark, is that it's an on-going operation. And I can't discuss that as it goes. That's why I made the point during the brief that when it finishes - and this has always been our procedure -when it finishes we'll give you the best brief we can about what transpired.

QUESTION: But you discussed it when it was on-going...

LIEUTENANT COLONEL DAVID TYLER:  No, we discussed significant events that affected Australians during it. And we've given you an undertaking to do that. When our troops come under fire, we feel we're obliged then to give you the information we can. But we can't give you a running commentary of the current operation and I'm not prepared to do that.

QUESTION:  Just in relation to that brief on Friday, on the weekend there were press - what's coming out of Britain suggested there may have been some exaggeration or spin put on it because there wasn't a lot happening. That was coming out of the British press reports, quoting I think British military. Is that something that you reject?

And there was also suggestions that maybe the enemy wasn't quite who we

were identifying it to be. Rather than it being Taliban or al Qaeda, they were suggesting it might be some tribal minority. I've got a follow up question after this.

LIEUTENANT COLONEL DAVID TYLER:  1 can only say that our troops came under quite substantial and sustained fire. Now, whether they were Taliban or al Qaeda remains to be determined. But they certainly weren't collecting for the Red Cross. And we reacted accordingly.

QUESTION: You say they were former Taliban or al Qaeda, they weren't some other ethnic minority with a gripe against the foreign military?

LIEUTENANT COLONEL DAVID TYLER: 1  don't have information about that. I can only say that we reacted with the rules of engagement and did what was required when we came under heavy and sustained fire in a known al Qaeda

stronghold.

QUESTION: What evidence was round subsequently that would point to the identity?

LIEUTENANT COLONEL DAVID TYLER: I don't have information on that.

That's part of the process which is being undertaken now. All of that battle assessment is being made and we'll be in a position I hope later on to give you some more information.

QUESTION:  The other thing was that there were reports today - and I think you might have alluded to it in your earlier remarks - where people fire weapons for all sorts of different things in Afghanistan including celebrations and wedding parties.

There was one recent celebrated incident in which a lot of the press of local Afghani sources are claiming that the US launched an air attack against what was a wedding party firing into the air to celebrate. What do we know about that? And did Australia have an y  involvement in calling in that air support?

LIEUTENANT COLONEL DAVID TYLER:  We - in fact I spoke to some of our

folk this morning about this very issue and we have - there is nothing in our official reporting about a wedding party. It's as well to remember that in these situations it's sometimes in the interests of an adversary to put about information of that nature. I

don't know where it came from, and I'm not able to confirm any wedding party.

However, I do know that people do sometimes fire weapons in celebration.

QUESTION:  Okay, let's just clarify that a little bit further. Are you saying there was no reporting referring to a wedding party, but have we got any reporting on an incident in which there was an aerial bombardment or an aerial attack, which others

have claimed could have been a wedding party?

LIEUTENANT COLONEL DAVID TYLER: I have no - no, I have no information on that. No.

QUESTION: So you're not ruling it out? Or are you saying that you have no information...

LIEUTENANT COLONEL DAVID TYLER: Well, if I have no information I obviously can't rule anything out. I have no information to suggest that.

QUESTION: Have you checked on that?

LIEUTENANT COLONEL DAVID TYLER: No, no, not specifically, no.

Because it's actually not necessarily our business about it.

QUESTION: All right. But that area where that alleged incident took place and where some people claim it was a wedding party, other people...

LIEUTENANT COLONEL DAVID TYLER: Well, we don't even know if it was an incident. I mean you say it's an alleged incident, yes.

QUESTION: Well, was that in an area of Australian operations or was it a long

way away from where we are?

LIEUTENANT COLONEL DAVID TYLER: Well, I don't know. I've just said I have no information on the incident how can I know where it was?

QUESTION: You don't know where it was?

LIEUTENANT COLONEL DAVID TYLER: No, I don't know where it was. I don't know where - I don't know of any alleged wedding party, so I can't tell you where it was.

QUESTION: There has been something in the press reports...

LIEUTENANT COLONEL DAVID TYLER:  Well, there were press reports saying we were flying FA-18s over Afghanistan - Australian. Forgive nee, but I don't necessarily take everything I read in the press as gospel.

QUESTION:  Is it possible just to make a check of that? It's probably the case that it was in another area of operations if you don't know anything about it. Is it possible to check on that to se whether it was an incident. We might say we called in air support that it wasn't a wedding party, it was a genuine enemy position firing weapons.

LIEUTENANT COLONEL DAVID TYLER:  We'll give you the best brief we can when Condor is finished. Every detail that we're able to give you. That's the only undertaking I can make.

QUESTION: Were the Australians anywhere near the US Special Forces soldier that was killed?

LIEUTENANT COLONEL DAVID TYLER: No. No other questions? Thank you very much.

FNE)

