01 September 2002

Attorney General Williams Challenged to Release Ennis File

Senator Bob Brown speaking from Johannesburg today called for a clearing of the air by the Federal government on the truth of serious allegations about the role of the Australian Federal Police in so called “disruption” activities in Indonesia designed to stop asylum seekers getting to Australia.

“These allegations made on Channel 9’s Today programme are so serious it warrants an immediate opening of the Ennis file and if they are untrue it is incumbent on the Attorney General to immediately say so,” Senator Brown said.

The allegations concerned the relationship between the Australian Federal Police and Kevin John Ennis and his activities relating to people smuggling in Indonesia.

It was alleged that Ennis impersonated a police officer, took a substantial sum of money from asylum seekers on a promise that he could get them into Australia at the same time as he was acting as a paid informant of the Australian Federal Police to the tune of $25,000.

It was further alleged that he boasted that on four or five occasions he paid Indonesians to scuttle boats carrying asylum seekers off the coast of Indonesia.

“What did the Australian Federal Police know about Ennis’s involvement in those sinking boats?” Senator Brown asked.

“What promises did the Government make to the Australian Federal Police or to Ennis about immunity from prosecution? If so, who knew that they were breaking the law? If not, were they breaking the law and what is being done to investigate? Were their activities “Controlled Operations”?

“Did the Australian Federal Police know what was involved in “disruption” activities and tasked the Indonesians to carry them out and never ask any questions as to what methods were used?” Senator Brown inquired.

“Was the Senate Committee misled by the Australian Federal Police in relation to the extent to which the Australian Federal Police ever authorised any informant to be involved in people smuggling or taking money from asylum seekers?

“Attorney General Williams must open the Ennis file.” Senator Brown concluded.

Category: Senate Office Author: Ben Oquist

