JULIA GILLARD M.P. Shadow Minister for Population & Immigration

MEDIA RELEASE

’PACIFIC SOLUTION’? - WHAT’S THE COST?

The Shadow Minister for Population & Immigration, Ms Julia Gillard, today called on the Howard Government to disclose the full cost of the so-called ‘Pacific Solution’.

The Howard Government has struck a new deal with PNG to make available around 800 extra places for the processing of asylum seekers.  These asylum seekers may be accommodated for up to a year, but perhaps longer if the deal is extended down the track.  The first deal with PNG obligated it to take approximately 200 asylum seekers.

The Howard Government has also made two arrangements with Nauru to take a maximum of 1,200 asylum seekers.

Despite the Minister for Foreign Affairs claiming this new deal with PNG means the so-called Pacific Solution is being consolidated, the Howard Government has not at any time detailed the real costs of this exercise.  A Cabinet submission leaked in December indicated the costs to Australian taxpayers could be in the order of half a billion dollars.

Under each of the deals with Pacific Island countries, the Australian Government appears to be responsible for the full cost of housing, feeding and clothing detainees. Australians staff the facilities.  But the precise financial and other obligations undertaken by Australia remain secret.  The Howard Government knows the total cost of offshore detention but refuses to release it.

Australian taxpayers are entitled to know how much is being spent on this government program.  The Howard Government argues the so-called ‘Pacific Solution’ is an effective program.  Australian taxpayers can only assess this claim if the full costs are disclosed.

If the Howard Government won’t come clean on this matter, Labor will pursue it during the Senate estimates process.  However, it should not be necessary to drag these cost details out of a reluctant government.  Australian taxpayers are entitled to know the full facts and the Howard Government should voluntarily disclose the truth now.

18 January 2002

For further information contact:  Julia Gillard, MP  0417 361 637

