- 1 -

Transcript Transcript Transcript Transcript                Jenny  Jenny  Jenny  Jenny MacklinMP MacklinMP MacklinMP MacklinMP

TRANSCRIPT OF MEDIA CONFERENCE - MELBOURNE, 2 JULY 2O02

ABBOTT; ALP REFORM; ASYLUM SEEKERS, INTEREST RATES, SIMON CREAN

MACKLIN: Tony Abbott should retract the offensive statement that he has made to all Australian workers and apologise. It’s his job as Employment Minister to actually stand up for workers to make sure that they’re protected from bad employers, to make sure they’re not exploited and to make sure they’re not harassed at work. What we need from the Employment Minister is someone who supports workers getting their entitlements, not someone who says to bad employers I’m giving you the green light to treat people badly.

JOURNALIST: (Inaudible).

MACKLIN: Well I do think so and I don’t think they were off-the-cuff comments. We’ve seen a pattern from Tony Abbott that he’s about confrontation in the workplace, not about making sure that good employers get on with their workers. Good employers know that it’s good for business to have good relations with their workforce. Tony Abbott just wants to create trouble.

JOURNALIST: What do you think his master plan is?

MACKLIN: Well his master plan is to get wages down as low as possible, to reduce conditions that workers have that protect their rights in the workplace. But what most Australians want, those good employers and their workers, what they want is a fair system in the workplace where they can have decent wages and decent conditions. And we don’t need an Employment Minister that just wants to provoke trouble.

JOURNALIST: (Inaudible).

MACKLIN: Yes I certainly do. I think that they, those comments were offensive. No wife, no daughter should have to stay in a situation where a husband or father is being abusive and we certainly don’t want a senior Government Minister suggesting that any women or any girl should have to put up with that sort of behaviour. No one should have to put up with it in the workplace and he shouldn’t be suggesting that anyone should have to put up with it in the workplace or at home.

JOURNALIST: … “the things that batter”?

MACKLIN: Well it does bring that back, that dreadful statement from Alexander Downer, back in I think it was 1995, very offensive statement about domestic violence. And once again we

Acting Leader of the Opposition Acting Leader of the Opposition Acting Leader of the Opposition Acting Leader of the Opposition

Shadow Minister for Employment, Education, Training & Science

Federal Member for Jagajaga

- 2 -

have Tony Abbott, very foolishly and offensively saying that a bad employer is just like a bad husband or a bad father. Well we don’t want bad employers or bad fathers or bad husbands. Government Ministers should be about making sure that both workers and people’s family lives are protected by good laws, not giving the green light to behave really offensively.

JOURNALIST: Do you think Tony Abbott…

MACKLIN: Well he should retract the comment and make it plain that this is not acceptable. This sort of behaviour is not acceptable in the Australian workplace or in the Australian home. He should retract the comment and apologise to the Australian workforce.

JOURNALIST: (Inaudible).

MACKLIN: Well what we’re about here in Australia at the moment on our side of politics is reviewing our policies in this regard. Simon Crean has already made it plain that from Labor’s point of view children should be removed from behind the razor wire. We do not think that detention centres are the appropriate place for children to be detained. We’ve also made it plain that we think that Woomera should be mothballed and that the management of detention centres should be returned to the public sector so that media, such as yourselves, can get in and report what’s going on.

JOURNALIST: Do you think that the international problem…?

MACKLIN: It’s a matter of making sure that we get our policies right. This is an issue around the world at the moment so Australia has a responsibility, as do other countries, to make sure that we are compassionate but also that we’re tough on border protection. We’ve made our position clear on a number of issues - getting children out from behind the razor wire, making sure that Woomera is closed because it’s not an appropriate place for people to be held. These are policy changes we’ve called on the Government to implement and I think it would be worthwhile for the Government to respond to those proposals.

JOURNALIST: (Inaudible).

MACKLIN: Well I think the Government, Mr Howard should in fact respond to the policy proposals that Simon Crean has put already. They’re constructive proposals that would see improvements in our detention process here in Australia.

JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)

MACKLIN: Well we’ve made the criticisms here in Australia. We think there are criticisms that can and should be made. We’ve put forward constructive proposals and I’d invite the Prime Minister to respond to those.

JOURNALIST: (Inaudible).

MACKLIN: Well many of the criticisms are similar so I would ask him once again to respond to the positive initiatives that we’ve put forward.

JOURNALIST: (Inaudible).

MACKLIN: We are very concerned about the level of household debt in Australia. There have been very, very significant increases in the level of debt that Australian families are holding, both increases in levels of mortgages and credit card debt, very significant increases since the Howard Government was elected. And so we are very concerned about any possibility of interest rate rises and

- 3 -

the impact that that would have on the capacity of Australian households to manage their mortgage payments.

JOURNALIST: Mr Howard’s not the only leader overseas at the moment, your Leader is overseas also for a couple of weeks…

MACKLIN: I think I’ll be okay for a couple of weeks. I think the important thing is that he’s set in train two major processes of review. The Hawke-Wran Review which is coming to finality. We’re expecting a report from them in the not too distant future. And of course we have a major policy review under way, which I’m responsible for. So those reviews are underway. I don’t expect anything particular to happen in the next couple of weeks so I don’t think it is a problem at all.

JOURNALIST: (Inaudible).

MACKLIN: …there are going to be important things that he will be doing while he’s overseas and the rest of us are getting on with the job while he’s away.

JOURNALIST: (Inaudible).

MACKLIN: I think I’ve answered that question.

ENDS

