Media releases and speeches are available from DFAT via the internet.      http://www.dfat.gov.au/

MEDIA RELEASE MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS ALEXANDER DOWNER FA84           30 May 2002

DIPLOMATIC APPOINTMENT: AMBASSADOR TO EAST TIMOR

I have today announced the appointment of Paul Foley as Australian Ambassador to East Timor.

East Timor’s independence ceremonies on 20 May 2002 were a moving celebration of East Timor’s entry  into  the  community  of  nations.   I  was  delighted  to  be  present  with  the  Prime  Minister  and  a broad delegation of Australians to witness the birth of a nation.

On 20 May I signed with East Timor’s Senior Minister for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation, Dr Jose Ramos-Horta, a Joint Communique to mark the formal start of diplomatic relations between our two countries.  I announced then the appointment of James Batley as Australia’s first Ambassador to East Timor,  an  appointment  which  closed  the  circle  on  Mr  Batley’s  three  years  as  Australia’s representative  in  Dili.   Our  new  Ambassador  will  play  a  central  role  in  fostering  the  strong  ties  of friendship between Australia and East Timor and in developing new partnerships, including business and community links, which will deepen our already rich and varied relationship.

For  the  immediate  future,  the  United  Nations  will  remain  in  East  Timor,  under  the  United  Nations Mission  of  Support.   Australia  will  continue  to  play  a  key  role  in  the  post-independence  UN Peacekeeping Force, in line with our substantial earlier commitments to INTERFET and to the United Nations  Transitional  Administration  in  East  Timor  (UNTAET).   As  a  close  neighbour  and  good friend, Australia will continue to be a strong advocate of East Timor in international forums and to do what  we  can  to  assist  the  new  nation’s  integration  into  global  and  regional  communities.   Our significant  aid  program  of  $150  million  over  four  years  from  2000-2001  -  focused  on  governance, education, health, water supply and sanitation and rural development - has already made a substantial contribution to readying the people of East Timor for the challenges of independence.

Mr Foley is a senior career officer with the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade.  His positions in Canberra  have  included  Assistant  Secretary,  Information  Management  Branch;  Assistant  Secretary, Y2K  Taskforce;  Director,  Evaluation  and  Audit  Section;  and  Director,  Parliamentary  Liaison  and Freedom of Information Section.  Overseas, Mr Foley has served as First Secretary and Counsellor in Riyadh and Third and Second Secretary in Kingston.

Educated at Monash University, Mr Foley holds a Bachelor of Economics degree with honours.  He also holds a Graduate Diploma in Strategic Studies from the Joint Services Staff College.

Mr Foley will take up his position as Ambassador to East Timor in June 2002.

The people of East Timor will face many challenges as they take up the vital work of building strong and democratic institutions, establishing productive regional and international relations and putting in place  the  framework  for  a  prosperous  future.   East  Timor  will  not  face  these  challenges  alone. Australia  is  committed  to  helping East  Timor  reach  its  full  potential  as  a  peaceful  and  independent nation.

Media enquiries: Chris Kenny (Ministerial) 0419 206 890 Julie McDonald (Departmental) 02 6261 1555

