LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION

TRANSCRIPT OF Q8tA - STUDENTS AT CHARTERS TOWERS SCHOOL OF   DISTANCE EDUCATION, QUEENSLAND - 16TH OF APRIL, 2002.

E & OE - PROOF ONLY

Subjects: School of the Air, Being a politician, Kyoto Protocol,

Sports in rural communities, War on Terrorism, drought, asylum seekers   and land clearing.

CREAN: Well good morning to all of you and thanks for the opportunity to talk   with you. My name is Simon Crean and I am the Leader of the Opposition in the   National Parliament. My task is to by and win the next election so that I do become   the Prime Minister. But we are meeting today in Charters Towers and hence I’m

here today at the School of Distance Education. I’ve also had the opportunity to   speak to similar groups to yourself, both from Alice Springs School of the Air and   also up in the Kimberley in relation to their distance education. Interestingly enough   I was Education Minister back in 1994,95 & 96 and we did a lot of investment in   connecting up remote locations. We also did a lot of things in terms of children of

isolated parents, particularly boarding assistance etc. So as a Minister of the   Government I do understand the importance of this network that you are on.

The other thing that I have been talking about today with your teachers is the   opportunities that the new technology can provide in offering the teaching services   and the curriculum in different, more innovative ways. Of course, one of the   drawbacks in that is the capacity to deliver the service so the broadband connection

is one of those things. One of the reasons we think that you have got to keep   Telstra in some public ownership is to use the community service obligation to get   that service out there, to get that connectivity, to get that access to broadband cable   and or satellite to deliver the services.

The other thing that clearly presents itself is the more connected we make the   education system the more of a market place you provide for people who develop   the products, the educational curriculum, the content, and you get a lot more variety   out of that. It’s also a different form by which you can get interaction between

yourself and the teachers through email and online processes.

So I am very excited by what I have seen here today. I hope that you study well and

I am here to answer any of the questions you have to make. The Shadow Cabinet is   meeting in Charters Towers. We have some important issues to discuss and we will   be meeting in Charters Towers and then heading off to different parts of the State   after this.

So thanks for the opportunity to be with you and if you have got any questions fire   away.

STUDENT: (Adam Black) Mr Crean, do you like being a politician and why?

CREAN: Well, Adam I love it and the   reason I love it is because it gives you the

opportunity to meet with lots of people to discuss issues of importance with them,   but in the knowledge that if you get elected to Government you can actually do   things that improve people’s lives and I think that is a very important quality. We   are not in this world for what we get out of it ourselves, although it is important that   everyone pursues their own aspirations, but more importantly is what we give back   to a community and how we can help each other. So I like that dimension of it.

But as much as I like being in Opposition it is much better being in Government and   I can talk from experience because I’ve been in Government for six years and it is   much better being on the other side of the Chamber because you have got more   capacity to do the things that I talked about.

STUDENT: (Quinton) Mr Crean, do you think a change in education for our young   people will help with problems with what we see on television nightly, and what is   the ALP going to do to ratify the Kyoto agreement?

CREAN: Well, interestingly we have made an announcement today that says   that we will ratify the Kyoto agreement if we get elected.   I made an important   announcement today, two things for the environment, one that we would ban   further, or any drilling and exploration on the Reef. Secondly, we would sign up to

Kyoto to reduce global warming because that is terribly important for our   environment. But it is also important for the tourism industries that rely so heavily   on the wilderness natural heritage values. Now the first part of your question.   I

think education is an important part of dealing with those problems because I think   that what we need is better tolerance and understanding. You look at the problems   in the Middle East. Interestingly I was in Israel a little under twelve months ago. I   am firmly of the view that a solution and a framework exists for a solution in the

Middle East. What doesn’t exist is trust, an ability for the warring sides to get   around the table. Colin Powell, the Secretary of State from the US, is over there   seeking to get that position. But, you know, it is interesting, you’d think that the   solution was complex. Well it is, but what seems to be even more difficult is the

inability to get round the table simply because people don’t trust each other.

Now trust is a very important thing. Education can help build trust but dealing   respectfully with people and having an understanding of different points of view is a   terribly important value.   It can come through the education but quite frankly it also

comes through family values and it comes from relationships with people.

2

So education has an important role to play but it’s not only education.

STUDENT: (Nathan) Did you have to get a degree before you became a politician?

CREAN: I didn’t have to but I did. In fact, I didn’t just get one I got two. I got   economics and law. I studied at Monash University. Law is important, it’s   interesting when you think about it because what do politicians do? They pass laws   so it often helps to understand what the legal system is all about, particularly issues   associated with the Constitution and administrative procedures. These are all an   important part of an understanding. You certainly don’t need a degree to

understand those things, you can pick it up simply by having interests in them.

But I do urge people to continue with their education because education whilst it   also prepares, whilst it can help to prepare for jobs, and it’s important for that, it’s   also important in terms of developing values and understanding the importance of   learning and imparting that learning and using commonsense and discussion to sort

problems out.

So there are many values that education can bring, jobs are part of it.

STUDENT: (Sally) If you were voted in the next election what would you do for   sport education in the rural community?

CREAN: Well, I think that sport is a terribly important part of education. We   had a program when we were in, to actually fund the development of sporting   facilities in the community because as much as the scholastic side of the learning   side is important so is physical development, so we have a very strong commitment

in terms of sporting education. And I am a bit of a keen sport activist myself. I   swim every day. I like to go bushwalking. So I like to come out to different parts of   your world. And this is the Year of the Outback Ill be out... In fact, I have got   someone working on my staff who is walking the Dingo Fence. She is walking, 800

km in Blundstone boots, can you imagine it? Well, she is going to do it. I said that   what I might do is come out and drop her a food parcel. But we might walk some of   that track. But I also like to cycle. I love watching sport too. My football team is   the Kangaroos and so I’m a keen participant as well as a spectator of sport.

STUDENT: (Matty) Mr Crean, what do you do in a normal day?

CREAN: Well I have lots of different normal days. This is a normal day because   I’m out in the regions and I started very early this morning. I have had to do four   radio interviews this morning plus a press conference, where I announced that   package about the no drilling and exploration on the Barrier Reef and our   commitment to Kyoto. I did one of those interviews I had to do by phone, I did   three of them in the studio. And then we drove up to Charters Towers, I’m speaking   with you now. We have got a Shadow Cabinet at 11 o’clock and when that finishes I

am going over to Alice Springs because I am going to visit Pine Gap tomorrow. It’s   an important communications installation. It’s a significant part of the alliance

3

between ourselves and the United States, it is important to that relationship and

whilst it is closed to the public, the facility, I have the opportunity as Opposition   Leader to be briefed on the activities.

Then I am going to Sydney where I have to make a speech at a conference and   then I will get home by Thursday and see the family. On the weekend a normal day   is, well I try to keep weekends as free as possible for the family, and just spend a bit   of time with them. I’ve been married now for almost 29 years now, I have got two   daughters. We went to the movies the other day.

I took one of them off to the

movies to see the Time Machine. Pretty ordinary, good special effects but I like the   book, I love the book. I read it in fact when I was your age. I really enjoyed the   book but I thought the movie was a little bit disappointing.

STUDENT: (Becky) If you were in Government what would you do about the   problem with higher costs, compensation pay outs which are causing interest rates   to rise and the cancellation of sports like camp drafts. They are important to   outback people and the pay outs are getting out of hand? What would you do Mr   Crean?

CREAN: Well that is a great question Becky. We’ve been talking about this in   the last couple of weeks. We need a national solution to the problem and I think   part of the solution lies in capping the payments out that are made and as well as   stopping the, what are called, if you like, ambulance chasers, lawyers who simply   drum up the claims. I think that the point you make about the community activities

being affected is a great tragedy because the lifeblmd of communities, especially   more remote areas, is their gatherings, the opportunity for people to actually come   together for a purpose and a cause. If that can’t happen because they are priced   out of existence they can’t fund the public liability then, as I say, that’s a great

tragedy.

Now what was tending to happen was that the federal government would blame the   state government and nothing would happen. Recently, there was a meeting in   Canberra where the two levels of government got together, and I had been calling   for this so I welcome it.

It looks as though a solution might be on the way and I   would urge both state and federal governments to get there and solve it because if   we don’t the lifeblood of communities will just drain away and we don’t want to see   that. So I’m keeping a very close eye on it, we will be pushing very hard for the

federal and state governments to get a solution because that is where the answer   lies.

STUDENT: (Mark) Mr Crean, when we will get Year 11 and Year 12...distance   education, Mr Crean?

CREAN: I was asking this very question just before we came on air because I   was interested to know how far the School of Distance Education went and it only   goes up to Year Ten. And I was informed that a lot or people do not get the   opportunity to go on from there. I think it is terribly important that we use every

effort that ensures that you get access to Year Eleven and Twelve because we have

4

said that that should be the aspiration that all young people should be able to call

for. So I am not too sure whether the solution lies in being able to extend the   Distance Education facilities or whether we have to look more creatively at   opportunities to bring students to the more, if you like, structured education. But I   think that it is terribly important. I am concerned that it does stop at Ten, I think   that we have got to create opportunities to extend it beyond there.

STUDENT: (Ian) What is your view on America’s war on terrorism, Mr Crean?

CREAN: Well, we support their war on terrorism. We have given bipartisan   support in the Parliament and recently I flew to Western Australia to welcome back   the first troops that had been over on tour in Afghanistan. Terrorism strikes at every   democracy and terrorism is not a conventional war it is a war on people. And it   strikes indiscriminately and in very harsh ways and it has to be stamped out because

if we allow it to develop democracies as we know them will break down.

I am a bit concerned about the noises coming from the US about the need to extend   the war into Iraq. I don’t believe the case has been made by the United States as to   why that extension needs to be made at this point. So I have been urging our   Government and the United States to explain more fully why there needs to be that   extension. They’ve not made the connection between Iraq and the al-Quaeda and I   think that if the argument is there than it needs to be made public so that we are

informed about it and we can make the appropriate decision.

STUDENT: (Amanda) What support will you give in the drought which is nearly   here, Mr Crean?

CREAN: Well, there are provisions for drought relief that the Commonwealth   and State Governments jointly fund. I’m not certain as to the adequacy of those   funds of the arrangements but   I was Minister for Primary Industries back in 1992

and 93. And I introduced improved provisions for drought relief as well as for relief   to deal with farms caught in exceptional circumstances whether it was drought or   any other condition that it causes. These were things like, in fact, zero interest   loans we’d introduced. I also think that it is terribly important that farm

management practices improve to lift the sustainability of the natural resource of the   land, and this is where I think education, the Land Care movement, improved   techniques in terms of farming practices these are all important roles that   governments can play. Just as you need education so too, in a life-long learning

sense, people who run, your parents who run and operate the farms need to   improve their skills and understanding to mitigate potential problems that come from   the natural conditions.

So   I do think governments do have a key role to play. Again, it has to be a joint   effort. You can’t have this situation where the federal government says, ah well we   will let the Queensland Government sort that out. It has to be a shared

responsibility, a partnership, and that is something that I am very keen to develop.

5

STUDENT:

(Stanley) What do you think about asylum seekers coming to Australia,   Mr Crean?

CREAN: Well I think that we have to do two things. We have to be tough in   protecting our borders but we have to be more compassionate in the way in which   deal with those people who do end up arriving. I think that we have said to the   Government that we will work with you to strengthen our border protection. We   think the Government should be doing more, for example, by introducing something

like the US style Coast Guard. A cop on the beat, if you like, to patrol the Northern   waters and to take preventative action. But I think that what is very concerning is   to circumstances of young children behind razor wire not getting access to   education.

I think they’re the innocent victims of a whole range of circumstances. I   think it is terribly important to get them from behind the razor wire. I also think that   the detention facilities have not been handling their circumstances very well. We   called for the mothballing of the Woomera Detention Centre, which now the   Government seems to be accepting.

So, again, I think that these are difficult issues. We have to protect our own citizens   and our own borders but we also have to be good international citizens and so here   is a question of getting that balance right between being tough on the border   protection but compassionate at the same time. I think we can do it and I have   indicated to the Government that I am prepared to work with them to achieve such   an outcome.

STUDENT: (Adam) . ..what would you do about tree clearing guidelines, Mr Crean?

CREAN: The tree clearing, we actually said before the last election that we had   to halt the land clearing. One of the states that was the big offenders in this regard   was Queensland, of course, and you can‘t halt it unless you’re prepared to put   resources in to address the problem. Even though the Governments have

announced an approach to deal with salinity they haven’t got any mechanism to halt   the land clearing because they haven’t put any resources forward. So again we   would work in partnership with the states to halt the land clearing but we would   provide the resources necessary to help us achieve that objective.

Well, thank you very much. I had some fantastic fun this morning. I’ve really   enjoyed this. I have had to be in all sorts of radio studios before and I must say you   have asked tougher questions. So thank you very much. Good luck with all of your   education and I hope that we can do something to extend that opportunity to you

beyond year Ten. Thanks very much.

Ends

6

