Senator Natasha Stott Despoja  Leader of the Australian Democrats 7 June 2002                          MEDIA RELEASE                                  02/295

http://www.democrats.org.au/

Democrats maintain stand against Ruddock’s farce The Australian Democrats have dismissed the latest attempt by Immigration Minister Ruddock to extend the area of excised islands to stop asylum seekers coming to Australia as nonsensical.

Leader of the Australian Democrats, Senator Natasha Stott Despoja, said it was time for the legislative farce to end.

“The Democrats will move to disallow these changes in the Senate to prevent any further extension of this foolish policy of excising islands from being part of Australia,” said Senator Stott Despoja.

“The Democrats put the challenge to the ALP to support this motion. The ALP has repeatedly said the ‘Pacific Solution’ was never a serious policy solution, was an unsustainable and costly failure, and an expensive charade.

“This will be a major test for the ALP to show that it is not all rhetoric with no substance.

“From the beginning of this Government’s campaign to stop asylum seekers coming to Australia the Democrats have opposed its moves.

“We moved to prevent Christmas Island from being excised and we will continue to oppose this mean spirited policy.

“It is obvious that the Government is sensitive to criticisms about Australian processing and detention centres, this action is an attempt to ensure no asylum seekers can apply for a protection visa from Australia.

“This is a clear attempt to ensure that independent authorities cannot scrutinise conditions in detention centres.

“One of the most offensive claims by Minister Ruddock to date is that Australia is continuing to meets its obligations under the Refugee Convention to people arriving at these excised territories.

“Everything about the Pacific Solution is in direct contravention of our obligations. The sole purpose of the Pacific Solution is to ensure people cannot apply for a visa thereby preventing our obligations under the convention from being triggered.

“The Democrats will oppose these regulations in the Senate and call on the ALP to do the same,” concluded Senator Stott Despoja.

For further information contact Alison Rogers on 0419 867 649

