1

LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION

TRANSCRIPT OF PRESS CONFERENCE - COASTGUARD POLICY LAUNCH, BRISBANE 27TH NOVEMBER 2002

E & OE - PROOF ONLY

Subjects:  Coastguard; MYEFO; Leadership; Taxes

CREAN: Ridiculous as it may seem, Australia with a coastline of 37,000 kilometres does not have a maritime policing authority. That’s is why we are committing to a Coastguard, a cop on the beat to ensure greater security and greater protection of our borders. This commitment will involve the expenditure of $612.5 million over four years. It’s built around four important pillars. First, three purpose-built, 80 metre boats to patrol the borders. And here we have a model of what one may look like. Headquartered in Darwin, but with one based in Broome, Darwin and Cairns. Each of the vessels will be equipped with a helicopter.

In addition to that there will be 250 additional personnel to man the expanded operation. The third dimension, of course, is to better utilise our fantastic volunteer network of coast watchers - the volunteer Coastguards. These are people, some 4000 of them around the country, a number that can be significantly enhanced if they are resourced. We are prepared to resource them, work with them. They are our eyes and ears, given the population expansion to the coast in this country, they are our eyes and ears but they need additional resources.

And the fourth policy pillar goes to improving intelligence and information gathering. We are prepared through this policy, to invest in an underwater radar system. It is a mechanism, (inaudible) technology, but by which through an underwater capacity linked to the air, the vessels can be identified and vessel movements can be identified.

Now this is a comprehensive policy. None of it detracts from the Navy. And I know that our opponents will try and say that the Navy does this job now. The Navy does a great job but it’s a defence operation, a defence task - what we need is a policing, law-enforcement operation, a cop on the beat. A Coastguard is our cop on the beat. It will work with Navy and it will work with

2

Customs. It will be established through a statutory authority reporting through the Department of Homeland Affairs to the Minister for Community Safety. A cabinet-level appointment.

Labor is committed to homeland security and our defence. We have always believed in the inherent values of sustainability, self-reliance and capacity. This Coastguard will enhance that capacity. I think I have brought your attention, also, to this map, which just goes to show the vulnerability of our coastline. This demonstrates - since this Government has been in office - the number of illegal entries, whether they are people smugglers, drug runners, gun smugglers or fishing breaches. This is the extent of the vulnerability of our coastline. A coastline that despite all of that vulnerability does not have a police authority on the beat. We are going to give it one. That is what the commitment to Australia’s Coastguard involves. It is a commitment of substance, it is a commitment of dollars, it is a commitment of vessels, it is a commitment of personnel. This is great for Australia’s border security, it is also important for job opportunities.

I invite Mark Latham, who has had carriage for the development of this policy since his appointment as minister, not only for economic ownership but for community security. An appointment I made when the opportunity was there with a vacancy created some months ago. I might also say, that in the development of this policy I had very lengthy discussions with the Coastguard in the United States. I am convinced that this is needed for the country, but it has got to be done properly. And this policy that we have developed does it properly. It has been a long time coming and it will only happen under a Labor government.

So I invite Mark to inform you further of the details.

LATHAM: Thanks Simon. If I can just run you through the details of the four pillars of our Coastguard policy. The first is new hardware. Labor will commission three 80 metre, off-shore patrol boats and helicopters with the capacity to protect Australia’s Indian Ocean territories, including Christmas Island. This fills the current capability gap where the frigates are too expensive for the task, and the regular patrol boats are too small. Our purpose-built boats will fill the capability gap.

The vessels will be built in Australia, they will be headquartered in Darwin with boats stationed in Cairns and Broome. The boats will provide strong border protection and maritime policing. They will have powers to go after drug smugglers and others people smuggling and pirate fishermen, and they will also defend Australia’s quarantine laws. The second aspect to our network is the new personnel. Our Coastguard will include more than 2000 specialist personnel including 250 new officers. The intention is train them as part of the Australian Maritime College in Launceston, Tasmania.

3

And in addition to staffing the Coastguard police, the staff will be posted on Navy and Customs vessels carrying out surveillance and maritime policing duties. This represents a significant extension of the Coastguard capacity but it also improves the flexibility and effectiveness of Navy and Customs operations. I put it to you that Coastguard is a Navy friendly policy, there should be no doubt about that.

And the third and one of the most significant aspects of our Coastguard network is the volunteers. We want Coastguard to rely on Australia’s biggest ever voluntary community effort. At the moment you have John Howard saying that Australia should be alert to the threat of terrorism. Labor says that people should be alert, but they should also join voluntary organisations to help with the surveillance and policing of our nation. We want people to join the Coastguard volunteers and play a very active role in making Australia safer and more secure. We believe that the time has come to mobilise all our resources - government and community-based - to improve Australia’s security.

Now our coastal communities, of course, are in the frontline. We will give them the incentives and support needed to form a comprehensive system of Coastguard volunteers. This includes training support, discounted boat registration, Coastguard badging and also the provisions of communications equipment in priority areas. Australia’s private fleet, the vessels include some 10,000 commercial boats and 500,000 registered recreational boats, so in this country we have really only just tapped a very small part of private vessels that should be part of the Coastguard volunteers. Playing their role in making Australia safer from all kinds of threats.

So these are real incentives and support. I have spoken to the current voluntary organisation the Royal Volunteer Coastal Patrol, and the Australian Coastguard Association. They are very keen about this approach and certainly support our effort to bring them together in a comprehensive network of Coastguard volunteers around the nation.

The fourth and final aspect of our Coastguard network is intelligence capacity. In truth, nothing beats good intelligence in the protection of our borders. This is why Labor will invest more in our surveillance infrastructure with the Coastguard developing a $30 million seabed sonar system. This will substantially increase our surveillance range with border protection readiness, it’s the fixed seabed radar system.

Unlike the current system, the Coastguard will be able to direct and prioritise half of the coastal intelligence effort. This will enhance Australia’s national security infrastructure including our capacity to fight terrorism. We have no doubt that terrorists look for nations with porous borders. Australia’s borders are way too poor. We need improved security and improved intelligence capacity to fight off this threat.

4

So in total you shouldn’t see Coastguard as a new hardware in isolation or the personnel or the intelligence capacity, or the volunteers. It’s all of those things plus more. It brings together a comprehensive network of Coastguard capacity around the nation. It’s a detailed and fully costed strategy, it leaves the Defence budget unaltered and it does not involve the transfer of Defence resources. This indeed, is a cost-effective approach. Every day the frigates cost the country $1 million per boat to do patrolling work. If you took 20 months of the frigates patrol, that’s $600 million. That is the full cost of our policy over four years. So you can see how cost-effective it is to establish a comprehensive national Coastguard network. We are the world’s largest island with a large coastline. It’s long overdue that Australia had its own Coastguard.

JOURNALIST:  [inaudible]

LATHAM: The Navy approach, of course, was set out at the last election where they had some concerns about the transfer of their resources and some of their budget to the Coastguard. We have taken account of that reservation, because this is a policy that adds new resources to Australia’s national security capacity. It doesn’t transfer any Navy equipment, it doesn’t affect the Navy budget at all, so I would have though the Navy would be happy that Labor has taken account of one of their reservations they had at the last election campaign. And this is a Navy friendly policy that they can fully support.

JOURNALIST: Why do we still need a Coastguard now …borders already in question for the last year or so?

CREAN: I don’t think anyone believes that the problem in terms of those incursions can be [inaudible] completely - that is the first point. But, the second point is that it is not just about people smugglers: it’s the drug smugglers, it’s the gun runners - very important in the context of a conference coming up on Friday to crack down on firearms. How better to start than to stop the illegal ones entering this country?

There is also the threat to our fisheries. Now, whatever the Government claims about boat people and people smugglers, they are not claiming that it has ended. And the great difficulty we have is that the Navy is not equipped well to deal with this problem. A frigate costs $1 million a day and if it intercepts there is no landing capacity. People on the boat have to actually jump in to the water - and you saw those photos that Mr Reith bodgied up in that context. That is not the appropriate way to intercept. It’s not the appropriate way to enforce. And the other thing of course, is that Naval officers don’t have the policing authority, they don’t have the powers.

So I think that it is important to understand the distinction between defence forces and police authorities. Just as we have troops to defend a country if we are invaded, we have police to defend communities when they are threatened

5

with crime. That is the analogy that needs to be understood so far as the Coastguard. It is the cop on the beat of our borders.

JOURNALIST: [inaudible] …porous borders is a sign of the threat. How does three of these ships going to solve that? Surely that’s not enough…[inaudible]

CREAN: We don’t pretend that three vessels alone will do it. But the three vessels are going to be at the core of the patrolling operation linked to the volunteer network which is fantastic around the country. We are going up tomorrow to Rockhampton and Yeppoon so we are going to be talking with the volunteer groups up there which have been doing a terrific job. I invite those of you who can come to come up with us, because you will see first hand the sort of network that we are talking about, so that you will have those eyes and ears.

You will also have the access to the existing equipment, the radical equipment which this policy sets out at the moment. Now there is air surveillance and all of those sorts of things, the trouble is that it is not owned by anyone. And Coastwatch - as it is currently called - can look, it can be told what to do but it can’t commission. The new authority will be able to get all of this intelligence gathering and decide the strategic direction that we go. And the other point that I think is terribly important is to look at this fixed seabed array. This is state of the art technology. This is radar under the water. And what it does is it can look from the water up and connect with the aircraft that are already there. But where the commissioning of it and the direction of the work is done through the Coastguard whose task it is to patrol, to police, to enforce.

JOURNALIST: [inaudible]…Coastguard in the last election, why are voters going to accept it this time?

CREAN: Well we lost the election for other reasons, it wasn’t because of the Coastguard policy. The Coastguard policy, quite frankly, has very strong support in the community. But this is a different policy to what we went with last time. This is policy that will be dedicated and have its own budget, its own statutory authority, its own Department of Homeland Affairs, its own Minister. This will be a Coastguard that has its own vessels and its own people and it will have its own budget.

The last policy was criticised by those who were critical of it because it was drawing from the Navy. This doesn’t. This complements the Navy. There will still need to be inter-agency agreements both with Navy and Customs because we do have to integrate, we do have to use the existing resources. And this is purpose-built, with its own authority.

6

JOURNALIST: What does the Senior Navy officials, the officers obviously, are they concerned that their officers are being used for the task at the moment, the…[inaudible].

CREAN: That is exactly the case. I have visited a number of areas in defence and Naval bases. They see it as an important opportunity to be part of, but they don’t want to see, they don’t like the fact that it detracts from their core business. Now just take the example that I mentioned before, with the frigates, that the cost of $1 million per day. We know that from Senate Estimates. What we have got to establish is how many days a frigate is involved. But one frigate has been on this activity a whole year. This is something almost around $300 million in one year. Our policy proposes expenditure of $150 million per year over four years, with patrol boats that are suited to the task. This is one of the examples.

But we have also drawn on the experiences to what the UK Royal Navy uses and the US uses. I have had the opportunity to visit US bases in San Francisco, for example, and see the sort of equipment that is needed. We don’t have that here. As Mark has said, the gap is in the middle, the patrol boats are too small, they can’t get out into the blue water where we need to do the intercepting and the turning back, or the frigates are too costly. What we need is a more efficient approach. This is a (inaudible) policy, but for the first time it is giving us the capacity to police our borders.

JOUNRALIST: What sort of weapons will they be carrying?

CREAN: These will have weapons on them as you can see. They would be armed vessels.

JOURNALIST: Do you deny that this is a recycled policy from the election?

CREAN: It builds on that policy, it gives substance to it. It puts dollars to it and it demonstrates that it is not at the expense of Navy - it’s additional to Navy and it also fits very well in fleshing out the importance of our Department of Homeland Security and the authority and the statutory authority that goes with the establishment of the Coastguard.

JOUNRALIST: Talking about our intelligence gathering capability, is there concern that the various bodies…[inaudible]…getting another intelligence authority to do it.

CREAN: No, I believe that the ability for the various bodies that need access to the intelligence today is there. Having the purpose built Coastguard is not going to compromise that, not going to complicate it. What we are talking about, under this budget, is enhancing our intelligence gathering capacity from the fixed seabed array, this is state of the art technology - this can intercept wooden hulls. And it can link with the other

7

intelligence gathering capacity, this is enhancement of the nation’s capacity. It is much better at securing our borders and protecting the nation.

JOURNALIST: Mr Crean, on another subject, the economic forecast that has been released today showed the…[inaudible]… from the drought. What do you think about the growth figures?

CREAN:  Well, it obviously shows the impact of the drought. And unlike the Treasurer who, two months ago said the drought wouldn’t have much impact on economic growth - sadly and mistakenly - he has been proved wrong. The drought is having enormous impact, and I am delighted that the Prime Minister is actually up in the drought territory today. I was up there seven weeks ago. And I have called for the assistance that I know farmers need, and they have been calling out for it and the Government has been dithering. It takes the mid-year economic forecast to demonstrate the impact of this on the economy in terms of growth, and the government has woken up too late to it. But you don’t need the statistics to tell you. You can find that out by going out there, looking at it, understanding it on the ground and doing something about getting money flowing to the farmers.

JOURNALIST: [inaudible]…three per cent is still a good figure though?

CREAN: Three per cent compared to the rest of the world is a welcome figure and the economy is projected to grow 4 per cent next year, as I understand it. My point is, that we need to diversify and strengthen our economic base and not enough is being done in that regard. When you look at the numbers of jobs created over the last three years, 700 only, pay more than average weekly earnings. There are no middle-income jobs being created under this economic growth. What we are seeing is the casualisation of the workforce and low-income jobs. This government is not investing in the drivers of economic growth, it’s not laying the base for sustained economic growth that is diversified and high-skilled high-wage. Nor is it paying enough attention to the sustainability of that growth in ecological terms. Its failure to ratify Kyoto is a disgrace and we will continue to pressure them to ratify Kyoto.

JOURNALIST: Just your position on tax, the latest figures show how much John Howard and Peter Costello got their hands on. Is that a problem for this strategy?

CREAN: The figures show two things today. One, a Coastguard can be afforded in the forward estimate period that we are talking about so this puts an end to the other nonsense about affordability, it’s a question of priorities. The second is that the revenue base has been sustained and the surplus sustained because this is the highest taxing government in Australia’s history. Now, just remember, John Howard was supposed to remembered for being the person, for producing simplified and lower taxes. He has presided over a government that has produced the highest taxes in the countries

8

history and every time they get into a problem because they have squandered the opportunities they resort to a new tax.

What these figures show is that we don’t a Sugar Tax, we don’t need the Ticket Tax, we didn’t need taxes that this government is whacked on every occasion that it has got itself into trouble. This government is not spending wisely, it is not prioritising, and it is taxing - very heavily - ordinary Australians.

JOURNALIST: Were you pleased to see that Wayne Swan’s finally ruled out a challenge?

CREAN: I was pleased to see that the press has finally interpreted his statement to have been what his intention was the very first time he spoke.

JOURNALIST: Well, maybe he should have made things clearer.

CREAN: Well, maybe you should have caught up with the interpretation a bit earlier. But, the problem is over, no equivocation, and we will get on with the task of exposing the government’s failings and putting forward constructive proposals in the nation’s interests.

JOURNALIST: [inaudible]…Wayne Swan should be taking a leaf out of Mark Latham’s book...

CREAN: The only thing that people should be taking from Mark Latham’s book is getting on with the policy. This is sound policy, it shows the application of hard work, it shows people rising to the task that they have been given and producing outcomes that are in the nation’s interest.

JOURNALIST: Here in Queensland today….and Wayne Swan being mentioned as a potential…[inaudible]…

CREAN: I’m always delighted to come up to Queensland. I was here four weeks ago, we had a Shadow Cabinet here, very successful Shadow Cabinet, we launched a research policy, a policy that is aimed at stopping the brain drain, stopping our best people going overseas and doing more to commercialise the research. We did it at one of the nation’s great universities - a university that got its opportunities under Labor government initiatives in the past. So this is a state I am always delighted to attend, it’s a state that has produced good Shadow Ministers, I want to ensure they have the capacity to become ministers in my government.

JOURNALIST: …not a Prime Minister?

CREAN: That is a circumstance for the party to determine well after I’m gone.

9

JOURNALIST: [inaudible]…policies release here today, will the reaction they get decide your budget for…

CREAN: It’s a combination of these issues. We will continue to put out the policy differences. We will continue to expose the hurt that is happening to the Australian people and put forward constructive initiatives. People will vote for us, essentially around issues that matter to them. Border security is one of them and what we are demonstrating today is that we can produce a better outcome, a more rounded and more comprehensive outcome than the government is dealing with. But underneath all of that, there are issues like the decline of bulk billing, the high taxing impact on middle and low income Australians, the difficulty that young people are having in affording a home, the fact that retirement incomes, aged care facilities and hospitals are badly in need. That is only going to addressed by a change in government because only Labor is committed to addressing them.

JOUNRALIST: But the voters aren’t listening to these policies… [inaudible]… that can be addressed and vote Labor?

CREAN: The voters will listen because we will make sure that we repeat the message. Thanks very much.

(ends)

