1

LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION

TRANSCRIPT OF DOORSTOP - PARLIAMENT HOUSE CANBERRA - 15TH OF FEBRUARY 2002.

E & OE - PROOF ONLY

Subjects: ‘Kids Overboard’ deceit.

CREAN: Today we’ve seen the Peter Reith firewall for John Howard collapse in on him. The other thing we’ve just heard from the Prime Minister is he’s going to ensure that the cover up continues. When questioned as to whether he would allow all public servants, called to appear before the Senate, he wouldn’t guarantee that they would be allowed. Now this is a Prime Minister that says that he wants all facts in the open. What he’s now trying to do is to gag public servants. We’ve got to get to the bottom of it and it’s essential that all public servants called be allowed to attend, speak freely and openly and establish the true state of affairs.

JOURNALIST: Mr Howard relied on the ONA report to a great extent towards the end of the campaign to justify what he had said. He’s now conceded that that report was essentially flawed. What does that say about the process that went on during the campaign?

CREAN: Well I think it just further shreds the Prime Minister’s basis for his allegations. You see there’s no solid basis now upon which the claim the Prime Minister made stood up. For all of those reasons there should’ve been further checking by him. I don’t believe he didn’t make further checks and I don’t think the Australian people will believe that. I don’t believe he didn’t get further advice from his Department. I don’t think the Australian people believe the Prime Minister on that but time will tell in that regard. This is a massive cover up. What we’ve got to ensure is it’s not further covered up and that’s why all public servants should be able to speak openly and freely at the inquiry.

JOURNALIST: Mr Ruddock has said this morning that one of the reasons why he thinks perhaps Bill Farmer didn’t tell him on the day he became aware that the advice was incorrect was that it came form conflicting sources. Do you accept that response?

2

CREAN: Look if it came from conflicting sources it was essential to get to the bottom of it before you went out and put your tainted view on it. Phillip Ruddock said that he was advised that the ‘children overboard’ was a planned and pre-meditated incident. How can something be planned and pre-meditated when it didn’t even happen? And he refused to answer in the Parliament yesterday whether he got that advice from his Departmental head. He’s given the impression all along it was his Departmental head that advised him but he wouldn’t say that in the Parliament. I think the other thing that’s very interesting in this is that I don’t accept that a line of command and reporting to the Prime Minister and Minister Ruddock that could get the lie out within four hours didn’t tell them of the truth when they found out later in the day. That’s why I don’t believe the Prime Minister’s explanation is believable and I don’t think ordinary Australians accept it as believable.

JOURNALIST: When, on the issue of whether or not M Reith and Mr Howard actually did contact each other. When you say you’ve been in contact with a Minister it can sometimes mean, can it not, that you’d been in touch with their adviser or someone in their office or, it doesn’t necessarily mean direct contact?

CREAN: Well it’s very interesting because the Prime Minister is making the point that in caretaker mode you don’t go to your Department you go to the Minister. So what John Howard said yesterday was that the only source he had was Minister Reith. He now says that he still thinks that he had that conversation, but yesterday in the Parliament he couldn’t recall whether he had that conversation with Minister Ruddock. I mean this is convenient memory lapse for the Prime Minister and I suppose we’ll have Peter Reith out there saying today maybe I was mistaken, maybe I did have it. I mean this is a massive cover up coming unstuck and when thieves’ fall out then the political damage is a consequence.

JOURNALIST: Does it sound to you like the public servants are going to be in the clear or do you think possibly some heads are going to role?

CREAN: I think that there are serous questions at the very top of Prime Minister’s Department. I think the question is did Max Moore-Wilton know of this information? Did the information get to him and I don’t believe that a Prime Minister’s Department that knows that this issue was raging during the campaign, everyone knew this was a central issue in the campaign, the boat people. And this was an incident that inflamed it. So if advice came to the Prime Minister’s Department, contradicting what the Prime Minister was saying of course the person at the top should’ve ensured it was passed on to the Prime Minister. If it wasn’t passed on the question’s got to be asked why. But I think what also has to be established is did it get to Mr Max Moore-Wilton? We won’t know that unless Mr Max Moore-Wilton fronts the Senate. It’ll be very interesting to see whether he or Ms Halton front the Senate, because Ms Halton even though she’s now in another Department, and she will probably use that excuse as to why she shouldn’t attend the

3

Estimates, that doesn’t stop her attending the inquiry and she should attend the Estimates to clear it up quickly. She was the person according to the report tabled that first advised the Prime Minister and yet that very afternoon the same afternoon that she’d advised him of the ‘Kids Overboard’ the committee that she was on said there was doubt about that claim. Now I don’t accept that she would advise the Prime Minister of the lie and then not advise him of the truth. That beggars belief.

JOURNALIST: The Prime Minster said this morning that any inquiry in the Senate would be politically motivated and therefore it’s inappropriate for him to attend, does that make it much more difficult to get to the truth?

CREAN: It is essential that the inquiry get to the truth. It’s in the public interest that we do so. That will only happen if all public servants are allowed to attend, speak openly and frankly. It won’t happen if they’re gagged and yet the Prime Minster today is saying that he won’t guarantee that all public servants can attend. He wants to continue the cover up. He’s politicising the Senate’s operations.

JOURNALIST: The Democrats and the Greens were pretty vigorous early on in raising suspicion about the Government’s claims that kids had, people had thrown their kids overboard. Why didn’t the Opposition pursue it so vigorously during the campaign?

CREAN: Well it did. I mean it was Kim Beasley that called for the release of the tape, the videotape, but look I think you’ve also got to understand this. We were being told by the Government of the day that it had intelligence report, sensitive information, information that we do not have access to. That we can’t access. We, just like the Australian public, is entitled to believe a government when it says it’s acting on sound advice. The trouble is it wasn’t acting on sound advice and the trouble is the Government wasn’t telling the truth. It knew that the story was wrong but it hid that from the Australian people. That’s the issue and we’ve got to get to the bottom of to what extent the Prime Minister really knew. His credibility’s at stake, he’s narrowed his defence to the fact that he didn’t know at any stage. Well let the inquiry determine that. I don’t think the Australian people believe him on that but if it needs proof because of the stubbornness of the Prime Minister. If it needs proof than we should get it.

JOURNALIST: Do you think Labor should have raised questions about it earlier on though?

CREAN: Labor did.

JOURNALIST: Can I ask you a question then about before the election? Did anyone in the Federal Opposition leadership team or their staff know before the election that these claims were false about the ‘Kids Overboard’?

4

CREAN: Well the first we became aware that the claims were false was when reports started to come from Defence that the allegations made and repeated were not correct and that’s when the Prime Minster, I think on the 8th of November assured the Press Club, the National Press Club, that he had checked the night before and confirmed his original view. Now the story today is he didn’t check. So the Prime Minister on that basis has misled the House yesterday but more importantly I think if he told the National Press Club on the 8th of November that he had checked and the stories stood then he should face a full press conference today and explain why that version of events isn’t accurate according to Mr Reith. A full press conference. Thank you.

ENDS

