1

Social justice in a secular society

The St Vincent de Paul Society has greatly honoured me by requesting my

participation  in  the  Ozanam  lecture.  The  word  ‘participation’  is  fitting

because  the  day  has  gone  when  fruitful  results  can  be  expected  from

pronouncements  from on  high.  My  purpose  is  to  scatter  among  you  a  few

seeds of thought, some of which may seem to contain ‘hard sayings’.

In  all  but  our  having  been  professors,  he  at  the  Sorbonne  and  me  at  the

Australian National University and the Australian Catholic University, I can

be  like  your  founder, Frederic Ozanam,  only in  one  thing. Like  Ozanam, I

demand the right to raise a voice of dissent.

Leo X111’s encyclical, Rerum Novarum, was published in 1891. In 1991 my

book on that great encyclical came out. On its last page I said of  Ozanam,

‘Not only did his work push the Church into “taking an option” for the poor

but, years before it was written, he also believed in, and proclaimed, almost

all that Rerum Novarum expressed.’ Tonight, I salute Ozanam and thank him

for all that he did and, through you, continues to do for the poor.  That a

good deal of what I have to say is based on Leo’s encyclical is an expression

of the debt that I owe to him.

The fundamental principle of all social justice is the inviolable right of the

human person to be treated with justice, respect and dignity. If we accept

that principle then every society, every community, every individual, even

2

God, must recognize it and act on it. God cannot demand love, God can only

long for it. The one thing that God can and does demand is justice. If the

God in whom we believe did not want justice, there would be no God. If we

do not want justice, we refuse to be God’s children.

We live in a secular Australia and surely, when we look at examples

elsewhere, we all agree that to live in such a society is far better than living

in a theocracy. Saint Augustine, the greatest thinker of the early church,

would not have rejected a secular Australia. Unlike the desert fathers who

fled from the cities and their temptations, Augustine remained in the world

of men as we do. I will not turn my back on the earthly city in which I have

found so much of my joy and fulfilment. In and through it I have been

nurtured, mentally and physically. To it I have related as the place of my

earthly origins and growth. It is especially to this city, Melbourne, the place

of my birth and baptism, that I look to with gratitude because here I began

my earthly pilgrimage.

As citizens, it is vital that we be concerned with the proper order of our

society because, without proper order, based on right reason, secular

Australia is doomed. Its civilization will not have to await destruction by a

foreign power. Rather, it will consume itself by greed, envy and, finally,

despair. The yardstick of our love for Australia is how we act to avoid that

end. As Christians, action becomes a sacred obligation.

The purpose of civil society is the common good. In that society social

justice regulates the relationships of the citizens to each other, to the state

and to the nation. Social justice also forms the basis of a proper relationship

3

between Australia and other nations. The problem is: how are to give flesh

to social justice in a secular society?

The secular society does not have to make a pretence to be other than itself

but, without social justice, it is not a society at all - put simply it becomes

part of the kingdom of injustice. Nonetheless, in a secular society, social

justice, as an abstraction, can seem remote and even forbidding, a thing for

courts and bewigged judges. Yet there is a way of thinking of social justice

that makes it much more human, even more Australian. Deep in our national

psyche there has always been an urge towards seeing the underdog get a fair

go and that we all be treated with the respect our human nature demands. At

times that urge has been stifled by darker impulses such as racism but, the

expression still used by some of us, ‘Fair go, mate’, sums up the finest

instinct in our understanding of ourselves as a people. Woe betide any leader

of the Australian people who tries to dampen or deflect that urge in us. He or

she thus becomes a stumbling block, a scandal, standing in the way of our

fulfilment as a human society.

In ‘fair go, mate’ there is no shadow of the inexorable scales of justice, the

exact apportioning of fault or blame, or of retribution for wrongdoing. In it

there is an instinct, an entirely human instinct, which first of all recognizes

that somehow, something is wrong, that someone, perhaps including

ourselves, has been done badly by, that an individual or a group of

individuals have been put at a disadvantage and that their situation is not

necessarily their fault even when others blame them for it.  What follows is

an impulse on our part to see things set aright.

4

That urge has its own mysterious chemistry because it expresses a kind of

common unease, a feeling, perhaps even a conviction, that there is a sickness

in the social body and unless something is done to heal it the contagion may

spread to us all. In essence, however, there is a sense that if everyone,

especially the underdogs, get a fair go, life will be better for us all. As a

result Australia itself will be a better place for us and our children to live in--today and in the future. That, at least, is our hope. Are there grounds for it?

I am convinced that we can already see ‘the rose fingered dawn’ of a fair go

in  Australia.   Right  around  the  world,  in  countries  where  the  ordinary

citizens are free to voice dissent from the injustices they perceive to exist in

their  societies,  they  are  doing  so.  The  old  labels  of  left  and  right,  of  red

ragger and capitalist lackey belong to an age of simplicities when they were

used by both protagonists in the Cold War and on either side of the Berlin

Wall. Communism rejected the absolute centrality of the human person and

was doomed to collapse because it was contrary to human nature.

Capitalism, until recently, pretended to believe in the centrality of the human

person. It is also doomed to collapse and no amount of so-called civilizing

capitalism will save it. It has no ideal beyond the attainment of its immediate

objectives  of  unrestrained  profit  based  on  never-ending  processes  of

consumerism.  Both  systems  are  identical  in  that  they  have  materialism  as

their base. Now that western capitalism and the former communist regimes

have  lost  their  enemies  in  each  other  they  have  been  forced,  since  the

dreadful  events  of  11  September  last  year,  to  combine  in  another  conflict

with an alleged opposite, namely terrorism. Despite the tendency to clothe it

5

in  religion,  terrorism  is  essentially  a  savage  and  violent  expression  of

opposition to the materialism upon which  its enemies fatten.

In this new age of the human person, an age of which the concept of a fair

go  and  the  practice  of  social  justice  are  symbol  and  reality  signifying  the

health  of  a  society,  what  is  the  first  sign  we  must  look  to?  Where  will  we

find the first buds of spring? We will not find them in violence, in rejection,

in hatred, in exclusiveness and in strident and empty proclamations. We will

only find  them in  the  holy soil  of  humanity in  which  all  good  things  have

their nourishment and increase. How then will we know them? The prophet

Elijah  on  Mount  Horeb  waited  to  sense  the  presence  of  God.  He  heard  a

mighty wind, and then the sound of a raging fire and, finally, the crashing of

an  earthquake,  but  God  was  not  in  them.  Then  ‘there  came  the  sound  of  a

gentle breeze’ and Elijah knew that God had come to him.

The voice of dissent, the voice that says no human being can be degraded,

the voice that insists on the acceptance of a fair go for all, is a gentle voice.

It is nonetheless a sacred voice that must not be stifled because any society

in which it is not heard will soon wither and die. It is a voice full of firmness

and  dignity which  is  not  made  more  effective  by clamorous  repetition,  but

by acts of respect and love.

In  Rome  many  years  ago  a  newly  ordained  African  priest,  now  an

archbishop,  said  to  me  with  tears  in  his  eyes  that  he  had  given  first

communion to a group of children that morning. One child had recoiled from

him saying, ‘Why are you a black man?’ I rose and put my arms around him

and  murmured  the  equivalent  of  ‘Sorry,  mate’.  He  looked  up  at  me  with

6

gratitude and said, ‘John, never say sorry to me again about my blackness. A

black man must be allowed to have his own dignity.’ That moment gave me

a glimpse into the sanctum of the human spirit.

It  is  not  my  purpose  tonight  to  propose  structured  alternatives  to  the

generally  accepted  status  quo  in  our  society.  Nevertheless,  I  want  to  raise

some  issues  of  importance  about  which  I  beg  to  dissent.  My purpose  is  to

proclaim our right and duty to reject what we perceive to be the wrong, the

unwholesome, the trash served up as the good and to point to another way of

doing things.

In  the  first  three  quarters  of  the  twentieth  century,  there  was  a  growing

acceptance  in  the  Western  world  that  the  state  should  foster  policies

designed  to  distribute  wealth  for  the  good  of  civil  society.   In  the  fourth

quarter,  something  went  badly  wrong.  We  saw  the  return  of  ‘market

fundamentalism’ from an earlier age. This ideology, presented as a ‘pinnacle

of  human  civilization’,  preached  that  the  state  must  not  intervene  in

economic affairs; that, left unfettered, the market would provide for all; that

the unbridled pursuit of wealth was good; and that, thanks to Adam Smith’s

‘invisible  hand’,  self-interest  would  unintentionally  promote  the  public

good.  In  short,  the  market  was  held  to  be  the  only  mechanism  capable  of

providing  the  adequate  means  to  meet  the  needs  of  society.  To  the  extent

that  the  state  were  to  intervene  in  this  process  it  would  work  against  the

common good.

In  practise,  the  state  was  expected  to  intervene.  Market  fundamentalism

demanded  the  deregulation  of  finance  and  industry,  a  reduction  in  taxation

7

for  the  wealthy  and  in  welfare  payments  to  the  under-privileged.  It  also

entailed  the  privatisation  of  public  utilities  and  services,  many  of  which  in

our society were regarded as belonging to the people. An example is the sale

of  the  Commonwealth  Bank  that  was  opposed  by  64  per  cent  of  the

electorate. In the last twenty years some $150 billion, $155 billion since the

sale of Sydney airport last week, worth of public assets have been sold and

some  observers  do  not  hesitate  to  say  that  the  privatisation  of  the  state

system of education is at hand. It is already taking place in CSIRO and in the

university  sector.  Yet  the  fact  remains  that  there  is  very  little  public

acceptance of wholesale privatisation, despite its constant promotion by the

coalition and the ALP for twenty years.

What can and does result from the development of unbridled privatisation?

Up  until  the  reign  of  Henry  V111  in  England  in  the  16th  century  large

segments  of  the  land  were  in  public  or  common  hands.  The  monasteries,

with  all  their  faults,  were  a  striking  source  of  public  service  and  welfare,

including health and education. It has been argued that, in Britain after 1980,

the  policy of  market  fundamentalism and  its  corollaries  has  resulted  in  the

largest transfer of wealth from the poor to the rich since the dissolution of

the monasteries and the enclosure of common land. Australia has witnessed

a similar transfer of wealth from the poor to the rich in the last twenty years.

There  is  increasing  opposition  to  market  fundamentalism  and  especially

among  those  economists  who  are  prepared  to  come  out  from  behind  their

walls  of  theoretical  analysis  and  confront  reality.  One  recently  remarked

that,  in  conventional  economics,  ‘We  see  a  cold  discipline,  replete  with

error, [full of] heroic assumptions and rickety methodology and increasingly

8

disengaged  from  the  world.’  Another  wrote,  ‘The  whole  superstructure  of

orthodox economics…rests upon rotten foundations.’ If, then, it is arguably

true  that  the  foundations  of  market  fundamentalism  are  rotten,  the

consequences  may  well  be  of  the  gravest  kind.  Market  fundamentalism  is

much  more  than  a  theory;  rather  it  is  an  ideology the  acceptance  of  which

determines the way of life for millions and especially for those who are at its

mercy.  In  short,  market  fundamentalism  has  worked,  still  works  and  will

continue to do so against the common good. The reason is not hard to find.

The  one  fundamental  element  lacking  in  all  its  equations  is  the  human

person.

Yet  it  surely  remains  the  case  that  the  common  good  is  the  unique  and

absolute  reason  for  the  existence  of  the  public  authority,  the  State.

Consequently the State must serve the common good. It must ensure that the

laws and political institutions generally work in such a way that the direction

and  administration  of  the  State  naturally  result  in  private  and  public

prosperity.  This  objective  also  demands  that  the  State  takes  measures  to

provide  equally  for  every  section  of  the  community  by  acting  with

unshakeable impartiality towards all.

When  a  monopoly  of  production  and  commerce  falls  into  the  hands  of  a

small  number  of  owners,  whether  grouped  in  a  global  or  local  entity,  they

must be prevented from using human beings as if they were objects of gain

or instruments to increase capital. They must pay their employees that which

is demanded by justice because it is a despicable crime to pay a wage less

than  justice  demands.  Is  it  not  also  a  despicable  crime,  and  a  violation  of

justice,  to  remunerate  work  in  such  an  excessive  measure  that  others  are

9

disadvantaged?  Do  we  wonder  why  almost  everyone  gasps  with

astonishment  when  they  become  apprised  of  the  magnitude  of  the

remuneration or, as so often happens, the pay-out made to serving or retiring

executives  of  large  companies  some  of  whom  have  led  to  ruin  the  very

enterprises they have fattened on?

In the United States large companies regularly pay their chief executives 500

times  the  pay  of  the  average  factory  worker.  This  means  that  the  worker

would have to labour for 500 years to make as much as the executive does in

a  year.  In  Australia  the  ratio  is  200  to  one.  When  has  an  Australian

government  acted  to  right  the  injustice  of  this  practise?  Yet,  when  the

workers ask for a wage rise it is immediately said by the representatives of

capital that the common good would be imperilled were the rise granted.

In passing one might ask whether it is a dream to imagine that the day will

come when the elected servants of the people, the politicians, would set an

example  of  solidarity  with  the  dispossessed  poor  and  show  even  some

degree  of  genuine  reluctance  to  seek  or  accept  a  pay rise,  a  brake  on  their

allowances or a moderation of their superannuation?

We  are  all  taken  back  by situations  in  which  workers  are  laid  off,  utilities

closed  and  services  abolished  with  resulting  profits  amounting  to  billions

paid  to  shareholders  who  have  done  nothing  more  than  contribute  their

capital  to  such  enterprises.  If  the  response  is  that  the  shareholders  have

risked  their  capital,  what  then  of  the  workers  who  have  nothing  but  their

labour  to  barter  with?  Is  it  not  the  case  that,  increasingly  in  the  work

10

contract, the employees put at risk their very livelihood, together with that of

their families?

Is it not further the case that, rather than sharing in the profits, their wages

are strictly controlled and they have to bargain their labour from a position

of weakness? Would not social justice demand a fair go in these matters and

insist  that  a  just  wage  is  not  determined  by  profits,  but  by  labour  and,

furthermore, that profits, like wages, demand, if not sharing, at least control

by the state authorities? If the reply to this question is that local capitalists

will cease to invest their money and that international interests will take their

capital elsewhere, are we to bow meekly to the extortion of Wall Street and

the  battery of  irresponsible  conglomerates  and  condone  social  injustice  out

of fear?

Another evil fruit of market fundamentalism is to insist that a policy of full

employment,  if  implemented,  will  lessen  profits  by  making  labour  more

expensive and thus be detrimental to the economy by causing inflation. Put

simply, this first of all means that only the shareholders, to the exclusion of

the  workers,  must  be  permitted  to  share  in  profits.  Thus,  the  smaller  the

workforce,  the  higher  the  profits  become.   Secondly,  and  even  more

perniciously, it means that human labour is merely a commodity that can be

bought and sold, just as slaves were bought and sold in the market places of

the  past.   It  must  also  mean  that  there  will  always  be  a  percentage  of  the

workforce destined, temporarily or permanently, to eke out an existence on

the lowest permissible wage.

11

A change of name from what used to be called a dole, but is now dressed up

as unemployment benefits, still means that their human dignity and worth is

devalued  by periods  of unemployment. Finally, during  those periods, often

alarming in their length, some of the unemployed will run the risk of being

branded  as  ‘dole  bludgers’;  ‘cruisers’  seems  to  be  the  most  recent  epithet

used by mean-spirited policy makers and implementers.

In the midst of this situation we have the problem of the working poor

whose wages are often so low that they are little better off than those who

remain on welfare. What incentive is there for workers to take up, or to seek,

employment in such circumstances although there will always be a pool of

noble souls whose dignity is such that they prefer to work for a mere

subsistence wage rather than take a handout from the State?

Add to this the problem of the casualization of the workforce in which a

large percentage work part time and many others are forced to grapple with

increasing overtime. Casualization gives a misleading impression of the

numbers employed while excessive overtime reduces those same numbers.

An observer in a future age will pause in amazement and conclude that a

deep malaise had penetrated the fibre of our society while recognizing that

unbridled greed was its cause. Were he or she familiar with the system of

child labour employed in, say, industrial England in the past, greater surprise

would follow from hearing that it was proposed in the twenty-first century to

introduce a so-called youth wage and that working for the dole was already

in place.

12

In these circumstances it is necessary to recall the role of the trade unions in

society  and  to  remind  ourselves  that  their  continued,  healthy  existence  is

central to the struggle against social injustice. The workers have, in fact as

well  as  principle,  the  freedom  and  right  to  join  together  in  a  trade  union.

They have the equal right to choose for their members the appropriate rules

and forms of organization they think will best serve their ends provided they

do  not  infringe  the  legitimate  rights  of  employers.  The  State  itself  must

protect the natural right of the workers when combined in a trade union and

not  impose  on  them  unreasonable  regulations  under  the  pretext  of  the

common good.

Furthermore,  if  the  workers  are  oppressed  by  employers  laying  unjust

burdens  on  them,  or  if  they  are  degraded  by  conditions  repugnant  to  their

human  dignity, the  power  and  authority of  the  State  should  be  used within

proper  limits  to  set  such  matters  aright.  If  no  preventative  action  is

successful and the workers still conclude that they have a just reason to go

out  on  strike,  social  justice  demands  that  they  deserve  to  be  a  priori

supported rather than denigrated.

I  have  long  argued  to  my  students  that  an  industrialized,  capitalist  society

without  a  strongly  unionised  workforce  will  soon  revert  to  economic  and

social  barbarism.  Among  the  most  remarkable  characteristics  of  the

Australian  workforce  has  been  its  deep  sense  of  a  fair  go,  of  the  reality of

mateship, of a readiness to make sacrifices, even of life in wartime when the

workers are expected to fill up the ranks. Furthermore, in times of national

need the workers have often had the generosity to lessen demands for wage

13

rises.  Surely  these  are  characteristics  that  deserve  to  be  cherished  and

imitated by the public, the government and the trade union movement.

It is a foremost responsibility of the trade union movement to strive towards

full  employment.  In  striving  to  this  end,  and  in  other  cases  of  justifiable

industrial  action,  no  union  is  entitled  to  put  the  temporary  good  of  its

individual  members  before  that  of  the  good  of  workers  generally  and  of

society  itself,  which  can  be  the  case  when  a  strike  in  a  vital  industry  has

widespread and serious effects. For a trade union to act against the common

good is to take exactly the position of those whom the workers rightly see as

unjust  when  they  put  the  good  of  their  shareholders  before  the  common

good, or of the good of those from whose labour they make their profits.

At the same time there can be an unjust tendency to vilify shareholders who,

for  the  far  greater  part,  are  no  more  than  decent  people  who  have  invested

their  savings  directly into  the  share  market  or,  indirectly by virtue  of  their

participation in superannuation and similar schemes in the buying of shares.

Between them and the enterprises in which the shares are held stand a raft of

managers, directors and such forth whose principal aim is their own accruing

of wealth by the use of others’ money. The responsibility of the state in this

matter  is  clear.  Social  justice  demands  that  the  integrity  and  expertise  of

such  people  be  thoroughly  scrutinised  before  appointment  and  that  their

fulfilment of their ongoing responsibilities bear constant vigilance.

It  is  one  thing  for  the  state  to  support  a  free  market.  It  is  another  to

countenance fraud, incompetence and thievery of the kind we see constantly

repeated  among  us.  We  hear  increasing  reports  of  shareholders  losing

14

millions in the ruin created by executives who have walked away from those

same ruins immeasurably enriched. In all the American states corporate law

enforces the duty of directors to maximise profits for shareholders. There is

no law that enforces them to respect the rights of their employees and of the

human community at large, or of their duty to preserve the environment. No

law can force people to have a conscience. Law can, however, punish those

whose acts violate the common good.

In the circumstances we find ourselves in today, it is entirely appropriate to

raise the voice of dissent about a federal budget that put such great emphasis

on  defence  and  border  protection  and  so  little  on  welfare,  education  and

public health. It is imperative to weigh up the matters of defence and border

protection with a view to a rethink of both and, despite the polls that seem to

indicate  otherwise,  it  is  still  true  that  men  and  women  of  good  will  are

disposed to listen to the voice of right reason when they are able to hear its

meaning without prejudice or pressure.

As human beings we are brothers and sisters of the whole of humanity and

therefore we have a higher allegiance that transcends the nation state when

its supposed good is clearly in conflict with, and detrimental to, the universal

good. Unless there is a firm concept of the universal good there can be no

progress with a global civil society, much less a global ethic or a universal or

local declaration of human rights and responsibilities.  Ejection of suffering

human beings and racism, sometimes resulting in zenophobic violence, can

never be part of either a healthy national or international ethic. A more

profound concept of national sovereignty than the one so constantly

hammered at us today is needed. It must be one that rejects the idolatrous

15

notions of freedom to act against, or in derision of, international standards of

behaviour. It must refuse to glorify the nation state and its borders, a concept

that lies at the heart of fascism, and remember that, like no man, no island

floats free in a world of its own making.

In the light of the foregoing let us ask ourselves how we can justify the

spending of huge sums of money on national defence when the international

common good cries out for aid? That aid, generously given and properly

used, would help to rectify the conditions that give rise in so many instances

to the growth of the evil of terrorism.  Is there not a difficulty in singling out

nations as part of an ‘evil axis’ when other nations, including the United

States, Russia, China, France, Britain, Sweden, the Netherlands and South

Africa make and supply arms to places where the possibility of violent, even

catastrophic conflict, is ever present. The making and supplying of arms has

become an evil and a scandal of limitless proportions. Let us leave aside the

deliberate evildoers, but can we not at least whisper a word of dissent that

may touch the hearts of those whose capital is used to foster this ever-mounting evil? Finally, how can we justify our protests against the violation

of inalienable  rights in other parts of the human community when we

imprison families and children who, in almost every case, have fled here to

escape monstrous injustices in their own countries?

We do these things, as we are constantly reminded by those responsible, to

protect our borders and to prevent the entry of terrorists or of unspecified

diseases into our society.  Have you ever seen the proof of there being a

terrorist or of an incurable and uncontrollable disease among the asylum

seekers? What indeed is meant by our borders except lines on a map which

16

the government itself seems to be free to redefine at will?  When did our

borders become so sacrosanct? From 1788 our ancestors saw no problem

crossing them and our leaders are not prepared to even apologize for their

having done so. We put totally innocent children behind razor wire for doing

so today.

The budget allocated $1.24 billion to the mindless ‘Pacific solution’ for boat

people, of whom 3648 have arrived in the past year. Meanwhile, there are

60,000 people at large in our community who never joined a queue to come

to Australia but remained here when legally obliged to depart. Nothing is

allotted to round them up but, unlike the boat people, you cannot demonize

them because they are mostly white, English speakers from countries we

respect. Where is the ‘fair go’ in all this?

I am not arguing that refugees should not be thoroughly scrutinised as to

their right to refuge. I merely argue that, to imprison them on whatever

pretext, and particularly that of discouraging others, is a flagrant violation of

human rights that makes us a pariah among civilized nations. This has all

been done by a government that did nothing to hinder the birth of racism and

zenophobia under the banner of Hansonism. That it then inherited the

portion of the electorate that supported such an abomination, and to which it

constantly appeals as its justification for its actions, adds to its disgrace. That

it was, at least in a significant part, elected on the basis of a tissue of lies

incessantly repeated to the nation about children in the sea makes the

episode of the last federal election so shameful that it will echo down the

halls of history. Finally, that the Australian Labor Party has acquiesced in so

17

much of this causes little short of despair among those who once looked to it

as an upholder of justice and decency.

I want to end of a note of hope and say that the springtime is near.

Because  we  are  afraid  we  only  hear  the  sound  of  the  mighty  wind,  the

earthquake and the fire. So much of all we see, read and hear is of tragedy

and  evil.  But  stronger  and  more  persistent  than  all  is  the  gentle  breeze  of

dissent that cleanses and invigorates minds and hearts. Above all it is heard

when we speak with the voice of social justice. When before our age was it

heard? Not in the much vaunted world of Homeric Greece where justice had

no role whatever, not in the Roman Empire, not in the ages of slavery, not in

the industrial age or in any other age or place except, briefly and decisively,

on a mountain side in Galilee in the ringing cadences of the Beatitudes.

The happy fact is that we are in an age when the rights of individuals, more

humane  public  and  private  law,  penal  legislation,  and  judicial  practise  are

unifying  the  world  and  building  a  new  world  order  in  a  way impossible  to

achieve  by  economic  panaceas.   The  acceptance  of  the  status  quo,  which

assumes  that  society has  its  own  inbuilt  and  unchangeable  laws,  that  there

will always be the persecuted, the weak, the poor, the different and hence the

outcasts,  has  met  dissent.  That  the  voice  of  dissent  is  gentle  is  merely  an

expression of a great truth. No lasting good can come from compulsion.

It  is  not  an  idle  bowing  to  convention  on  an  occasion  such  as  this  that

prompts me to end my word of hope with a reference to the Holy Spirit. I do

so because it is the Holy Spirit to Whom we look as the Divine Person who

renews the face of the earth. That the Holy Spirit enlightens and strengthens

18

us  when  with  all  gentility,  respect  and  firmness,  we  speak  with  a  voice  of

dissent is a guarantee of the coming of our springtime.

John Molony                     Melbourne 9 July 2002

