MEDIA RELEASE

Senator Chris Evans Labor Senator for Western Australia Shadow Minister for Defence

10 April 2002

GOVERNMENT MUST COME CLEAN ON DEFENCE BUDGET

Labor today called on the Government to come clean on the real cost of Defence operations to allow an honest debate about the long-term funding for the portfolio.

“Until the Government comes clean on what Defence operations are costing it is impossible to accurately assess the adequacy of current funding,” said Senator Chris Evans.

“The Minister for Defence has refused to answer questions about the real cost of our contribution to the war on terrorism and the patrols to deter unauthorised boat arrivals.

“During the election campaign the Treasurer repeatedly stated that these operations would be funded out of existing funds and would not cost one extra dollar.

“We then had the Howard Government admitting that these two operations carried a bill of $340 million in the current year.

“We now know that $340 million does not cover the whole cost of these operations.

“The Government has been cutting Defence maintenance budgets, withholding ammunition and delaying necessary capital projects as a way of funding current operational expenses.

“Instead of fully funding Defence operations the Government is making savings that compromise current and future capability.

“This short-sighted approach is impacting on the current and future capability of the ADF.  It is false economy to cut back maintenance activity, if it means increased costs in a few years time.

“The Government’s own 2001-02 Defence Budget paper admits that maintenance and upgrade programs had been delayed as a means of saving money to pay for current operations.

“It was revealed in a leaked report that the Government is saving $80 million a year by not giving the Army the ammunition it needs to properly train its personnel.  The cuts to ammunition even extend to the SAS, who are currently participating in highly dangerous operations in Afghanistan.

“The leaked report highlighted that the cuts to ammunition and the undermining of training have increased the risk of injury or death of Army personnel.

“The Government seems intent on continuing with this short-sighted approach into next year, which means more programs will be cut and further compromises in capability will have to be made.

“In order to meet its own commitment on the Defence White paper the Government must allocate $500 million in the 2002-03 Budget for its implementation.

“This is in addition to any funding for current operations.

“We know that the cost of our contribution to the war on terrorism, for half a year, was at least $320 million.  Across a full year and without any offsetting savings the real cost could be upwards of $700 million.

“The Government claims that the operation to deter unauthorised boat arrivals cost $19 million, but again refused to detail the savings it had made to offset the full cost.

“The real cost of having warships intercepting asylum seekers off our north coast is clearly more than the Government is willing to admit.  Across a full year and without any offsetting savings the real cost of this operations could be upwards of $80 million.

“In addition to these two operations, Defence has increased its counter-terrorist capability, including a chemical and biological response unit.  This comes at a cost and unless the Government provides additional funding these capabilities will come at the expense of other areas within Defence.

“There is clearly a battle going on inside the Government over this issue.  This week we had the Defence Minister contradicting the Treasurer over the Defence budget. Robert Hill refuted Peter Costello’s claim that Defence would ‘want for nothing’ after the Budget.

“The Departmental Secretary of Defence recently said, in relation to current pressures on the portfolio, ‘The Government can supplement Defence, it can cut personnel levels, it can scale back operations or it can vary the Defence Capability Plan.’

“The Government must now make that choice, rather than continue with its current approach of trying to make savings out of essential expenditure and compromising Defence capability.”

For comment: Chris Evans 0419 983 593 Tim Friedrich 0438 983 908

