1

LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION

TRANSCRIPT OF DOORSTOP - NATIONAL MUSUEM, CANBERRA, 27TH MARCH 2002.

E & OE - PROOF ONLY

Subjects: Young people, Election 2001 and border protection.

(Tape break).

CREAN: …I mean there’s no hesitancy, there’s a preparedness to engage and I think that’s great. The second is that they seem to have a very strong set of humanitarian values and I think that is the basis for a very good stock of citizenry coming forward. I think those values are terribly important in shaping people.

JOURNALIST: They clearly didn’t approve of some of your policies?

CREAN: Well that’s fine. I think that we want them to indicate what they don’t agree with. As I’ve said we’re going through the process of major policy review. So all of this is important contribution to that review. I don’t pretend that we’ve got every policy right, I never have.  But I am keen to try and make them right and so this exercise is part of it.

JOURNALIST: Is it important that you get up close like this with the young people around the country?

CREAN: I think it’s important to get up close with everyone. Young people included but I mean I’ve always enjoyed doing these sorts of things and I’ll continue to. I enjoyed today.

JOURNALIST: Would you like to see some of those young people end up with careers in politics or indeed in the press gallery?

CREAN: Absolutely. I don’t know about the press gallery, give us a break (laughs).

JOURNALIST: Too good huh?

2

CREAN: They’re too good yeah. You might be under real threat if they come to the press gallery. No, of course, I think, my advice to all of them is pursue your passion and if you really have concerns about these issues and want to change it, politics is a great vocation through which to pursue it.

JOURNALIST: So you want them to be politicians, Mr Crean?

CREAN: No I want them to do what they want to do. I want them to pursue their passion and if they are passionate about these issues and think the policies need changing well maybe they should consider politics but that’s up to them.

JOURNALIST: How do you get these people into say, the Labor Party, when a large number of them at the last election were the very ones you lost to people like the Greens (inaudible).

CREAN:  I don’t know that we did lose them. They certainly went across to the Greens but came back in two party preferred terms. I think they probably, if we were being honest, didn’t see enough differentiation between us and the Government on the asylum seekers issue and that’s what I’ve set about correcting. But I’ve set about correcting it on our terms not the crossover terms. Not the open door policy, which is the alternative to the closed door with no compassion. I happen to believe you can develop a policy outcome that’s tough on the border protection but compassionate at the same time and our task is to convince people that that is the correct direction in which to go. I didn’t find too much opposition, even in the questions today, about that. I heard criticism about where we stood last time and where we should push the agenda where they think we should push the agenda now. But I don’t sense a fundamental objection to getting a policy outcome that’s both tough on borders and compassionate at the same time, or a disbelief that it can happen.

ENDS.

