LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION

TRANSCRIPT OF DOORSTOP - PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA - 25TH JUNE 2002.

E & OE - PROOF ONLY

Subjects: ‘Newspoll’; Terrorism Bill; Democrat Leadership tensions and Party Reform.

JOURNALIST: Are you concerned at the latest ‘Newspoll’, in particular, your dissatisfaction rate?

CREAN: Look when you’re undertaking reform it’s hard. People whose positions feel threatened don’t like it. But if we’re to win the next election we simply have to reform and the time to do that is at the beginning of the term. And whilst it can be unpopular in the short term, it’s the question of the short-term pain for the longer-term gain. I think it’s interesting if you pay attention to ‘Newspoll’, just go back a couple of weeks when we’re able to get the positive message up, about our response to the Budget and it’s when we were polling really well. Now all I’m saying is, these things bounce around, this has been a tough couple of weeks for the Labor Party, but we will get through this, we’ll come through strengthened. I’m confident about the future and my task is setting the real poll, for the next election date, not worrying about them as they appear from fortnight to fortnight.

JOURNALIST: It’s been quite an eventful six months though and now you’re back at square one according to ‘Newspoll’?

CREAN: Well it’s been a very eventful six months and an eventful six months because we’ve been prepared to take on the issues. Not just reform within the Party but put forward positive proposals to the Australian people. Now, we know the Government doesn’t like that and so they keep looking for diversions, they want to play politics. In the end people will see through that, I’m confident about that.

JOURNALIST: Do you think the island excision has played a part in these later figures?

CREAN: The island excision is a nonsense. It’s surrendering Australia’s territory. I’m about defending Australia, not surrendering it.

JOURNALIST: But is that what the voters think though Mr Crean?

CREAN: Well the voters will have their say come the election. I wouldn’t be too worried about a particular poll. I’m saying that what we’re going though at the moment is difficult change and reform within the Party. That will make people unhappy, I accept that. But it’s something that has to be done now for the longer-term opportunity.

JOURNALIST: …Democrats, are you surprised that, I guess, given the GST deal, that there is some sort of flow on effect now between Meg Lees and Natasha?

CREAN: You see this is not just leadership tensions, this is policy tensions. The Democrats were split over the GST and they’re now split over Telstra. This is going to be a major challenge for them. Take the personalities out. It’s a fundamental issue on the policy response on Telstra. It will be very interesting to see whether the Democrats hold firm in the opposition to the further sale of Telstra.

JOURNALIST: What does it mean for other issues that will come up to be negotiated in the Senate?

CREAN: Well, that remains to be seen on the issues, but the Democrats have voted unanimously to oppose the Budget measures for example. I can’t see that of itself changing. But you know the Government can get its Budget through if it approaches it a different way and I’ve put forward constructive alternatives as to how the Government can get it’s Budget through. It’s a pity it doesn’t want to listen.

JOURNALIST: Back on the poll issues are you resigned to bad polling until the reform process is over?

CREAN: I’m committed to the reform process. I’m committed to modernising the Labor Party. I’m committed to policy differentiation from our opponents and I think where we’ve been able to get the policy differentiation up, that’s when we’ve done well. When we’ve been diverted from that task, that’s when we don’t do so well. I’m committed to the task of reform and if it’s unpopular in the short term, that’s a price I’m prepared to pay for the longer-term advantage. It’s in the interests of the country.

JOURNALIST: Are you happy with the amendments for the counter terrorism laws, last night?

CREAN: I haven’t seen the amendments to the counter terrorism laws. This is the terrorism Bill that the Government put through?

JOURNALIST: Late last night.

CREAN: Yes, well I haven’t seen the, what I can say about that is Labor has been constructive in showing the way in which we can get strong anti-terrorism laws through but laws that target the terrorists, don’t hurt innocent people in the process.

The other point that I would just make mention of, I welcome the initiative of the U.S today in terms of the Middle East, and its attempts to broker a peace, a lasting peace, in the Middle East. I welcome it because the parties themselves, whilst they have to negotiate a settlement, need someone in there brokering that peace. I’ve called for the U.S to get involved in the past, so I welcome this initiative. Importantly, the Americans seem to be making a strong statement that the solution rests in independent states of Palestine and Israel with secure borders. There’s also an important recognition by the U.S that the issue of the Occupied Territories needs to be addressed. And the call for the Palestinians to democratise, to develop more democratic institutions, is an important part to building the basis for the Palestinian State. These are welcome initiatives and I hope that they can lay the basis for a lasting peace in the Middle East.

JOURNALIST: …is it the same sort of rhetoric we’re hearing all the time from the United States?

CREAN: Well it will be rhetoric if it’s not followed up with action. There needs to be the pulling back from the brink. The end to this cycle of violence, these killings of innocent people, it’s just got to stop. There has to be a ceasefire, there has to be a preparedness for the parties to sit down and negotiate. There is a framework there that the U.S is proposing. There’s no guarantee that this will work but it will, but it can work if there is a will from the individuals who participate. I welcome the initiative of President Bush, I just hope it’s given proper construct to, that it’s followed up, that it’s developed.

JOURNALIST: On the asylum seekers issue, Mr Crean, what’s your thoughts about Greg Barns resigning form the Liberal Party to try and stand as a Democrat in Tasmania, as a Senator?

CREAN: Well the Liberal Party have spurned him. They dis-endorsed him, I think, or didn’t endorse him, I can’t remember the precise circumstances, so when you’re rejected by a party, it’s natural to look elsewhere. I wish him well.

JOURNALIST: Well he’s actually saying he’s leaving because of the asylum seeker issue, doesn’t that vindicate Labor’s stance?

CREAN: Well I mean if he’s leaving because of the asylum seekers issue then I think that that’s a recognition that within Liberal Party ranks that the policy that’s been put forward is not only unfair and unjust, it needs

change. So to the extent to which he’s recognised the importance of change, he should recognise the significant steps that Labor’s making in this direction.

JOURNALIST:  Can I ask one more question about the ‘Newspoll’, are you saying that you actually predicted such a bad turn out for Labor in it?

CREAN: No, I didn’t predict at all. I accept, I read what’s there. What I’m saying to you is that reform, when it’s undertaken, can cause concerns and therefore people can be upset about it. But the reform itself is important. For the Labor Party to win the next election it’s important to embark upon it upfront and it is the question of the short-term pain for the longer-term gain. And I’ll persist with the task because it’s the correct way to go.

JOURNALIST: Do you think that the public are maybe concerned that they don’t really know where the Labor Party is going?

CREAN: No, I don’t think that for one moment. I think that the people are seeing a clear differentiation, in the Labor Party, on key issues. And when it’s those issues that come to the fore they like the change, they support the change. What we’ve got to do is to persist with that change, keep putting forward the alternatives. That I will continue to do.

ENDS



