1

LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION

TRANSCRIPT 0F DOORSTOP - COLLINS STREET, MELBOURNE, 25th FEBRUARY 2002.

E & OE - PROOF ONLY

Subjects: Population policy; Governor-General

JOURNALIST: Mr Crean talking about targets of population could be quite controversial.  Do you think it will divide people if you’re talking about an increase in population?

CREAN: It’ll only divide us if people choose to have it divide us. We have been able to develop a bipartisan approach on these key issues in the past and we’ve got to do it for the future. Quite frankly, if we go down the path of the current Government this country will stagnate. I don’t know anyone who wants us to stagnate. If we want to move forward we have to embrace a population policy. I believe that means if we’re to get sense into it we’ve got to develop targets. Not one particular target but a series of targets and that requires appropriate analysis. I think today’s conference lays the base for it and I want that co-operation to continue. More importantly though where’s the Government on this? Why isn’t it leading? You’ve got every State Premier and every Territory Chief Minister recognising the need for us to develop population policy. The Federal Government has to be in there too. To date it’s not. I’m urging them to. This needs to be a whole of governments through a heads of government approach. The Prime Minister must put it on the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting.

JOURNALIST: What sort of targets would Labor be talking about?

CREAN: It’s too early to specify the targets. I made that point in the speech. In the past I’ve resisted setting the targets for the very reason that the target becomes the issue but I’m now convinced that unless we set targets we don’t get meaning into the debate. But we have to bring the community with us, it requires analysis, that’s what we should go through and come forward with considered opinions and put them to the Australian people.

JOURNALIST: But are you backing targets similar to what Premier Bracks and Richard Pratt have put on the public record of close to fifty million?

2

CREAN: I believe it’s too, far too premature to be setting the targets now. I believe what we need is proper consideration of it and let’s come forward based on that consideration.

JOURNALIST: How should we go about increasing our population if that’s what the target required?

CREAN: Well obviously there are two dimensions to population policy. One, of course, is increasing the fertility rate and that comes back to a whole series of issues that goes to the issue of why families are not as large. That’s policies associated with families it goes to issues like maternity leave and childcare. These are terribly important issues for us to be considering as part of the domestic policy framework. On the question of immigration, clearly we have to look at the overall levels of immigration into this country. The sustainability of higher levels and our ability within that to attract skills to deal with family reunion and to deal with our humanitarian obligations as well. That’s a balanced approach, a comprehensive approach. That’s what I’m looking for.

JOURNALIST: How do you expect to sell that to the community when generally it appears that public opinion is hostile to asylum seekers and that sort of immigration?

CREAN: Well asylum seekers is one component and it’s because the Government has played on the fear of the Australian people. I think we can develop policies that are tough on border protection but are compassionate and at the same time recognise our humanitarian obligations vis a vis the rest of the world. I think we can do that. But the dealing with asylum seekers, if it’s seen in the broader context of an overall population policy I think we can take the public with us. After all this country is where it is today because of the strength of immigration and the contribution of immigration over the past fifty years, since the war. I believe that immigration has unambiguously been good for this country. Good for us economically. Good for us socially. Good for us culturally. All of the evidence points to it being a plus. We’ve got to remind the Australian people of the positives not the negatives and not the fear. What I want is the positives and hope over fear and negativism.

JOURNALIST: Mr Crean your comments on the continuing Governor-General crisis?

CREAN: Well I haven’t heard what’s happened since I’ve been in there but I understand the Governor-General is still in the position. Look my position hasn’t changed from last Thursday. If anything the case is stronger for the Governor-General to be dismissed by the Prime Minister. If the Governor-General doesn’t resign I don’t think the Prime Minster’s got any other choice then to ask the Queen to terminate the appointment. But why won’t John Howard do it? Because his judgement is at stake. He alone has selected this person. He alone has made the errors of judgement associated with it and him dismissing confirms those errors of

3

judgement on his part. The circumstances that lead us to where we are now are errors of judgement amongst other things on Dr Hollingworth’s part.

JOURNALIST: Mr Crean just back on population. Given that the talk of targets people will be expecting the ALP to nominate a target. What kind of time frame can you give them?

CREAN: Well we, like all of our policy reconsideration, we will develop through co-operation with key interest groups in the community. The forum that was here today provides an important base on which to build. We will be developing our approach and our position on the targets following proper consultation. We want input. We want to listen. We want to debate. We want to take the community with us.

JOURNALIST: Do you think this forum today runs the risk of being little more than just a talkfest?

CREAN: No this is about a modern Australia. That’s what we’ve all got to aspire to. Where does Australia want to be? How can it hold its head up, how can it prosper, how can it create job opportunities for its citizenry? This is what it’s about, a modern Australia and we need policy changes to advance the modern Australia agenda and that’s what I want to be at the forefront of leading.

ENDS

