LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION

TRANSCRIPT OF DOORSTOP - PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA, 19TH JUNE 2002

E & OE - PROOF ONLY

Subjects: Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme; US First Strike policy; university                  fees

CREAN: The Government should withdraw its Pharmaceutical Benefits proposals, the increased charges of 30 per cent, and have costed Labor’s alternative approach to fixing the Budget bottom line.

Five weeks ago I said that there were initiatives that could tighten access to the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme that would produce important savings.  I challenged the Government, and the Treasurer, to have those proposals costed and to release the details.  They have not done so.  What have they got to hide?

And, so far as Peter Costello is concerned he was sent in to negotiate and all he’s doing is blackmailing.  He does not know how to negotiate.  And John Howard is going to have to take charge of yet another Budget mess caused by the Treasurer.

And if the Treasurer thinks the solution is a double dissolution, bring it on, make my day.  I think that all it does is to show why people on the backbench still want John Howard to stay as leader and not hand over to Peter Costello.

JOURNALIST: Should the Parliament have to sign off on any moves to send more troops away to somewhere like Iraq?

CREAN: Well, it’s very interesting this statement from the Defence Minister yesterday, unannounced, that is now being interpreted as a major shift in relation to Iraq.  One can only conclude it’s yet another diversion because of the mess the Government has itself in over the Budget, over the International Criminal Court and now over divisions within their Party on Stem Cell Research.

2

But let’s take the position seriously that Mr Hill is putting out.  Labor announced its position three months ago in relation to Iraq and essentially it is this:  The case has to be made if action is to be taken against Iraq.  That if it relates to further evidence on weapons of mass destruction we want to know what further evidence the United Nations framework, which is looking at that dimension of the problem, has.  We are entitled to know.  If it’s the link to terror make the case but we want a full briefing on what the changed circumstances are and if necessary the Parliament should be recalled to consider any further commitment by Australia.

But the interesting question here of Senator Hill is, what has changed?  Only last week the Prime Minister, having met President Bush, said that there were no proposals on the table in relation to Iraq.  So what has changed?  That is the question that Senator Hill has to be asked and it is the question that we will be seeking answers to today because I’m asking for a briefing from the Government as to what has changed.  What’s changed from Prime Minister Howard’s visit to Washington last week that warrants this statement?  Let’s see the facts, let’s get a briefing and let’s make a considered response.

JOURNALIST: On the broader issue, though, of the US First Strike policy do you think that as a matter of policy should we be looking at pre-empting strikes against counties?

CREAN: Look, countries obviously, are entitled to take whatever steps they need to defend themselves and protect themselves.  But so far as our support for a pre-emptive strike against Iraq I am not going to answer hypotheticals.  I am entitled to know the full facts to consider those facts.

Only last week I called for a full briefing in relation to the changed circumstances on border protection.  Based on that briefing I announced the position that the Labor Party would be taking on that issue.  As with all of these things it is not a question of responding to hypotheticals.  This Government has deceived in the past, it’s misused intelligence information. We are entitled to know the full facts before responding and we certainly should not be responding to hypothetical situations.

JOURNALIST: Do you support the US’s First Strike policy?

CREAN: I support the right of the US to defend itself, but I am not going to respond to hypothetical cases.  Three months ago I set down the process by which Labor would make its response.  That is, make the case. Make the case.  Give us access to the briefings, let’s consider the facts, but I am not going to respond to hyotheticals.

JOURNALIST: Does that leave Labor open to claims that you have gone soft on the war on terrorism?

3

CREAN: Labor is absolutely committed to fighting the war on terrorism.  We are the ones that have actually got the Government to a position in which they can get a bill through the Parliament that has toughened laws against terrorists.

We have also said that we are prepared to support efforts, international efforts, to smash terrorism.  But we are go to do it on the basis of the evidence, not hypothetical commitments.

JOURNALIST: Could there be a risk to Australia if we actually do take on the First Strike policy?

CREAN: I think the risk to all of us is not tackling the terrorists. We have to smash the terrorists.  That is why we need tougher laws here. It’s why we need informed discussion about what the threats are.  It’s why we need bipartisan support to tackle the war on terrorism but it has to be based on the facts.  Not mere statements emanating from the Defence Minister who has put out no reasons as to why there should be changed circumstances.

Last week the Prime Minister said there was no information, no evidence, no plans on the table in relation to Iraq.  Today the Defence Minister is saying we need to consider certain changed circumstances with Iraq.  What has changed?  We want to know.

By the way I think it’s very interesting on this question of the Government misusing information and using it for diversionary purposes to get itself away from other difficulties.

There is the other report today in relation to the vessel that sunk last October.  It now appears that the Prime Minister, who said over and over again that this boat sunk in Indonesian waters, was told by his own taskforce that it didn’t.  This is another example, if it’s true, of a Prime Minister deliberately misusing information and knowing that information to be incorrect.

This is the reason why this evidence has to always be double-checked when it comes to statements from the Government.  The Australian public deserves to know that decisions are being taken on the facts and it’s entitled to be certain that those facts are not being misused.

JOURNALIST:  Just on university fees, should universities be given more power to set their own course fees and structures?

CREAN:  I think it’s very interesting that John Howard went to the last election saying that there would be no increase in university fees, and within six months he’s opened the door to the increase in fees.  This is a huge blow

4

to Australian students.  This is going to price them out of the market if the Government allows it to proceed.

We need a campaign for the Government to come clean on what it intends in terms of university fees.  This is another example of no mandate.  As on pharmaceuticals, they had no mandate to put them up.  On this occasion, they have no mandate to put up university fees.  Let’s see what their justification is.

JOURNALIST:  Yesterday, you told the Party that you feared the Government might use the IR Bills as a double-dissolution trigger.  Last night, Mr Costello was mentioning the PBS in the same breath as a double-dissolution trigger.  How seriously do you take the Government’s prospects of pulling a D-D?

CREAN:  I didn’t say in the Caucus that I feared it; I said I

welcomed it.  If the Government intends to have a double-dissolution on making it easier to sack people, bring it on; make my day.

If, in fact, they want to add to that and have a double-dissolution on increasing charges for pharmaceuticals by 30 per cent, bring it on as well, as soon as they like.

This is a Government that has no mandate for the latter, has threatened the former on so many occasions people are sick of hearing it.  They’re not serious, they’re looking for diversions.  They only know one way forward, and that’s blackmail and threats.  They ought to sit down, consider Labor’s alternative to the Pharmaceutical Benefit proposals, and come back with a sensible proposition.

I’ve signalled a preparedness to work with them to achieve the Budget bottom line.  I challenge them to release the costings of the proposals that I’ve put forward.  If they don’t, you can only assume they want to hide it. There is an alternative, there is a better way.  Labor has put it forward; the Government should embrace it.

JOURNALIST:  The Caucus said yesterday that there were some fears that there could be some electoral backlash over the migration excision decision.  Do you think, though, that there could be some risk if a double-dissolution was called and that was included as well?

CREAN:  Well, again I think that we’ve got to get to a position in which we have effective policy protecting our borders.  The excision decision is not effective policy; it’s a nonsense policy.  It’s not protecting our borders, it’s rubbing them out.  And what does that say to the rest of the world? We’re going to defend ourselves by diminishing ourselves?  Now if, in fact, we can get agreements with Indonesia to stop the boats leaving Indonesia, that’s a far more effective deterrent.  They won’t be coming here if we can get

5

agreements with Indonesia and other countries in the region to process asylum-seekers in country of first asylum.  That’s a far more sensible approach.  If we can get agreement to an effective coastguard to patrol our northern borders, not only against people-smugglers, but drug-runners, quarantine risks, that’s smart border protection.

These are all initiatives that I will wholeheartedly support.  Because in the briefing that I had the other day I asked the question and was told that these things would help.  Well, if they help, why aren’t they being done?  Why are only selective measures being done, and selective measures which the briefing told me could give no assurance that it would stop further boats coming?  This is the difference between politics and policy.  And I think, in the long run, people want a policy that’s going to protect their borders. They’re sick of a government playing politics with diversions.

JOURNALIST:  How about Senator Green’s, ah sorry Bob Brown’s plan to try and table the excision regulations.  Would you give, would the Opposition give consent so they could actually be tabled?  Or what, in fact, the protocol is?  It seems a bit different …

CREAN:  Yes, I’m still getting advice on what the legality is of the order of someone else putting it forward.  But let me say, I understand the position that we adopted in the Senate yesterday was to seek to have the Government table its own regulations, and I think that’s the telling question.

If the Government believes this proposal’s going to work, why won’t it table it?  What is it hiding?  This is a Government that wants to govern by decree and fear, knowing that this is an instrument that has to be approved by the Parliament.

Now the Prime Minister keeps asking the rhetorical question, what’s the difference between excision of Ashmore, Cocos and Christmas Islands, and all of the other islands?  Two important differences, well three important differences.

First, those islands all named.  Second, those islands are all much closer to Indonesia than to Australia.  And third, approval was not given to excise any other island willy-nilly.  It was an approval, subject to disapproval.  It was approval, it was declaration, subject to disallowance.

In other words, the Parliament has to still approve the specific measure. Now, if the Parliament has to approve the specific measure, the Government has to put those measures before the Parliament.  If it doesn’t, you can only conclude that they’re not serious about it.

JOURNALIST:  Yes, but the strategy makes sense in a way, doesn’t it, because we’ll have to wait until September.  Meanwhile, the laws have been in place or in effect for three months before the Senate gets to knock it off.

6

CREAN:  I think it’s very important to ask the Government why it’s not prepared to table this great decision that it thinks will further deter.  The briefing that I’ve had shows that these measures won’t in themselves deter. Other measures can; those other measures should be pursued.  If the Government is serious, it will table its regulations.  If they don’t table them, we’ll wait and see what the next step is in the Senate process.

Ends.

