KEVIN RUDD M.P. Shadow Minister for Foreign Affairs

MEDIA RELEASE

AUSTRALIA’S “ARC OF INSTABILITY” IS STARTING TO COME RADICALLY UNSTUCK

Government security mission to PNG, Vanuatu, Solomons and Fiji underlines the extent of regional instability

Reports  today  on  the  despatch  of  a  high  level  Australian  Government  mission  to  four South  Pacific  regional  states  underlines  the  degree  of  political  instability  that  currently characterises much of our immediate region in the South Pacific.

What Defence analyst Paul Dibb described some time ago as an “arc of instability” to our north and our northeast is starting to become an unfolding, strategic, reality.

Much of Melanesia is now characterised by acute political factionalism compounded by the political polarisation of local police forces.

This  is  particularly  evident  in  the  Solomons  where  Foreign  Minister  Downer’s  much vaunted Townsville Peace Agreement has fallen apart at the seams.

The core of that Agreement was a $30 million Australian aid package aimed at disarming rival  militia  gangs  and  restoring  the  independence  and  the  professionalism  of  the Solomon Island police service.

The truth of the matter is this aid program has failed to meet its objectives.  The Solomon Islands  remain  awash  with  guns  and  there  is  little  evidence  that  the  police  service  is contributing to a restoration of law and order.

Recent reports from Honiara indicate that in the last month alone 15 people have either gone missing or have been murdered in gang violence.  And with the Townsville Peace Agreement formally expiring on 15 October, there is nothing in place to replace it.

Regrettably, such instability is not confined to the Solomons.  There continue to be grave concerns  about  instability  elsewhere  in  Melanesia  -  most  particularly  Vanuatu. Australia currently spends nearly half a billion dollars each year in taxpayer aid to the South  Pacific.   Yet  our  aid  delivery  has  been  comprehensively  ineffective  in  restoring political  stability  and  even  modest  levels  of  economic  development  to  the  region.  This represents a major and comprehensive failure of Australian diplomacy.

Foreign  Minister  Downer  seems  very  happy  to  play  in  the  major  league  of  Iraq, Afghanistan and the war on terror. At the same time, he seems increasingly oblivious to the rapid deterioration in the security policy environment in our own backyard.

If people ask what’s in this for Australia, they should bear in mind that any large-scale implosion in our neighbourhood would result in a significant outflow of asylum seekers from  the  region  seeking  safe-haven  in  either  Australia  or  New  Zealand.   The  Solomon Islands alone has a population of nearly 500 000.

Mr Downer’s emergency security mission to the region should not be seen as a substitute for a complete overhaul of Australia’s engagement in the region.  Neither regional states nor Australian taxpayers are likely to respond positively to a band-aid solution.



Ends 2 October 2002

For further information contact: Kevin Rudd on 0418 796 931 or Alister Jordan on 0417 605 823

