



Transcript                Jenny MacklinMP













Acting Leader of the Opposition

Shadow Minister for Employment, Education, Training & Science  Federal Member for Jagajaga





TRANSCRIPT OF DOORSTOP - MELBOURNE  TUESDAY 31 DECEMBER 2002

E & OE - PROOF ONLY

Subjects: Sugar tax; government taxes and charges; drug rehabilitation services;  detention centres; war on Iraq; North Korea

MACKLIN: From tomorrow we are going to have yet another tax from the Howard  Government, this time a three cents a kilo sugar tax. We know that the Howard Government  is the highest taxing government ever and tomorrow people will be paying for it every time  they buy a cake or buy some sugar from the supermarket.

JOURNALIST: How does this affect business and the community at large?

MACKLIN:  It’s going to affect businesses, of course. Businesses like this cake shop  are going to see increases in their costs because of the increased price of sugar. We know  that all the food processing companies around Australia are going to have more pressure  put on them because of the increased costs that they’ll have to bear and every person who  buys sugar or buys processed food in the supermarket will pay more because of the Howard  Government’s new sugar tax.

JOURNALIST: Is it not fair that some of the money going back in this is being put back  into industry? Is there not an element in the tax which is relevant and is appropriate?

MACKLIN: We do support the reform package for the sugar industry. There’s no  question that people in the sugar industry are doing it very tough but we think the Howard  Government should pay for the money that’s needed for the sugar industry from the  Budget. We shouldn’t really have to have yet another tax from the Howard Government.  This is the highest taxing government Australia has ever seen. Since they came into office  Australians are paying almost $8000 a year extra in tax and from tomorrow they will be  paying extra sugar tax as well.

JOURNALIST:  The diesel excise also rises from tomorrow, one cent a litre, and the NFF  is very disappointed about that. What do you think?

MACKLIN: That’s yet another tax. We’ve still got the Ansett tax as well. The  government doesn’t need to keep taking money from travellers. We know they’ve raised  enough money from the ticket tax to pay for the Ansett workers. The Ansett workers are  still waiting for their money and travellers are still paying the ticket tax. It’s time that tax  was taken off.

JOURNALIST:  There is also going to be a rise of seven per cent per prescription  tomorrow. Do you think cumulatively the effect of all of these small rises is going to make a  big impost for a lot of people?



MACKLIN: Well we know it is making a big impact on Australian families, whether  it’s the increased price of medicines, whether it’s the increased price of sugar, increased  taxes in general, that are the result of the Howard Government being such a high taxing  government. Almost $8000 a year extra Australian families are paying because of all these  different taxes the government has put on.

JOURNALIST: Today it was discussed that the Federal Government was going to  significantly increase funding for drug rehabilitation services. Do you think that’s a plus?

MACKLIN: It’s always important to do whatever we can for people suffering from  the effects of drug overdose and so we certainly support efforts in that regard.

JOURNALIST:  On  another  matter, in regards to the fires overnight at Woomera, there’s  been further fires and further unrest, what should be done to quell this unrest?

MACKLIN:  This is not the first time we’ve seen unrest in our detention centres and  all we hear from the Howard Government is that nothing is going to change. What we have  to do is make sure that the processing of asylum seekers happens much more quickly than  it has been. People are being held in detention centres for too long. We also, from Labor’s  point of view, want to see management of the detention centres returned to the public  sector, taken away from the private sector operators.

JOURNALIST: Do you think there’s any support for the asylum seekers as a (inaudible)?

MACKLIN: Nobody supports the sort of action that has been happening in the  detention centres. Obviously it does put at risk the lives of people living in the detention  centres and working in the detention centres, so nobody supports those actions. But it is  time that the government acted and made sure that processing of asylum seeker’s claims  happens much more quickly and the level of frustration we’ve seen would not build up.

JOURNALIST: The fires in the detention centres. What’s it showing about detention  policy?

MACKLIN: We are, of course, very concerned about the fires in the detention  centres. Nobody should be undertaking these sorts of activities. They put at risk the people  who live there and the people who work there. They certainly won’t be condoned by  anybody. It does demonstrate that we need to get the processing of asylum seekers

happening much more quickly. People are being held in detention for too long. People need  to be processed more quickly and decisions made quickly about their status.

JOURNALIST:  One person I heard quoted this morning about why one of the fires  started has been in a detention centre for three years.



MACKLIN: That’s just a demonstration of why Labor’s policy of processing asylum  seekers quickly should be implemented by the Howard Government. People need to get  their decisions quickly.

JOURNALIST:  Do you agree with Mr Howard that no matter how fires are started it  won’t affect government policy of having detention centres?

MACKLIN:  Labor supports mandatory detention. We do think people should be  held for security reasons. They need to be checked. But we think the processing of their  asylum claims needs to be done as quickly as possible.



JOURNALIST: Do you think a war on Iraq is inevitable?

MACKLIN:  I certainly hope not. More than anything for the New Year we hope for  peace and we hope the United Nation’s processes in disarming Iraq will work.

JOURNALIST: Will the public stand for a war in Iraq?

MACKLIN:   The  public  certainly don’t want to see war. They want to make sure that  the United Nations’ weapons inspectors are going to be able to get in and do their job and  make sure that we don’t see war in Iraq.

JOURNALIST: Is the crisis in North Korea a bigger problem than what we are seeing in  Iraq?

MACKLIN:  It is certainly a very serious problem and one that we need to put as  much diplomatic effort as possible in to. We have seen yet again the Howard Government  not put the diplomatic effort into the North Korean problem that it should be. Labor would  like to see the Australian Government joining together with our regional neighbors to put as  much diplomatic pressure on North Korea as possible.



More information: Adrian Rollins, 0438 950 375

