Robert McClelland MP  Federal Member for Barton  Shadow Attorney-General  Shadow Minister for Justice and Community Security





20 November 2003

Court exposes Howard Government over Melville Island affair

The  Howard  Government’s  deceptive  handling  of  the  Melville  Island  affair   has now been exposed by an Australian court.

In a judgment delivered today, the Northern Territory Supreme Court found:

“It is plain … that the policy of the government was to operate  as  clandestinely  as  possible  and  to  provide  no  access  to  the   plaintiff or her officers and no information to the plaintiff or to the  public  through  the  media  to  the  extent  that  this  could  be   avoided.  …  Behaviour  of  this  kind  usually  implies  that  there  is   something to hide.” (paragraph 10)

In relation to the Government’s evidence, the Court expressed disbelief:

“[Mr John Eyers, Assistant Secretary, Legal Services and Litigation  Branch,  Department  of  Immigration]  said  that  he  did  not  know   whether  any  of  the  persons  concerned  had  asked  for  legal   assistance  or  not  and  did  not  know  whether  any  of  them  had   asked for asylum.  Even allowing for the urgency with which this  affidavit  was  sworn  I  find  it  incredible  that  the  1st  and  3rd  defendant’s principal witness could not answer these questions.”  (paragraph 24)

In  a  rerun  of  Children  Overboard,  Howard  Government  Ministers  were  later   forced to admit that asylum claims were in fact made to Australian officials.

How  can  Australians  believe  a  word  the  Howard  Government  says  about   border security, when it:

Failed  to  intercept  the  Minasa  Bone,  following  cutbacks  to  coastal   surveillance.

Lied to the Australian people about the making of asylum claims.   Damaged  our  relationship  with  Indonesia  in  the  fight  against  people-smugglers.

Let the people-smugglers aboard the Minasa Bone go free.

For further information:

Robert McClelland 0408 118 995  Jonathan Kirkwood 0414 522 387

