National Youth Roundtable  Members Meet Minister

IPS 012/2003

A group of six young Australians, participants in the  upcoming National Youth Roundtable, met with the  Federal Minister for Indigenous Affairs, Philip Ruddock,  at Parliament House yesterday.

The meeting enabled the six young people to obtain  input from Mr Ruddock on their projects prior to  presenting their papers to the Government as part of the  National Youth Roundtable, to be held on 20 March.

The six participants of the meeting were Daniel Hunt  from Westminster in WA; Jayde Kelly from Kempsey in  NSW; John Maynard from Claremont in Tasmania;  James Stanley from Stirling North in South Australia;  Anthony Ormond from Alice Springs in the Northern  Territory and Tonya Booth from Burketown in  Queensland.

Mr Ruddock supported the event, hosted by the Minister  for Children and Youth Affairs, Larry Anthony, which  gave the Government an insight of what young  Australians thought about a range of issues.

'I believe that initiatives to raise youth issues are very  important to the Australian community and are to be  commended,' Mr Ruddock said.

Each year the National Youth Roundtable, which was  established by the Federal Government in 1999, brings  together 50 young people from diverse backgrounds and  locations across Australia to exchange with the  Government their views and perspectives.

The outcomes of the Roundtable will be sent to relevant  Ministers.

The Projects and Participants

Daniel Hunt  West Australian university student Daniel Hunt, 20, met  with Mr Ruddock, to discuss Indigenous youth issues  yesterday at Parliament House, Canberra.

Daniel, who is from a remote community, has seen the  effects of diabetes and renal failure on his family and  community, which has led him to study medicine at the  University of Western Australia.

He is also a volunteer for Djooraminda, a respite  program for young Indigenous children in foster care,  and is an organiser with the Western Australia Student  Aboriginal Corporation.

Jayde Kelly  Kempsey local Jayde Kelly, 21, met with Mr Ruddock  yesterday to discuss her plans to establish a mentorship  program for Kempsey's Indigenous youth.

After winning the Kempsey NAIDOC Aboriginal Achiever  Award for her HSC achievement, and securing a  traineeship with the Kempsey Shire Council, Ms Kelly  found that her friends were asking her how they to could  achieve similar success.

It was then that she thought of a mentorship program.

'While the local kids do have role models that they look  up to, they often feel that they cannot approach them for  advice and guidance,' Ms Kelly said.

John Maynard

Tasmanian student John Maynard, 16, intends to use the  Roundtable to focus on issues of Aboriginal  homelessness and childcare.

He has developed a particular interest in these subjects  through his work with the Tasmanian Aboriginal Centre  and Aboriginal Community Connections.

Currently studying personal and social interaction at  Claremont College in Tasmania, John would like to  continue his work with the local Indigenous community  by pursuing a career as a social worker.

'I hope that my participation in the National Youth  Roundtable will be a step towards achieving that goal  and helping my people,' John said.

James Stanley

South Australian James Stanley, 17, is an Indigenous  student at Caritas College with a strong interest in the  arts.

James was a founding member of 'Witchetty Bubs', a  local children's performance group that has performed  throughout Port Augusta.



James is interested in promoting awareness about  Indigenous issues among the non-Indigenous  community.

'Whatever I do, I hope that I can become a role-model for  young Indigenous children,' James said.

Anthony Ormond

Anthony Ormond, 16, met with Mr Ruddock today at  Parliament House in Canberra yesterday to discuss his  plans to address youth drug and alcohol use.

Anthony is a student at Alice Springs High School, where  he has been a member of the Student Council for four  years and is also a Peer Helper at the school. Anthony  said his project involved trying to establish what  motivated young people to use drugs and alcohol and  the development of programs to reduce usage or, at the  very least, to minimise the harm.

'I like getting involved in problem solving and have been  encouraged by my family, my teacher and Alice Springs  High School to take on the challenge of participating in  the National Youth Roundtable,' Anthony said.

Tonya Booth  Tonya is a 20-year-old Indigenous student of horticulture  from Burketown on the Gulf of Carpentaria.

She works for Paminco's Century Mine and as such has  first-hand knowledge of the successful partnership  between the mine and Native Title claimants.

She has been extremely active in developing and  promoting youth activities in the region, and has  developed an awareness of the value of these activities  in assisting young people in remote communities.

Media Enquiries: Jeremy Chitty 0418 971 042

19 March 2003

