Speeches Page 1 of 4

Title :

City : Me1 bourne

The History Wars - Launch 3 September 2003

Date : 03 September 2003

AN EXTEMPORANEOUS ADDRESS  BY  P.J. KEATING  LAUNCHING THE HISTORY WARS  MELBOURNE, 3 SEPTEMBER 2003

The writing of The History Wars is very important. The book will sit on  the shelves of libraries as a sort of code stone to help people  understand the motivations of players in today's contemporary debate.  It sheds light on the political battle which is carried on in the pubs and  on the footpaths about who we are and what has become of us. For  the protagonists and antagonists in academe are now surrogates in a

broader politica I battle about Australia's future.

We should reflect on this: alone, amongst the peoples of the world, we  have possession of a continent, a continent we laid claim to as part of  an empire, one we expropriated from another race, but a continent  that is no longer an island in a sea of subjugated and colonial places.  The Dutch no longer run Indonesia, the French no longer control Indo-

China. And the Chinese now run China for themselves.

We occupy a continent surrounded by ancient societies; nations which  have reclaimed their identity and their independence.

The Australian story, for it to be a record of continuing success has to  come to terms with our expropriation of the land, our ambivalence  about who we are and our place in the new geo-political make-up of  the region. That is, being part of it, rather than simply being tolerated

in it.

History is always our most useful tool and guide. Knowing our past  helps us to divine our future.

To see the long strands which denote our character and which have  been common in each epoch of our development. And how they may  be adapted in our transformation as an integral part of this region,  while re-energising our national life.

How do we pick the good strands and the step changes on the  pathway to our security?

Because there are only 20 million of us, the primary matter for  national policy is how we maintain possession of the continent.

How do we find the pathway to  a genuine security, a naturally

reinforced one. Security in Asia and not from Asia. Where we are other  than a client state perennially searching for a strategic guarantor.

Once, all our faith was in the British Navy. Now it has swung to the  American defence establishment.

http://w\?;w. keating.org.au/cfin/details.cfin?ID=86 1311 0/2003

Speeches Page 2 of 4

Those who militantly defend the conservative orthodoxy in Australia  see all change as an affront to the past, especially their view of the  past. Whereas, knowing the past and seeing it for what it is with all its  blemishes, allows us to divine our destiny for our appointment with

reality .

And our appointment with reality has to come around. We are no  longer part of some empire. We are no longer some passenger on the  British Lion. We are no longer protected by their navy to the extent  that we ever were.

While people may say we enjoy some protection from the Americans,  we have to be clear what reality, in this respect, means.

I have never understood why the Howards and the Blaineys et al are  so defensive. So resistant to novelty and to progress. They are more  than conservatives. They're reactionaries.

Conservatives gradually, if somewhat reluctantly, accept change.  Reactionaries not only resist change, they seek to reverse it.  Understanding and acknowledging the past and moving on to bigger  and better things is anathema to them.

They absolutely insist on their view and the lessons they see in our  history. Yet in their insistence, their 'proprietorialness' their  'derivativeness' and their rancour, they reduce the flame and energy  within the nation to a smouldering incandescence. What they  effectively do is crimp and cripple our destiny. It's like suffering from  some sort of anaemia; robbing the political blood of its energy.

The problem for the Howards and the Blaineys is that their story is  simply not big enough for Australia.

No great transformation can come from their tiny view of us and their  limited faith in us.

Their failure is not simply one of crabbiness or rancour; it's a failure of  imagination, a failure to read our historical coordinates correctly but  usefully to move to a bigger construct, a bigger picture as to who we  are and what we can be. That's the real job of political leadership.

Their timidity not only diminishes their own horizon, it is a drag on the  rest of us. The country always has to make its progress despite them.  They never help. They have always to be dragged along and they will  only accept a new norm when someone else has struggled to put it

into place.

But the fact is, their view will not prevail. They cannot win because  they have no policy framework to win with. And deep in their tiny,  timorous hearts they know it.

The undertaking is simply too big for them.

This is why you get all this thrashing about in the press and why we  are drenched in the babble of the lickspittles and tintookies around  them. And it's just that, babble. It's babble because at the heart of  their wrong-headed campaign is an attempt to contain and censor the

human spirit, to muffle, muzzle and vitiate it.

http://www.keating.org.au/ch/details.cfm?ID=86 13/10/2003

Speeches Page 3 of 4

Their exclusiveness, whether we are talking about White Australia in  the past or boat people now, relies on constructing arbitrary and  parochial distinctions between the civic and the human community.  Who is in and who is out. Who is owed possession. Who has rights.

I f  you ask what is the common policy between the Le Pens, the  Terrablanches, Hansons and the Howards of this world, in a word, it is  "citizenship". And it has always been. Who is in and who is out. Who is  approved of.

Wolfgang Kaspar, writing in Quadrant, was brazen enough to instruct  us in the "frictional costs of Australian settlement of Muslims". This is  an example of the new fascism.

Rather than celebrate the successful multiculturalisation of Australia,  they seek to shear people off and play on old prejudices by the use of  implicitly negative phrases like "for all of us", when they really mean  "for some of us". This is a government that talks in code.

John Howard does not understand that base motivations run through a  community and a polity like a virus, that these things are poison to the  nation's soul. They are part of an anti-enlightenment. He has  recalibrated Australia's moral compass, where due north is only for  elites, whoever they are.

A national leader, I think, should always be searching for the threads  of gold in a community. Nurturing and bringing them out. Focusing on  the best instincts - running with the human spirit and not punishing it.

A growing public morality and probity based on notions of charity and  human regard should not be traduced by slurs such as "political  correctness", with implicit support for an official "incorrectness". It  takes a long time to build institutions and to build new norms of

behaviour, new acceptances of protocols in any country. But to build  them and then have them traduced is a terrible thing.

Those who want to celebrate only our European past, rejoicing in its  prejudices, and who want us to be exclusive and cocooned and who  employ division and ridicule in their quest, must lose.

Many people are dispirited by this period and they think that somehow  the Bolts and the McGuinnesses, the Devines and the Albrechtsens  somehow have got the upper hand. They will simply be a smudge in  history. What have they put into place which is enduring, which makes  the heart skip a beat? Nothing. And, in the end, there will be no

punctuation mark in our annals from their paltry efforts.

The game is too big for them.

This is why those of progressive mind shouldn't despair, arid as this  period is. Because in the end, the vapid and heartless messages of the  militant conservatives will fail to make any real headway.

Always confronting them will be these things. Who are we? Can we  borrow the monarch of another country perpetually? Can we go to the  region and say we've turned a new leaf but, by the way, we never got  to a proper basis of reconciliation with our indigenes? How do we find  our security in the region rather than from the region? How do we

make our multiculturalism work better? How do we make everyone

http://www.keating.org.au/cfm/details.cfm?ID=86 13/10/2003

Speeches Page 4 of 4

feel as though they belong, that the place, truly is, for all of us?

These questions are still on the agenda, unsatisfied perhaps and  unattended. But still sitting there.

I notice people saying this debate hasn't harmed us in Asia. I don't  know who they are talking to. The publicity people in foreign affairs  departments around the region perhaps, certainly not those who  actually run these countries.

The fact is, there are a lot of wise heads in this part of the world;  those who see Australia in a longer context and who are waiting for us  to recover our equilibrium.

The History Wars rolls out the canvass of this debate. It helps us  better understand the battlefield. I t  gives us some of the infrared we  need to discern the shapes in the current darkness. We owe Stuart  Macintyre and Anna Clark for that.

It is with most respect that I launch The History Wars and wish it well  in its journey to the library catalogues.

http://www.keating.org.au/cfm/details.cfm?ID=86 13/10/2003

