Philip Ruddock MP  MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AND INDIGENOUS AFFAIRS



Possible Sites Identified For Residential  Housing Project In Port Augusta

MPS 23/2003

NOTE: correction to release made 1 May 2003

Three possible options for a residential housing project in Port  Augusta have been identified, the Minister for Immigration and  Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs, Philip Ruddock, announced  today.

'Information about the residential housing project and the process  for exploring options in Port Augusta was provided to residents by  my department at a public meeting in February 2003,' Mr Ruddock  said.

'It was also indicated at that time that once options had been  identified further consultation would be undertaken.'

Following discussions with South Australian Government officials  and Port Augusta City Council representatives on potential locations,  agreement has been reached that further consultation should  proceed on the following sites:

• a 10-acre site on Slade Road, in the western outskirts of Port  Augusta  • vacant South Australian Housing Trust (SAHT) land at Ellis  Close, Port Augusta West, and  • vacant SAHT land in Willsden, Port Augusta East.

Consultations will now be held with residents in the vicinity of these  locations.

'I anticipate a final decision on the site for the Port Augusta housing  project to be made following these consultation processes,' the  Minister said.

To ensure the Slade Road option remains available to establish a  residential housing project, the Commonwealth has purchased this  land. The Commonwealth has advised the State Government and

the council that it will dispose of that land if it is not progressed as a  residential housing project.

The Minister took the opportunity to thank the Port Augusta  community for its responsiveness to the needs of the detainee  children at Baxter in relation to them attending local schools.

'The arrangements for attendance at primary and high school level  are working very well and I am hopeful that a successful residential  housing project will be developed and implemented in Port  Augusta.'

23 April 2003

