





LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION

TRANSCRIPT 0F MEDIA CONFERENCE - PERTH, SATURDAY, 5 JULY 2003

E & OE - PROOF ONLY

Subjects:  Education;  Medicare;  Asylum seekers; David Hicks and  Mamdouh Habib; WA State Conference

CREAN:  Obviously  the  important  new announcement today was the  beginning of our policy rollout in relation to education.  John Howard has made  education for our young people unaffordable.  And I just don’t understand how we  expect our young people to not only get an education, but to get a start in life.   They don’t get a start in life if they’re going to be crippled with debt and if they’re  going to be denied access to a university or TAFE course because they can’t pay for  it or because the place doesn’t exist.

Obviously, we will be having a lot more to say over the next couple of weeks, but  the initiatives today are important.  Raising the HECS threshold by $10,000 to  $35,000, which is the point at which the HECS payment needs to begin to be repaid.   Starting salaries for graduates are, on average, around $35,000.  It is unfair to  expect people to pay if they can’t get jobs that their qualifications should require,  and they’re earning something less.

Similarly, with the announcement that the Government made to double the number  of full-fee-paying Australian undergraduate places, we will abolish full fees for  Australian undergraduates.  Of course, we still expect the HECS contribution, but  under a fairer HECS.

This is a demonstration on our part that we recognise the crippling financial burden  that the Howard Government is putting our students under.  I am going to make  sure that they don’t just get an education, the actually get a start in life.  I don’t  understand how you expect people to start a family and buy a home if, when they  have finished their degree, they have got crippling debts.

JOURNALIST: Is it fair to say the days of free university education are over?

CREAN: I think I’d put it this way, Peter.  I’ve never tried to pretend that  health or education are free; they’re not.  People pay for them through taxes and, in

1

the case of health, through the Medicare Levy, which is a progressive payment.  The  more you earn, the more you pay.

In the case of education, we introduced HECS.  I was ACTU President at the time,  and I moved the resolution at the ALP Conference that introduced HECS.  But the  HECS that we introduced was fundamentally different to what the Howard  Government is talking about.  Our HECS equated to about 20% of the cost of the  lowest course - and there was only one HECS levy.  What, of course, this  Government has done is to massively increase the HECS burden.  It has almost  doubled under the Howard Government, and they are now going to put it up  another 30%.

Education and health both involve private benefits, but predominantly they are  public goods.  For a civilised society, what we need is affordable access to health  and to education.  It is a question of getting the balance right between the public  investment and the private investment.  John Howard has tipped it far too much in  the direction of the private individual, and he has shifted the cost from government  to the individual.

I have shown with the health issue how you can rearrange the Budget and get the  investment.  It is not ‘tax and spend’; it is ‘invest and fix’.  Fix it for the people  concerned; invest for the nation’s future.

JOURNALIST: I note you are saying funding will be announced in the next few  weeks, but have you got a costing on this yet?

CREAN: We have, but I think it is important that you see the rollout of the  total package.  Then you will see how it is all costed and funded.  I thought today it  was important to deliver a down payment to demonstrate the direction of our  thinking, in contrast to the Government.  But I make this commitment - absolutely  and unequivocally - all our initiatives will be costed and funded.  I will not be doing  anything or spending one cent that puts the Budget surplus at risk or that drives up  interest rates.

JOURNALIST: What do you think is a fair HECS rate, then?

CREAN: You don’t have to take my word for it.  The OECD looked at our  system when it was introduced post-1987 and, as Education Minister, I had a  number of discussions with the OECD.  The OECD said the system that we had in  place, which was one HECS payment regardless of the course and equating to  around 20% of the cost of that one payment, was the fairest system of contribution  around.  They urged other countries to look at the Australian model.

JOURNALIST: Mr Crean, what will the delay mean for students in two, three or  four years later?  Have you worked that out?

CREAN: It will depend on the circumstances, of course.  It depends how  quickly they get a job that actually pays at that level.  We have got so many

2

examples now where people can’t get into university, and those that do then can’t  get a job opportunity.

That goes to a whole different agenda that we are trying to address - the skilling of  Australia and making ourselves a more dynamic economy based on high wages and  high skills.  If you look at the direction of the workforce recently, there has been  more and more casualisation.  People are working longer hours, and the growth in  jobs has been in the part-time, casual and low-skilled areas.

We do have to invest better to build and strengthen our nation to try and get a high-wage, high-skilled economy.  That is the limb of my argument that talks about  nation building, for example.  But, clearly, students won’t have to start repaying until  later under Labor’s proposals, with the $10,000 increase.

JOURNALIST: Will that have a major impact on the Budget?

CREAN: No, it won’t.



JOURNALIST: We heard the other day about Mr Hicks standing trial, but there is  no information about Mr Habib.  Does his Australian family deserve more certainty  about what is going on?

CREAN: I think they certainly deserve for the Government of this country  to try harder to get access, to get information, and to get them returned home to be  tried in Australia.  That is what they deserve.

JOURNALIST: What do you think about Mr Hicks and possibly Mr Habib facing  the death penalty in the United States?

CREAN: Well, how can we say that until we know the charges?  The  Attorney-General couldn’t even tell us what the charges were yesterday.  He  announces that Mr Hicks is likely to be charged, but can’t tell us what the charges  are.  What is the Attorney-General doing?  He should be insisting harder; he should  be seeking information.  If these people have done wrong, they should, of course,  be prosecuted to the full extent of the law - if they have done wrong.  We are  entitled to know, and importantly their families are entitled to know.

JOURNALIST: What about the boat people?  They have now arrived at  Christmas Island from Port Hedland.  Should they now come back to the mainland?

CREAN: I think we need the full information disclosed by the Government.   They keep changing their story every time you talk to them.  And why is it that we  haven’t been able to get the answers from them?  Why is it that they have moved  them, at enormous cost, to a place they didn’t have to necessarily move them to?   What is going on?  We know they never told us the full truth about the Kids  Overboard.  They’re still not telling us the full story now, and the Australian people  are entitled to know.

3

What we have to do is to ensure that we have got a quicker system for processing  asylum seekers to determine whether they are legitimate or not.  In the case of  these people, if they are from Vietnam, there are arrangements in place - because  Labor negotiated them with Vietnam when it was in Government - to return people  who are not genuine asylum seekers.  We have got similar arrangements with China.

We don’t have these arrangements in the case of Indonesia, and I have been urging  the Government to actually get an agreement with Indonesia along those lines.   What we have got is a Government that talks about fear and protection, but doesn’t  develop the policies to effectively deal with the issues.

JOURNALIST: Do you believe there has been a conspiracy within the  Government?

CREAN: The Government should come clean and tell us why it is  expending exorbitant additional amounts of money when, in fact, it would appear  that alternate, cheaper ways of processing these people could have been the real  answer.

JOURNALIST: But they say the cost benefits are in the long term.

CREAN: What cost benefits are in the long term - shipping them 1,800 km  in a naval vessel when they could have been processed at Port Hedland?  They have  shipped them to a facility that hasn’t been built, isn’t equipped, and where - if they  were found in Australian territorial waters - their rights are going to be the same on  Christmas Island as if they had landed at Port Hedland.  You tell me what the cost  benefit of that is.

JOURNALIST: A parliamentary committee left Christmas Island this morning  after being told the asylum seekers would not arrive until the afternoon, when in  fact they arrived an hour later. [Inaudible].

CREAN: I think we’ve got to get to the bottom of it, Peter.  I don’t know  the details; that is the first I have heard of that.  But that would seem to be  confirmation of the fact that the Government is just not coming clean.  It didn’t tell  the full story in relation to Kids Overboard, and it deceived the Australian public  during election time.  It is not telling the full story now, and we are entitled to know.   This Government has form; it has a track record.  It’s about time it owned up and  told the full story.

JOURNALIST: Do you believe the Labor Party missed an opportunity back at the  Kids Overboard affair, and may miss another opportunity here?

CREAN: It was very important that the parliamentary process was taken in  relation to the Kids Overboard.  Clearly the threats and the allegations by the  Government were totally unfounded.  And we know that the Government knew that,  but withheld that information from the Australian people.  We know that Minister  Reith was told that his story was not correct, but he didn’t see fit to tell the

4

5

Australian people.  In the end, people want honesty from Governments, and I think  they will always remember that the Government didn’t tell the truth about the Kids  Overboard.   What the Government must now do is tell the full story on this episode,  and how they intend to deal with the issue in the future.

Labor has put out a very detailed set of proposals for dealing with this, which is  tough on border protection but compassionate with speedy processing.  All of those  initiatives, and a Coastguard.  The reality is that if there had been a Coastguard, we  could have intercepted the boat.  This is the sort of policy initiative that the  Government should pick up.  It should swallow its pride.  It should accept that it can  be done a better way.  And it should work with Labor to secure the balance between  stronger border protection and a more compassionate treatment of the asylum  seekers.

JOURNALIST: You acknowledged today the contribution of Stephen Smith in  developing your Medicare package.  How are your relations now with Mr Beazley and  Mr Smith?

CREAN: Very good.  I said that I was going to draw a line under the  leadership challenge.  Obviously in the heat of a leadership battle, all sorts of things  are said and allegiances forged.  But now that it is behind us I want us to move  forward in a cohesive, united way.  I want us forcefully advocating the policy  agendas, and I know in the conversations I have had with Kim and Stephen that  they will play a constructive role.

JOURNALIST: You actually received a standing ovation this morning after your  speech that you didn’t get last year.

CREAN: Well, I loved the support today.  But, actually, if you go and  speak to Bill Johnston, he will remind you that last time I was here I also got a  standing ovation.  It’s just that it wasn’t reported.  Now, I know if you didn’t report it  last time, you are going to do the right thing and report it this time.  So I look  forward to seeing that.  In fact, I’ll have to check with my friends here that that is  how it is reported, because I’ve got to go to Tamworth this afternoon.



(ends)



