









JULIA GILLARD M.P.

MEDIA RELEASE

Shadow Minister for Population & Immigration

MINISTER RUDDOCK CONTINUES THE COVER-UP

In a press release issued today, Minister Ruddock continues the cover-up instead of answering  the allegations made o Monday night’s 4 Corners program.

First, Minister Ruddock’s only answer to the allegation that ACM obtained payments from  the Howard Government by deliberately misrepresenting staff numbers is that those making  the allegation do not understand the nature of the contract between DIMIA and ACM.   This  answer is absurd given it is Minister Ruddock himself who has ensured that the contract  between DIMIA and ACM has been kept secret.

The only way that Minister Ruddock can properly answer the allegation made is to publicly  release the contract and the details of every payment ever made under it.  If he maintains it  must be confidential then perhaps he would prefer to 100% guarantee to the Australian public  that every payment ever made under the contract has been properly made.  If the Minister  does neither then Australians are entitled to conclude that there has been a substantial problem  with payments to ACM and Minister Ruddock is continuing the cover-up.

Secondly, Minister Ruddock’s only answer to allegations of abuse of asylum seekers in  Woomera is to misrepresent my call for Woomera incident reports to be made public.   Incident reports have never been made publicly available and DIMIA has never published an  analysis of them.  It appears from Monday night’s 4 Corners that CD Roms of the incident  reports exist.  Minister Ruddock, let me repeat my call very clearly - publicly release these  CD roms.  If you won’t, then what are you hiding?

Thirdly, Minister Ruddock has provided no answer to the very serious allegation that the  DIMIA Manager at Woomera knew about the alleged contract payments fraud and reported it  to DIMIA.  It appears that there were two DIMIA Managers at Woomera during the time to  which the 4 Corners allegations relate. One of these managers is still employed by DIMIA  and is currently posted in Paris.  I repeat my call that the Minister should make this DIMIA  officer available to answer questions on these allegations.

Finally, in recent coroners’ reports into the deaths of two detainees, two different coroners in  two different states, found that file and case notes were missing.  Missing files, reports  removed from files and incident reports thrown away were also part of the allegations raised  on 4 Corners.  Minister Ruddock, if this isn’t indicative of a cover up what would be?

Labor renews its call for the Howard Government to end the cover up and deal with each  allegation made fully and publicly.  If the Howard Government is not prepared to do so,  Labor renews its call for a full and independent judicial inquiry into these allegations.

For further information contact   Julia Gillard MP on 0417 361 637 or Ann Clark on 0425 711 922





21 May 2003

