Philip Ruddock MP  MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AND INDIGENOUS AFFAIRS

Doorstop interview, Parliament House, 3 March 2003

Mr Ruddock: ……….. There are some suggestions that there is some major stoush between me and the NSW Government.

Reporter: What's the change in the…

Mr Ruddock: Let me just put the matter in perspective first. The fact is that the Premier of NSW has been pushing me over a  long period of time to reduce the migration program but more particularly to reduce the migration program because he alleges  there are too many people settling in Sydney. And I agreed last year that we would form a taskforce to review a range of  measures that might be possible to effect a better dispersal of the migration program away from Sydney and to regional parts  of Australia and regional NSW in particular. Those meetings have been ongoing and have been ongoing now for sometime  and at this point in time there is not a concluded result.

It certainly seemed to me that if you were serious about dealing with the numbers of people settling in NSW it would not be a  matter of arguing that you could reduce skilled migration. Skilled migration is largely in response to opportunities that people  perceive are there. Skilled migration reflects employer requirements to fill job vacancies and if you closed off skilled  opportunities to people who may be settling from abroad, you would simply increase the numbers of people who would be  moving domestically.

But one area in which there is a very significant cost - particularly to the NSW Government and to local authorities, as well as  the Commonwealth - are the areas of family migration and humanitarian refugee migration. The costs emerge primarily  because people are largely welfare dependent, so they make a demand upon Government services but contribute little. We  have a refugee program. One can seek to encourage people to settle in places other than NSW and I don't think for most  refugees that would matter. In relation to family reunion, again we know that it is one of the drivers in terms of where people  settle, and if you want to influence settlement decisions, a willingness to tackle family reunion would evidence a sincere  desire to deal with that issue and in all the discussions that have taken place, where there have been a number of ideas floated,  any of those that might realistically have an impact in that area have not been proceeded with. And I think it does go to the  NSW Government's motives in pursuing this issue that Sydney is too large, if you are not prepared to make recommendations  or even look at proposals that might influence that.

Reporter: What are some of those proposals that you have put up?

Mr Ruddock: Well, look I'm not putting up proposals. What I am saying to the NSW Government is, if you are serious about  these issues then you tell us which of these range of measures that are available, you would like us to pursue. They are not my  proposals. What I've said is that you can look at a range of measures that impact on permanent residency for skilled business  migrants. We have looked at a number of proposals that might build upon skills and attributes that people have. One that will  be interesting to see whether the NSW Government supports as well will be proposals to enable people who study at regional  universities to get a more concessional entry than those who study in what are often euphemistically referred as 'sandstone' or  capital city universities.

Reporter: Mr Ruddock, on the University issue, I understand that there was some opposition from the big universities who

weren't too happy about these full fee paying overseas students moving towards to regional universities. Have you overcome  and sorted out that opposition?

Mr Ruddock: Well, those issues are still being progressed. One of the measures that you can implement that is likely to  impact on where people will settle, is where they study. If they are eligible for a migration outcome and have studied in a  regional location, it's where they're familiar, it's where they've got perhaps friends, support groups, it's where they may well be  familiar with the job market, the whole host of factors that are likely to influence a settlement decision that commence when  you start your studies. So, I think it is a very good idea to getting a better dispersal and I'll be interested to see how that matter  progresses.

But, family reunion… I mean there are a number of areas in which the successful outcome is depended upon sponsorship. If  you give sponsorship to people who have already made a decision to move and settle in a regional area… in other words their  outcome is more likely to be successful because they have been in Bathurst or Orange or moved to Adelaide or settled in Port  Hedland or some of these other rather pleasant places around Australia… if you have settled in those regional areas, you are  more likely to succeed with your sponsorship application. It may be for a special need carer, it may be for parents. You can  build on those sorts of linkages and it can influence where people will settle because will say look, if I want to sponsor this  particular relative… if I move to a place other than say Sydney, I'm more likely to be successful.

So measures like that I suspect could have a fairly significant impact, but I find it strange to wake up every so often and hear  the Commonwealth being belted about the size of the Commonwealth's immigration program and yet matters that could  influence the extent to which people settle in Sydney are put on the backburner until after a State election.

Reporter: So do you think that the State election…….Bob Carr is playing to the migrant vote in Sydney? Is that why he is  not going to come to the table on this?

Mr Ruddock: Well, I mean my view is that this issue was raised last year as an issue of some urgency. I responded  immediately. I mean we had a taskforce set up within weeks to get on with the job of looking at the range of initiatives. There  have been a range of initiatives presented and anything that looks at all difficult has been put off.

Reporter: So, you're saying he is not fair dinkum?

Mr Ruddock: Well, I think if you are fair dinkum, you would be pushing on to get these issues resolved and we would have  been taking about implementing initiatives that have been agreed last year.

Reporter: You too are from Sydney. Do you think Sydney has enough people?

Mr Ruddock: Look, I understand the issues in relation to development in Sydney because there is a lot of pressure on  Communities to change when you have got very considerable growth but you can address that in a number of ways and the  area I have responsibility is in relation to migration and the way in which I can help is by getting a better dispersal… by  getting people to think about where else they might be able to go. I mean, the reality is that in the last 4 to 5 years we've  influenced something like 17,000 decisions in terms of where people are going to settle and what I'm saying is that  cooperation can influence even more.

Now there are other issues to which I am not responsible and a lot of the problems can be addressed more effectively with I  think better long-term planning and for the State dealing with the issues for which it is responsible more effectively.

Reporter: Minister, on the universities, could you please just outline what the difficulties are in terms of big universities and  what you're doing in terms of negotiations to try and work this through?

Mr Ruddock: No, look it is a matter in which we will make certain announcements when we have concluded our  examination of the issue. But I have flagged very clearly that if you can give in the migration program, a benefit to people  who have studied regionally, it may well influence where people ultimately settle and so get a better dispersal of migration.

Now, it will also have the effect of reducing temporary movements and temporary movements are just as important as  permanent movements. I mean if you've got to provide accommodation and you've got to provide a range of infrastructure and  services to meet a group of people who are living lawfully but temporarily, it has the same impact as permanent migration.

And the fact is that universities can see important opportunities in being able to market courses to overseas students and I  suspect that large universities in metropolitan locations would still want to be very actively involved in promoting themselves  as a destination for students. And you know again, if you are fair dinkum about reducing the impact on Sydney, then  achieving a better dispersal, that is getting more students seeking to study in other regional universities can reduce the impact  upon Sydney.

Reporter: Given the Carr Government's in a caretaker mode at the moment, there is very little it can do really, isn't there?

Mr Ruddock: Once you go into a caretaker mode you don't make policy decisions and…

Reporter: So why did you bring this up today?

Mr Ruddock: Well, this was the subject of a story in the Sydney Morning Herald in which one of your very industrious  reporters was seeking information.

Reporter: But both sides could be playing politics here, you could be playing politics just as much as the Carr Government.

Mr Ruddock: No, he was provided with information in response to his enquiries and I don't think it's surprising that a  creative journalist would ask questions about a taskforce that was set up last year and want to know whether there had been  any outcomes.

Reporter: So as far as you're concerned, it's not the Federal Government's fault that there has been no outcome at this stage, it  lays purely on the doorstep on the Carr Government?

Mr Ruddock: Well, what I can say without any fear of contradiction is that these issues have been pushed by me and my  officials ever since the matter was first raised by the Premier in broad terms in terms of the impact of migration generally and  his complaint is the impact of migration on Sydney. What I'm saying is that you can get a better dispersal of the migration  program, which will reduce impact upon Sydney. There are a range of initiatives that can be pursued and all that requires is a  willingness to sit down and address those issues constructively, and I'm prepared to do that, and my Department is prepared to  do that and we are now at the point when the government is in care-taker mode and in that sense not more can be done. But I  suspect during course of an election campaign when asked to comment on planning issues and when asked to comment on  issues in relation to Sydney and the pressures on Sydney, Mr Carr will want to go and blame the Commonwealth for pursuing  high levels of immigration. We've had a government that has not been about that, but that's what he'll do and I think all this  has done is ensure that when people are addressing those issues, they understand that when he had an opportunity to influence  the extent to which settlement occurs in NSW, he walked away from it.

Okay?

Reporter: How much longer will Woomera stay open till? Are you planning to close that before Easter?

Mr Ruddock: Well, I've indicated a predilection to move to closure and that's been on the public agenda for some time. Now  the reason is quite clear. We've had a decline in the population that we had to detain. I think we are now down to 80 detainees  at Woomera and at some point in time we will have to make some further arrangements and when we are making those I'll let  you know.

Reporter: Given a large proportion of the centre was destroyed over Christmas, why has it taken so long?

Mr Ruddock: Well, it's got nothing to do with the extent to which there was very very heavy destruction of infrastructure and  amenity. The fact is that I think Woomera had something of the order of 1,200 places. So you can take four or five hundred  places out and you've still got a facility that can take four or five hundred people. Woomera is a very large facility and  whatever happens, Woomera will be available for detention purposes if required. The question is whether we should  rationalise our facilities down to two active facilities.

The reason we haven't moved to do that has been because I have been very conscience that Woomera also supports the  alternative detention model. The alternative detention model about which people have flagged a very high degree of support  and want to see continuing, is largely dependent upon that. Now if you were to make other arrangements in relation to

Woomera you would have to be putting in place alternative arrangements for the alternative detention model.

You know that I have been endeavouring to negotiate that with the community, the community in Port Augusta. Everybody  wants to be consulted. Consultations don't occur as quickly as you would like, and even when you have them you don't always  have an unanimous view. And we saw that with some meetings that were being held last week. So look, it's a live issue, I'm  not yet in a position to make any announcements.

Reporter: Is there any further movement on your meetings with the Iranian Government about forced repatriation asylum  seekers?

Mr Ruddock: Well, I think there will be some developments and I am more confident today than I was say a week ago but  we will get some movement on that front. But, the basis upon which we have been talking to Iran and has been about the  whole context of lawful movement between Australian and Iran. And lawful movement requires countries to accept  obligations in relation to their Nationals and it's a matter in which I do think there will be some developments but I'll leave  that until the time when I can make the announcement.

Reporter: Why are you more confident than last week?

Mr Ruddock: Because I think we are getting closer to a deal. Okay?

3 March 2003



