



THE HIGH COURT AND THE DEATH PENALTY - LOOKING BACK,

LOOKING FORWARD *





The Hon Justice Michael Kirby AC CMG **





ONE HUNDRED AND FOURTEEN SOULS



The  Centenary  of  the  High  Court  of  Australia  affords  an

opportunity  to  look  back  and  to  look  forward.   Of  many  things  in  the

Court and the law we can be proud.  Such was the history of violence,

war, genocide and revolution in the twentieth century that there are few

countries  that  can  celebrate  a  hundred  years  under  the  same

Constitution,  upheld  by  the  same  final  court.   Judges  are  required  to

apply the law which, for the most part, is made by others.  They are not,

as  such,  morally  responsible  for  the  content  of  the  law.   If  they  cannot

uphold  the  law,  their  duty  is  to  resign  and  seek  greener  pastures.

However, this does not tell the whole story.  Judges, especially in a final

court, play a large part in developing the principles of the common law.

With  a  new  Constitution,  the  Justices  of  the  High  Court  had  large



*  This  paper  was  the  text  for  an  address  to  the  Criminal  Law

Association (Vic) and Reprieve Australia in Melbourne on 6 October  2003, the centenary of the first sitting of the High Court of Australia.  **   Justice  of  the  High  Court  of  Australia.   The  author  thanks  Alex  de

Costa, Legal Research Officer of the High Court of Australia, for the  collection of materials and comments used in this paper.

2.

choices  to  make  concerning  the  meaning  of  the  document  of

government.  Judges have discretions.  They must make choices about

the  meaning  of  ambiguous  words.   They  often  influence  the  course  of

events in trials.



For most of the first century of the High Court, it presided over the

criminal  law  of  Australia  under  which,  for  certain  capital  crimes

(principally  murder)  the  punishment  involved  was  the  infliction  of  State-sanctioned termination of the prisoner's life.  Between the foundation of

the  Commonwealth  in  1901  and  the  hanging  of  Ronald  Ryan,  the  last

person  executed  in  Australia  on  3  February  1967,  114  prisoners  were

executed 1 .   During  this  time,  the  last  hope  of  such  prisoners  was  the

intervention of the High Court.



It  is  difficult  to  find  accurate  statistics  about  the  role  of  the  High

Court  in  capital  cases.   Many  of  the  early  decisions  involving  special

leave applications in criminal matters were not reported.  The unreported

decisions  are  not  searchable  or  readily  accessible.   The  names  of  the

114  prisoners  executed  in  Australia  are  unavailable.   The  appeals  in

which the sentence of execution was confirmed, as in the case of Rupert

Max Stuart 2 , do not tell the whole story.  In some cases, like Stuart's, the

death  penalty  was  later  commuted.   In  many  instances,  no  reference



1   Australian  Institute  of  Criminology,  (I  Potas  &  J  Walker) Capital  Punishment (February 1987) at 1.

2   Stuart v The Queen (1959) 101 CLR 1.

3.

was  made  to  the  fact of the sentence of death.  Its availability, and the

practice  of  commuting  it,  varied  between  the  Australian  States

depending  on  the  government  in  power.   The  sentence  of  death  was

abolished  in  Queensland  in  1918.   Where  it  survived  in  other  States,  it

was  normally  commuted  when  the  government  was  formed  by  the

Australian Labor Party which had a policy of abolition.



Nonetheless,  it  is  instructive  to  look  at  sixteen  reported  cases  in

the  High  Court  of  Australia  involving  capital  crimes.   They  illustrate  the

way in which the Court performed its role as effectively the penultimate

arbiter  of  life  and  death.   After  the  High  Court,  the  only  chance  of

reprieve lay in the Royal prerogative of mercy.



CAPITAL CASES IN THE HIGH COURT



The  first  reported  case  recording  a  prisoner  under  sentence  of

death is that of Ross  v  The  King 3 .  Colin Ross was convicted of sexual

assault and murder of a young girl.  The Full Court of the Supreme Court

of  Victoria  refused  leave  to  appeal.   In  the  High  Court,  Mr  Ross

complained  of  deficiencies  in  the  trial  judge's  summing  up  because  he

had  failed  to  inform  the  jury  that  they  could  enter  a  conviction  of

manslaughter.   This  remains  a  relatively  common  source  of  complaints

about  judicial  charges  in  homicide  cases 4 .   By  majority,  the High Court



3   (1922) 30 CLR 246.

4   See eg Gilbert v The Queen (2000) 201 CLR 414.

4.

rejected  the  contentions.   Justice  Isaacs  dissented.   The  decision  was

given  on  5  April  1922.   The  prisoner  was  hanged  at  Melbourne's

Pentridge Prison on 24 April 1922.



The second case has recently returned to the news.  In Tuckiar v

The King 5 , Mr Tuckiar, described as a "completely uncivilised Aboriginal

native" 6 ,  was  charged  with  killing  a  police  constable  at  Woodah  Island

near  Groote  Eylandt  in  the  Northern  Territory.   The  trial  judge  directed

the jury to draw an inference of his guilt from the prisoner's failure to give

evidence.   This  was  a  serious  departure  from  the  principle  of

accusatorial  trial  and  the  general  right  to  silence.   In  the  days  before

organised  legal  aid,  the  lawyer  appointed  to  represent  Mr Tuckiar was

very  inexperienced.   He  did  not  object  to  the  prosecution  leading

irrelevant  and  prejudicial  evidence  of  the  good  character  of  the

deceased  constable.   Following  the  jury's  conviction  of  Mr  Tuckiar  for

murder, and in the midst of high feeling in the Territory about the crime,

the appointed counsel announced in open court that he had been told by

Mr  Tuckiar  that  he  had  lied  to  one  of  the  two  witnesses  who  gave

evidence against him.  The prisoner was sentenced to death.  The High

Court  overturned  the  conviction  and  sentence.   It  directed  that  an

acquittal be entered.  It expressed the view that the public remarks of Mr

Tuckiar's lawyer would so have prejudiced the chance of a fair trial that a



5   (1933) 52 CLR 335.

6   (1934)  52  CLR  335  at  339  per  Gavan  Duffy  CJ,  Dixon,  Evatt  and   McTiernan JJ.

5.

fresh proceeding should not be ordered.  In July 2003, the Tuckiar case

was remembered in Darwin at a ceremony in the Supreme Court.  The

occasion was an opportunity for symbolic acts of reconciliation between

the families and the indigenous community and other citizens.



In Sodeman  v  The  King

7 ,  the  prisoner  had  confessed  to  murder

but entered a plea of insanity.  The trial judge instructed the jury that the

prosecution  had  to  prove  the  constituent  elements  of  the  crime  beyond

reasonable doubt and that Mr Sodeman bore the burden of proving that

he was insane at the time of the offence.  The High Court agreed that Mr

Sodeman  carried  the  burden  of  proving  insanity,  although  not  on  the

criminal  onus.   The  question  arose  as  to  the  interpretation  of  the  trial

judge's charge.  The Court was evenly divided.  Latham CJ and Starke J

concluded  that the  trial  judge  conveyed  to  the  jury  were  adequate.

Dixon  and  Evatt  JJ  disagreed.   Because  the  High  Court  was  evenly

divided, the decision of the Court of Criminal Appeal of Victoria was not

disturbed.   A  petition  for  special  leave  to  appeal  was  dismissed by the

Privy Council on 28 May 1936.  Four days later, at Pentridge Prison, Mr

Sodeman was hanged.



In Cornelius  v  The  King also in 1936 8 , the prisoner had allegedly

killed  a  minister  of  religion  after  entering  his  church  for  the  purpose  of



7   (1935) 55 CLR 192.

8   (1936) 155 CLR 235.

6.

stealing.   An  issue  arose  as  to  whether  a  written  confession  signed  by

Mr  Cornelius  should  have  been  excluded  on  the  basis  that  it  had  been

procured by an "inducement" which was "calculated to cause an untrue

admission of guilt to be made" 9 .  The High Court unanimously found that

the  commission  was  rightly  admitted.   Special  leave  to  appeal  was

therefore refused.  Mr Cornelius was hanged at Pentridge Prison within

the month of the Sodeman execution.



In  the  following  year,  in Davies  and  Cody  v  The  King

10 ,  the

accused  were tried for the murder of an employee of the Stamp Duties

Office killed in the course of an attempted robbery.  They were convicted

and sentenced to death.  Evidence was given against them by a former

criminal  associate  who  said  that  they  had  made  admissions  to  him.

After the Court of Criminal Appeal of Victoria had dismissed their appeal,

the  associate  confessed  that  his  evidence  had  been  totally  fabricated.

This  evidence  was  considered  by  the  High  Court  in  the  special  leave

hearing  in  circumstances  that  might  not  now  be  possible 11 .  The Court

unanimously  decided  that  the  convictions  were  unsafe  and  they  were

quashed.





9   Evidence Act 1928 (Vic) s 141.

10   (1937) 57 CLR 170.

11   cf Mickelberg v The Queen (1989) 167 CLR 259 at 266, 274, 297- 299, cf at 282;; Eastman v The Queen (2000) 203 CLR 1 at 11 [11]- [12],  24-26  [68]-[78],  32-37  [103]-[11],  59-63  [181]-[192],  96-97

[290]-[291]; cf 79-93 [240]-276], 123 [371].

7.

In  the  same  year  in Packett  v  The  King

12 ,  the  prisoner  was

convicted  of  a  double  murder  and  sentenced  to  death.   The  trial  had

been  fought  on  the  defences  of  provocation  and  self-defence.   In  the

Tasmanian  Court  of  Criminal  Appeal,  he  unsuccessfully  complained

against  the  summing  up  by  the  trial  judge  and  about  the  form  of  the

indictment.  These complaints failed in the intermediate court and in the

High Court.  It is not clear whether Mr Packett was later executed but in

all probability he was for that was the standard of those days.



In 1938 in Green v The King

13 , the prisoner was convicted of the

murder of two women and sentenced to death.  In the Victorian Court of

Criminal  Appeal  he  sought  to  adduce  fresh  evidence.   His  application

was dismissed and so it was in the High Court.  The leading judgment of

the High Court was given by Latham CJ.  He rejected the new evidence

on the ground that it had been available to Mr Green at his trial.  In those

days, such issues were dealt with by rules of procedure that tend to be

stricter  than  those  that  we  observe  in  times  more  attentive  to  the

substance of the case.  Mr Green was hanged at Pentridge Prison on 17

April 1939, which was a month after I was born.





12   (1937) 58 CLR 190.

13   (1938) 61 CLR 171.

8.

The  next  capital  case  was O'Leary  v  The  King

14 .   This  was

another  appeal  against  conviction  of  murder.   It  was  claimed  that  the

homicide had occurred in the course of a drunken orgy during which the

prisoner  had  assaulted  a  number  of  people.   Evidence  of  the  other

assaults was admitted at trial on the basis of the similar facts rule.  The

trial  judge  directed  the  jury  to  have  regard  to  that  evidenced  as

demonstrating  that  the  prisoner  was  "a  man  who  had  no  care  for  the

ordinary  feelings  of  pity  or  humanity  which  restrain  ordinary  people".

The prisoner's lawyer complained that this effectively put him on trial for

multiple  offences  and  diverted  attention  from  the  issue  to  be  decided.

However,  his appeal  to  the  Supreme  Court  of  South  Australia  was

rejected,  as  was  his  application  to  the  High  Court.   McTiernan J

dissented.



In 1950 the celebrated case of The King v Lee & Ors 15  was heard

in  the  High  Court.   Jean  Lee  was  the  last  woman  to  be  hanged  in

Australia.  She was convicted of murder with two confederates who had

strangled  the  victim  in  a  hotel  room.   Miss  Lee  had  not  participated  in

any act of violence against the deceased.  However, she was convicted

of  murder  on  the  basis  of  the  doctrine  of  common purpose.  An appeal

by  the  three  prisoners  was  allowed  by  the  Victorian  Court  of  Criminal

Appeal  in  June  1950.   It  was  held  that  statements  to  police  had  been



14   (1946) 73 CLR 566.

15   (1950) 82 CLR 133.

9.

obtained  improperly.   However,  in  a  single  joint  judgment,  following  a

Crown  appeal,  the  High  Court  overturned  that  decision  and  reinstated

the convictions and death sentences.  An application to the Privy Council

failed  in  February  1951.   Eight  days  later  the  three  prisoners  were

hanged at Pentridge Prison.



Eight years after the reimposition of the death penalty in that case,

in The Queen v Howe 16 , Dixon CJ said:



"It would not be in accordance with the practice of this Court  to  entertain  an  application  for  special  leave  from  an  order   setting  aside  a  capital  conviction  and  granting  a  new  trial  if  there  were  no  other  grounds  for  the  application  except  that   the  State  Court  of  Criminal  Appeal  ought  to  have  taken  a   different  view  of  the  evidence  or  ought  not  in  the  particular   case to have regarded some specific direction to the jury as  necessary  or  ought  notwithstanding  that  some  error  of  law   appeared  to  have  held  that  no  substantial  miscarriage  of  justice had occurred".



These  remarks  suggest  that  Chief  Justice  Dixon  believed  that

there  was  such  a  practice  of  the  High  Court  derived  from  more  cases

than those that are reported.  Of course, it might also suggest a growing

disenchantment  with  capital  punishment  in  the  Court,  as  in  the

Australian community at that time.



In Stapleton  v  The  Queen

17 ,  the  prisoner  was  convicted  of

murdering a police constable at Katherine in the Northern Territory.  He



16   (1958) 100 CLR 448 at 457.

10.

was  sentenced  to  death.   However,  the  High  Court  unanimously  set

aside the conviction and sentence, holding that the trial judge had failed

to explain the legal test of insanity correctly to the jury.  A new trial was

ordered.  The outcome may be contrasted with that in Sodeman.



In  1958  in  The  Queen  v  Howe

18 ,  the  prisoner  was  convicted  of

murder  and  sentenced  to  death.   His  defence  had  involved  claims  that

he had been victimised by "sodomitical attacks".  The issue was whether

the  prisoner  had  used  more  force  than  was  reasonably  necessary  and

whether  the  judge's  directions  were  appropriate  in  this  respect.   The

Court  of  Criminal  Appeal  of  South  Australia  overturned  the  conviction.

Unanimously, the High Court refused to intervene.



Then  came  the  decision  in Stuart  v  The  Queen 19 .   Rupert  Max

Stuart  was  convicted  of  the  murder  and  rape  of  a  nine  year  old  girl  in

South  Australia.   There  were  three  objections  to  the  safety  of  his

conviction.   The  most  important  related  to  the  admissibility  of  a  typed

confession.   The  High  Court  received  an  affidavit  suggesting  that  Mr

Stuart  was  only  proficient  in  the  Aranta  language  of  his  native  people

and  that  the  contents  of  the  confession  did  not  represent  his  own

expression.  In an unanimous decision, the High Court stated twice that



17   (1952) 86 CLR 350.

18   (1958) 100 CLR 449.

19   (1959) 101 CLR 1.

11.

the case had caused it "a great deal of anxiety".  Nonetheless, although

Mr Stuart was under sentence of death, the Court declined to intervene.

Later the death penalty was commuted following the establishment of a

Royal  Commission  in  response  to  media  and  public  concern.   An

Australian film has recently been distributed telling the story of the trial of

Max Stuart.  It portrays the culture of the law of those days.  By so doing

the  film  also  illustrates  the  improvements  that  have  happened  in  the

meantime 20 .



In Thomas  v  The  Queen

21 ,  the  prisoner  was  convicted  of  wilful

murder  and  sentenced  to  death.   In  the  course  of  his  summing  up,  the

trial judge had directed the jury that they could convict if they arrived at

"a  feeling  of  comfortable  satisfaction  that  the  accused  is  guilty".   The

accused  complained  that  these  words  misdirected  the  jury  concerning

the obligation of the Crown to prove the case beyond reasonable doubt.

The  High  Court  set  the  conviction  aside  and  ordered  a  new  trial.

However,  Mr  Thomas  must  have  been  convicted  at  the  new  trial

because  he  was  hanged  at  Fremantle  Prison  in  Western  Australia  less

than six months after the High Court's decision.  There is no record that

he attempted a second appeal.





20   M  D  Kirby,  "Black  and  White  Lessons  for  the  Australian  Judiciary"   (2003) 23 Adelaide Law Review 195.

21   (1959) 102 CLR 583.

12.

In Mizzi  v  The  Queen

22 ,  in  1960,  the  prisoner  was  likewise

convicted  and  sentenced  to  death  for  murder.   At  the  trial,  the  judge

misdirected  the  jury  concerning  the  defence  of  insanity  and  did  not

explain how medical evidence, received during the trial, was relevant to

the  factual  question  which  the  jury  had  to  answer.   The  High  Court  set

the conviction aside.  It entered a judgment of "not guilty on the ground

of  insanity",  an  apparently  bold  step  taken  on  the  judges'  review  of  the

facts for themselves.



In Tait v The Queen

23 , the prisoner was convicted of murder.  His

sole  defence  was  insanity.   The  case  involved  a  dramatic  contest

between  the  High  Court  and  the  Bolte  Government  in  Victoria.   Chief

Justice  Dixon  insisted  upon  obedience  to  a  delay  in  the  hanging  of  the

prisoner so that his application to the High Court would not be rendered

futile.  In the end, the High Court and the Privy Council refused leave to

appeal.   However,  the  death  penalty  imposed  upon  the  prisoner  was

subsequently commuted, in part as a result of the controversy that had

surrounded the challenges in the courts 24 .



There  followed  in  1966,  the  last  capital  case  to  come  before  the

High Court.  On 29 June of that year, Ronald Ryan sought special leave



22   (1960) 105 CLR 659.

23   (1962) 108 CLR 620.

24   M D Kirby, "The Death Penalty - A Special Sign of Barbarity" (2001),  118 Victorian Bar News 38.

13.

to  appeal  from  a  decision  of  the  Court  of  Criminal  Appeal  of  Victoria

dismissing  the  appeal  against  his  conviction  for  murder.   The  Court  of

Criminal Appeal had made a number of critical observations concerning

the  case 25 .   In  a  unanimous  decision,  the  High  Court  rejected  the

request  that  it  should  intervene.   Because  it  viewed  the  conviction  as

inevitable,  it  refused  to  intervene,  as  did  the  Privy  Council  in  January

1967.   Ronald  Ryan  was  hanged  at  Pentridge  Prison  on  3  February

1967,  becoming  the  last  person  to  suffer  the  punishment  of  death  in

Australia 26 .



A TEST OF VIGILANCE?



Can it be said that in the foregoing cases, or any of them, the High

Court  exhibited  a  standard  of  vigilance  in  relation  to  the  accuracy  and

fairness of trials resulting in the conviction of prisoners of capital crimes?

Is a test of "vigilance" relevant to the contemporary law?



There is no doubt that, in capital cases that now come before the

Judicial  Committee  of  the  Privy  Council,  some  members  of  the  Board

have acknowledged the special vigilance with which convictions followed

by  the  death  sentence,  must  be  viewed.   Thus  in  Higgs  and  Mitchell v



25   R v Ryan and Walker [1966] VR 553.

26   P Tennison, "The Ryan Trial:  Appeals" in Defence Counsel:  Cases  in the Career of Philip Opas QC (1975) at 161.

14.

The Minister of Social Security and Others (Bahamas) 27 , Lord Cooke of

Thorndon put it this way:



"Self-evidently every human being has a natural right not to  be  subjected  to  inhuman  treatment.   A  right  inherent  in  the   concept of civilisation, it is recognised rather than created by  international human rights instruments such as the Universal  Declaration of Human Rights, the International Covenant on  Civil and Political  Rights,  and  the  European  Convention  for   the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms  … A duty of governments and courts in every civilised state  must  be  to  exercise  vigilance  to  guard  against  violation  of   this  fundamental  right.   Whenever  violation  is  in  issue  a  court  will  not  fulfil  its  function  without  a  careful  examination   of the facts of each individual case and a global assessment  of the treatment in question."



In that case Lord Cooke was writing in dissent.  Three weeks after

the Privy Council's decision David Mitchell was hanged in the Bahamas.

The  other  appellant,  John  Junior  Higgs,  escaped  the  gallows  by

committing  suicide  on  the  day  before  his  appointed  execution 28 .   The

notion  of  vigilance  of  which  Lord  Cooke  spoke  appears  to  have  been

adopted  by  the  Privy  Council  in  later  capital  cases.   The  Board  has

recently been inclined to subordinate application of pre-existing authority

to  the  need  for  specific  examination  of  the  validity  of  the  capital

prisoner's  conviction  and  sentence.  Such an approach may be seen in

five cases that followed Higgs and Mitchell.





27   [2000] 2 AC 228.

28   According  to  F  Wheen,  "Britain's  Executioners"  The  Guardian,  14  June 2000.

15.

First,  in Lewis  &  Ors  v  Attorney-General  of  Jamaica, 29  the  six

applicants  for  leave  to  appeal  were  sentenced  to  death  in  Jamaica  for

murders committed there.  Three issues arose before the Privy Council:

whether  it  was  incumbent  upon  the  Jamaican  Executive  before

considering whether a person’s death sentence was to be commuted, to

disclose information that it had received relevant to its decision; whether

it  was  unlawful  to  execute  a  person  where  that  person’s  petition  still

remained  for  consideration  by  the  Inter-American  Commission  on

Human Rights; and whether a person’s conditions of imprisonment could

render  unlawful  the  death  penalty  imposed  on  him  or  her.   As  Lord

Hoffman  observed  in  dissent,  there  was  very  recent  authority  (that  was

unfavourable  to  the  applicants)  on  all  of  these  points. 30   In particular, in

Higgs  and  Mitchell  (where  Lord  Cooke  had  dissented  on  the  prison

conditions  issue),  Lord  Hoffman  had  led  majorities  specifically  against

the  second  and  third  contentions. 31   However,  the  majority  in Lewis

chose  not  to  follow  these  authorities  in  the  circumstances  of  the  case.

As one commentator has observed,



“Lewis is revealed as an exceptionally important case which  immensely  enhances  both  the  procedural  and  substantive  rights  of  death  row  inmates  and  demonstrates  an  unusual   willingness to depart from existing authority.”

32





29   [2001] 2 AC 50.

30   [2001] 2 AC 50 at 88.

31   [2000] 2 AC 228 at 238-251.

32   I  Hare,  “Prerogative  and  Precedent:  The  Privy  Council  on  Death  Row” (2001) 60 Cambridge Law Journal 1 at 3.

16.

Lord Cooke’s conception of special vigilance is also visible in the

Privy  Council’s  recent  treatment  of  the  mandatory  imposition  of  the

death  penalty  for  murder.   As  one  commentator  notes,  the  obligatory

nature  of  the  death  penalty  in  this  context  had  gone  unquestioned  in

many  cases  before  the  Privy  Council.  33   However,  in  three  cases  that

were heard together, 34  the Board held that differential culpability inherent

in the offence of murder rendered the mandatory death penalty offensive

to  international  human  rights  norms.   Such  norms  then  informed  the

Board’s  approach  to  the  construction  of  constitutional  provisions  that

forbade infliction upon a person of “inhuman or degrading punishment or

other treatment.”



A  consequence  of  this  vigilant  approach  has  been  an  apparent

increase  in  the  number  of  death  sentences  set  aside  by  the  Privy

Council.  In fact, it does not appear that the Privy Council has upheld a

death  sentence  in  the  past  eighteen  months.   The  recent  decision  of

Roberts & Anor v The State (Trinidad and Tobago)  35  would seem to be

another  example  of  this  vigilant  approach.   There,  the  two  appellants

had been convicted of murder and sentenced to death by a court in Port

of Spain.  On appeal, a point arose concerning the sufficiency of the trial

judge’s  summing  up  in  relation  to  certain  identification  evidence.   For

reasons  that  were  not  made  clear,  the  shorthand  notes  of  the  trial



33   T  Roe,  “Human  Rights  and  the  Mandatory  Death  Penalty  in  the  Privy Council” (2002) 61 Cambridge Law Journal 505 at 505.

34   Reyes v The Queen [2002] 2 AC 235; R v Hughes [2002] 2 AC 259;  and Fox v The Queen [2002] 2 AC 284.

35   [2003] UKPC 1.

17.

judge’s summing up had been lost.  However, a line of authority existed

which held that, where a trial judge’s short hand notes of a summing up

could  not  be  located,  it  was  to  be  assumed  that  the  trial  judge  had  not

substantively  erred.   Nonetheless,  based  on  other  decisions  that

suggested that judges in Trinidad and Tobago were frequently failing to

give  sufficient  identification  directions,  the  Privy  Council  held  that  such

an  assumption  was  “much  too  fragile.” 36   Accordingly,  the  appellants’

convictions were set aside.



DID THE HIGH COURT ACCEPT A VIGILANCE APPROACH



Of  course,  in  the  way  of  those  times,  there  was  no  reference  to

international  human  rights  law  in  the  decisions  of  the  High  Court

disposing of the appeals in the capital cases that I have listed.  The case

of Stuart  v  The  Queen,  in  particular,  would  seem  to  indicate  that  the

High Court did not, as a general rule, adopt a specially vigilant approach.

It  expressed  its  "anxiety"  yet  failed  to  intervene.   Nonetheless,  two

decisions  indicate  that  at  least  two  of  the  Justices  were  specially

concerned  because  of  the  drastic  outcome  that  rested  on  their  judicial

decision.  In Packett v The Queen 37 , Evatt J adverted to "the fact that the

charge  is  for  a  capital  offence  [which]  cannot  be  excluded  from

consideration" 38 .





36   [2003] UKPC 1 at [10].

37   (1937) 58 CLR 190.

38   (1937) 58 CLR 190 at 218.

18.

Earlier, in Ross v The King

39  Isaacs J, in dissent, at the outset of

his  reasons,  asked  “[h]as  the  prisoner  had  substantially  the  fullest

chance  for  his  life  before  the  jury  which  the  law  says  he  shall  have?” 40

There  followed  a  detailed  examination  of  whether  the  trial  judge’s

summing up had been deficient because of his failure to inform the jury

that they could have entered a conviction of manslaughter.  In dissenting

and answering that question in favour of Mr Ross, it is difficult to escape

the  conclusion  that  the  prospect  of  the  death  penalty  was  foremost  in

Isaacs J’s mind.  At the end of his opinion he states:



"[i]n  my  opinion,  and  without  hesitation,  I  hold  that  there  should be a new trial, because the proper finding of the guilt  of  the  accused,  involving  capital  punishment,  should  be  ascertained, not by Judges, but, on a sufficient direction, by  a jury in the way the law requires."

41



In other fields of law, the notion of special vigilance is sometimes

mentioned in the High Court.  Thus, I have referred to it in the criminal

context  42  and  in  refugee  cases 43

.  There are doubtless other instances



39   (1922)  30  CLR  246.   See  above.   See,  for  example,  M  Hedge,  “A   Sentence Only Slowly Dying” Western  Australian (16 August 2003)  at 55; C Pearson, “Justice: Absolute or Diluted” Weekend Australian

(16 August 2003) at 22; A Bolt, “Amrozi Taps Anger” Herald Sun (11  August 2003) at 19.  40   (1922) 30 CLR 246 at 256.

41   (1922) 30 CLR 246 at 270.

42   King v The Queen (2003) 199 ALR 568 at 593 ([103]).

43   The  Minister  for  Immigration  and  Multicultural  Affairs;  Ex  pare  Application S20/2002 (2003) 198 ALR 59 at 98 ([169])-[170]).

19.

where  the  circumstances  and  consequence  of  a  judicial  decision

demand heightened attention and closer scrutiny.



CONTEMPORARY RELEVANCE



The  death  penalty  no  longer  operates  in  any  jurisdiction  of

Australia.   Australia  is  a  party  to  the  Second  Optional  Protocol  to  the

International  Covenant  on  Civil  and  Political  Rights (ICCPR).   This

effectively  accepts  that capital  punishment  is  contrary  to  human  rights

and human dignity.  It represents an obstacle to any attempt on the part

of  a  State  or  Territory  of  Australia  to  restore  capital  punishment.   The

federal  government  and  opposition  have  each  expressed  opposition to

the  return  of  capital  punishment  in  Australia.   What  relevance  then,  if

any, does capital punishment have to lawyers in this country?



If they continue to follow legal developments in the United States,

Australian  lawyers  will  be  familiar  with  the  continuing debates about the

requirements  of  the  Constitution  in  that  country,  as  interpreted  by  the

courts.   Two  recent  decisions  may  be  noticed.   On  2  September  2003,

the Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit held in Summerlin v Stewart 44

that  State  laws  permitting  judges,  and  not  juries,  to  decide  whether  the

sentence  of  capital  punishment  should  be  imposed  on  a  convicted

prisoner,  were  unconstitutional.   The  decision,  which  rests  on  the

jurisprudence  of  the  Supreme  Court  of  the  United  States,  seems

unfami liar to us.  In our tradition, it is ordinarily for judges to impose the



44   No 98-99002 (Unreported, 2 September 2003).

20.

sentence,  although  in  the  case  of  capital  crimes,  the  imposition  of  the

death  penalty  was  ordinarily  fixed  by  law,  giving  the  judge  little  or  no

discretion.  The decision in Summerlin considered a question which the

Supreme Court had left open in Ring v Arizona 45 .  There, that Court had

held  that  the  United  States  Constitution  required  that  only  a  jury  could

sentence  a  convicted  murderer  to  death.   The  Supreme  Court  had  left

open the question of whether the right was so fundamental as to apply

retrospectively or whether it should only have application to present and

future cases in which the point was specifically raised.



Secondly, in Atkins  v  Virginia 46 ,  the  Supreme  Court  held  that  the

imposition  of  the  death  penalty  upon  mentally  retarded  prisoners  was

contrary to the requirements of the Constitution.  The importance of that

decision  was  the  reliance,  by  the  majority,  upon  a  principle  of

international  human  rights  law  and  the  reference  to  decisions  by  the

European Court of Human Rights and other international bodies.  In the

past,  the  Supreme  Court  of  the  United  States,  reflecting  the  isolationist

culture  of  that  country,  has  not  found  international  human  rights  law

helpful  in  elaborating  the  requirements  of  the  United  States

Constitutions.   The  decision  in Atkins,  followed  soon  after  by  the

decision in Lawrence  v  Texas 47 ,  which  held  unconstitutional  the  Texas

criminal  law  against  consensual  adult  homosexual  conduct,  represents



45   122 S Ct 2428 (2002).

46   536 US 304 (2002).

47   538 US 1 (2003).

21.

something of a break-through for the utilisation of universal human rights

law  in  constitutional  elaboration.   In  Australia,  I  have  invoked  the  same

principle  as  an  interpretative  principle  in  construing  the  Constitution 48 .

So  far,  it  has  not  attracted  general  support.   If  one  looks  as  the  broad

directions in which the final courts of the world are moving, there can be

little doubt that municipal law and national constitutions will, in the future,

be influenced by international legal developments.  This is a natural and

inevitable  process  of  legal  symbiosis.   It  is  one  in  harmony  with  the

globalisation of the economy and of ideas.



Closer  to  home,  it  is  a  development  in  Indonesia  that  has  given

debates  concerning  the  death  penalty  a  heightened  significant  for

Australia.   The  imposition  of  the  death  penalty  on  Amrozi  bin

Nurhaysim 49  and  on  Samudra  (Abdul  Aziz)  50

for  their  parts  in  the  Bali

bombings  on  12  October  2002,  has  reinvigorated  the  debate  about

capital  punishment  in  Australia 51 .   This  debate  cannot  be  ignored.



48   Newcrest Mining (WA) v The Commonwealth (1997) 190 CLR 513  at 657-661; Kartinyeri v The Commonwealth (1998) 195 CLR 337 at  417-419  [166]-[167]; Austin v The Commonwealth (2003) 77 ALJR

491 at 542-544 [252]-[257]; 195 ALR 321 at 390-391.  49   See,  for  example,  M  Hedge,  “A  Sentence  Only  Slowly  Dying”

Western  Australian  (16  August  2003)  at  55;  C  Pearson,  “Justice:   Absolute or Diluted” Weekend Australian (16 August 2003) at 22; A  Bolt, “Amrozi Taps Anger” Herald Sun (11 August 2003) at 19.  50   Sydney Morning Herald, 11 September 2003, 1.

51   See,  for  example,  M  Hedge,  “A  Sentence  Only  Slowly  Dying”  Western  Australian  (16  August  2003)  at  55;  C  Pearson,  “Justice:   Absolute or Diluted” Weekend Australian (16 August 2003) at 22; A

Bolt, “Amrozi Taps Anger” Herald Sun (11 August 2003) at 19.

22.

Abolition  forever  of  capital  punishment  cannot  be  taken  for  granted  in

any country.



In  a  poll  conducted  in  Australia  in  August  2003,  56%  of

respondents in Australia answered affirmatively the question "would you

personally  be  in  favour  or  against  the  introduction  of  the  death  penalty

for  those  found  guilty  of  committing  major  acts  of  terrorism?" 52 .   As

reported, the Prime Minister, whilst expressing his personal repugnance

to capital punishment, expressed a somewhat ambivalent view about the

death penalty in some circumstances.  He suggested that its introduction

could  only  be  "pursued  at  a  State  political  level"  53 .   Because  all

Australian States and Territories presently have governments formed by

the Australian Labor Party, which is institutionally opposed to the death

penalty,  there  would  seem  to  be  no  immediate  possibility  of  legislation.

In  any  case,  by  virtue  of  Australia's  adherence  to  the  Second  Optional

Protocol  to  the  ICCPR,  if  a  State  or  Territory  Parliament  chose  to

reintroduce capital punishment in Australia, it would arguably be open to

the Federal Parliament to override the change by a federal law based on

compliance  with  that  international  treaty  54 .   The  Prime  Minister's



52   See  S  Lewis,  "Terrorists  Should  Die:  Poll" Australian (19  August  2003) at 1.

53   See C Banham & R Wainwright, “PM Ignites Death Penalty Furore”  Sydney  Morning  Herald (9  August  2003)  at  1;  A  Webster,  “PM  Sparks Death Debate” Sunday Age (10 August 2003) at 5.

54   S Garkawe, “The Reintroduction of the Death Penalty in Australia? -  Political and Legal Considerations” (2000) 24 Criminal Law Journal  101 at 107-108; M D Kirby, “The Death Penalty - A Special Sign of

Barbarity” (2001), 118 Victorian Bar News 38.

23.

ambivalence  on  the  issue  is  reflected  in  similar  remarks  by  the

Opposition  Leader,  Mr  Simon  Crean.   Words  of  opposition  were  left  to

others.



Some  commentators  have  suggested  that  the  ambivalence  in

relation  to  the  imposition  of  the  death  penalty  upon  the  convicted  Bali

bombers is unwise.  If executed, the prisoners may become martyrs for

a  cause  that  could  proliferate.   By  failing  to  lift  their  voices  in  these

cases,  Australians  may  disable  themselves  from  making  effective

representations  in  other  cases  where  Australia's  national  interests  are

not  involved.   This  may  be  another  instance  of  the  important  lesson

which  the  High  Court  taught  in  1951,  in  one  of  the  most  important

decisions of its first century.  In the Communist Party Case 55 , the Court

insisted  that  it  was  essential  to  adhere  to  basic  principles  in  respect  of

people  who are unloved and seen as a threat.  That is when adherence

to fundamental human rights is tested.  It is not really tested in dealing

with people like ourselves with whom we can identify.  It is tested when

we  have  to  deal  with  strangers  who  are  hated  and  feared.   It  will  be

tested, in the years ahead, as we enact and apply laws to deal with the

global problem of terrorism 56 .





55   Australian  Communist  Party  v  The  Commonwealth  (1951) 83 CLR  1.

56   M D Kirby, "Australian Law After 11 September 2001" (2001) 21(3)  Australian Bar Review 253.

24.

Last  month,  in  Boston,  the  Governor  of  Massachusetts,  Mr  Mitt

Romney,  launched  a  move  to  bring  the  death  penalty  back  to  that

State 57 .   The  penalty  had  been  abolished  there  in  1984.   However

Governor Romney ran on a platform of restoration and was elected.  He

has  now  appointed  an  eleven  member  committee  to  write  a  law  that

would  rely  on  scientific  evidence  to  justify  the  death  penalty.   As  in

current moves to reverse the centuries old principle of relief from double

jeopardy (also upheld by international human rights law) there are many

who put unqualified faith in science as a stimulus to basic change in the

availability of capital punishment.  It cannot be assumed, in Australia or

anywhere else, that abolition of capital punishment is forever.



LAWYERS' OPPOSITION TO CAPITAL PUNISHMENT



If  we  ask  why  most  lawyers  in  Australia,  including  most  judges,

are  opposed  to  the  death  penalty,  there  are  three  basic  the  answers.

First,  lawyers  know,  better  than  anyone  else,  the  fallibility  and

imperfections  of  any  system  of  human  justice -  even  the  highly  refined

Australian  system  over  which  the  High  Court  of  Australia  has  presided

for a century.  It is not much comfort having judicial inquiries years after

an  execution  which  find  a  miscarriage  of  justice  and  apologise  to  the

family.  Some of the cases in capital crimes that came before the High



57   USA Today, 24 September 2003, p 5A.

25.

Court  demonstrate  that  it  can  occasionally  be  a  close  run  thing  as  to

whether the Court intervenes.



Secondly,  lawyers  are  also  familiar  with  the  statistical  evidence

that demonstrates that the presence or absence of the death penalty has

insignificant  consequences  on  the  rate  of  homicide.   Looking  at  the

intervals  when,  in  several  Australian  States,  the  death  penalty  was

carried out and when it was commuted, it is clear that executions had no

effective  deterrent  effect  in  the  long  term.   Unreasoned  violent  conduct

does not usually act in such rational ways.  That leaves only vengeance

to  support  the  punishment  of  death.   But  this  denies  the  postulate  of

redemption  and  reform  that  lie  at  the  heart  of  all  of  the  world's  great

religions and philosophies.



Thirdly,  the  death  penalty  brutalises  the  state  that  carries  it  out.

Public  servants  must  prepare  the  messy  business  of  termination  of  a

human life.  They must act with the greatest premeditation.  They must

clean  up  the  mess  when  it  is  accomplished.   Many  lawyers  object  to

being  part  of  this  process -  the  sole  civilian  profession  that  would  be

involved in deliberate, planned homicide.  Like much else, it is a left-over

from an earlier and more barbaric time.



We have set ourselves upon a path to a higher form of civilisation.

It is one committed to fundamental human rights.  Such rights inhere in

the dignity of each human being, even those who have denied respect to

the  woes  of  others.   When  we  deny  human  dignity  we  diminish

26.

ourselves.   We  become  part  of  the  world  of  violence.   Lawyers  and

judges stand for the rational alternative to a world of terror and violence.

The  law  will  often  fail.   But  inflicting  the  death  penalty  is  the  ultimate

acknowledgment of the failure of civilisation.  That is why most lawyers

continue  to  oppose  it.   Even  in  the  age  of  terrorism  and  weapons  of

mass destruction.

































THE HIGH COURT AND THE DEATH PENALTY - LOOKING BACK,

LOOKING FORWARD



The Hon Justice Michael Kirby AC CMG

