

ADMINISTRATIVE LAW AND PUBLIC SERVICE

Address by Dr Peter Shergold, Secretary, Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet

AUSTRALIAN INSTITUTE OF ADMINISTRATIVE LAW OPENING ADDRESS:  3 JULY 2003

Introduction

There has been a transformation of the Australian Public Service in the last generation. Management  reforms have placed a much greater emphasis on results. The last decade has seen much stronger focus  placed on value-for-money in service provision; explicit reporting on outputs and outcomes rather than input  and process; the adoption of new information technology; improved client focus; and the introduction of  systemic measurement and evaluation of corporate and individual performance. The changes, I firmly  believe, have led to a more productive APS. They have markedly improved the efficiency with which we  manage public resources and the effectiveness with which we apply them to achieve outcomes in the public  good.

But it is worth remembering that many of the reforms now identified as ‘new managerialism’ were not driven  initially by the quest to turn the APS into a ‘high performance organisation’. Early reforms were prompted by  a desire to ensure that public servants had less power and influence to run their ‘own’ agendas. In large part  organisational changes were pursued by politicians wanting to rein in all powerful public service ‘mandarins’.  There was a strong view in the Parliament that Canberra bureaucrats wielded excessive control over the  political process, too often becoming the masters of the government they were meant to serve. Since the  1970s, when the Royal Commission on Australian Government Administration focussed on this perception of  inadequate bureaucratic responsiveness to government, the Service has been made more accountable.

Consequently the ‘new mandarins’, according to last week’s Business Review Weekly, are ‘no longer an  inner circle of surrogate power’. The good news is that the Weekly named me in today’s top 20 bureaucrats  (who were, I note in parentheses, 95 per cent male). The bad news is that apparently I’m not half the men  who preceded me: influential masters who - in those halcyon days of public service intrigue and influence -  were able ‘to exercise more power than their Ministers’. I don’t know how much this common perception is  based in historical truth. I do know that, to the extent that it is, the APS is a far, far better place to work today.  It is the elected politician, not the appoionted public servant, who must decide on those policies that are in  the national interest.

Part of the supposed diminution in Secretarial authority lies in the growth in importance of Ministerial  Advisers and policy think-tanks who contest the terrain of public policy. But at the same time, and equally  important, public service accountability has improved dramatically in the last generation, subjecting that  authority to increased scrutiny. Developments in administrative law over these years have opened up public  service decision-making to far greater scrutiny. Public servants now work in an environment where their  decisions are subject to extensive merit or judicial review. Freedom of information laws have increased  access to official information. Public servants now have to be far more careful about what they do with  information about citizens - the Privacy Act 1988 sets out principles for the appropriate and courteous  handling of information about people.

Scrutiny of public service decision-making has increased significantly, and not just through Parliamentary  committees. There are many organisations sitting within Australia’s administrative law structure - including  the Administrative Appeals Tribunal, Commonwealth Ombudsman’s Office and the Australian National Audit  Office - that ensure organisational behaviour is evaluated, investigated and made public. Their reports  provide grist to the media mill.

This administrative law structure, and indeed the APS as a whole, greatly benefits from the research work  and commentary from the Administrative Review Council and Australian Institute of Administrative Law. That  is why I am delighted to be here today at this Conference to talk about how administrative law benefits the  public service .



Some seven years ago, when I last addressed the Institute, I argued strongly that the scrutiny of public  servants needed to be significantly greater than for those who worked in the private sector.

Here is what I said.

"The role of a public service until now has been clear although its articulation has been somewhat hidden by  the rhetoric of contemporary managerialism. Because governments have found it impractical to undertake all  the administrative tasks required to deliver their policies, they have delegated substantial powers to an  appointed public service. These powers have traditionally been exercised as a monopoly.

The public service serves the public interest. Its actions express the will of the state as set out in the  Constitution, the judicial interpretation of that document, and the policies set by the government of the day  and scrutinised by representative parliaments. In providing policy advice the public service does so on the  basis of its understanding of the public interest. That is why it continues to set high store on strong, impartial  and apolitical public service leadership."

"The public service", I posited, "delivers programmes that have a public intent and are paid for out of the  public purse. It has access to the coercive powers of government in implementing policy. For their efforts  public servants are paid out of money levied from the people of Australia. The disciplines which public  servants face, and the ethical traditions to which they aspire, derive from the need to control governmental  power, keeping it within proper bounds to protect the Australian citizen from abuse and excess. Public  servants are part of the democratic process."

Broadly, I still believe that. That may come as a surprise given that Shergold vs Tanner, a battle about the  issuing of a conclusive certificate under the FOI Act, is becoming an extended footnote to the history of  administrative law. But that long legal process, scrutiny by the Ombudsman and Auditor, and the vigorous  tussles that I have enjoyed in the theatre of Senate Estimates, have not diminished my strong belief in the  beneficial rigours of an open public service scrutiny.

In the intervening years the democratic process has continued to evolve towards what I describe as ‘network  governance’or, more controversially, the ‘democratisation of public administration’. When using this phrase, I  intend to convey a sense of the increased range and influence of policy players and the significant expansion  in the number of organisations providing government services. Contestability has increased. Most relevant to  administrative law is that the public service now faces the challenge of increasing competition in the delivery  of services to government and on behalf of government. Much of the delivery of public policy has been  outsourced. There now exist markets of public, private and community organisations able and willing to  deliver services under the contract management of the APS.

Values

Through these significant changes, and the managerial reforms that have responded to them, it has been  important to retain the traditional values of public service. High standards of behaviour have long been  expected of public officials and assist good decision-making. The Australian Public Service has remarkably  high standards of practice: that is the very reason why examples of corruption are so newsworthy. These  standards are set out in the Australian Public Service Act of 1999. This Act - unlike its 1922 predecessor -  does not prescribe detailed rules or regulations. Rather, it is an ethics-based document, containing the APS  Code of Conduct and an explicit statement of the APS values that underpin our professional, non-partisan  and accountable public service.

The Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review) Act 1977 (ADJR Act) is also a values-based document. The  Act is built on the principles of administrative law: lawfulness, fairness, impartiality, rationality, openness and  efficiency. These administrative law principles are embedded in the APS values, helping build public  confidence and inform public servants of the standards of behaviour that are expected.

The ARC has recently developed a code of conduct for tribunal members. It is not surprising that this Code  of Conduct lays down very similar values to the APS Code: including respect for the law, fairness,  independence, integrity, accountability, diligence and efficiency.

It is a natural strength of the APS and our administrative law structure that we are all working from similar  values and a shared ethical perspective. Not only are these values instrumental in determining behaviour  and providing a reference-tool for public servants or tribunal members as they go about their day-to-day  work: they are also useful principles against which to evaluate new public service practices.

The ARC has done this on a number of occasions. For example, among the questions the ARC has

suggested we need to ask when we determine whether or not to outsource a particular service are: how will  it affect the accountability or transparency of government activity; and how can we be assured that services  will be delivered fairly and equitably? Efficiency and effectiveness cannot be judged in dollars alone. It is  equally necessary to ensure that the values of public service, and the scrutiny of administrative law, can be  incorporated in the management and delivery of government programmes.

Delivery of Services

It is vital to scrutinise the commitment of the APS to deliver government policy, whether directly or by  contract. Whether the service is making a welfare payment to an Australian; deciding on whether someone is  eligible for a protection visa; issuing a passport or approving a licence to carry out a particular activity, the  government has the right to expect the public service to make decisions in a responsive manner. The  government needs to ensure that the APS is committed to the delivery of services on behalf of the  government, with high standards of probity and integrity, whether undertaken directly or under contract.

My personal perspective is that we should aspire to an APS which is respected as much as for its capability  to deliver as for its ability to develop policy. There is a frustration in

government, and it is one which I share, that for a wide variety of reasons the implementation of policy or the  delivery of programmes is sometimes slower and less successful than the government had anticipated. On  occasion, services are riddled with administrative complexity, often introduced for the very best policy  reasons, but imposing heavy costs on recipients. Administrative law, and the structures of administrative  scrutiny, play a valuable role in identifying those burdens, and challenging us to examine how they might be  reduced.

For the public servant, too, administering policy is often very difficult. Frequently the law is complex and  difficult to interpret, requiring mastery of detailed subordinate legislation and hundreds of pages of  administrative guidelines. This panoply of prescribed process needs to be understood and implemented by  the everyday decision-maker. It is a challenge. Decision-makers have to actively turn their minds to the facts  of each case - you cannot have public servants implementing policy or using the guidelines in a blanket  fashion without regard to the merits of a particular application or entitlement. Balancing the need to exercise  discretion and consider the facts of each case with the need for consistency is very time consuming.

By and large the structure of public administration does deliver services on a vast scale, across the nation,  with remarkable efficiency. Bureaucracy works. Just think of the volume of decisions that are made with  remarkable accuracy, day-in, day-out. Every fortnight, for example, Centrelink makes approximately 8.5  million payments to some 5.7 million Australians. It faces 300 million decision points in any year. It does all  this with less than 25,000 staff. The ATO processes the returns of approximately 11.9 million taxpayers a  year, with less than 20,000 staff. Overall the Commonwealth makes some 50 million decisions a year. An  extraordinarily low number are appealed or reviewed.

Can the APS do better? Of course. Indeed it is in response to these issues of administrative complexity, as  well as other systemic issues, that we are about to establish an Implementation Unit within PM&C.  Prospectively, its goal will be to ensure that strategic delivery, planning and project management is built into  Cabinet submissions and to identify any systemic barriers, (including perhaps legislative or administrative  issues), that may make implementation difficult. Retrospectively, the aim of the Unit is to monitor and report  to government on the timeliness and effectiveness of delivery of key programmes and services.

The Unit will not duplicate the roles of other monitoring organisations. Rather it will ensure that service  delivery issues are considered at the front-end of policy making and identify mistakes or successes that  agencies can learn from across the service. I anticipate that the scrutiny of the ANAO, the Ombudsman’s  office and the Privacy Commission, and the review and appeal process for administrative decision-making,  will help to inform the Unit about the likely costs of and barriers to effective programme delivery.  Administrative law can, I believe, contribute to assessment of a key question that should be asked of any  public policy: namely, are the administrative costs of compliance and implementation (the ‘red-tape’) greater  than the benefits that the policy seeks to confer?

Outsourcing

Our commitment to ensuring effective implementation of government policy is now more - not less -  important as a result of the increasing number of government programmes that are contract managed rather  than directly delivered by the APS. One of the main challenges for administrative law is to maintain  accountability, including transparency of process and review of decision-making, in the new world of  competitive delivery of government services.

I mentioned at the beginning that I have recently coined the phrase, ‘the democratisation of public  administration’, to describe the massive increase in the number of providers of policy advice and services to  the government and for the government. But, of course, this ‘democratisation’ is not universally welcomed:  many remain cautious about the challenges of delivery of government programmes under contract.

The use of outsourcing by Australian governments is not new. However, its level and scope are growing  markedly. When the Industry Commission released its report Competitive Tendering and Contracting by  Public Sector Agencies in 1996, it noted that gazetted service contracts let by the Commonwealth budget  sector had increased fourfold between 1991-92 and 1994-95. That trend has continued. Since 1996, for  example, the government has undertaken significant outsourcing of information technology services  (estimated to be worth $1.2 to $1.3 billion over five years), labour market programmes (approximately $3  billion over three years) and the delivery of new apprenticeships (approximately $340 million over four  years).

Is outsourcing more effective? In many cases the answer is ‘yes’. I applaud the necessity to test the delivery  of government services in the market and, if there are efficiencies, to contract manage private and  community enterprise rather than deliver programmes directly. However, the public interest does not end  when we develop a model of contracted service delivery that meets the criterion of efficiency, effectiveness  and best practice. We also need to ensure that arrangements are such as to ensure transparency and  accountability in outsourcing arrangements for the delivery of public policy.

Seven years ago I mused about how best the administrative law framework could be applied to outsourced  delivery. I asked to what extent private sector competitors should be subject to an administrative law  framework similar to that which applied to the public service.

Since then, the challenge outsourcing poses for public administration has been the subject of several  reports, including the ARC’s Contracting out of Government Services which concluded that "the contracting  out of government services should not result in a loss or diminution of government accountability or the  ability of members of the public to seek redress where they have been affected by the actions of a contractor  delivering a government service".

The ARC recommended the preservation of accountability and avenues of redress through a mix of public  and private law mechanisms, to allow government agencies and contractors to retain the flexibility they  require in arranging their relationships. At the same time, the ARC thought it necessary to ensure that the  interests of the government agency, the members of the community and the contractors are protected in any  outsourcing arrangement.

I am therefore delighted that the government has recently agreed, in response to a request by the Joint  Parliamentary Committee on Public Accounts and Audit, that the Ombudsman should have jurisdiction to  investigate actions of those Commonwealth contractors providing goods and services to the public. It is an  important and appropriate commitment.

Such scrutiny will help to ensure that an outside agency is able to deliver government services to all  Australians fairly and with probity. One of the most important challenges for Departments is to build into their  contracts for service delivery, arrangements which will ensure providers deliver equitably to all Australians  who are eligible - including people who may not be the easiest customers to reach - for example, the  elderly, people with a disability or Indigenous Australians. This is precisely because, as far as the public  service is concerned, we are not dealing with customers but citizens. This culture needs to be imparted to  delivery agencies. But, let me be blunt, the APS can also learn. Indeed many of the successful outsourced  providers - Mission Australia, the Salvation Army, the Uniting Church and an impressive array of community  advocacy organisations - are successful in tender processes in large measure because of their impressive  history in ensuring access and providing support to disadvantaged Australians.

There is one final thing I want to emphasise. It is very important in situations where there are many partners  involved in the delivery of services to ensure that there is a first-class system of information support and  record-keeping. Good records management is, of course, a pre-requisite for all public servants. It is even  more vital when there are several agencies or entities working together to deliver a government service in a  seamless manner. Well-managed record-keeping provides assurance that administrative processes are  adequate and have integrity. Files need to record significant decisions and processes to ensure that the  decision-making is properly reviewable and subject to effective Parliamentary scrutiny …. and, in the  immediate future, open to the Ombudsman.

Technology

Information technology has in different ways both simplified and complicated public service life. New

technologies have been employed to save time and improve the quality and consistency of our outputs.  However, the sheer quantity of information available through new technologies, most obviously the Internet,  has bombarded public servants. Technology has also sped up the delivery of advice and services. In a world  of real-time policy development, electronic transactions and service delivery by telephone and e-mail, the  need to keep file notes and retain records has become more, not less, important.

One interesting development is the use of automated decision-making or ‘rule-based expert’ systems. This  challenge to traditional public service procedure is currently the subject of an ARC inquiry which tests the  operation of these rule-based systems against administrative law values.

Expert systems are computing systems that, when provided with basic information and a general set of rules  for reasoning and drawing conclusions, can mimic the thought processes of a human expert. They are a  branch of artificial intelligence technology. These systems are already used widely in the APS as decision-making and risk management tools.

Since July 2002, Centrelink has been using a ‘Claims Processing’ expert system to help administer family fax  and child care benefits and maternity allowances. Centrelink also uses a ‘Policy Development’ system that  enables officers to model proposed changes in legislation to determine the impact of changes on different  sections of their customer base. The ATO also extensively uses expert systems.

Some of these systems have also been installed on the Internet to help clients self-assess their situations  and possible entitlements.

Other systems are being used, either in decision-making, or as a policy development and evaluation tool, in  the Departments of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry Australia, Veteran’s Affairs, Health and Ageing and in  Environment Australia.

Expert legal systems have some distinct advantages. Properly administered and employed, they can help to  ensure consistent and accurate decision-making. The decision-maker can be taken through all the elements  necessary to make a proper decision. Additionally, the potential for consideration of irrelevant factors can be  limited, removing opportunity for decision-making that is inadvertently wrong-headed or biased. A statement  of reasons can be generated by the system outlining at every step how information has been employed to  reach a decision, providing a useful tool in reviewing decisions. It can also significantly reduce the costs of  decision-making.

However, the use of these systems also raises challenges. For example, it would be inappropriate for an  expert system to incorporate rules that narrow the discretion available to a decision-maker under a piece of  legislation. Careful system design is crucial. The perceived saving in costs and other benefits offered by an  expert system must not remove discretion from the administrative decision-making process in its desire to  make the ‘legislation fit the system’.

As the ARC has concluded in its Issues Paper, an expert system should be at least as good as the system it  replaces. It should take account of circumstances and not detract from the exercise of discretion or the ability  of human beings to give weight to relevant considerations.

We must also be wary of allowing the use of expert systems to diminish the skills of decision-makers. There  is a danger of turning our decision-makers into data processors or electronic clerks. Corporate knowledge  may be lost if there is an over-reliance on experts systems in decision-making.

Reform of Tribunals

In 1995 the ARC in Better Decisions: Review of Commonwealth Merits Tribunals called for the unification of  existing merits review tribunals into a single tribunal, and emphasised the need for the proposed new tribunal  to adopt informal and flexible procedures. The Australian Law Reform Commission in Managing Justice  noted that Administrative Appeals Tribunal (AAT) cases take longer to finalise than Federal or Family Court  cases.

In 1998, the government decided to amalgamate four merits review tribunals - the Administrative Appeals  Tribunal, the Migration Review Tribunal, the Refugee Review Tribunal and the Social Security Appeals  Tribunal into a new Administrative Review Tribunal (ART). The proposed ART incorporated a number of  structural reforms including a ‘purchaser provider’ funding model, limited rights to legal representation and a  greater use of single-member panels.

The Senate rejected legislation establishing the ART in February 2001. In February 2003, the government

announced it will not seek to reintroduce the ART legislation in the current Parliament.

However, the government remains convinced that the amalgamation of tribunals would provide real benefits  for people seeking administrative review of government decisions, and it will investigate options for  amalgamation in the future.

In the meantime, the government has announced it will undertake ‘sensible reform of the existing tribunals on  an individual basis’. As a starting point, the Attorney-General proposes to reform the AAT, and has  foreshadowed that areas of amendment could include procedures of the tribunal and allowing greater use of  ordinary members.

The AAT performs an important role in providing a fairer and more effective merits review system that strives  to deliver administrative justice to individuals and a high standard of government decision-making. In  announcing the interim reforms, the Attorney-General said that "the AAT must be able to deliver informal,  fast and fair merits review, unfettered by costly and legalistic procedures".

I do not believe there is anything to fear from these proposals. Indeed, many of you will recall that it was  precisely these ideals of informal, fast and accessible review of government decisions that led to the  establishment of the AAT and other elements of the administrative law package in the 1970s.

The APS has responded to constant changes over the past thirty years by its commitment to continuous  improvement in administration. Similar reforms are now being sought for those bodies that review  administrative decisions. In the words of the Attorney-General, "the government’s reforms are aimed at  enabling the AAT to flexibly manage its workload and to ensure that reviews are conducted as efficiently as  possible."

Administrative review bodies, just like the agencies they review, need to ensure that procedures and  workflow management continue to operate in a timely and effective manner. Just as the government and the  public expects APS administration to be efficient, so too the bodies that review administrative decisions  should be expected to look at whether the way they undertake their business could be improved.

Conclusion

We have come a long way in the last 30 years. Changes to administrative law and the public service more  broadly have transformed the way in which the bureaucracy works and significantly increased its productivity.  The quality of public administration has been improved. The public service workplace has, in many ways,  become more rewarding: less hierarchical, more flexible, tolerant and welcoming.

However, I do not wish to suggest that all is for the best in the best of all bureaucracies. That is why it is so  useful for Conferences such as this to reflect on how we can do better and face the challenges ahead. What  are the circumstances in which it might be appropriate to limit judicial review? What policy framework should  apply to the coercive investigative powers of APS agencies? To what extent do the procedural directions of  the AAT and other Review Tribunals need reform?

But as we change the structures and practices of the public service, and as we consider how best to review  the administrative decisions that result, so must we maintain the traditional ethical standards, conduct and  values that underpin public service.

The APS has remained a cornerstone of our democratic way of life for over a century. Look around the  world, consider our region, and you will quickly be persuaded that voting, even in secret and fairly conducted  elections, does not of itself bring democracy to a nation. Nor do Parliaments. Democracy requires an  institutional structure which can foster and protect the decisions which citizens make at the ballot box.  Responsible and representative government requires more than a loyal Parliamentary Opposition, an  independent judiciary and a vigorous and unfettered media. It also requires a professional public service.

Democracy without the rule of law is no freedom. Democracy which fails to guarantee protection to citizens  from the arbitrary exercise of executive power affords no liberty. A professional public administration,  whatever its alleged bureaucratic faults and intrigues, is essential to a democratic society. Forget, for one  moment, political parties, election campaigns, victory speeches and mandates: if the administrative arm  which develops policy options, prepares legislation and delivers programmes for government is one in which  appointments are based on nepotism; in which corruption is endemic; in which services are not provided  equally to all those who are entitled to receive them; in which careers depend upon political patronage; and  in which bureaucrats cannot be held responsible for their failings; then democracy is fatally weakened.

In a profound way, the Australian Public Service has contributed values of profound importance to the  sustenance of democratic culture. The framework of administrative law, and the review and broader scrutiny  of public service decision-making, has helped to maintain these values. Although I am oftentimes not aware  of it, the dog constantly snapping at my heels is my best friend!

Note:

I would like to thank Andra Putnis for her contribution to this speech. My earlier remarks can be found in  AIAL Forum, No 10, 1996

3 July 2003

Return to Media Releases and Speeches

