

Senator Andrew Bartlett  Leader Australian Democrats   Spokesperson for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs    May 13, 2003                        MEDIA RELEASE                              03/307



Children as Young as Four on Anti-Depressants

The Australian Democrats today called for action on the report into the mental health of children in  detention, backed by the University of NSW and the Royal Australian and New Zealand College of  Psychiatrists.

“This is the latest in a series of inquiries, reports and individual assessments by health professionals  which confirm we are facing a crisis in our detention centres,” Democrats’ Leader Senator Andrew  Bartlett said.

“I have been warning of an epidemic of despair within the refugee community for many months.  After visiting Baxter before Easter, I called on the Howard Government to immediately remove  families from detention.

“The rate of family breakdown is at crisis point. Families in a detention environment cannot look  after children because the parents have no control over the events that occur in their lives.

“These families arrive mentally and physically traumatised, and continued detention ensures that  their situation disintegrates.

“The majority of people in detention - including children as young as four-years-old - are taking  anti-depressants.

“Health specialists have been repeatedly ignored by Immigration Minister Philip Ruddock. The  situation is so serious that people have only been released when it is proven that continued detention  would kill them.

“What is happening to people in detention is as devastating as if they had stayed in countries like  Iraq and continued to suffer. After three years in detention their families have broken up, their  mental and often physical health is destroyed.

“It is time that this callous Government realised entering a country in order to seek asylum is not an  offence punishable by death.

“Australia sent our young men and women to war in order to overturn the regimes these people  have fled. Yet, we lock up people whose only crime is to ask for help.”

Senator Bartlett said that he would seek a meeting with legal and health experts to explore ways to  force the Government to meet their legal obligation regarding children in their care.

For interview with Senator Bartlett, please call Katrina Beikoff on 0419 867 649



http://www.democrats.org.au/

