E and OE

9

Downer: I want to announce today the appointment of Trevor Flugge , who is a  very distinguished Western Australian farmer, as the Joint Senior Agricultural  Adviser in Iraq. He'll be jointly holding the position of Senior Adviser with an  American - somebody from the United States Department of Agriculture. And they

will be responsible in the short term for providing advice and assistance to Iraq,  both in terms of the rebuilding of Iraqi agriculture after thirty years of dictatorship,  and also they'll be responsible for ensuring food security and food supply. We're  delighted to have a very senior and experienced Australian play this significant  role. Australia has long-standing involvement in Iraqi agriculture, not only through  providing wheat as we have done for many years, but also we have had dry land  farming projects in Iraq and we've had other substantial involvement over many  years with Iraqi agriculture. So I think Trevor Flugge will be able to play a very  substantial role. He is the former Chairman of the Australian Wheat Board. He's  on a number of boards, including the board of Wesfarmers. So he's a distinguished

businessman, not just a farmer, who's been very active in agripolitics in Australia  over many years. He will go t o  Iraq fairly soon to make an initial assessment of  the needs there. And I know from my own conversations with him in the last  couple of weeks that he's already given a lot of thought t o  what can be done to

help Iraqi agriculture. This is also an area where Australia will be providing  substantial assistance to Iraq. Our aid program is going to focus significantly on  agriculture, but also of course in other areas such as water and sanitation and the  like. But agriculture is going to be a real focus of our aid program, and with Trevor

Flugge jointly being Senior Adviser for the immediate future on agriculture in Iraq,  it gives us an opportunity t o  make a real contribution t o  the rehabilitation of that  country.

Journalist: This is obviously going to be a long-term project. For how long is  Australia prepared to commit someone like this as a resource?

Downer: I don't have an answer to that. We'll have him there for some months  in any case, whether it'll go beyond months I think is a bit questionable. It  certainly won't roll into years, and probably wouldn't be for as long as a year. But  certainly for some months, because Iraq needs to go through a process of  rehabilitation - much more as a result of the long-running and corrupt and evil  dictatorship than as a result of the war, The war itself hasn't done much damage  to Iraqi agriculture - their agriculture is in any case very degraded. The UN

sanctions of course have meant that Iraq's not able to get fertilisers and parts for  tractors and that sort of thing. So there's a lot of work that needs to be done in  those areas as well. It will be a question of Trevor Flugge and his American  counterpart helping to get momentum back into Iraqi agriculture, provide

appropriate advice and they'll have a team of advisers with them, including Roger  Hartley who is a senior public servant from South Australia, and a number of  others. And of course in time the Iraqis themselves will pick up the momentum  created by Trevor Flugge and his American counterpart.

Journalist: Are you concerned by the suggestion of a fundamentalist Shiite  administration arising from the ruins of Iraq?

Downer: No I ' m  not. I think what you'll end up with is a coalition type of  government in Iraq where of course, the Shia will have to be represented but also  Sunnis, Kurds, other minorities - they'll all need t o  be appropriately represented in  the government. So I think what you'll end up with in Iraq is a balanced

government reflecting the complexity of Iraqi society. I don't think having  elections in Iraq where you have a winner takes all result is likely to create great  stability. That's why these arguments that the Iraqis themselves have been putting  forward, not just us but the Iraqis themselves have been putting forward for some

kind of a federal system make a lot of sense. So in the end that is a matter for  them, but a federal system or a federal style system, a power sharing system, is  going to be important in Iraq in order to ensure that no one ethnic group or  religious group completely dominates the country a t  the expense of others.

Journalist: Can we just ask you about the boat carrying 40 Vietnamese asylum  seekers? How concerned are you by reports that it could be on its way to  Australia?

Downer: I don't think it's a matter of great concern but obviously we've been  following this. We have information which came to us I think from media sources  and the like, that there was a boat which had been refuelled and provisioned in  Indonesia and some Indonesians hadn't wanted the boat to land because they were  concerned that the passengers may be carrying SARS. In any case, there is a

rumour that this boat may be heading for Australia, but we certainly don't know  that the boat is heading for Australia. And we've had some discussions over the  last few days with the Indonesians, including with their search and rescue people,  because we have concern that the boat is a very small boat, potentially rather a

leaky and old boat according to those locals in Indonesia who have seen it, so we  have some concern for its safety. But whether it's heading for Australia I think is  uncertain. We just don't know whether it would even be able to get that far,  frankly. By all accounts it would be a major achievement if a little boat like that  could get so far. So the Indonesians are looking into it - the Indonesians as in the  Jakarta Government is looking into it. Some Indonesians have, as I've explained,

have refuelled and provisioned the boat and not allowed it to land, but they were  local people, that was a decision made a t  a local level. And we've had some  discussions over the last few days with the Indonesians and they're looking into it.  We've had very constructive talks with them.

Journalist: Any indications as to where the boat could be, in terms of  su rvei I la nce?

Downer: I think the Indonesians are going to be able to tell you, because I can't  tell you exactly where it is. But I think the Indonesians are satisfied they know  where the boat is, yes.

Journalist: Could you tell us if you would like John Howard to lead the Coalition  into the next election?

Downer: Well, look, he's just done a wonderful job as the Prime Minister. It's in  my experience, and I can remember Prime Ministers back to Robert Menzies,  though I only remember him as a child, but I don't recall ever a Prime Minister  getting stronger the longer he has been in the job and more popular the longer he

has been in the job - more sure footed. But he is absolutely that, and the  feedback I get from people is that they think he's doing a marvellous job. But  equally, he has said that he'll reconsider his future when he reaches his 6 4 t h   birthday, and no doubt he will have some appropriate comments to make either on  that day or sometime before that day. We'll just have to wait and see. But, he

must make these judgements himself. Everybody I think around the country, not  everybody he has his hate-squad, but most people in Australia are very satisfied  with him as the Prime Minister, but if he wishes to retire people will understand  that, and if he wishes to go on they will understand that as well. So it's a question  that he's going to have more to say about it a t  an appropriate time for him - it's

not really for the rest of us.

Journalist: Would you be equally comfortable if say, Peter Costello was at the  helm?

Downer: Peter Costello is an old friend of mine and he's done a fantastic job as  Treasurer. Anybody who for seven years has presided over an economy going  through, first of all the Asian Economic Crisis, and now through very flat global  economic conditions with the economy growing at between 3 and 4 per cent, a t

some stages over 4 per cent, has done a mighty job. And in the end though, this  question of the leadership of the Liberal Party is one that Mr Howard will mull over  at an appropriate time and he'll make a decision on what he wants t o  do and we'll  just wait and see.

Journalist: Can I just ask you about North Korea. I think you indicated on  Sunday that possibly North Korea should be offered aid in exchange for it not to go  ahead with its nuclear program. Do you still stand by that or ...

Downer: Well I stand by what I said two days ago, yes. Let me make the point  here, just to be absolutely clear. North Korea cannot expect the economic  cooperation of the rest of the world, if it goes ahead with its nuclear program. It's  just not going to happen, except for emergency humanitarian aid, and we're one of

the countries that provides that to North Korea, and we continue to do that. But if  North Korea abandons its nuclear program, then its prospects of advancing its  relationships with other countries, including importantly the countries of North-East  Asia, not just the United States or for that matter Australia - will be much

enhanced. And in those circumstances, as Chris Patten made clear also on Sunday,  the European Commissioner, North Korea is going to be able to get more

assistance from the international community. But it won't if it sticks with this  nuclear program, because the one thing the international community has very  much in common, is a desire to ensure that the Korean Peninsular does not become  nuclearised. I f  it does, it creates a very dangerous and a very volatile environment  in North-East Asia. That by the way, means a lot to us, because remember not  only is North-East Asia relatively close to Australia, but the bulk of our trade goes  to North-East Asia and if there is to be a security collapse in North-East Asia that

will have enormous implications here in Australia for people's living standards and  livelihoods and we shouldn't underestimate that. So we have a very substantial  vested interest in there being a successful diplomatic solution to this problem of  North Korea. Now this week, the tri-lateral talks between China, the United States  and North Korea are going to take place. We shouldn't have excessive  expectations about those talks, but the fact of them happening is a very important  step forward. And we're delighted that the talks are going t o  take place. Now  what the outcome will be - I would caution people not to be too optimistic. I think  this is likely to be a long and a tortuous process. But there are signs that  diplomacy is having some impact.

Journalist: Just relating to the aid issue, what's the US stance on this? Aren't  they opposed to any inducements?

Downer: People aren't offering North Korea inducements, but what they're saying  t o  North Korea is that the chances of economic progress for North Korea, in terms  a t  least o f  its engagements with the rest of the world, are zero if it continues to go  down a nuclear path. And this is right. Here is an extraordinarily poor country,  spending vast economic resources which it can ill-afford on nuclearising its military

- whilst at the same time it is unable to feed its own people. You have people in  North Korea who are utterly dependent on the generosity of the international  community, including Australia, just for their survival. You have people in North  Korea who have been reduced to scavenging, in some cases boiling grass in water  in order t o  make soup to get some nutrition. They have a terrible humanitarian  situation there, and the government is spending millions and millions of dollars on  the Yongbyon nuclear plant and apparently on another secret enrichment plant.  And in those circumstances the international community shouldn't be rushing to  them saying, we'll give you anything more than humanitarian aid. But if they

abandon these nuclear programs, then you can imagine the situation where they  would have better opportunities to get assistance from South Korea, from Japan,  from Australia, from the United States and of course, importantly, from the  European Union.

Journalist: What is the Federal Government's attitude be to if the US did decide  t o  oust the North Korean regime?

Downer: Look, what do we think about the North Korean regime? This is a  totalitarian regime. There aren't many left. There are dictators, but there aren't  many totalitarian regimes left in the world. This is one of the two last Stalinist  regimes standing on earth. They're an absolutely ruthless dictatorship. No respect  for human rights. It's all no democracy, appalling record of economic management

- spending all their resources on building up their military. I f  this regime were to  pass on, well it could be replaced by a liberal democratic regime, and we're always  in favour of liberal democratic regimes. But I don't think this sort of theoretical

debate needs an awful lot a t  the moment. I think the important thing to  concentrate on is the discussions that are going to take place in Beijing during the  course of this week, and see if it's possible to talk the North Koreans out of their  nuclear programme. And I think that is the task that lies ahead of us a t  the  moment.

Journalist: I s  Australia now locked into a coalition that threatens to bomb any  country that displeases America?

Downer: No sir, we are not. I don't think America is planning to bomb any  country that displeases it. I think you'd be pretty safe that the Americans are not  going to bomb New Zealand, for example.

Journalist: Illegal boats and the SARS virus. Obviously that's even more of a  concern now with the threat of that. Are you satisfied that Australia can protect  itself from that threat?

Downer: Well I must say I take very seriously the SARS virus. I've been very  disturbed at the large number of cases that have emerged over the last few weeks,  and our travel advisories certainly reflect the concern of the Government and  making sure people do know where SARS outbreaks have taken place, and to  counsel caution to people. On illegal migrants, we always make the point whatever  it's to do with, whether it's to do with health issues or whether it's to do with  security issues, or whatever it may be, that people should have a visa when they  come to Australia. That's the requirement. We have a universal visa system,  except for New Zealand, We have a universal visa system and so when people  come t o  Australia they're expected to apply at the appropriate Australian mission  for a visa, not to try and circumvent our processes and come through the back  door. This story of people on the Vietnamese boat having SARS we absolutely

couldn't confirm. I have no idea - actually I would have thought it was a little less  likely than likely frankly. I would have thought it was highly unlikely, but  nevertheless it's what some people in Indonesia have claimed.

Journalist: How fruitful will your discussions be a t  the conference on people  smuggling in Bali?

Downer: Very good. We've had enormous success with the Indonesians since  towards the end of 2001. And they've done a good job in trying to address the  issue of people smuggling. It's not easy in a country like Indonesia - not dealing  with the same sort of situation as you are in Australia. But they've done a good job

and we appreciate their cooperation. And over this story about the Vietnamese  boat over the last few days, there has been good cooperation with them again, and  they're looking into it and doing what they can. So, I think this second Bali  Conference on People Smuggling, which is a follow-up conference to the one in

February last year, I think it's a great opportunity to just consolidate the work that  we've been doing, of course not just with Indonesia but through the Asia-Pacific  region.

Journalist: I've got a question to ask you about Telstra. We've had concerns  raised by the CPSU today about Telstra outsourcing labour t o  Indian I T  companies

at the expense of South Australian workers. Now I believe in 2001 your  Department produced a paper talking about the possible benefits of outsourcing  labour to India. What are your thoughts on then on what the concerns that have  been raised?

Downer: I'm not familiar with the issue at all in relation to Telstra. I can tell you  absolutely nothing about it. I know nothing about. You'd have to go t o  Richard  Alston. Overall though I'm not a protectionist. I believe in ensuring that we make  the most of the world, not cut ourselves off from the world. And I don't think

cutting ourselves off from India, or cutting ourselves off from South-East Asia or  North-East Asia is going t o  be the best way to pursue Australia's broader economic  interests.

Journalist: Are you concerned though about the use of cheap labour a t  the  expense of Australian jobs?

Downer: I ' d  have to know something about this particular case. It's a sort of  rather tendentious question. I suppose logically one would say that first and  foremost one supports jobs in Australia. But you will destroy jobs in Australia if  you cut Australia off from the rest of the world. I f  you say we're going t o  run a

protectionist system here in Australia. So am I concerned about us reducing our  tariffs over the last twenty years and opening up the Australian economy? And is  that going to produce less jobs? As it turns out that's wrong that argument.  Opening an economy creates more jobs. We've created an enormous number of  jobs in Australia over the last twenty years as a result of reducing protection in this

country. And the kind of 1950's quasi-socialist protectionist model, once very  popular by the way in South America, of cutting yourself off from the rest of the  world and trying to generate an economy just from within - that's the model that  doesn't work. No country has lost large numbers of jobs across its economy as a

result of being an open economy. The more you integrate your economy with the  rest of the world, the more you're an open economy, the more jobs you'll create,  the more prosperous you'll become and the happier people will be.

