









KEVIN RUDD M.P.

MEDIA RELEASE

Shadow Minister for Foreign Affairs

PLEASE EXPLAIN, MR DOWNER



In September 2002 the US Intelligence Agency says Iraq has no chemical weapons  - one month later you tell the Australian people Iraq does have chemical weapons

Alexander Downer now has a huge credibility problem.

The Head of the US Defence Intelligence Agency has confirmed that in September  2002, a DIA report stated it had no concrete information of the existence of chemical  weapons in Iraq.

But barely a month later on 4 November 2002 Alexander Downer, in a formal speech  to the Royal United Services Institute of Australia, stated without qualification that  Iraq did possess chemical weapons. Mr Downer declared:

we know Iraq is still producing chemical and biological weapons, and has endeavoured  to produce nuclear weapons.

Given that Australia, in its intelligence relationship with the United States, would  automatically be in possession of the September 2002 DIA report, Mr Downer must  now tell the Australian people what changed in the four weeks between the DIA’s  report which concluded there was no firm evidence of Iraqi chemical weapons and  his own unequivocal statement that there were.

In a joint press conference with the US Senate Armed Services Committee Chairman  Senator John Warner, the Director of the DIA Admiral Jacoby was asked extensively  about the September 2002 DIA report on Iraqi chemical weapons. Admiral Jacoby  stated:

We could not specifically pin down individual facilities operating as part of the  weapons of mass destruction program, specifically the chemical warfare portion.

Prime Minister Howard and Foreign Minister Downer have denied emphatically that  they in any way exaggerated intelligence reports in their possession on Iraqi WMD  prior to the Iraq war.

Both Mr Howard and Mr Downer stated prior to the war that the single reason for  Australia dispatching troops to Iraq was to eliminate Iraqi WMD - including the  chemical weapons in its possession.







Should there be any doubt about this, Mr Downer again said on 4 April in a 2UE  radio interview:

I certainly think the chemical and probably and biological weapons exist. I don’t think  there's any doubt about that.

Mr Downer and Mr Howard now have an absolute responsibility to commission an  external inquiry into whether their Government in any way exaggerated the  intelligence information in their possession on Iraqi WMD. In Washington there are  now two inquiries under way - one by the House and one by the Senate. In London,  there are also two inquiries under way - one by the House of Commons Foreign  Affairs Committee, the other by the Intelligence and Security Committee.



In the children overboard scandal, John Howard used intelligence information to  justify his claim that asylum seekers had thrown their children into the sea. The onus  is now on John Howard to prove that children overboard tactics have not been  deployed on Iraq as well.

Ends.  8 June 2003



Further information: Kevin Rudd, MP 0418 796 931 or Alister Jordan 0417 605 823













