







JOINT MEDIA RELEASE  THE MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS, ALEXANDER DOWNER   THE MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION, MULTICULTURAL AND  INDIGENOUS AFFAIRS, PHILIP RUDDOCK  THE MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CUSTOMS, SEN. CHRIS ELLISON

28 April 2003



Second Regional Ministerial Conference on People Smuggling,  Trafficking in Persons and Related Transnational Crime

Australia and Indonesia will co-host a second Regional Ministerial Conference on  People Smuggling, Trafficking in Persons and Related Transnational Crime in Bali  from 28 to 30 April.  Foreign Minister Downer will co-host with his Indonesian  counter-part, Dr Hassan Wirajuda.  Senator Ellison, the Minister for Justice and  Customs will accompany Mr Ruddock, the Minister for Immigration and  Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs, who will lead the Australian delegation.

The Government is delighted with Indonesia’s commitment to co-chairing the second  Conference.  This is a reaffirmation of the strength of our bilateral relationship and of  our commitment to working together to tackle serious issues that affect us both.

At the Conference, Australia will be seeking regional endorsement of a forward-looking agenda that will build on the results achieved.  The Conference will take  stock of the significant progress which has been achieved in regional cooperation to  combat people smuggling and other forms of illegal migration since the first regional  Ministerial Conference in Bali in February 2002.  It will also consider the way  forward for cooperation on these issues.

The achievements of the two Ad Hoc Experts’ Groups, that Ministers agreed to  establish at the first Conference, will provide the basis for further cooperative  measures.  Both of the Experts’ Groups have developed Plans of Action which will be  presented to Ministers for their endorsement at the Conference.  The Experts’ Groups  have a strong practical focus.  They have, for example, sought to strengthen  legislation and law enforcement.  They have developed model legislation,  strengthened cooperation between law enforcement agencies and established a  website to facilitate information exchange.

The series of indiscriminate terrorist acts which have been perpetrated in our  neighbourhood since the first Regional Ministerial Conference have only served to  underline the need for tightened border security and strengthened law enforcement.

Ministers and senior officials from approximately 30 countries are expected to attend  the Conference.

Contacts: Chris Kenny  0419206890 (Mr Downer)    Steve Ingram 0419 278 715 (Mr Ruddock)

Mairi Barton (02) 6277 7260 or 0429 300 335 (Senator Ellison)

