

CASTAN CENTRE FOR HUMAN RIGHTS LAW

"HUMAN RIGHTS IN AN AGE OF

TERRORISM"

Paper delivered on 3 June 2003 by Professor Ivan Shearer Challis Professor of International Law,  University of Sydney

The very title of this talk seems to suggest that the observance of  human rights might have to give way to the demands of the  community for protection against acts of terrorism, or that human  rights must be cut down, or modified, in dealing with terrorists.  This is very far from my thesis. The dictum of the Roman  statesman Cicero "silent enim leges inter arma" (1) is often cited  as ancient authority for the proposition that laws are inoperative in  war, but this was intended as a cynical comment more than as a  prescription. If we could truly speak of a "war" against terrorism  today, then the body of laws developed during the 19th and 20th  centuries to govern the conduct of armed conflict, which we now  call international humanitarian law, would have to apply. There are  many connexions and overlaps between that body of law and  human rights law. However, we are not truly concerned with a war.

The term "war against terrorism" was popularised by US President  George W. Bush after the attacks on the World Trade Center, the  Pentagon, and in the air over Pennsylvania on 11 September  2001. The word "war" must be understood in a political and not a  legal sense. Since the advent of the United Nations Charter in  1945 war is no longer a right of states. The use of force must be  restricted to the circumstances allowed under the Charter. To

invoke the term "war" does not in itself give the United States, or  any other country, belligerent rights to attack terrorists wherever  they may be found. The relevant rights must be founded in both  international law and national laws as measures of prevention and  enforcement.

I will examine first the present state of international law with  respect to action against terrorists. Then I shall look at the various  strategies and laws adopted, or in prospect, by Australia and other  countries at the national level. And finally I shall measure these  against the yardstick of human rights law, in particular the  International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.

1. The definition of terrorism in international law

Efforts in the United Nations to achieve by consensus a  comprehensive definition of terrorism have been pursued since  1996. (2) These efforts were accelerated after the events of 11  September 2001, but so far have stumbled over the difficulty of  accommodating liberation movements. In this, as in so much else,  the conflict between Israel and the Palestinians casts a long  shadow. However, the core definition has been agreed. Article 2 of  the Draft Convention provides:

"1. Any person commits an offence within the meaning  of this Convention if that person, by any means,  unlawfully and intentionally, causes: (a) death or serious bodily injury to any person; or (b) serious damage to public or private property,  including a place of public use, a state or government  facility, a public transportation system, an  infrastructure facility, or the environment; or (c) damage to property , places, facilities or systems  referred to in paragraph 1(b) of this article, resulting or  likely to result in major economic loss,

when the purpose of the conduct, by its nature or  context, is to intimidate a population, or to compel a  government or an international organization to do or to  abstain from doing any act."

The essence of the definition is thus that terrorism is committed by  private persons or groups, not acting as lawful combatants in a  situation of armed conflict governed by the Geneva Conventions,  by acts directed at persons or property for a political purpose.  Terrorism may be confined to the territory of a single state, or it  may be directed across international boundaries.

2. International co-operation in the suppression of terrorism

International co-operation in the suppression of crime began with  the systematic practice of extradition in the 19th century. It has  since widened to include measures for mutual assistance in the  provision of evidence and documentation, investigation, and the  tracing of illicit funds. An important feature of extradition treaties  was the exclusion from their application to political offenders. No  state wished to be a party to assisting other states in hunting down  their political opponents; indeed, they might wish to give them  political asylum. However, a problem arose to challenge this  policy, which was based on 19th century liberalism. What if the  means used by offenders with purely political motives were  indiscriminate or caused disproportionate injury to innocent  bystanders? An English case in 1894 tested this issue. A French  anarchist named Meunier escaped to England after committing  two bomb attacks, one on an army barracks, the other on a cafÃ©  crowded with civilians. The court decided that the political offence  exception to extradition did not apply in such a case. The court  held that the offences were not truly political in the sense of a  struggle for power among contending forces; anarchists were the  enemies of all governments and their acts were directed primarily  at the general body of citizens. (3) In the 20th century the Swiss  courts developed a concept of the 'relation of means and  purposes' to apply to applications for extradition of violent political  offenders: if the means used were excessive in relation to the  political ends sought by the offender, the crime ought not to be  regarded as political. In a case where Yugoslavia sought the  extradition of the hijackers of a Yugoslav aircraft, where the  hijackers wished to seek political asylum in Switzerland, the court  held that the political motive and the means used were sufficiently  commensurate 'to excuse, if not justify, the injury to private  property'.(4)

These relatively tolerant attitudes towards political violence could  not survive the advent of aircraft hijackings in the 1960s and the  spread of terrorism towards the end of the century. In the case of  aircraft hijacking the international community was not ready to  abandon altogether the concept of the political offence in  extradition and thus to require in all cases surrender of the  offender to the victim state. Instead, the conventions adopted at  that time, and still in force, invented a convenient way around the  difficulty. They provide that the hijacking, or endangering the  safety, of an aircraft is always an offence, irrespective of motive,  but that the state receiving an offender on its soil has the option of  prosecuting the offender itself if it considers that the offender might  not receive a fair trial in the victim state. This formula "aut dedere  aut punire (judicare)" ("either extradite or punish (prosecute)"),  which is a form of universal jurisdiction since the receiving state in  such circumstances would have no normal territorial or other basis  upon which to assume jurisdiction other than by reason of the  convention, has been adopted in many subsequent conventions,  including the two United Nations conventions on terrorist  bombings and the financing of terrorism of 1998 and 1999, and the  current draft comprehensive terrorism convention, discussed  earlier.

A more radical step might be to declare that all terrorists, as  defined in an international convention yet to come, will face  extradition to the state where their outrages were committed. Such  is the solution already adopted by states parties to the European  Convention on Terrorism adopted in 1977. (5) That convention  removes the political offence exception to extradition in cases  involving hijacking and sabotage of aircraft, hostage taking, crimes  against internationally protected persons, and torture (all as  defined in existing international conventions), and for "an offence  involving the use of a bomb, grenade, rocket, automatic firearm, or  letter or parcel bomb if this use endangers persons." The dangers  for the observance of fair trial safeguards under the European  scheme are largely avoided by the adherence by the same parties  to the European Convention on Human Rights and the compulsory  jurisdiction of the European Court of Human Rights. It is not  possible at present to suggest this model for the international  community as a whole, which lacks such cohesiveness and  similarity of institutions as in Europe.

Under Australian law certain offences have been removed from  the exception of political offenders for the purposes of extradition.  This has been so for some time, and it is not a recent development  in response to new circumstances. The Extradition Act, 1988,  excludes from the definition of "political offence" offences of the  kinds defined by the international conventions relating to hijacking  of aircraft, endangering aircraft in flight, attacks against  internationally protected persons, genocide, hostage-taking, and  torture. These offences have all been incorporated by statute into  Australian law. Moreover, the Act also excludes from the category  of political offences, where regulations applying to particular  countries have been made, attacks on the person of the head of  state or head of government and their families (the "attentat  clause"), and also "an offence constituted by taking or  endangering ...the life of a person, being an offence committed in  circumstances in which such conduct creates a collective danger,  whether direct or indirect, to the lives of other persons...."(6) The  last is as good a brief definition as any of terrorism.

3. Other obstacles to international co-operation in the  suppression of terrorism

The practice of extradition is subject to certain other obstacles,  with implications for the handling of terrorists.

(a) The death penalty

Many states, including Australia, refuse extradition where the  offender would be subject to the death penalty, or make extradition  conditional upon an assurance that the death penalty, if imposed,  will be commuted to a sentence of imprisonment. This presents  particular difficulty for the United States, the law of which provides  for the death penalty for a number of offences, including terrorism.  The giving of an assurance to the state requested to give  extradition of, say, Osama bin Laden, would be a heavy political  price for the United States to pay for bringing him to trial and  sentence. How would one explain it to the people of New York, or  the whole United States, when far less serious offenders are  subject to the death penalty? This question was indirectly  considered recently by the House of Lords in the case of a request

by the United States for the extradition of three men accused of  involvement with Al Quaeda in the bombings of American  embassies in East Africa. (7) The point at issue was whether the  United States had jurisdiction, within the meaning of the bilateral  treaty of extradition between the United States and the United  Kingdom, over offences of an extraterritorial nature. It was decided  that it did have the right to request extradition, since the laws of  the United Kingdom allowed a similarly broad application of its  own laws with respect to terrorism extraterritorially. (8) The point  regarding the seeking of assurances regarding the death penalty  was not argued, but was noted as a matter for the discretion of the  Home Secretary. (9)

The question of extradition to face the death penalty has arisen  before the Human Rights Committee under the International  Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. May a country that has  abolished the death penalty in its own laws extradite to a country  which retains the death penalty? The answer given is that it may,  but the requested state is bound by article 6 of the Covenant to  ensure that the death penalty will not be applied in such a way as  to offend the provisions of article 6 (i.e. be applied in cases other  than the most serious offences, and to pregnant women or  persons under the age of 18 years). (10) Dissenting views in this  case, however, point to possible future developments in which it  may be decided that a state may not do indirectly by extradition  what it may not do directly as an abolitionist state.

(b) Fair trial safeguards

Extradition treaties do not normally contain provisions requiring the  parties to observe accepted standards of fair trial after surrender.  In the past, the very existence of a bilateral treaty has been  regarded as tacit acknowledgment of the respect the parties have  for each other's processes. Doubts have emerged, however, in  recent years where multilateral treaties containing extradition  clauses are open to all states to adhere, some of whose trial  standards are open to question. Such treaties include the hijacking  and hostage-taking conventions and will extend to later  conventions having a relevance to terrorism. Can extradition be  refused in such circumstances? (11)

Since extradition treaties are silent in the matter, requested states  must fall back on their general executive discretion not to extradite  having regard to all the circumstances of the case. For example, if  there is reason to believe that the requested person, if  surrendered, would be liable to torture (12) in the requesting state  or would not receive a fair trial, the Attorney-General has the  discretion under Australian law not to sign the final surrender  warrant. These are matters, however, for the unreviewable  discretion of the Attorney-General, not for the courts. (13) In  relation to the similar discretion vested in the Home Secretary  under the United Kingdom's extradition laws, Lord Scott in a  recent English case remarked:

"The media have, over the past few weeks, carried  reports of the intention of the President of the United  States, acting under emergency executive powers, to  establish military tribunals to try non-US citizens who  are accued of terrorist offences. The offences with  which [the appellants in the present case] are charged  might well be presided over by military personnel, not  judges, will be able to admit evidence that would not  ordinarily be admissible before a criminal court of law,  and will be able to conduct the trial behind closed  doors. The charges against the appellants that have  led to the extradition requests [in the present case]  were laid before the US District Court for the Southern  District of New York. If the appellants are to be  extradited I imagine that they will be tried before that  court or some other Federal Court and not before a  military tribunal that will not need to sit in public and  that need not observe the rules of evidence." (14)

Clearly Lord Scott was firing a shot across the Home Secretary's  bows (which caused another law lord in the case expressly to  dissociate himself from those remarks). (15) Nevertheless they  have real point: it is an unsatisfactory state of affairs to allow so  much discretion to reside in the executive and so little scope for  inquiry by the extradition court. It is much harder for a government  to resist pressures from other governments for surrender when  they have a discretion than if all the essential powers are held by  an independent judiciary.

4. Rights and obligations of national action against terrorists  imposed by international law

(a) Rights

It is a long-standing principle of general international law no state  may allow its territory to be used in order to launch attacks on  other states. That principle even applies to recruiting of forces for  deployment in an internal war of a foreign friendly state. (16) To  allow terrorists to operate from bases or safe havens in a state's  territory is a clear violation of this principle.

When the United States first located Al Qaeda bases in  Afghanistan and Sudan, following the bombing of US embassies in  East Africa, strikes were carried out by missiles against those  bases. The right of self-defence was cited in justification. So far as  is known, no prior warning or demand was given to those states.  However, following the events of 11 September 2001, the United  States expressly directed a demand to the Taliban authorities in  control of the greater part of Afghanistan for the handing over of  Osama bin Laden and his senior officials. The Taliban refused,  and in its statements appeared to endorse and approve the  actions of Al-Qaeda. Thereupon the United States, together with a  number of allies, launched an invasion of Afghanistan with a view  to capturing Al Qaeda personnel. It was clear also that an  important though indirect aim of the invasion was to remove the  Taliban government and allow a more friendly government -  preferably a democratic one - to take its place. These actions were  not endorsed by the United Nations Security Council, nor was  such endorsement sought by the United States. It saw its  justification in the right of self-defence against armed attack,  recognised by article 51 of the United Nations Charter, which  requires no prior authorisation but does require report to the  Security Council and allows for the Security Council to take charge  at an appropriate time (or to condemn). Indeed, a preambular  paragraph of Security Council resolution 1373 (2001), passed  shortly after the events of 11 September, expressly recognised the  right of self-defence against armed attack launched even by non-state entitities, although that in itself was not intended as a warrant  for the invasion of Afghanistan. Professor Yoram Dinstein, writing

before September 2001, presciently imagined such a scenario,  and characterised such an action as a sub-species of self-defence  which he called "extraterritorial law enforcement." (17) The notion  of extraterritorial law enforcement is that the government of a state  that harbours terrorists (or other types of criminals launching  attacks across borders), and which is either unable or unwilling to  take effective action to prevent and punish them, is required to  stand aside while the victim state takes the necessary action. It is  implicit in this notion that the incapable or unwilling government is  not itself the target, although it may suffer "collateral" damage in  the process of law enforcement.

No doubt Professor Dinstein was thinking of "failed states", like  Somalia. But in the case of the Taliban regime in Kabul, the US  went considerably further than the suggested doctrine would allow.  It secured an ouster of the Taliban and the setting in train of a  process leading to a new government. Did this represent a  transition - mid-operation so to speak - from law enforcement to  regime change in order to ensure that the past danger did not  reappear? By reason of the identification by the Taliban with the  cause of Al Quaeda the task of justification by the United States  was made easier: the situation was transformed into a classic  instance of self-defence against an aggressor state. And there is  no doctrine that requires self-defence to stop short of the complete  defeat or submission of the aggressor.

(b) Obligations

The mixed justification of the actions by the United States and its  allies has led to confusion in the status of persons detained in  Afghanistan and in bordering countries, some of whom are now in  special prisons constructed at the US naval station in Guantanamo  Bay, Cuba. Much attention has been given in Australia to the  detention there of two Australian citizens, David Hicks and  Mamdouh Habib. Two questions arise: (i) what is the position of  the detainees under international human rights law, and (ii) what is  their position under the law of armed conflict (international  humanitarian law)?

(i) The relevant provisions of international human  rights law are set out in the International Covenant on

Civil and Political Rights, to which both Australia and  the United States (and 149 other countries) are  parties. Articles 9 and 10 are directly relevant. They  provide that no person shall be subjected to "arbitrary"  (meaning unreasonable) detention and that persons  arrested or detained shall be informed of the charges  against them. They shall moreover be entitled to trial  within a reasonable time, and to have access to a  court to test the lawfulness of their detention. It is clear  that the provisions of the Covenant bind the United  States even in relation to those detainees held at  Guantanamo Bay, Cuba. Although article 2 of the  Covenant obliges each party to respect the Covenant  in relation to individuals "within its territory and subject  to its jurisdiction", it has been held by the Human  Rights Committee that the obligations of the Covenant  apply to parties beyond their strict territorial limits to  anywhere where they exercise control. (18)

On the face of it, the detention of those persons at  Guantanamo Bay in the given circumstances does not  meet the tests of the Covenant in so far as they have  not been charged and have not been brought to trial  within a reasonable time. Efforts to seek habeas  corpus on their behalf have been unavailing as the  United States courts have considered that the war  powers granted to the President by the Congress to  "use all necessary and appropriate force against those  nations, organizations, or persons he determines  planned, authorized, committed, or aided the terrorist  attacks" or "harbored such organizations or persons"  (19) necessarily included the capture and detention of  any forces arrayed against US troops. (20)

(ii) Might alternative justification for the detention be  sought by the United States in the law of armed  conflict, operating as a lex specialis overriding the  general law? (21) The United States is a party to the  Geneva Conventions, 1949 (but not to the Additional  Protocols of 1977). Article 4 of the Third Geneva  Convention defines the categories of persons entitled

to treatment as prisoners of war on capture and thus  also, indirectly, those who are lawful combatants.  Members of the armed forces of any party to the  conflict are lawful combatants and thus entitled to be  treated as prisoners of war, even if they profess  allegiance to a government or an authority not  recognised by the detaining power. (22) This was the  position of the Taliban, whose government was not  recognized by the United States, Australia or any  other state (other than Pakistan) as the government of  Afghanistan. Nevertheless, they had lawful combatant  status under the Convention provided that they carried  their arms openly and wore a distinct uniform or  insignia visible at a distance. (23) It was otherwise  with respect to Al Quaeda forces. The Geneva  Convention requires that members of a "militia", not  being part of the regular armed forces, will be entitled  to lawful combatant and prisoner of war status only if  they are commanded by a person responsible for his  subordinates, have a fixed distinctive sign  recognisable at a distance, carry arms openly, and  conduct their operations in accordance with the laws  and customs of war. (24) Even so, the situation on the  ground in Afghanistan was not absolutely clear cut. To  what extent the Taliban forces distinguished  themselves from the civilian population was not clear,  and to what extent the Taliban and members of Al  Quaeda fought together in certain places was also not  clear. The Convention itself provides an answer in  such cases: "Should any doubt arise as to whether  persons, having committed a belligerent act and  having fallen into the hands of the enemy, belong to  any of the categories enumerated in article 4, such  persons shall enjoy the protection of the present  Convention until such time as their status has been  determined by a competent tribunal." (25)

Reliance was placed on this provision and the lack, so far, of any  action by the US authorities to establish a tribunal to assess the  status of the detainees, in the case of Hamdi v. Rumsfeld (above).  The court held that the Geneva Convention could not be applied

as a rule of US domestic law because its provisions were not self-executing in the sense required by constitutional law. (26)

The situation in Australia is very different. The Geneva  Conventions have been incorporated into Australian law by the  Geneva Conventions Act, 1957, and thus questions of combatant  status, if they were to come before an Australian court, would be  decided according to the Convention. (27)

It is a fundamental principle of international law that a state may  not plead its own domestic law as an excuse for failure to carry out  its international obligations. (28) Thus, the United States owes  duties to other states, including Australia, to have regard to the  Geneva Conventions in the treatment of so-called "battlefield  detainees" by clarifying their status. The Convention is silent,  however, as to how long this determination may be delayed. In the  absence of an express provision reliance should be placed on the  principles of reasonableness and good faith which govern the  discharge of all responsibilities under international law. The time is  fast approaching, if it has not already arrived, that the clarification  of the status of Mr. Hicks and Mr. Habib should be made.

It should be noted, however, that there is no obligation on the  Australian Government, enforceable under Australian law, to  demand the return of Australian citizens held abroad for whatever  reason. International law recognises the right of diplomatic  protection by states of its citizens, and this must be respected by  other states in so far as it is a facet of general diplomatic relations,  and constitutes a basis for the espousal of a claim before an  international tribunal. (29) Appeals may be made on the basis of  international human rights law, or as in this case, also the law of  armed conflict (international humanitarian law). But in the hands of  the national state, whether to exercise the right or not is entirely  discretionary. The national state will in this respect have to weigh  its own assessment of the threat posed by the individual, based  often on secret information, and the delicacy of its relations with  the detaining state, against pressures from the family of the  detainee, the media (30) and from domestic political sources.

5. Australian laws against terrorism

It is important to acknowledge that the impetus for new laws  against terrorism comes as much from an international source as  from domestic constituencies. There are two consequences of  this. First, that the necessity for, and to some extent the drafting of  the particular language employed in Australian laws, derive from  international instruments binding on Australia. The second is that  the powers of the Commonwealth parliament are greatly extended  in this area of legislative competence by reason of the  international source being an "external affair" and as thus  engaging the operation of the external affairs power of the  Constitution (section 51 (xxix).

Very shortly after the events of 11 September 2001 the United  Nations Security Council passed resolution 1373 (2001). It called  upon all members of the United Nations to report, within 90 days,  on the steps they had taken to implement the terms of the  resolution. Some 160 states, including Australia, have done so.  The resolution required that all states take steps to ensure that  "terrorist acts are established as serious offences in domestic laws  and that the punishment duly reflects the seriousness of such  acts." The resolution further obliged states to criminalise the  provision of funds to terrorists, and freeze the financial assets of  persons who commit terrorist acts. The resolution also required  states to review their laws relating to banking practices, arms  control, law enforcement and cooperation in the suppression of  terrorism, and other matters concerned with security. Those  Australians who urged, in May 2002 before the Senate Legal and  Constitutional Legislation Committee, that no new laws were  necessary to combat terrorism overlook the binding nature of the  decisions of the Security Council under article 25 of the UN  Charter. (31)

Australia submitted its report to the UN Counter-Terrorism  Committee, established under resolution 1373, on 21 December  2001. The Australian report stated that the government had  convened task forces to review Australia's systemic and legislative  preparedness to respond to a terrorist attack in Australia and to  freeze any Australian assets of terrorists and their sponsors. It had  legislation in train to achieve these purposes. It also intended to  become a party to the remaining two of the 12 existing  international conventions relevant to terrorism. (32) These laws

will be examined below.

Before doing so, it is worthy of special note, in view of a current  controversy in Australia, that the Special Committee established  under Security Council resolution 1267 (1999) (33) has the power  to proclaim lists of prohibited organisations and corporations,  known to have terrorist connections. The organisations and groups  so listed are banned under Australian law by declarations by the  Minister of Foreign Affairs under the Charter of the United Nations  (Anti-terrorism Measures) Regulations, para. 9(1). (34) The  Hezbollah organisation, active in the Middle East, and supported  by, inter alia, Iran and Syria, has not been listed by the Committee.  There are those in Australia who think it should be banned, and  are calling for special legislation to be passed, on the assumption  that the powers of the Foreign Minister under existing legislation  are confined to what the UN has specifically authorised.  Resolution 1267 also calls upon states to prohibit entry into or  transit through their territory of individuals named in the List. (35)

Australian Anti-Terrorism legislation

Australian legislation has been largely consolidated into  complementary sets of Commonwealth, State and Territory  legislation. In relation to terrorist acts Commonwealth legislation is  contained in the Criminal Code Act, 1995, Divisions 100-103. In so  far as the general corpus of the criminal law is not a federal power  but remains vested in the States, the States have referred their  powers to the Commonwealth under section 51 (xxxvii) of the  Constitution. (36) At the same time the States have enacted their  own legislation on a common pattern so that there are no conflicts  between themselves and the Commonwealth or the other States  and Territories.

The common definition of "terrorist act" adopted in this legislative  scheme comprises acts of violence which cause serious physical  harm to persons or property, or constitute a collective danger,  committed for a political, religious or ideological cause, and  intended to coerce, influence, or intimidate a government, or to  intimidate the public generally. Expressly excluded from the  definition are advocacy, protest, dissent or industrial action which  are not intended to cause serious harm to persons or public

safety. (37)

It is not possible in a paper of this length and with its purpose to  examine the constitutional aspects of the legislation, nor is it  desirable to descend into the detail of the legislation. My purpose  is to examine those aspects of the legislation that might be thought  to give rise to issues of compatibility with international norms of  human rights.

There can be little doubt as to the necessity of legislation against  terrorism. Some have argued that its very existence creates a  climate of fear and lays the groundwork for future repression; that  existing legislation regarding crimes of violence is sufficient. (38)  In my own view focused legislation is both necessary and  desirable to respond adequately to the need, and to embrace  international standards and rules developed under the authority of  the United Nations. (39)

The heart of the matter lies in the exercise of powers by the  authorities against the individual under this legislation. The general  rule of the common law, as amended by statute in varying degrees  among the States and Territories of Australia, is that a person may  not be detained for questioning by police. If arrested on  reasonable suspicion of having committed an offence, the person  may be detained for up to about four hours (with some exceptions)  before being formally charged. The person is not required to  answer questions (except under certain legislation when required  to give name, address and proof of identity.) Anything said before  the warning against self-incrimination is given at the time of arrest  may not be used in evidence against the person. (40)

The powers given to police under the legislation respecting  terrorism so far mentioned does not significantly diminish these  basic protections of the rights of the individual. For example, under  the Terrorism (Police Powers) Act, 2002 (NSW) there is  authorisation to exercise what is termed "special powers". These  powers do not, however, provide for detention without charge, nor  do they extend the period allowed for questioning. The Act  requires that a person who is the subject of an authorisation given  by senior police disclose his or her identity and provide proof. The  Act also provides for extensive powers of search of the person,

vehicles and of premises.

Attention has rightly been focused on a proposed piece of  legislation, which has not yet been enacted: the Australian  Security Intelligence Organisation Legislation Amendment  (Terrorism) Bill, 2002. As originally proposed, the Bill would have  enabled persons suspected by ASIO of having information about a  terrorist offence, and with the concurrence of the Attorney-General, to be held for questioning for considerable periods of  time, as authorised by a warrant issued by a judge, to be held  incommunicado and without access to a lawyer, and required to  answer questions on pain of committing an offence. The Bill  received much criticism. For example, the President of the NSW  Bar Association, Mr. Bret Walker SC, wrote in the press on 6  March 2003:

"From what we know of it so far, this is the genuine  emergency case where detention is authorised for the  purpose of questioning a person who may not be a  criminal suspect, but is thought to have information  which could avert death and destruction. With  appropriate safeguards, this intrusion into our usual  freedom to be left alone and not to be required to  answer questions from the government can easily be  justified. The devil is in the details of any  safeguards....These must surely include an absolute  guarantee that nothing revealed by a person under  compulsory questioning can ever be used to prove  that person's guilt of any other offence. Otherwise, we  should stop beating about the bush and start devising  regulated torture." (41)

The Attorney-General of the Commonwealth has announced  significant amendments to the Bill, including (having regard to Mr.  Walker's last point) that any evidence taken from a detained  person cannot be used against them in prosecution for a terrorism  offence. This is a significant concession, since the right to silence  is not constitutionally protected in Australia as it is in the United  States. (42)

6. Measuring terrorism laws against the International

Covenant on Civil and Political Rights

The International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR)  was adopted in 1966 as one of a trilogy of instruments that makes  up the "International Bill of Rights" (the others being the Universal  Declaration of Human Rights, 1948, and the International  Covenant on Economic Social and Cultural Rights, 1966.) It has  been adhered to by 150 countries, which must submit regular  reports to the Human Rights Committee established under the  Covenant and subject themselves to an examination by that  Committee. Moreover, the First Optional Protocol to the Covenant,  to which Australia and more than 100 other countries have  adhered , allows for a right of individual petition to the Committee  where a person claims a violation of the Covenant which has not  found a remedy after exhausting the processes of domestic law.  (The United States is not a party to the Optional Protocol).

(a) Length of detention for questioning

Under the ASIO Bill, if passed, a person may be  detained for questioning under a warrant for up to 48  hours, which may be extended by a Federal Court  judge for periods of up to a maximum of 7 days. This  does not sit very easily with article 9 (1) of the  Covenant, which requires that "no person shall be  subjected to arbitrary arrest or detention". In the  jurisprudence of the Committee, the word "arbitrary"  means unreasonable. Thus a lengthy detention on  national security grounds requires justification in terms  of its reasonableness and proportionality. The impact  of international terrorism has not yet been specifically  considered by the Human Rights Committee in the  context of the application of article 9. The Committee  has, however, considered the scope for derogation  from the rights under the Covenant in times of national  emergency. This will be considered below. Without  declaring an emergency, a state must justify its  detention in terms consistent with the Covenant. For  example, indefinite detention of asylum seekers under  migration laws has been condemned by the  Committee as incompatible with article 9. This was the

case of A. Australia where the Committee upheld the  complaint of a Cambodian asylum seeker detained for  nearly four years at the time of the complaint. (43) In  1997 the Committee, in its concluding observations on  the periodic report of Peru, criticised the laws under  which persons suspected of terrorism could be placed  in preventive detention for fifteen days, extendable by  another fifteen days, without charge. (44) It is an open  question whether the flexibility of the word "arbitrary"  (reasonable) in article 9 of the Covenant would extend  so far as to enable a lengthy period of detention such  as proposed under the ASIO Bill to be justified.  Justifiability could be tested before the Human Rights  Committee either on a complaint being made to it by  an individual, or in the course of the examination of  Australia's next periodic report (due in 2005). It may  be that the length of the detention is not on its own the  sole relevant factor; the availability of judicial review of  the detention and access to legal assistance would  also come into account.

(b) Access to counsel

Article 14 (3) (b) of the Covenant provides that in the  determination of any criminal charge the person shall  be entitled to "communicate with counsel of his own  choosing". This right of communication is wider than  the right to legal assistance at the trial itself (para. (d))  and has been held by the Committee to apply in cases  of incommunicado detention before charges have  been laid. (45) The ASIO Bill in its present form  proposes that a person detained shall have access to  a "security-cleared" lawyer, except where specific  gorunds exist for denying that right during the first 48  hours of detention. This means that a panel of lawyers  in private practice, each granted appropriate security  clearances, must be established. They will, however,  not be permitted to consult with their clients in private:  contact must be carried out within the hearing of a  "warrant holder", in practice an officer of ASIO. (46)  Questions of reasonableness, having regard to all the

circumstances, also arise here.

7. Derogations from the Covenant in times of emergency

Australia has given no indication to the present time that it  considers that its laws relating to terrorism require any derogation  from its obligations under the Covenant. Presumably Australia  considers that the degree of flexibility inherent in the relevant  provisions would allow Australia's response to pass muster on a  showing of the reasonableness of the measures in all the  circumstances. This contrasts with the action of the United  Kingdom which on 18 December 2001 gave notice of derogation  from article 9(1) of the Covenant in respect of the detention of  foreign nationals intended to be deported form the UK under the  Anti-Terrorism, Crime and Security Act, 2001.

Article 4 of the Covenant allows states parties to take measures  derogating from their obligations under the Covenant "to the extent  strictly required by the exigencies of the situation". These  measures may be taken only during "a time of public emergency  which threatens the life of the nation and the existence of which is  officially proclaimed". Such a state of emergency was officially  proclaimed by the UK following the attacks in the United States of  11 September 2001.

So far, neither Australia nor the United States have made a  proclamation of emergency communicated to the states parties to  the Covenant through the Secretary-General of the United  Nations, as required by article 4(3). There would be an  understandable reluctance to do so, even after such catastrophic  events as those of 11 September 2001, for fear of spreading panic  in the community, or appearing to confess the inability of the  government to take effective measures against terrorists within the  existing law or within theframework of special laws considered by  it to be compatible with the Covenant. The fact that the UK has  done so may be a reflection of the fact that the UK has, in the  past, made declarations of emergency in relation to Northern  Ireland, and to that extent the public is not unused to them.

The fact that article 4(2) lists certain articles of the Covenant as

being non-derogable (e.g. the right to life, and the prohibitions of  torture and slavery), and that the non-derogable articles do not  include articles 9 and 14, considered above, does not mean that  those provisions can be set aside entirely where an emergency is  proclaimed and the derogation communicated to the UN Secretary-General. The Human Rights Committee made an important  pronouncement on this subject in 2001, just prior to the events of  11 September. In General Comment No. 29 on Derogations  During a State of Emergency (47) the Committee explained that:

"...the obligation to limit any derogations to those  strictly required by the exigencies of the situation  reflects the principle of proportionality which is  common to derogation and limitation powers.  Moreover, the mere fact that a permissible derogation  from a specific provision may, of itself, be justified by  the exigencies of the situation does not obviate the  requirement that specific measures taken pursuant to  the derogation must also be shown to be required by  the exigencies of the situation. In practice, this will  ensure that no provision of the Covenant, however  validly derogated from, will be entirely inapplicable to  the behaviour of a state party....The legal obligation to  narrow down all derogations to those strictly required  by the exigencies of the situation establishes for both  states parties and for the Committee a duty to conduct  a careful analysis under each article of the Covenant  based on an objective assessment of the actual  situation". (48)

The Committee also emphasised that measures derogating from  the provisions of the Covenant "must be of an exceptional and  temporary nature". It must be wondered whether, in an age of  terrorism, special measures, if they are of such a nature as to  require formal notification as derogations, could ever be regarded  as "temporary". It is likely that they are here to stay.

8. Conclusions

In my opinion, knee-jerk reactions of horror at restrictions on  certain rights are not helpful to the general cause of human rights

in an age of terrorism. There must be a sober analysis of the  dangers and of the measures necessary to combat them. To a  large extent, we in Australia are more alive than most to the  importance of civil liberties. Our society has benefited from the  common law inheritance that has provided a more effective  protection of those liberties in the past than paper guarantees in  charters of human rights. Perhaps at this stage of our  development a written bill of rights could supplement and enhance  those liberties and to that extent play a useful role. But the right  instincts were planted long ago. In addition we enjoy the benefits  of a free and democratic society, in which the need for special  measures to deal with terrorism can be openly debated.

Nevertheless, while we may feel ourselves to be qualified and  equipped to face these challenges, useful guidance is to be found  in the international standards outlined in this paper. Above all, the  considerations of strict proportionality set out in General Comment  No. 29 of the Human Rights Committee should be taken into  account, and weighed heavily against the objectively assessed  present dangers to our society.



1 Pro Milone oratio, IV, xi. 2 Report of the Ad Hoc Committee Established by General  Assembly Resolution 51/210 of 17 December 1996, General  Assembly, Official Records, 57th Session, Supp. No. 37, U.N.  Doc. A/57/33 (2002). 3 In re Meunier [1894] 2 QB 415. 4 Re Kavic (1952) 19 International Law Reports 371. See also a  similar Swiss case at 34 International Law Reports 143, and an  Austrian case at 28 International Law Reports 343. 5 European Treaty Series No.90. 6 Extradition Act, 1988 (Cth), section 5 "political offence". 7 In re Al-Fawwaz [2002] 1 AC 556. 8 Cf the recent Australian law with extraterritorial application: The  Offences Against Australians Act, 2002, incorporated in the  Criminal Code Act, 1995 (Cth), Division 104. 9 Per Lord Scott of Foscote, [2002] 1 AC 556, at para.121.

10 Kindler v. Canada (470/91), digested in Joseph S., Schultz J.,  & Castan M., The International Covenant on Civil and Political  Rights: Cases, Materials and Commentary (OUP, 2000), 122-128. 11 On this question see Dugard J., and Van den Wyngaert C.,  "Reconciling extradition with human rights", 92 American Journal  of International Law (1998). 12 Extradition Act, 1988 (Cth), section 22 (3)(b). 13 Section 16(1), 22, 23. 14 In re Al-Fawwaz [2002] 1 AC 556, at para. 121. 15 Lord Hutton, at para. 93. 16 This principle is given effect in Australian law by the Crimes  (Foreign Incursions and Recruitment) Act, 1978, which was  enacted first with Rhodesia in mind, then the former Yugoslavia.  17 Dinstein Y., War, Aggression and Self-Defence (3rd ed.,  Cambridge University Press, 2000), xyz 18 Lopez Burgos v. Uruguay (52/79), Joseph, Schultz and Castan,  59. See also the Committee's Concluding Observations on the  periodic report of Belgium in relation to the conduct of Belgian  forces in Somalia: id., 62. See also para. 9 of the draft General  Comment of the Committee on article 2 , which states that article  2(1) "means that a state party must respect and ensure the rights  laid down in the Covenant to anyone within the power or effective  control of that state party, even if not situated within the territory of  that state party": CCPR/C/74/CRP.4/Rev.3 (5 May 2003), available  on www.unhchr.ch/tbs/doc.nsf/  19 Authorization for the Use of Military Force, Pub. L. No. 107-40,  115 Stat. 224 (September 18, 2001). 20 Hamdi v. Rumsfeld US Court of Appeals, 4th Circuit, January 8,  2003. See also Padilla v. Bush ...... 21 It is a general principle of interpretation of international law and  national legal systems that the particular prevails over the general:  generalia specialibus non derogant. In this instance the argument  would be that the narrower categorisation of battlefield detainees  in an armed conflict would have priority over their general  categorisation as persons detained for any reason.  22 Geneva Convention Relative to the Treatment of Prisoners of  War, 1949 (Geneva III), article 4(1), (3). 23 These qualifications are contained in Additional Protocol I  (1977) to the Geneva Conventions, article 44 (3). They are  regarded as confirming customary international law and therefore  are accepted by the United States, even though it is not a party to

Additional Protocol I. 24 Geneva III, article 4(2). 25 Geneva III, article 5. 26 This proposition is of long standing: Foster v. Neilson 2 Pet.  253, per Marshall CJ at 314 (US Supreme Court, 1829). See also  Sei Fuji v. California 242 P. 2d. 617 (Supreme Court of California). 27 For war crimes generally, and crimes against humanity, see the  Criminal Code Act, 1995 (Cth), Chapter 8, Division 268. 28 This is an uncontroversial general principle of international law,  reaffirmed by the International Law Commission of the United  Nations in the Draft Declaration on Rights and Duties of States,  1949, article 13: Yearbook of the International Law Commission,  1949, 286, 288.  29 E.g. The Nottebohm Case (Liechtenstein v. Guatemala),  International Court of Justice, Reports, 1955, 4. 30 E.g. Sydney Morning Herald, editorial, 6 May 2003. 31 Report of the Committee, May 2002, para. 3.3. 32 These two UN conventions, on Terrorist Bombings (1998), and  the Financing of Terrorism (1999), have been since ratified by  Australia and incorporated into domestic law by the Criminal Code  Act, 1995, Divisions 72, 102, 103. 33 This committee was established before 11 September 2001 in  the light of the Financing of Terrorism Convention, 1999. Its  mandate was confirmed and strengthened after that date by  Security Council resolution 1390 (2002). 34 Published in the Commonwealth Gazette, 21 December 2001,  20 March 2002. See also the Criminal Code Act, 1995, Division  102. 35 Presently implemented under Public Interest Criteria 4003 of  the Migration Regulations, 1994. More specific regulations under  the Migration Act 1958 to implement these measures are under  consideration.  36 See e.g. New South Wales: Terrorism (Commonwealth  Powers) Act, 2002. 37 Terrorism (Police Powers) Act, 2002 (NSW), section 3.  Definition of "terrorist act".  (1) In this Act, terrorist act means an action where: (a) the action falls within subsection (2) and does not fall within  subsection (3), and (b) the action is done with the intention of advancing a political,  religious or ideological cause, and

(c) the action is done with the intention of : (i) coercing, or influencing by intimidation, the government of the  Commonwealth or a State, Territory or foreign country, or of part  of a State, Territory or foreign country, or (ii) intimidating the public or a section of the public. (2) Action falls within this subsection if it: (a) causes serious harm that is physical harm to a person, or  (b) causes serious damage to property, or (c) causes a person's death, or  (d) endangers a person's life, other than the life of the person  taking the action, or (e) creates a serious risk to the health or safety of the public or a  section of the public, or (f) seriously interferes with, seriously disrupts, or destroys, an  electronic system including, but not limited to: (i) an information system, or (ii) a telecommunications system, or (iii) a financial system,or (iv) a system used for the delivery of essebtial government  services, or (v) a system used for, or by, an essential public utility, or (vi) a system used for, or by, a transport system. (3) [Action excluded] Action falls within this subsection if it: (a) is advocacy, protest, dissent or industrial action, and (b) is not intended: (i) to cause serious harm that is physical harm to a person, or (ii) to cause a person's death, or (iii) to endanger the life of a person, other than the person taking  the action, or (iv) to create a serious risk to the health or safety of the public or a  section of the public. (4) In this section: (a) a reference to any person or property is a reference to any  person or property wherever situated, within or outside the State  (including within or outside Australia), and (b) a reference to the public includes a reference to the public of  another State or Territory or of a country other than Australia. 38 Report of the Senate Legal and Constitutional Legislation  Committee, May 2002, para. 3.3. 39 For a concurring view see Dr. James Renwick, "The War  against Terrorism, National Security, and the Constitution",

Address to the New South Wales Bar Association, 3 October  2002. 40 The Law Handbook, 8th. ed., 71-75 (Sydney, Redfern Legal  Centre Publishing, 2002). 41 Quoted by Dr. James Renwick, above. 42 United States Constitution, Fifth Amendment. It has recently  been reported that the Supreme Court of the United States has  decided in the case of Martinez v. California, 27 May 2003, that  questioning a suspect after arrest is not unlawful, but that anything  the detainee says cannot be used in evidence against him or her  (although it may be used against other persons). This narrows the  earlier authority Miranda v. Arizona (1966). 43 Case No. 560/93. Joseph, Schultz and Castan, above, 214 44 ibid., 214. 45 Kelly v. Jamaica (537/93); Drescher Caldas v. Uruguay (43/79);  Joseph, Schultz and Castan, 312. 46 Dr. James Renwick, above. 47 HRI/GEN/1/Rev.5/Add.1, 18 April 2001. In this General  Comment, it is evident that the Committee had regard to the  earlier work of two non-governmental groups of experts whose  recommendations are of value. These are the Paris Minimum  Standards of Human Rights Norms in a State of Emergency,  International Law Association, 1984, reprinted in 79 American  Journal of International Law 1072 (1985), and the Siracusa  Principles on Limitation and Derogation Provisions in the  International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, reprinted in 7  Human Rights Quarterly 1 (1985).  48 Id., paras. 4, 6.



Return to Castan Centre Previous Events



Law Home

Monash University ABN 12 377 614 012  Copyright © 1994-2000 Monash  University - Caution  Last Date Modified: 03 July 2003

Privacy

