E and OE

21 May 2003

Minister for Foreign Affairs, Alexander Downer

Commonwealth Ministerial Action Group Press Conference,  London

Reporter: You’re obviously impatient with the Commonwealth.  How much has the situation  in Zimbabwe deteriorated?

Downer: I think the situation in Zimbabwe frankly is just continuing to deteriorate.  You now  have about seven and a half million people suffering from food shortages.  The political  situation frankly isn’t getting any better in Zimbabwe and the Commonwealth has suspended  Zimbabwe from its Councils.  But there is a division of view in the Commonwealth about what  more could be done and the extent to which there needs to be very active engagement with  President Mugabe and senior officials of his party Zanu PF.  You have to take these things into  account.  You can’t act in a multilateral institution like the Commonwealth unless everyone  agrees.  One of the lessons of operating through a very productive and a very constructive  organisation like the Commonwealth is that it is limited always by the need to achieve  consensus.

Question: Everyone has (inaudible)

Downer: Everyone has a veto, yes exactly.  We are concerned about the issue of Zimbabwe  and we frequently raise it.  Of course, for the Commonwealth Ministerial Action Group it’s an  issue that has more or less been taken out of CMAG’s hands and given to the Troika.  From  Australia’s point of view we have succeeded, though, in getting Zimbabwe suspended and the  suspension being extended until the Abuja meeting.  So the next watershed for the  Commonwealth on Zimbabwe is going to be the Abuja meeting.

Question: What (inaudible) Zimbabwe more extreme action to be taken against Zimbabwe?

Downer: You’re reaching a point where any sanctions are going to be pointless because  President Mugabe has taken his own sanctions against his own country.  The economy has  completely collapsed.  There are now queues for fuel and according to my foreign ministerial  colleagues who I’ve been with in the last two days, queues which can last for up to two days  as people wait to get fuel because Zimbabwe can’t afford to import sufficient fuel.  I  mentioned earlier that Zimbabwe’s reached a point with an inflation rate of 220 percent that it  can’t any longer afford to import the ink and paper to print bank notes.  It’s reached a point  where seven and a half million people in Zimbabwe are now suffering from food shortages.  So  sanctions aren’t going to make any difference, particularly economic sanctions.  But I think, in  the end, the neighbouring countries of Zimbabwe are going to be absolutely crucial in putting  more pressure particularly on the government party Zanu PF to fix up this problem.  And in  the end, you’re probably not going to solve the problem for as long as President Mugabe  remains in office.  It’s our view that, in the end, the sooner he stands down and there’s a

transition of power, the better.  The country can get back on its feet.

Question: Which countries do you think have an influence on President Mugabe and which  ones are you in dialogue with, if at all, over that issue?

Downer: Of course we’ve been in dialogue with South Africa and Nigeria, but other countries  in the region have some influence as well.  For example, the President of Malawi was recently  in Harare talking with President Mugabe and the Zimbabwe government about these  problems.  I was pleased that the Presidents of Malawi, South Africa and Nigeria did in the last  three weeks visit Zimbabwe to talk about the issue and to try to find a way through it.  You  don’t expect instant results from these sorts of visits, but I hope that they are a sign that  there is going to be a greater degree of activism from Southern Africa more generally in trying  to solve the problem, because a lot of the onus on influencing Zimbabwe is going to be on  Southern Africa generally.

Question: Mr Downer, I’m interested in your attitude to multilateral organisations in the  sense of dealing with dictators like Robert Mugabe or Saddam Hussein.  It is very phlegmatic  about the idea that anybody could use a veto. You’re talking consensus, yet if  France even  threatens to use its veto in the Security Council, it’s threatening the viability of the  organisation?

Downer: I think the two views by the way are entirely consistent.  Not every country  measures things in the same way, but it’s probably a very Australian way of looking at things.   We look at the efficacy of institutions in terms of outcomes.  The Commonwealth is effective in  a number of different ways, but it hasn’t been effective in solving the problem of Zimbabwe.   It hasn’t solved it.  The problem continues despite the diplomatic language and consensus  statements being put together and so on, but it hasn’t solved it.  In the end the United  Nations Security Council, because it wasn’t possible to get at least an appropriate consensus,  you don’t need a complete consensus of course on the Security Council, but you need nine  votes and you’ve got to avoid one of five vetoes, when it wasn’t possible for it to reach  agreement the United Nations Security Council there wasn’t able to achieve an outcome,  which was the disarmament of Saddam Hussein’s regime, the liberation of the Iraqi people.  It  couldn’t achieve that.  The United Nations Security Council didn’t save 700,000 people in  Rwanda.  The United Nations Security Council didn’t solve the problems of the Balkans.  Now,  having said all that, you’ve got to be hard headed about this.  Sometimes multilateral  institutions can be very effective and you wouldn’t abolish them.  You wouldn’t resign from  them.  You wouldn’t walk away from them.  You can get very good outcomes from multilateral  institutions.  They’re very good for example at aid delivery.  The United Nations did a good job  in East Timor though it was driven by us and we got the outcomes which we wanted.  With the  Commonwealth it’s had its successes as well.  But you need to be aware of the fact that  sometimes they can be successful, these institutions, but also sometimes they can’t.  And  where they can’t be successful that isn’t an excuse to say you’re going to walk away from  your objectives.  We want to see Zimbabwe saved and the Commonwealth isn’t saving  Zimbabwe, but we’re talking bilaterally to countries in Southern Africa and to other countries,  of course, such as the United Kingdom and the United States about what else we can do to try  to put more pressure on President Mugabe.  We did solve the problem of Iraq and it was  regrettable it had to be solved the way it was solved but it was solved.

Question:   On domestic issues closer to home there’s Aceh (inaudible).

Downer: Our Embassy, our Ambassador there has been speaking with the Indonesian  government over the last 24 hours about the issue and of course over quite some period of

time we’ve been engaged with the Indonesians.  Obviously we would want there to be a  peaceful and negotiated resolution to the problem of Aceh, but this is a very long standing and  difficult issue.  We regret the fact that the negotiations have broken down.  We hope that it  will be possible to get those negotiations going again before too long.

Question: (inaudible) West Australia (inaudible) Indonesia.

Downer: That’s more or less what we’re saying.

Question: You may suggest (inaudible) troops (inaudible)Aceh.

Downer: Well, they own Aceh.  Aceh's part of Indonesia like Tasmania is part of Australia.   Indonesian troops are allowed to move around Indonesia.  You can't go to the Indonesian  government and say they can't move their troops into Aceh.  You can say we hope that there  won't be a loss of life or, if there is to be a loss of life, obviously that that will be kept to an  absolute bare minimum.  On the other hand, you can focus a lot on the Indonesian  government, but what about the rebels?  They have used violence.  They have been killing  people in order to achieve their objective of secession from Indonesia.  We are in favour of  Indonesia being able to maintain its territorial integrity.  So it's a difficult issue and we're not  going to walk away from our commitment to Indonesia's territorial integrity.  We hope they  can maintain that in a peaceful way.  But in the end the onus just isn't on the Indonesian  government or the Indonesian military.  The onus is on the secession, it's on rebels, wherever  they may be in Indonesia, to try to negotiate their way through these issues and not to use  violence.  We supported the plans of Jakarta to provide Aceh with special autonomy as they  have been extending to some other parts of Indonesia such as West Papua, Irian jaya, and we  hope that that will in the end prove to be workable.

Question: Is it worrying though that we're seeing the same military tactics being used in  Aceh that we saw in East Timor with the crack down, martial law and now the burning of  villages which was exactly what happened in East Timor when martial law was imposed?

Downer: This is of course in part of Indonesia, Aceh, and where there are rebels within a  country who are resorting to violence to achieve political ends inevitably the authorities are  going to have to try to deal with them as best they can.  That would be the case in any  country regardless of what sort of political system they have.  The important thing though is  always in these circumstances to make sure you do your best to win the hearts and minds of  the local people.  You're not going to be able to win the hearts and minds of the rebels by  definition, particularly if they have resorted to violence to try to achieve their objectives rather  than a negotiated settlement.  But, for the Indonesian military, the additional important  question is going to be how well they handle local communities there that aren't actually  involved in rebellion.  They've got to make sure that they handle them constructively and  well.  You don't want to be drawing analogies the whole time but, in the case of East Timor,  the Dili massacre in 1991 was a real turning point in terms of this whole question of  Indonesian management of East Timor.  My view is that they could have originally won over  the East Timorese people but, when they started to turn on civilians and non combatants,  then inevitably in those circumstances the local people got a little resistant to that.  So, in the  case of Aceh, it's important that they handle civilians, non combatants, people who aren't  rebels, make sure that they look after those people.

Question: So do you see the international solution or is it purely (inaudible)?

Downer: The international community has been trying to help.  Don't forget that.  We've  been providing financial support for the peace monitors who have been in Aceh.  They aren't  Australians but we've been providing financial support to help make their presence possible.   There's been a lot of NGO support in particular but some governmental support for a  settlement in Aceh.  But, look, Aceh is a part of Indonesia.  This isn't an international dispute.   This is an internal dispute and the Indonesians are going to have to try and solve it as best  they can.

Question: So you (inaudible) response (inaudible) UN to mediate?

Downer: In the end it's up to the Indonesians.  I don't think the Indonesians want a United  Nations mediator to come into Indonesia and try to sort out a domestic problem, difficult as  that domestic problem is.  I think they want to try to sort it out themselves.  I suspect that,  you've got to be very careful of political parties when they're in opposition, they'll say  anything.  You've got a situation where the Labour Party tells the government to beat up on  the Indonesians over Aceh on the one hand and, on the other hand, they're always criticising  us for not being close enough to and ingratiating ourselves enough to Jakarta.  And apparently  on the one hand we've got to ingratiate ourselves and grovel to Jakarta and, on the other  hand, we've got to be hammering Indonesians over Aceh or whatever it might be, on  Irianjaya, West Papua.  And this is the world of opposition where you can put forward  completely contradictory positions and hope that the media don't notice that the two positions  don't add up.  Now, Labor's position on this issue just doesn't make any sense.  Our position  is that this is an internal issue for Indonesia.  We accept that.  We hope though that, in  addressing that internal issue, that they'll be able to move back towards a negotiation and  achieve a negotiated outcome and any action that is taken against armed rebels will result in  a minimal number of casualties and that armed rebels, instead of being armed rebels, will lay  down their arms and go back to the negotiating table.

Question: Any update on the Solomon Islands?

Downer: I did most of the talking at the meeting, I suppose by definition because I'm going  to be the one who knows the most about the Solomon Islands.  You can imagine it's not a big  issue on the agendas of a lot of the countries participating.  You look at the list of the  countries participating.  I don't say that critically, it's just inevitable.  I must say I am still  very worried about the situation in the Solomons.  The Australian who was killed was a  missionary and my overwhelming concern is that there is so much violence in the Solomons.   Now last week I met in Canberra with the Police Commissioner in the Solomons Mr Morrow,  who's British, he used to the Chief Superintendent of Manchester before he became Police  Commissioner in the Solomons.  He's a phlegmatic man facing a rather daunting challenge.   His problem is that there aren't enough people in the police force who are loyal.  There aren't  enough people in the police force who take orders.  There aren't enough people in the police  force he can rely on.  And I also during the course of last weekend met with the Prime Minister  of the Solomon Islands.  We had a good talk about this problem and about ways over and  above what we are already doing where we might be able to help them be more effective in  trying to re-establish law and order.  The problem in the Solomon Islands isn't any longer a  problem of inter-ethnic conflict as it was before the Townsville Peace Agreement.  The  problem is a big problem, but it is a problem of law and order and the need to reinforce the  authority of the police, to make sure that there are enough honest cops to do that.

Question: A question of our Thai programme.  They've had a lot of feedback from the Thai  Government that they aren't too happy about the latest travel warning that Australia's put  out.  Was there any specific information that you had that forced Australia to put out a travel

warning to Thailand at this time.

Downer: We have information which causes us concern about possible terrorist attacks in  South- East Asia and we are required to tell Australians if we think that that is a possibility.  I  know they're not very happy about it.  I accept that, but my first priority is to the welfare of  Australians and so I put up with disappointment and sometimes criticism about our travel  advisories.  Our travel advisories have a very good record.  We upgraded our travel advisory  before the Riyadh bombing.  We upgraded our travel advisory before the Mombasa attack.   We have good intelligence.  We have good sources of information.  We discussed that  information with the local authorities.  We urged the local authorities to be decisive in dealing  with these problems.  The more effective countries are in addressing the problem of terrorism,  whatever country it is, the better the travel advisories will be.

Question: But Thailand, in Australia’s view is a possible terrorist target?

Downer: I wouldn't say, you say Thailand in particular, it's not the country in the world what  causes us the greatest concern and we haven't actually upgraded the travel advisory to  Thailand.  We've reissued it and drawn people's attention to it.  But it's a bit of a myth that  we've upgraded the travel advisory.  We haven't.  But we do remain concerned about the  possibility of terrorist attacks.  We must tell people that.  You're sort of in a Catch 22 here if  you don't tell people and there's a terrorist attack.  Then there is uproar, understandably, I  mean entirely acceptable uproar that you've misled your own people and endangered their  lives.  On the other hand, when you do tell people, then people come to you and say but  haven't we offended the local government.  So you have to work out what's the most  important thing to you.  Is it to avoid offending the local government or is it to look after your  own citizens and I can easily answer that question.  The most important thing to us is to look  after the welfare of Australians.  That's our job.  That's what we do.

Question: Is the terrorist risk greater now since the war in Iraq?

Downer: No, I don't think it is.  I think the terrorist risk is less after the war against Iraq.  I  don't think there's any question about that.  The regime of Saddam Hussein aided and abetted  terrorism in many different ways.  We had an Australian killed during the war against Iraq  from the ABC, well he was a contractor to the ABC, killed by a terrorist organisation in Iraq  by  an organisation that has direct links to Al Qaeda.  That organisation cannot operate and  does not operate any longer in Iraq.  Iraq had the regime of Saddam Hussein, gave very  strong financial and physical support to terrorist organisations in the Middle East.  That regime  doesn't exist any more so therefore that support is no longer being provided from Iraq.  So it  has made a difference but that's not to say, nobody ever claimed, that by overthrowing the  regime of Saddam Hussein there would be no more terrorists left on earth.  There are.  And  the war against terrorism, as we've said right from the beginning since soon after September  11, will take a long time but it pays to be assiduous and determined in fighting it.

Question: What do you make of the recent terrorist attacks just in the past several weeks.   Do you think they would have happened anyway?

Downer: Definitely.  They would have been a long time in the planning, particularly when you  bear in mind that there appear to have been suicide bombers involved.  Secondly, when you  look at the targets.  It's very important to look at the targets and the locations of the attacks.   One of the attacks was in Saudi Arabia.  We had information on the possibility of that.  Well,  we think it was the same attack, but we had information on the possibility of an Al Qaeda  attack back in April, late April.  That was reflected in our 1 May travel advisory.  There's no

doubt that this is a typical Al Qaeda style operation.  Al Qaeda wants to overthrow the Saudi  government.  Al Qaeda wants all westerners, foreigners, out of Saudi Arabia.  They want to  establish a Taliban- style regime in Saudi Arabia.  That's why they choose the targets they  choose.  Nothing to do with Iraq.  In the case of Morocco, the targets were a combination of  Jewish and Spanish targets.  It would obviously be a great breakthrough of the world if we  were able very quickly to solve the Israeli/Palestinian issue.  I think the roadmap offers an  excellent opportunity to do that.  I think the very successful military campaign against  Saddam Hussein's regime has been a salutary lesson throughout the Middle East.  I think in  countries like Syria and Iran they have noticed it, not to say the Americans are planning an  attack against these countries, but they have noticed how successful the coalition, particularly  the Americans were and that has led to some changes in attitude.  I'll be in Iran in a few days  time.  I'll get a better sense of how much that's changed attitudes, but there's certainly been  some changes in both Syria and Iran.  That's encouraging.

Question: Is Australia at risk of suicide bombers?

Downer: We'd never say it's not.  Obviously it hasn't happened to us so far.  There hasn't  been a terrorist attack actually within Australia.  We've put every possible reasonable measure  in place to make sure that that doesn't happen.  We have no information that leads us to  believe that's going to happen but I don’t think it would be right for me to say I absolutely  know something is not going to happen.  (Inaudible) I just don't know.  Hopefully we've got in  place sufficient measures.

Question from BBC World Service:

Question: You're heading off to Baghdad soon.  What do you expect to come out of there?

Downer: I think there are some very early signs now that the Administration there is starting  to have some impact and is starting to get things into order but it's early days and there's still  a big job to be done to end the disorder particularly just criminal acts and also some, but not  a lot of resistance coming from Ba'athist and Saddam Hussein loyalists.

Question: Now Australia does have the third largest contingency there.  What role do you see  Australia having in the next phase of development there?

Downer: There are two sort of levels of activity for Australia.  First of all we have our military  involved there.  We have a small number of soldiers in Baghdad and they're basically  providing security and protection for the Australians there and do one or two other tasks as  well but not a lot.  Secondly we have air traffic controllers who are running Baghdad airport.   Thirdly we have people who are doing a part of the weapons inspection work.  We're putting a  lot of money into helping with the rehabilitation of Iraq after particularly ten years of sanctions  and war, more than ten years of war, so there's a lot of rehabilitation to do, particularly  focusing our activities on agriculture but we're helping with the restoration of water and  sewerage services and the like.  So we've got quite a lot of aid workers gradually coming in.   We have an Australian who's the senior adviser on agriculture and there are big issues like  getting in the harvest.  We're getting to harvest time in Iraq, and we're helping with all of  those kinds of issues.  So whether Australia will get contracts out of this, we didn't go into this  for contracts.  No doubt Australian companies will win contracts.  Some have already.  But  that's not what we're in there for.

Question: Just quickly, Aceh is very close to home for you and there's a lot of talk at the

moment about getting ready for an influx of refugees flowing out of Indonesia.  Are you  worried that some of them will hop on boats and head for Australia?

Downer: No, we don't have a history of that.  Aceh has a history of violence and  confrontation but there hasn't been a history of people going on boats from Aceh down to  Australia.  I think that's pretty unlikely.  There is a history of going across to Malaysia.  I'm  sure that is something the Malaysian government is very focused on.

ENDS

