MINISTER FOR COMMUNICATIONS,  INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND THE ARTS

SENATOR RICHARD ALSTON

Speech to the ICT World Forum  Hannover, Germany

Tuesday, 11 March 2003

(Check against delivery)

The transformational effect of ICT -  the real meaning of the new economy

During the heady days of the 1990s technology boom, many commentators around the world got  very excited about the ways in which new technologies were going to transform every aspect of  our lives.

In those days, quite a few people seemed to think:

●     That the internet had in fact changed everything,

●     That the boom would go on forever;

●     That the business cycle was a thing of the past, and

●     That the world could look forward to an uninterrupted tide of prosperity driven by

an ever increasing level of new technology

In the cold light of day in early 2003, we now see that a great deal of this enthusiasm was  misplaced. And that many of the predictions about the impact of new technologies were either  premature, or in some cases just plain wrong. We also see that while the internet has changed  many things, the success or lack of success of internet-based businesses is still determined by  old-fashioned market forces.

It would be tempting to react to all of this by saying that the hype about the new economy was  over-blown and that we should not expect so much from these new technologies. But if we did  so, then we would also be wrong.

History tells us that other new technologies have, in their time, created similar investor-driven  frenzies. Railroads and automobiles are two examples that come to mind.

But does anyone today doubt that railroads and automobiles have gone on to deliver technology-based changes which have transformed society? I think not.

And so it is proving to be with the technologies that drive the new economy. When you strip  away the hype and the disappointment of unrealised expectations following the tech wreck, what  is revealed is a story of increasingly profound change driven by innovation.

Just how important ICT is for productivity improvements and economic growth has been hotly  debated by economists ever since Robert Solow questioned those productivity benefits back in  1987. Now Australia provides a useful case study in this debate, and I would like to explore some  of the background to the Australian case, using it to illustrate some of the transformational  impacts that are being experienced across the world.

My key message today is that the real significance of the information economy lies in its capacity  to both create new forms of economic activity and also in its related - and to my mind much  more important capacity - to transform existing industries; i.e. to re-energise the old economy.

Australia has a long and proud record as an innovator and early adopter of new technologies.  From our early pioneering days, Australia has a strong record of innovation, as shown by our  development of the black-box flight recorder, the cardiac pacemaker and more recently our  major contribution to the development of a wi-fi global standard.

Australia has consistently been at the forefront of the use and development of technologies that  have changed people's lives.

Indeed, the whole of the Australian story - from the adaptation of our indigenous peoples to the  harsh Australian environment, to the successful European settlement in that same environment,  to the development of our highly productive agriculture and mining industries, and then to the  acquisition of our current technological sophistication - has been a story about the capacity of our  peoples to adapt to difficult challenges and to develop the technological and management tools to  overcome those challenges.

This has certainly been reflected in our national experience over more recent years, where there  has been an enormous transformation in the balance of activity in the Australian economy. Ten  years ago the mining, agricultural and manufacturing industries of Australia accounted for 74 per  cent of the stock market value of Australian companies. Now 10 years later finance and services  comprise two-thirds of that stock market value. At the same time we have preserved the best of  our traditional industries. They are still large and important wealth producers, employers and  adders of value. But we have embraced new industries, and more particularly we have embraced  new technology and applied it to all industries.

The Australian Government has played a major role in supporting this process. As I will  demonstrate, we recognised early that we had to introduce a more fiscally responsible regime;  get the economic fundamentals right; and then focus our attention on reforms that would  energise Australia's economy.

Some of this may come as a surprise, as I don't expect that most Europeans or Americans spend  much time thinking about the basic features of the Australian economy.

Let me give you some context. Australia, as the 14th largest economy in the world, is a highly  developed economy about the same size as South Korea.

The economy has been growing consistently at between 3-5% GDP over the last 10 years along  with low inflation. This makes Australia a leading economy in the OECD in terms of sustained  growth over the last decade in fact over the last few years the standout performer. Our

achievement in sustaining that growth rate over the past seven years is all the more remarkable  when you think of how many national economies have faltered in that time.

●     We also have an English-style legal system with enforceable contracts;

●     A rock-solid banking system that is well integrated into world financial markets;

●     A highly skilled workforce and flexible labor market with about 33% of workers now on

flexible contracts;

●     High levels of public investment in public infrastructure, health, education and R&D;

●     Highly developed capital and foreign exchange markets;

●     A modern taxation system with taxes at only about 34% of GDP and with a federal budget

that has been in surplus for 5 out of the last 6 years;

●     An economy that has benefited from a long period of micro-economic reform where the

proceeds of privatisation were applied to reducing government debt, and

●     A Federal Government with a AAA borrowing rating.

The results of Australia's commitment to economic reform are there for all to see. Australia is  clearly an economy where the fundamentals are very strong and where the Government is  committed to building on that strength. Perhaps less well known is Australia's productivity  performance, which has been among the world's best for more than a decade, and which has  provided the foundation for Australia's outstanding growth performance over the 1990s.

The latest OECD report - Economic Survey on Australia - (released March 2003) focuses on how  investment in ICT has been a key contributor to the Australian economic success story. The  report concludes that Australia's investment in ICT contributed almost 0.5% per annum to our  economic growth between 1990 and 1995 rising to almost 0.7% between 1995 and 2001. These  figures point to an outstanding performance in ICT uptake, putting Australia second only to the  United States.

The OECD assessment is that "Spreading the benefits of ICT to the services sectors (such as  banking, finance, insurance) is of particular importance, as these are among the most important  users of ICT. It is in these sectors, not in the ICT sector, that the long-term impacts of ICT use  may be most important. Evidence from the United States and Australia indicates that ICT has  already enabled productivity improvements in some services." In Australia, ICT-using services  contributed over 1.0% to aggregate annual productivity growth between 1996 and 2001, next to  the US at 1.3%. In fact over the whole of the 1990s, our multifactor productivity growth of over  0.7% was second only to Ireland and Finland, and ahead of the United States.

These figures point to the fact that in present day Australia, a new transformation is well  underway. Information and communication technologies (ICT) are transforming the way in which  we do business, the way we work, and the way we play. I know I am preaching to the converted  when I say that these changes are part of a profound transformation that is sweeping the whole  world. As Richard Florida and Martin Keeney said in their 1991 book: The New Age of  Capitalism":

●     "Capitalism is undergoing an epochal transformation...to a new era of 'innovation-

mediated production' where the principal component of value creation, productivity and  economic growth is knowledge."

As I indicated at the outset, some people have recently made the mistake of confusing the  dot.com boom with the Information Economy. The subsequent "tech wreck" has brought out the  doomsayers. But the Information Economy is alive and well. What the Information Economy  involves is a long-term transformation, not a short-term fix. In this regard, it is important to  remember that such developments as railways, wireless radio and motor vehicles were all  associated with share market crashes, which also brought out the doomsayers. But those  developments continued to transform society long after those bubbles had burst, and long after  the doomsayers had moved to other concerns. And so it will be with the Information Economy.

Earlier in my talk I mentioned Professor Solow's 1987 comments contrasting the everyday  productivity experience of the computer-age with its absence from the productivity statistics. In  light of the high productivity experiences of the US, Australia, Finland and other countries in the  1990s, economists now commonly explain the Solow paradox by the delay in the dissemination  of benefits of general purpose technologies such as ICT.

Professor Solow has since modified his view. Some early contributions to this debate were  suspect because of limitations arising from their underlying assumptions and the use of models  which were inadequate to explain the impacts of the diffusion and take-up of technology. In  recent years, attempts have been made to develop models which incorporate the more complex  relationships among the players in the innovation system. Indeed, a broad consensus is  emerging which confirms a much more positive relationship between the diffusion and take-up of  ICT and economic growth.

Australia's experience shows that a strong and sophisticated user community developed through  existing industries and infrastructure will create an innovative community to service this  transformation. This has been particularly true in traditional sectors such as manufacturing,  mining and mineral exploration, transport and agriculture. There are clear examples of how these  sectors have led to the development of innovative export focused Australian companies. It is  clear that the diffusion and the innovative use of ICT is increasingly important not only to the  development of the ICT industry itself, but its key user industries, and hence economic growth  more generally.

Indeed, the OECD has reported that ICT is still driving innovation and growth, and the market for  ICT products is recovering. ICT continues to have a strong impact on performance notably in  traditional sectors such as wholesale and retail trade. Continued productivity growth in the US  suggests that part of the acceleration in productivity growth in the 1990s was structural and  could continue for years to come. Productivity growth in Australia, Canada and Ireland, all  countries characterised by ICT-intensive growth, has also been strong over recent years.

In Australia's case, when we drill down into our productivity performance we find two major  factors at play. First, Australia's great wave of microeconomic reform throughout the 1980s and  1990s (including floating the Australian dollar and competition policy) opened up our economy  and exposed Australian firms to much greater competitive pressures, forcing them to adapt in  order to survive and grow. Second, from the middle of the 1990s, the application of ICT became  increasingly important for reinforcing the productivity growth and economic flexibility which had  first been unleashed by microeconomic reform. This process continues undiminished to this day,  and recent research by Australia's National Office for the Information Economy indicates that  Australia has the potential for still more productivity growth across broad areas of the economy.

This is also likely to hold true for other OECD countries, particularly since a number of these  appear to have reaped comparatively small productivity benefits from ICT to date. It is our view



that as ICT networks become pervasive throughout the OECD business sector they are likely to  enhance productivity and business performance for many years to come. ICT investment is also  likely to increase once world economic recovery gets underway.

And the underlying enabling technology is continuing to develop at a rapid pace in areas such as  artificial intelligence, human-computer interaction, ubiquitous computing and bandwidth, and  very high performance computing through developments in quantum computing. But mere  investment in ICT is not sufficient. Australia's experience suggests that obtaining the benefits of  such investment often requires complementary investments in such areas as skills and  organisational change. ICT does not compensate for poor management, lack of skills or lack of  competition. Moreover, the benefits take time to emerge.

Nevertheless, these changes are very important. We are all becoming increasingly conscious that  information and knowledge are the basis for innovation, economic growth and the creation of  wealth. But of course, this was always true. All economic processes, economic growth, and social  life more generally has depended on the development, codification, transmission and use of  knowledge. It was the slow growth in knowledge which concealed this truth from us. Over the  last few centuries, and in recent decades in particular, we have systematised the development  and exploitation of knowledge. So much so that developed economies are now experiencing a  rapid increase in knowledge intensity of products and services and an explosive development of  the underlying enabling technologies. In particular, ICT is so radically improving our ability to  share, store, transmit and manipulate information at very low cost that it is having a  transformational impact on all aspects of life. ICT is also the driver of innovation and  globalisation, the pace and extent of which is without precedent. The information economy is also  creating flatter organisational structures, networked organisations, virtual organisations, and new  business models. It is providing greater diversity in the sources of information and empowering  consumers and citizens. It is demolishing the tyranny of distance.

The Internet is now playing a key role in this transformation. As PriceWaterhouseCoopers'  Technology Forecast 2000 noted: "In record time, the Internet and the World Wide Web have  become the lifeline of many organisations and the progenitors of a new breed of applications and  brands in areas such as knowledge dissemination and management, communications,  entertainment and the arts, science, medicine, government and education as well as business-to-business and business-to-consumer commerce."

The Australian Government is one of many governments which have realised that our future and  capacity to meet their strategic priorities depends heavily on how well the Information Economy  cultivated. This is one of the most important innovations in centuries and the Australian  Government is working hard to ensure that we adapt well.

Because Australia is such a distant community, with population spread thinly across a huge  continent, we have more to gain from ICT than many other countries. Indeed, our sophisticated  telecommunications network is already transforming our ability to stay in touch cheaply with  each other and with our cousins in the remotest corners of the globe, for example in Europe. Few  here will know that we have been pioneers in distance education, pioneered through our Schools  of the Air that date from the 1920s. Similarly, we have been pioneers of distance health  provision, through our flying doctor services, which also date from the same era.

ICT is enabling us to build a profound new capability on top of those experiences. For example,  broadband-based 'telehealth' services are transforming health care models and enabling a more  effective use of health resources. Broadband-enabled telehealth services such as opthalmology  and radiology are providing a new level of care in places where specialist visits are scarce and  patients have to travel long distances to reach clinics. Broadband connectivity linking general  practitioners, allied health professionals and hospitals will provide greater continuity of patient



care and potentially reduce the number of repeat tests, with significant cost savings. Our  educational services are also exploring the benefits of broadband. For example, the South  Australian School of the Air has piloted a broadband program to provide a virtual classroom for  isolated children who currently use two-way radio facilities. The improved quality of the  communications experience has enormously improved interaction and created the feeling and  benefits of being in a real classroom.

More broadly, there is no doubt that the new ways of communicating and exchanging information  online are transforming Australian communities. Highly networked communities are finding that  local social capital and economic development work in tandem. As the technological and skills  base grows, a support base is provided for local industries as well as a stimulus for developing  new applications and services. These so-called "smart" communities, or learning communities,  are using ICT to empower residents, institutions and regions as a whole. Communities that take  advantage of these new technologies are creating jobs and economic growth as well as improving  the overall quality of life of their citizens.

These have been just a few examples of the wide range of experiments underway in the  application of ICT to day-to-day problems. Not all such experiments are going to work out, but  across the entire Australian economy, industry sectors as diverse as banking, insurance, finance,  mining, wine and government services are reaping the benefits of integrating ICT into their  business processes - benefits illustrated by increased productivity, efficiency and exports.

ICT is also making a major contribution to the management of the Australian environment.  Australia has a diverse ecosystem, from tropical and cool temperate rainforests to deserts. It has  a maritime economic zone which is larger than our continent in area, while our agricultural lands  are greater than the landmass of Western Europe. This diversity and scale gives rise to  substantial, large scale environmental and land management issues. Satellite data, high  performance computers, complex modelling software, wireless data collection and a diverse  range of other software and ICT hardware are key building blocks to forecasting our weather, to  investigating our salinity problems and to improving agricultural production processes. The latter  application includes GPS-guided tractor systems to micro-climate management in vineyards and  animal tagging.

Don't just take my word for it. Our effective adaptation to ICT is verified by the OECD. In The  New Economy, Beyond the Hype (2001), the OECD confirmed that ICT is a key input to  productivity and growth performance. The OECD's subsequent analysis has shown that Australia  stands out in terms of its adaptation to the Information Economy, across all of the indicators  used by the OECD. There continue to be marked differences in ICT diffusion across OECD  countries.

There are a few other countries also doing well, but none are doing significantly better than  Australia. The OECD Economic Survey on Australia concludes that "in the middle of 2002, the  current economic expansion completed its eleventh year, with GDP growth averaging 3.6%, thus  exceeding the average growth performance of OECD countries by more than one percentage  point." There are many other developed countries whose adaptation to the Information Economy  is a good deal behind our own. And it is this good Australian performance that is partly  responsible for Australia's very strong growth performance in recent years. By way of illustration,  let me give you some key indicators of our adoption of the Internet: As at June 2002:

●     72% of adult persons (16 years and over) have accessed the Internet. This ranks Australia

third in the world , only behind Sweden and the US;

●     54% of Australian households have Internet access at home, ranking us in the top 5

countries in terms of household penetration;

●     72% of all businesses were online;

●     24% of all businesses had a web presence;

●     The value of Internet e-commerce is estimated to be A$11.3 billion;

●     57% of online businesses accessed government services online;

●     86% of online businesses accessed the Internet via dial-up services, 6% via cable modem,

4% via ISDN, 1% via DSL, 1% wireless access, 1% other high speed services, and

●     In January 2003, 32% of home Internet users accessed government services online.

Back in 1997, we set ourselves the goal of putting all of the Commonwealth Government's  services online. That goal has been achieved in full. We now have 1,665 individual  Commonwealth services and agencies which are fully online.

But to build on this great start, we need to extend the availability of broadband across our  continent. Broadband, itself, is just an enabling technology. Its power lies in its transformational  potential - what it allows people to do and how it allows them to do it. It becomes a catalyst for  structural and systemic change both at the enterprise level and at the sectoral level. Online  access is already changing how people work and learn, conduct business and access  entertainment. Broadband will do much more than simply allow people to do all of this faster.  Broadband technologies make possible many networked communications that are not possible  with first generation Internet technologies. In particular, the always-on capability of broadband  makes it practical and workable for people to use the Internet in their everyday activities. This  will change the way that people think of the technologies and makes it possible to change work  practices.

Broadband take-up in Australia has already increased dramatically in recent years - up by 162  per cent between 31 July 2001 and 30 September 2002. Broadband take-up is expected to grow  strongly over the next few years and IDC predicts that Australia's broadband market will grow to  more than 3.5 million subscribers by 2006, equivalent to around 50% of households. This puts  Australia on track to be a leading broadband nation. Increasing this take-up still further,  particularly in remote localities, is a great policy challenge, and it is one we are examining very  closely at the moment. Last year, we appointed a Broadband Advisory Group (BAG) to assist me  in this task and that group reported in January of this year. What we want is a competitive,  technology-neutral regulatory environment to encourage investment in Broadband. Key  stakeholders including industry, state governments, and members of the public have contributed  to these deliberations. Recognising the important role broadband connectivity can play in using  scarce specialist services, the Broadband Advisory Group has recommended a series of measures  to improve connectivity in the health and education sectors. In particular, the group has  recommended a National Broadband Strategy to coordinate investment in these sectors and  address infrastructure gaps, particularly in rural and regional areas.

We have already implemented almost $US 100 million in initiatives that will drive demand for  broadband, including: a National Communications Fund, for regional high-speed applications in  health and education; an Advanced Networks Program; the establishment of an Australian  Research Education Network for higher education institutions; online schools curriculum; and a  Broadband Development Fund administered by the Australian Film Commission.

Regardless of bandwidth, Australians are already taking to the Web like fish to water. This says  something very important about contemporary Australians - we have not lost our adaptability.  We are still very open to new ideas and new opportunities. We are very innovative. And you can  see this in the way which we have changed so radically in the last 50 years. We have built a  distinctive Australian society on what were British roots, by embracing large numbers of  European and Asian refugees and migrants. These changes have enriched us culturally and  economically.

This adaptability gives us a head start. As the Word Bank's recent Report: Innovative East Asia:  The Future of Growth says, the future rests not only on sound policies and good institutions, but  on the emergence of an environment that promotes innovation. And I would add that this  promotion of innovation involves a willingness to experiment pragmatically with organisational  arrangements and with policy settings. In any event, Australia already provides all of the  institutional and policy environments recommended by that Report. And innovation is a policy  thrust that the Australian Government has been pushing very vigorously indeed.

Australia is not just an exciting place to visit. It is an exciting place to be, it is an exciting place  to invest and a safe place to live. And it is a great and inexpensive place to do R&D.

Everyone in this audience will be aware of how R&D underpins the transformational impact of  ICT. You may not be aware, however, of the fact that Australia's key role in exciting new fields  like smart cards, fixed and mobile wireless communications, photonics, quantum computing, e-security and a range of advanced software applications. Australia recognises that it must focus its  capacities and aim to be world's-best in selected areas. In setting its own priorities, the European  Community has recognised that there are some areas of research where it is not globally  competitive. Similarly, the Australian Government recognises that as a smaller advanced  economy there is no choice but to be selective and to establish priorities. And that is what we are  doing.

Australia historically has not been a large producer of IT equipment. Indeed, the OECD uses  Australia as an example of a country that has achieved high productivity gains without a large  ICT producing sector. Nevertheless, we still are sophisticated users of ICT and while we buy most  of our computers from our trading partners, we are sophisticated producers of niche ICT  products.

The world is moving on, and the nature of ICT production is changing. Increasingly, ICT is being  embedded in other products and services, and Australia is getting its share of this kind of  production. This has the effect of rendering the crude distinction between ICT production and use  something of a misunderstanding. But let me assure you, lest there be any misunderstanding, we  want to get our share of new high value added production opportunities in ICT. We recognise that  a healthy, growing ICT sector can contribute to productivity growth. But what we want is a  vibrant, globally competitive industry which has international recognition.

In particular, we don't want to compete head-on with established producers of high- volume low-margin commodity ICT products. We have plenty of other commodity production already, where  we are technological leaders and where we are highly competitive. This is why Australia is active  in pursuing a level playing field in global trade in agriculture. We do not wish to waste resources  by buying our way into commodity production in ICT. Nevertheless, we are putting a great deal  of effort into moving up the value chain, but in a way that is responsive to the market system  and the international trading system.

The Commonwealth Government in conjunction with the ICT sector, wider industry, and the  research and educational community has recently undertaken a comprehensive analysis of the  Australian ICT sector and the scope for further development in the light of trends in the

development of the industry globally. This process is assisting us in developing a framework for  the future of the Australian ICT industry. As a first step we have recently enhanced our efforts to  attract direct foreign investment in priority technology areas including ICT. Consequently, we are  prepared to compete for direct foreign investment in areas which complement our existing  capabilities and which extend those capabilities in a sensible way. We have a lot to offer such  investors. So if you are looking for a new investment location, particularly in the Asian time zone,  check us out. Talk to Invest Australia.

Let me emphasise again - the Australian Government, like most OECD countries has got the  message that investment in education, in R&D and in innovation are keys to our long-term  prosperity. We are acting on that insight. Indeed, our initiatives in these areas are among the  present Government's proudest achievements. This is the reason we are pushing the e-transformation agenda so hard. But we are also pushing R&D very hard. Australia has provided  generous taxation treatment for R&D expenditure broadly defined for some considerable time.  We have improved that taxation treatment still further, by providing a 175% deduction for  incremental R&D. We are even allowing smaller companies to cash out these benefits. Indeed, we  recently made an unprecedented additional direct commitment to R&D through a $3 billion  innovation action plan, Backing Australia's Ability. Its central objective is to support innovation  focussed on high value adding areas in key priority sectors leading to its effective  commercialisation and diffusion.

The establishment of a world-class ICT Centre of Excellence is a major element of this action  plan. The Centre will build a critical mass of ICT research capacity in Australia, exploit Australia's  research strengths, attract world-class researchers and establish a focal point for innovation in  Australia. Another important initiative has been our decision to change the tax treatment of  foreign investment in Australian Venture Capital. Most foreign institutional investors, who are  active in venture capital investments, can now receive the same tax treatment as US institutional  investors have received i.e. a zero rate on the capital gains made on the sale of venture capital  investments. We have also changed our taxation laws to provide a more familiar investment  vehicle, a venture capital limited partnership, for such purposes.

Tomorrow I have the honour, together with German Federal Minister fro Education and Research,  Ms Edelgard Bulmahn, of opening future parc at CEBIT. It is at this event that the Australian  Government will be officially launching a new technology investment attraction and promotion  initiative - the Technology Australia brand by Invest Australia. The focus for Australia's  promotional activities at CeBIT will be on innovative ICT sectors where Australia has a  demonstrated competitive advantage: photonics, wireless communications, e-Security, IT  Services and regional support, software development and electronic gaming. These efforts will  demonstrate the considerable R&D expertise that Australia has in each of these areas.

I could go on and give you a catalogue of other policies and programs which are intended to  improve our innovation system and our adaptation to the Information Economy. But that is not  my main purpose here. Rather I want to emphasise how important innovation and the ICT  transformation is to all countries. This transformation is one of the most significant to have  occurred in historical times, rivalling the invention of printing and the spread of literacy in the  scale of importance. It is a transformation that impinges on the whole of life, not simply certain  specialised sectors. The real meaning of the new economy is not to be found in those specialised  sectors alone, but in all the sectors of the economy, including the sectors characterised as the  old.

In conclusion,let me remind you that Australia is a nation that identifies itself very strongly with  the great liberal democratic tradition. It is nation uniquely placed in the Asian-Pacific region,  which is being steadily enriched by its relationship with that region, but also a nation that has  very deep roots in Europe. You'll find a modern, thriving, innovative nation. You'll find a nation  with a strong and growing economy. A nation which over the last 20 years has undertaken major

changes and reforms to her economy which have enabled Australians to withstand the buffeting  and the shocks of major economic downturns. You'll find a nation whose growth prospects in the  year 2003 are better than most. You will find a nation rapidly adapting to the opportunities and  challenges posed by the Information Economy. You will not simply find a new economy, but also  an Old Economy being transformed by ICT.

