Gary Hardgrave MP   Minister for Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs

Media Release H66/2003 - 23 May 2003



New Contracts for Migrant English Language Tuition

The Minister for Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs, Gary Hardgrave, today announced the  awarding of a contract that will provide English language tuition to over 2,000 migrants and  refugees in the North Melbourne area.

The contract, between the Department of Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous  Affairs and the Northern AMEP Consortium, represents a commitment on behalf of the  Commonwealth of $15 million over five years, beginning 1 July 2003.

It will deliver English language tuition to migrants from 87 countries and 76 language  backgrounds.

Nationally, the Federal Government has allocated more than $500 million over the next five  years to the Adult Migrant English Program (AMEP), including $114 million in the next  financial year.

Speaking at the contract launch ceremony, Mr Hardgrave said that the new contract would  help thousands of migrants and refugees on their journey to successful settlement in  Australia.

"The Adult Migrant English Program is a vital component of the Government's commitment  to 'nation building,' community harmony and cohesion," Mr Hardgrave said.

"It represents a significant investment by the Commonwealth in ensuring that new arrivals  have every opportunity to take up their entitlement to learn our national language, and so  take the first and most important step towards full participation in Australian society," he  said.

The Northern AMEP consortium comprises six significant providers of English as a second  language tuition, vocational education and training, community, adult and higher education  in the North Melbourne region:

●     the Northern Melbourne Institute of TAFE (lead agency)

●     RMIT University

●     Glenroy Neighbourhood Learning Centre

●     Moreland Adult Education

●     Olympic Adult Education

●     Preston, Reservoir and Adult Community Education.

"One of the most pleasing aspects of this consortium arrangement is that it provides a range  of learning options tailored to the new and emerging settlement patterns and client profiles of

arrivals in this region," said Mr Hardgrave.

"It ensures that wherever AMEP clients live and work, and whatever their personal  circumstances and learning preferences, they will be able to find tuition appropriate to their  needs."

Media contact: Amanda Lynch 0419 123 862

