Media  Release







SENATOR THE HON. CHRISTOPHER ELLISON



Minister for Justice and Customs

Senator for Western Australia



E144/03           10 October 2003



Alleged SIEV-X people smuggler to be extradited from Sweden

The Minister for Justice and Customs, Senator Chris Ellison, today welcomed the decision by the Swedish  Government to extradite alleged people smuggler, Khaleed Shnayf Daoed, to Australia.

Daoed, an Iraqi national, is alleged to have played an important role in a people-smuggling operation that  attempted to bring people to Australia aboard the vessel known as ‘SIEV-X’.  The vessel sank in October  2001 during its voyage to Australia and approximately 353 people lost their lives.

Daoed is also alleged to have played an important role in arranging the voyage of another vessel which  brought 147 illegal immigrants to Australia on 4 August 2001.  He will face 13 charges under the Migration  Act in Australia for his alleged people-smuggling activities and, if convicted, he could face up to 20 years’  imprisonment.

Australia has previously successfully extradited two other alleged people smugglers, Ali Al Jenabi and  Hasan Ayoub, from Thailand in respect of other matters.

“The recent successful extraditions to Australia and Abu Quassey’s prosecution demonstrate the  Government’s continued commitment to bringing alleged people smugglers to justice,” Senator Ellison  said.

“I welcome the news that the Swedish Government has decided to grant Australia’s request for the  extradition of Daoed,” he said.  “I am not aware of any avenues for appeal of this decision.”

“The Australian Government is grateful for the cooperation shown by the Swedish authorities in this  matter.”

Arrangements are being made to have Daoed escorted to Australia as soon as possible.

“This arrest is the result of a long and successful investigation by the joint Australian Federal Police (AFP)  and Department of Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs (DIMIA) People Smuggling  Strike Team,” Senator Ellison said.

The Australian Federal Police and DIMIA continue to work hard to pursue those who organise and  facilitate the practice of people-smuggling - wherever they are in the world - and the Australian government  will take all steps possible to ensure these people are returned to Australia to face prosecution.

Senator Ellison said in this case the AFP has worked collaboratively with the Swedish National Police  through the AFP's international network.”

Abu Quassey, another of the alleged organisers of the SIEV-X, is being prosecuted in Egypt in connection  with his alleged people-smuggling activities.  Australia is assisting the Egyptian authorities with his  prosecution.

Media inquiries: Simon Troeth    Ph 02/6277 7260 or 0439 300 335

