

Senator Andrew Bartlett   Leader of the Australian Democrats                                    Spokesperson on Immigration

April 16, 2003                      MEDIA RELEASE                                      03/236

Howard Government Should Pay  Compensation to Detainees for Suffering

The Australian Democrats today said the Howard Government continually detaining asylum seekers  created the prospect of having to pay compensation for the mental and physical ill health caused by long  term detention.

Democrats’ Leader Senator Andrew Bartlett said Australia had shown no respect for the human rights  of Iraqis in mandatory detention, yet was attempting to advise Iraqis on the rebuilding and the instituting  of a democratic system in their battle scarred nation.

“John Howard claims he is attempting to liberate the Iraqi people, yet in our own backyard he treats  those who have fled the atrocities of Saddam Hussein with such inhumanity he leaves them locked in  prison-like conditions,” Senator Bartlett said.

“The Howard Government’s hypocrisy has been highlighted in a stinging attack on his mandatory  detention policy by leading Iraqi political figure, Sheikh Sayed Jamaluddin, who said in Iraq that  Australia should not be telling post-war Iraq how to build democracy while they have Iraqi refugees  kept in prisons.”

Senator Bartlett said the full Federal Court finding yesterday that it was illegal to indefinitely detain  asylum seekers who had exhausted their refugee claims but could not return home, was a massive blow  to the Howard Government’s heartless refugee policy.

“This decision clearly undermines Immigration Minister Philip Ruddock’s practice of deliberately  keeping people in mandatory detention as a warning for other overseas asylum seekers.

“Almost all the people who remain in detention have been there for more than 18 months because they  cannot be removed to the countries they have fled.

“In some cases people want to go home but cannot - the country they have fled simply refuses to accept  them.  Continuing to detain a person under those circumstances is granting a potential life sentence to a  person who came to Australia seeking protection.”

Senator Bartlett said Mr Ruddock and his Department had to be called to account for their inhumane  and legally unacceptable behaviour.

“Philip Ruddock has adopted a gulag mentality whereby every migrant and asylum seeker is treated as a  criminal.  “It  is  Mr  Ruddock  who  refuses  to  accept  court  decisions  and  costs  the  Australian  public  money  by   repeatedly  appealing  against  them.   In  the  past  the  Government  has  also  tried  to  change  the  law   whenever it loses in the courts, but the Democrats believe there is little chance the Senate will allow that  to happen this time.”  For interview with Senator Bartlett, please call Katrina Beikoff on 0419 867 649



http://www.democrats.org.au/

