Media  Release







SENATOR THE HON. CHRISTOPHER ELLISON



Minister for Justice and Customs

Senator for Western Australia



E102/04              28  July  2004



McClelland ignorant on Coastwatch funding

Today’s announcement of Coastwatch surveillance contract extensions will see Coastwatch funding  maintained at current levels, the Minister for Justice and Customs, Senator Chris Ellison, said today.

Mr McClelland has not let the facts get in the way of his rush to undermine the Government’s tough  and effective approach to border protection.

Mr McClelland’s confused claim that there has been a “concerning reduction” in surveillance funding  conveniently overlooks the fact that today’s announcement relates to only nine out of 17 Coastwatch  aircraft.

Contracts for eight of the Coastwatch aircraft (with a value of $23.7 million) have already been  extended to 30 June 2007, and the new contracts announced today (with a value of $135 million) will  extend the surveillance programs for the remaining nine until the same date.

Only two months ago Mr McClelland received a briefing from Coastwatch on their operations  including discussion on the value of the contracts, and extension provisions.

The only political party proposing cuts in the area of border protection is Labor, with their Coastguard  proposal scaled back from $895 million (in October 2001) to $612 million (in November 2002) to $500  million (an unfunded costing estimate announced by Mr McClelland when launching Labor’s fourth  attempt at a Coastguard policy in just three years on 30 June this year).

Coastwatch and Customs are doing a great job protecting Australia’s borders from illicit drugs, illegal  arrivals, disease and other threats to our nation’s welfare.

The Howard Government’s strong stand on border protection is helping to protect, secure and build  Australia’s future.

Mr McClelland should focus on getting his facts right, rather than scuttling about parading his  ignorance of Australia’s border protection funding arrangements.

Media Inquiries:  Simon Troeth (02) 6277 7260/(0439) 300 335

http://www.ag.gov.au/www/justiceministerHome.nsf







