Senator Amanda Vanstone  MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AND INDIGENOUS AFFAIRS

Media Centre

Further Decisions Handed Down on Nauru

VPS 76/2004

The Australian Government today announced a further 39 Afghan asylum seekers on Nauru had been granted refugee status.

Minister for Immigration, Amanda Vanstone, said the decisions were handed down on Nauru yesterday and all 39 would be offered resettlement in  Australia.

'This takes to 131 the number of Afghan asylum seekers on Nauru who have been granted refugee status over the past week since I announced the  first decisions on Friday 14th May,' Senator Vanstone said.

'The decision to grant refugee status reflects the commitment I gave late last year to review the cases of the Afghan asylum seekers, in light of the  UNHCR's advice concerning changed conditions in parts of Afghanistan.'

The Minister said eight people had been advised today that they did not meet the criteria for refugee status.

'All those granted refugee status would continue to be provided accommodation, food, clothing and medical care while arrangements are made for  resettlement, expected within the next few weeks,' the Minister said.

'Of the decisions handed down this morning, 25 relate to men, seven to women and 15 to children.

'The approvals today take to a total of 61 men, 19 women and 51 children, including 3 unaccompanied minors, granted refugee status since 14  May.

'There are 25 Afghans or people claiming to be Afghans remaining on Nauru. Decisions on those cases will be handed down in the near future.

'Departmental officials on Nauru are working with individuals granted refugee status towards resettlement. It's expected the first resettlements will  begin in the coming weeks.'

23 May 2004

See: Index of Media Releases

| Home | Search | Links | Copyright & Disclaimer | Privacy | Site Map | Immigration Department |

URL: http://www.minister.immi.gov.au /media_releases/media04/v04076.htm  Last update: 24 May 2004 at 16:44 AEST

