

FEDERAL LABOR LEADER

TRANSCRIPT OF DOORSTOP - ACTU MEETING, SYDNEY

Subjects:   ACTU meeting, Federal Budget; Athens; detention centres;  Science package

LATHAM: Thanks for coming along. I'm here today with Craig Emerson our  Shadow Minister for Workplace Relations to brief the ACTU executive on Labor's  policies for working families and to encourage their support for our strategy.



Our starting point is to end the Howard Government's dog eat dog approach to  industrial relations. We believe that cooperation and consensus are the best way  to build productivity in the Australian workplace. As a result we want enterprise  bargaining to be the main organising principle for industrial relations rather than  individual contracts.

We believe in workplace flexibility but it has got to have a basic safety net. It's  got to have enterprise bargaining as the main focus. We also believe in industrial  relations that take seriously the issue of work and family, helping parents get the

balance right and we'll be putting forward our policies to improve the rights of  working parents right around the country. And also emphasising our very  important baby care payment, this important payment is to help families with the  cost of raising a newborn baby, to ensure that it is a time that they can love and  nurture their child rather than worry about all the financial pressures. Mr Howard  calls this the barbeque stopper but there is not much sizzle on his hot plate.  We're actually advancing very good initiatives and we are seeking the support of  the ACTU for it.

We'll also be talking about our strategies for social investment in health,  education - ensuring that we are opening up social opportunity as much as  possible around the country - our plan to invest in early childhood development,  needs based funding for our schools; our strategy for expanding the university  and TAFE system, reversing the Government's 25% increase in HECS. Our very  important strategy for saving bulk billing in Australia, saving Medicare and  restoring the practice of a national dental program.

In the meeting I will also be outlining our approach to the forthcoming budget.  We're very critical of the way the Howard Government handles Budget strategy  because they load up with a spending spree prior to the election and then claw  back the benefits when the election is out of the way. Prior to the 1998 election

they spent $25 billion to try and get themselves out of political trouble. Prior to

the last election they spent $20 billion doing the same thing and after that  election what we find out is through the loss of bulkbilling, through higher  university fees, through higher Telstra charges, through family debts and other  imposts on the family budget, people are actually worse off.



So we don't see the talk about tax relief or tax cuts as genuine. The truth is since  1996 the average household is paying an extra $9000 in federal taxes and all the  Government is proposing to do is give back a small fraction of that - the extra  money that people have paid, giving a small refund on that in the Budget next  Tuesday. So we are critical of the Government pea and thimble trick in terms of  Budget strategies - spending sprees prior to the election and then clawing back  the benefits after the election. We want to invest in a more sustainable way in  the long term future and benefit of Australia rather than this election strategy  that the Howard Government has embarked upon.



LATHAM: We are here to talk to the trade union movement about those  important issues and I must just ask Craig to say a few words as our Shadow  Minister.



EMERSON: Thanks mate. Labor supports productive harmonious work places  where the benefits of [inaudible] are fairly shared. As Mark has said in the past  we are all for prosperity, prosperity with purpose, prosperity that is shared,  prosperity that creates opportunity. In talking to the Union Movement today  about our approach to workplace relations and the broader task of charting the  future for this country, we don’t support the dog-eat-dog mentality of the  Howard Government.



We know that encouraging people through harmony, by working together and  making sure that the benefits are fairly shared. Just yesterday the National Wage  Case came down to $19 a week, the Government argued for $10 a week for the

lowest paid workers in this country, which would be: after tax and inflation be  $2.10 a week pay cut. So you can see the philosophy of the Howard Government  as contrasted with ours which is a fair go for all. We believe in a fair Australia  and this election will determine whether we can again invoke a fair Australia or  whether we go back to law of the jungle and we don’t want to see that.

In this country 1.9 million, almost 2 million trade union members and we will be  talking to the trade union leaders today, building those bonds with the trade  union movement that we have been building. We are proud of our bonds with  the trade union movement and we wish to convey through the leadership and  through direct face to face meetings that Mark has been involved in, that I have  been involved in shows how committed we are to living standards of working  Australians in this country. So we will be expecting to improve that relationship

that has been improving all along and we want to make that bond very strong so  we can communicate with working men and women of Australia in the trade  union movement and those who are not in a trade union. That is the force we  attach to returning Australia to being a fair country.

JOURNALIST: [inaudible]

EMERSON: We will give our casual workers who are employed on a regular long  term basis a right to request a conversion of permanent work. And employers  will not be able to unreasonably refuse such a request. In terms of  reasonableness what does that mean? Well it would have regard to the size and  nature of the business. We recognise that smaller businesses might find it more  difficult to agree to a request to convert to permanent work. But it is a big  problem in this country and we intend to do something about it. Give some job  security, some job entitlements; sick leave, holiday pay to those long term casual  workers. And very importantly when we have got record low first home  ownership it is important to understand that one in four Australian workers is a  casual and they find it very difficult to get a home loan. They are locked out of  home ownership or get smaller deposits than those who are in permanent work.  So there are big social dimensions through our policy to give a little bit of job  security to those casuals who are employed on a long term regular basis.

JOURNALIST: [inaudible]

EMERSON: We are fair dinkum about work and family balance. As Mark said in  relation to John Howard’s barbecue stopping issue of work and family balance  there is not much sizzle on the hotplate and any sizzle that might be there is not

very well fuelled at all. But we are absolutely committed to improving the  balance between work and family life. We have announced already a range of  measures; the baby care payment will assist mothers who have babies, of course  working and non working mothers. And we will give working mothers a right to  request a return to work on a part time basis. So again very similar to the  emphasis on casuals, this will assist working mothers to balance work and family  much better, so that they don’t have to make this once and for all choice. That  is; full time parenting or full time work, they will be able to balance work and  family responsibilities. I know they aspire to be good parents and good workers.  This will allow that to happen. So we have announced that policy and it has been  warmly embraced by the trade union movement as has our policy in relation to  casuals.

JOURNALIST: [inaudible]

LATHAM: There is always extra issues that get raised and as Craig mentioned  they are the biggest community based organisation in this country with nearly 2

million members. And for that reason it is important to have the dialogue. There  is always issues that need to be discussed and sure we don’t agree on  everything. But certainly when it comes to the basics of social investment, the

basics of balancing work and family, our long term strategy for the country, our  agenda for industrial relations, it is good to have their support and we will be  wanting to talk through those issues and look forward to that process in the  future.



JOURNALIST:  Mr Latham the latest Al Qeada warnings puts Australians in  Indonesia on the top of Al Qeada’s hit list. Does that confirm for you that  Australia’s involvement in Iraq is making us more of a terrorist target?

LATHAM: That has been acknowledged by experts and by the general public that  the Howard Government’s failed policies in Iraq have contributed to the level of  risk and danger in this country. We need to respond by getting the home front  right. There are a whole range of concerns about national security. The fact that  our intelligence service has been heavily criticised from within. The fact that our  airport and port security is inadequate. The fact that we don’t have a coastguard,  an effective maritime policing in Australia. We haven’t got a Department of  Homeland Security, a point of reference where the states and territories can  work with the Commonwealth to make this country as safe and secure as  possible. So we know these threats exist and that the Howard Government’s  policies haven’t been right and they have been inadequate on the home front,  and Labor will be advancing a lot of strategies to ensure we get it right in this  country to keep the Australian people as safe and sound as we can for the  future.

JOURNALIST: Should the guards accompany the athletes to Athens?



LATHAM: I would have the thought the best thing to do is take professional  security advice. If the advice is that they need armed security at the Olympic  Games then that’s what should happen. So it is best left to the professionals to  make their assessment. Certainly I’m sure the Australian people want our  athletes to be as safe as possible through this period of the Olympic Games in  Athens. The appropriate thing to do is take professional advice and of course  take absolutely no risks with safety.

JOURNALIST: Do you think that they should go, or should not go?

LATHAM: They’re going, as I understand it, based on the available advice. But in  the period leading up to the Games the best thing always is to take professional  advice about security issues. We’re all hoping as much as possible that the  Games are free of any incident and all the athletes from around the world are

safe and secure. But it’s not for politicians to be making judgements this far out.  It’s more prudent to take professional security advice and give our athletes and  the Australian people every guarantee that this is going to be a successful  Olympic Games free of any problems and incidents.



JOURNALIST: The Foreign Minister says that the ongoing political debate about  withdrawing troops from Iraq is making us more of a terrorist target, do you  agree?

LATHAM:  Well not even his own Prime Minister agrees. Mr Howard wouldn’t  confirm that assessment yesterday nor would the Defence Minister Robert Hill.  So what is Mr Downer doing? He’s really arguing against himself. Last year the  Government said Australia would be in Iraq for months not years, and they had  exit strategies of their own for the air traffic controllers at Baghdad airport.  They’ve reversed those strategies so in the large part Mr Downer is arguing  against himself and they’re [inaudible] comments that he’s making.

JOURNALIST: The Attorney General said today that asylum seekers should have  to pay for a third of their costs in front of the High Court and also that lawyers  might have to pay for un-meritous cases. Do you think that will impede the

justice system or make the courts more efficient?

LATHAM: We support the principle of streamlining the processes for migration  cases through the courts. We supported that principle and we are always happy  to look at good constructive proposals consistent with the principal. I haven’t  seen the detail of what Mr Ruddock has said today but Labor always examines  his propositions carefully. We have a principal of streamlining and making the  system as efficient as possible and we’ll look at his latest propositions with an  open mind.



JOURNALIST: Mr Ruddock is also saying that children will remain in detention  despite this damning leaked report today, which has been very critical of the  immigration department and its practices.





LATHAM: We think that’s wrong. Labor believes that the children should be out  of detention centres. We’re not waiting for a court judgement or other  assessments, that’s our policy. If we truly believe in family values, if the Howard  Government is serious about family values how can we have children growing up  behind barbed wire in Australia? Our policy of having the children out is the right  one and if the Howard Government truly believed its rhetoric about family values  it would adopt the policy too.

JOURNALIST: The Government has released a $5 billion science package, that  seems pretty generous doesn’t it?

LATHAM: It’s called an innovation statement but it’s actually got nothing new in  it. It’s old money that’s been recycled, old priorities that have been re-ordered. It  doesn’t really achieve much that’s new, it doesn’t have a lot of innovation in it  and it’s also consistent with the Government’s strategy of giving with one hand  and taking with the other. They’ve de-funded 19 co-operative research centres  including valuable research about the Great Barrier Reef. So we don’t see this as  the package that takes R&D and science in this country forward, in fact it’s a  recycling of old priorities and old money.



ENDS

