ADDRESS BY: The Hon Justice Michael Kirby AC CMG  The University of Melbourne Chancellor's Human Rights Lecture  2004   Wednesday 3 November 2004

HUMAN RIGHTS AND GOOD GOVERNANCE  CONJOINED TWINS OR  INCOMPATIBLE STRANGERS?

CONTEXT AND TIMING

I have been coming to the University of Melbourne for close on fifty years; ever  since I took my first tentative steps in student activities in the 1950s. It is one of  the great universities of our country, indeed of the world. From the start, in 1850, it  has been a leader in ideas essential for the progress of humanity. I am thankful for  the chance to give this lecture in such a seat of learning.

Recently, at a conference to mark the centenary of the institutions of conciliation  and arbitration in Australia, I came upon an instrumental talk given at this  University by Henry Bournes Higgins1 who had graduated Master of Arts and  Bachelor of Laws of the University. On 13 July 1896, a hundred and eight years ago,  he delivered a lecture to the Historical Society of this University. Higgins, like so  many of the founders of the Australian Commonwealth, was a product of this place.  In receptiveness to new and bold ideas, there has been no institution more  welcoming in Australia than the University of Melbourne.

In his talk, Higgins, the product, like me, of Protestant Ireland, educated by the  Wesleyans, embraced notions that had been propounded in 1891 by Pope Leo XIII  in his Encyclical, Rerum Novarum 2. I am sure that I do not have to tell you that for  a man born in, or derived from, Ulster, this was no small thing. The Pope had  addressed himself to "poverty and suffering [in this world, not] ... joy and glory  hereafter. ...[I]n place of telling the masses that whatever they suffer is of God's  will, and that they should submit patiently, he enter[ed] into an elaborate discussion  of the social question and the means of dealing with it ... [He proposed] that a State  can, if it adopts the right means and without distribution of doles, alter the  economic condition of the poor".

This papal idea was founded in concepts of the natural law. Much of its reasoning  would be explained today in terms of notions of the inherent dignity of the human  person and the human rights and fundamental freedoms that are the consequence.  Leo XIII's ideas struck a chord with Higgins who had been trained at this University  in the English common law and in the rules of equity, which always reflected  precepts of natural law. In the young Higgins' mind a marvellous alchemy arose,  marrying the natural law ideas of the Popes and the English legal notions of fairness  and reasonableness. Mix in a little economics and some political theory (together  with history to keep his audience's attention) and Higgins was well on the path to  the constitutional concept of industrial conciliation and arbitration for Australia.

In the event, this famous graduate was to play a key role in the constitutional  convention in Melbourne3 that adopted the constitutional power to permit the  coming Federal Parliament to make laws on this subject. As a member elected to  that Parliament from a constituency not far from here, he was to play a vital part in  the debates that led to the statute that was finally nearing adoption exactly a  century ago4. Later, as a Justice of the High Court of Australia, Higgins was to have  important functions in clarifying the provisions, and constitutionality, of that Act. As  second President of the Commonwealth Court of Conciliation and Arbitration, he was  to prove innovative and influential in implementing his new province of law and  order in the industrial scene5.

All of this is simply to show that great things sometimes come from addresses given  to audiences at this University. Looking back on Higgins' 1896 effort, we would now  describe it as a notable contribution to securing individual human rights and good  governance in Australia. Certainly, the system of industrial justice for which he  worked, and which he inaugurated6, was to become one of the three economic

pillars of Australia's federal story during the nation's first century7. By century's  end, industrial arbitration, the White Australia policy and high tariffs had declined or  disappeared. Such is the cycle of ideas. Lecturers, here and elsewhere, do well to  remember the transience of ideas, even large ones.

The present Human Rights Lecture, named for the Chancellor, celebrates Fay  Marles' contribution to human rights. It was inaugurated at her behest. The  Chancellor has a personal and longstanding commitment to human rights. As  Victoria's first Equal Opportunity Commissioner, she made notable contributions  both to the principles and practices of human rights protection - specifically in the  rights of women, indigenous Australians and other groups disadvantaged by  discrimination or exclusion.

Most Australians are, or have family or friends who are, members of some minority  group. I myself - a constitutional officeholder - know what it feels like. As a member  of a sexual minority, I have been on the receiving end of discrimination, prejudice,  calumny and hatred. In these times of enlightenment, it is astonishing that it should  still be so. Astounding that misunderstood passages in Holy Books should be used in  the twenty-first century, against all of the knowledge that is now available to  humanity, and often at the instigation of people pretending to religion and  spiritualism, who stigmatise homosexuals.

Recent public comment in Australia has sometimes, sadly, evidenced prejudice8.  Those responsible for such discord and animosity in our community bear a heavy  responsibility for the violence, suicides, denigration and low self-esteem that ensue.  It seems truly remarkable to me that such ignorance exists and stubbornly survives  in the face of so much contemporary science about the universal and natural  occurrence of sexual variation in humanity as in other species. A society of human  rights and good governance will provide effective institutions, laws, education,  leadership and redress to combat the primitive demons and ignorant superstitions  that some people stir up.

I honour the Chancellor for the work that she has done to make human rights and  good governance a reality in our midst in Australia. It is by science, research,  teaching and the spread of knowledge that the veil of ignorance and hatred will  eventually be lifted. Recent events suggest that we still have a long way to go.  Bishop Desmond Tutu once said that everyone hates discrimination so much that  they try to pass it down the line to someone else. Many people, it seems, need  someone they can look down on. This infantile disorder will not be cured overnight.  It will only be overcome by the effective protection of human rights and the creation  and maintenance of strong institutions that truly believe in the principle of equal  justice under law. That is the principle for which the judges of this nation stand. I  believe it is the principle of our Constitution. But in Australia and elsewhere in the  world, it is a principle that needs constant reinforcement. We can never take it for  granted.

A DECADE OF PROGRESS

The years 1995-2004 were designated as the United Nations Decade for Human  Rights Education. The decade is therefore drawing to its close. One feature of the  decade has been the growing appreciation, including in Australia, that talk, or fine  international instruments, about human rights are not enough. It is essential to  address the institutions, theory and practical implementation of human rights9. This  realisation has directed increasing attention to good governance. Governance and  good governance have attracted many definitions. But the notion remains a  "contested concept"10. Why is this so?

The United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) has defined the word  "governance" broadly as "the exercise of economic, political and administrative  authority to manage a country's affairs at all levels. It comprises the mechanisms,  processes and institutions, through which citizens and groups articulate their  interests, exercise their legal rights, meet their obligations and mediate their  differences"11.

A shift to placing emphasis on good governance, both in the rhetoric of the conduct  of foreign affairs and in institutional and aid policy has been a marked feature of the  strategy of the present Australian government. Thus AusAID, the agency for  Australia's foreign aid programme, adopted a definition of "governance" similar to  that of UNDP. It described "good governance" as the "competent management of a  country's resources and affairs in a manner that is open, transparent, accountable,  equitable and responsive to people's needs"12.

In placing this emphasis on "good governance", Australia was reflecting moves that  have occurred both within the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and  Development (OECD), in the United States administration and in agencies of the  United Nations responding to these concerns. Thus, the United Nations High  Commissioner for Human Rights in 2002 expressly linked the effective realisation of  human rights with improvements in national governance13:

"Governance is the process whereby public institutions can conduct public affairs,  manage public resources and guarantee the realisation of human rights. Good  governance accomplishes this in a manner essentially free of abuse and corruption,  and with due regard for the rule of law. The true test of "good" governance is the  degree to which it delivers on the promise of human rights: civil, cultural, economic,  political and social rights".

This shift to a new institutional emphasis on "good governance" came to a head  within the organs of the United Nations on 21 April 2004. At the 57th meeting of the  Commission on Human Rights, a resolution14 was adopted, without a vote, on the  subject of "The Role of Good Governance in the Promotion of Human Rights".

This resolution recited the universality of human rights and the adoption by the  United Nations Millennium Declaration of a commitment to good governance in  promoting human rights. It noted that "transparent, responsible, accountable and  participatory government ... is the foundation on which good governance rests" and  that, as such, it was indispensable to the full realisation of human rights and the  building of "effective democratic institutions". The Commission resolution went on  that "good governance practices necessarily vary according to the particular  circumstances and needs of different societies". In its substantive part, it called  upon member states to provide governance responsive to the needs and aspirations  of the people in order to achieve the full realisation of human rights, to eradicate  poverty and to build international cooperation on development. It called on the High  Commissioner for Human Rights to convene an international seminar on this subject  and to compile ideas and practices for the furtherance of this notion throughout the  world.

On 15-17 September 2004, the proposed seminar took place in Seoul, Republic of  Korea. The new High Commissioner for Human Rights (Madame Louise Arbour, a  past Justice of the Supreme Court of Canada) attended. So did I. In the course of  my attendance, I became aware of some of the controversies of this notion of "good  governance". The purpose of this lecture is to indicate some of the strengths of the  new idea; but also to mention some of its difficulties. Be sure that, in the years  ahead, we will all hear more about "good governance". It is, it seems, an idea  whose time has come.

The difficulties of the notion of good governance were addressed very soon after the  opening of the Seoul seminar. A participant from a well-respected non-government  organisation (NGO) in India referred to recent reports ascribing to the President of  the World Bank (Mr J Wolfensen) the assertion that the Bank preferred to talk in  terms of "good governance" because talk of "human rights" made its donors  "nervous". Why does human rights talk make financial donors "nervous"? Is "good  governance" a softer option and should that be a matter of concern?

To some participants from developing countries in Seoul, the idea of "good  governance" is simply the latest attempt of developed countries to impose on the  developing world their notions of governance, whatever the culture, needs and  capacity of poorer nations. In short, talk of "good governance", in practice, could,  according to this viewpoint, be seen as a Trojan horse for institutions and laws that

would impose upon developing countries the machinery of "governance" considered  suitable to the developed world and protective of the interests and power of the  developed world. Instead of promoting human rights and nation-building, "good  governance", according to this viewpoint, is the means of ensuring strict obedience  to the rules imposed on the developing world by the World Trade Organisation and,  through bilateral trade agreements, the means whereby the richest countries shore  up their economic advantages when compared to the rest.

From this viewpoint15, so-called "good governance" is simply another mechanism to  reinforce good protection of flows of capital and finance around the world to the  enormous advantage of rich nations and their investors16. Critics of the idea of  "good governance" point out that, increasingly, economic power has shifted from  governmental organs, and even regional groupings of nations, to multinational  corporations which bestride the world and dictate in significant ways how it will be  governed, naturally to their own benefit. Tony Evans, in a critical article, has  explained17:

"At the global level, the increasing authority of global institutions, and the activities  of trans-national corporations, suggest that democratic representation and  participation are less achievable in the post-Cold War world than many  commentators argue. The creation of a global free market, backed by the creation  of new global institutions with international standing, described by some as the 'new  constitutionalism', favours the interest of capital above the interests of all others.  This is seen in the activities of the World Bank, the WTO and regional economic  unions, all of which are designed to impose a market discipline that favours  corporate and financial interests. Rather than taking a wider view of development  that includes human rights, security and dignity, 'new constitutionalism' confers  privileges, rights of citizenship and representation on corporate capital, while  constraining the democratisation process that has involved struggles for  representation for hundreds of years"18.

I have, by now, sketched the ambit of this debate. Given the importance which the  Australian government, and other bodies, attach to the notion of "good  governance", what should we think about it? Is it truly an indispensable support for  the attainment of human rights? Or is it, as some critics assert, simply the latest  attempt of neo-liberalism and the international economic market to debase human  rights in the unending pursuit of the global economic advantage of the already  wealthy? The answer to these questions is important in the world today, including  the world concerned about the protection of human rights.

GOOD GOVERNANCE ON AUSTRALIA'S AGENDA

Let there be no doubt that an emphasis on "good governance" is high on the foreign  affairs agenda of the Australian government. Indeed, it would be right to say that it  is one of the highest priorities which the government, and specifically the Minister,  Mr Alexander Downer, have emphasised, especially in relation to the region of Asia  and the Pacific to which Australia must chiefly relate.

In August 2000, the Minister authorised the publication of Guiding Principles for  Implementation of Good Governance19. In his foreword, Mr Downer stated that  Australia had a central role to play as an advocate of good governance. It was a  sponsor of the resolution of the Commission on Human Rights on the subject which  was "ground-breaking" and heralded "new international thinking on the connections  between human rights and transparent, accountable and participatory  government"20. He pointed to this country's long and robust liberal-democratic  tradition and its position as a strong, stable and significant regional power as  reasons why Australia's relationship with its neighbours would place increasing  emphasis on governance issues. He cautioned the need to tailor solutions to  governance problems "individually", recognising that it was inappropriate to adopt  an approach of "one size fits all". The principles of good governance endorsed by the  Minister included some strategies related to politics; some to economics; some to  study of the theory and practice of good governance.

We can readily see the shift in direction of Australia's foreign assistance towards  each of these special targets.

Take politics and governance as a first example. In the Indonesian general election  of 1999, the first fully free election since 1955, Australia provided an experienced  team of electoral observers and a $15 million electoral assistance package. The  Australian Electoral Commission21, which has an unblemished record at home,  helped its Indonesian counterpart to rekindle electoral democracy in our  neighbourhood. The recent presidential election, and the peaceful transitions of the  presidency in Indonesia, suggest that democratic principles have widespread  popular backing. Most of the credit must be given to the Indonesian people  themselves. Clearly, however, the building of electoral democracy (for all of its  faults) is an important component in safeguarding human rights. Without  democracy, it is arguable that human rights, even if supported by a government,  are merely privileges "granted" by those in power. They are not asserted rights,  claimed as an entitlement by the people to whom they properly belong22.

Secondly, building an economy necessitates improving the rule of law as an  assurance for investors that disputes, when they arise, will be determined not by  corrupt deals or brute power but by expert judges based on pre-existing norms  explained and justified in a public process. Here too, Australia has been involved in  neighbouring countries. It has assisted in the establishment of a commercial court in  Indonesia and in the training of its judges and officials. It has provided specialised  academic courses to strengthen the Indonesian judicial system. It has arranged  training of Indonesian officials in such subjects pertinent to good governance as  intellectual property rights law, human rights law, environmental law, town planning  and international trade law and practice23.

More basic assistance has been given in East Timor, following its independence. It  has had to start, virtually from scratch, in creating a legal and judicial system of its  own. For many years, Australian judges, or retired judges, have provided assistance  to the courts of the Pacific countries. I did so myself between 1993-1996 when I  was President of the Court of Appeal of Solomon Islands. But now the institutional  assistance is more intensive. It is supplemented by support from, and to,  community based organisations24. These are practical measures of good  governance.

A major governance project in the Pacific has been the Policy and Management  Reform (PMR) initiative. This has promoted a harmonised system of tariffs; a  reduced tariff structure following the lines of Australia's own earlier reduction of  tariff barriers; public service reform including enhanced protection against  corruption; and the placement of selected Australian public servants as mentors and  instructors in key government departments. For example, in Samoa, Australia is  working closely with the Treasury, the Public Service Commission, the Department  of Trade and Customs to advance the government's economic and public sector  reform agenda25.

In order to improve the workings of the private sector, assistance is being given to  fairly basic projects in Pacific countries. These include review of the law governing  directors; the introduction of courses on corporate conflict of interest, ethics, duty of  care and due diligence; the provision of audit trails; board effectiveness; statutory  duties and so forth26.

The participation of Australian police in United Nations peacekeeping work has a  long history. Lately, the cooperation has been more direct and bilateral. Thus,  Australia has been helping East Timor and Solomon Islands to strengthen policing as  a prerequisite to the rule of law and conditions of peace in which alone human rights  will be respected27. Similarly, Australia has been a lead supporter of the struggle  against HIV/AIDS in developing countries. Recently, when I was in South Africa, I  found that small specialised projects, supported by AusAID, have been initiated in  Africa to supplement the many initiatives in countries28 geographically closer.  Building on our own strong institutional response to the HIV/AIDS epidemic,  Australia has contributed substantial funds both to bilateral and multilateral

initiatives aimed at strengthening national infrastructures so that they can respond  effectively to the epidemic.

Two special subjects have been given priority in Australia under the auspices of  "governance" initiatives. One has been addressed to poverty alleviation. The other  involves an initiative to respond to the danger of terrorism in our region. Recent  events in Bali and Jakarta have demonstrated that the dangers are close and are  not theoretical. In the provision of aid to neighbouring countries, a realistic linkage  has been acknowledged by Australia between terrorist risks and poverty. In a recent  treatment of this subject, AusAID observed29:

"Sustainable reductions in poverty can only be achieved in stable environments and  growing economies. Terrorism destroys lives and properties, exacerbates instability  and has significant economic consequences. The threat of terrorism results in less  confidence, reduced investment and disrupted services - all of which suppress  economic growth, making the challenge of tackling poverty more difficult. It also  undermines personal security particularly for the poor who are most vulnerable".

What might have been added is that terrorism, and strengthening counter-terrorism  capacity, is not purely a matter of poverty or security resources. Terrorism  commonly grows out of ideas. Sometimes those ideas may be justified. Mahatma  Gandhi and Nelson Mandela (who at different times were incarcerated in the same  prison in the centre of Johannesburg) were for a long time "terrorists" to the  governments they confronted. Throwing around the label of terrorism, and thinking  that its challenge can be met solely by law enforcement, would be hopelessly naïve.  We need great subtlety of mind, and flexible strategies, in response to the  challenges that are now labelled as "terrorist".

This is why the third governance strategy of the Australian government should be  noted. It involves promoting study of the theories and practices that underpin good  governance and teaching human rights to specialised groups. The Australian  government has established the Centre for Democratic Institutions (CDI), hosted  within the Australian National University in Canberra. CDI provides support to  developing countries through training, placements, networking and information  exchange. It conducts workshops for overseas Parliamentarians; orientation for new  judges; leadership courses for non-governmental organisations; media courses for  journalists; support of the Ombudsman and activities designed to address anti-corruption30.

From my short review, it can be seen that an important change has occurred in  Australia's recent strategy to promote human rights through foreign aid. There is  now increasing attention to systemic and institutional issues. There is increasing  acknowledgment of the essential role that key players in the legislature, the  judiciary, the media and civil society play for the defence of human rights. This is as  true at home as it is internationally.

Some observers have drawn to attention the ambivalence of Australia's strategy in  the provision of foreign aid. For instance, we strongly support the inclusion of a Bill  of Human Rights in the interim constitution for Iraq. But most of our political  leaders, in both major groupings, are strongly opposed to the adoption of a Bill of  Rights at home. This would be more understandable if it could be said with  conviction that Australia's legislative process was always effective in defending the  basic human rights of minorities. Sadly, it is not so whether those minorities are  Aboriginals31; refugees32; prisoners33; electors in unequal constituencies34; the  physically disabled35; homosexuals36 and so forth.

A PERSONAL EXPERIENCE: CAMBODIA

So what is the response we should give as Australians to the recent insistence of the  rich countries of the world that more attention should be paid to issues of  governance? Is this truly a diversion because the world of global finance gets  uncomfortable at the mention of human rights? Is it just a stalking horse for the  effective protection of financial interests and the unimpeded flow of capital that reap  ever-richer rewards for developed countries at the cost of the poor? Or is it an

essential prerequisite for the effective protection of individual human rights to have  strong governmental institutions in place to help do the job?

Between 1993 and 1996, I had the opportunity to consider this puzzle when I  served as Special Representative for the Secretary- General of the United Nations  for Human Rights in Cambodia. The post was provided for in the 1991 Paris Peace  Agreements. I became one of about 30 United Nations Special Rapporteurs and  Special Representatives reporting on particular countries or themes to the  Commission on Human Rights and the General Assembly. The post gave me a rare  opportunity to see the translation of the noble language of the United Nations  human rights instruments into actuality. Emerging from two decades of violence,  revolution, genocide and war, Cambodia needed more than talk about human rights.  It needed to identify exactly what "human rights" means to ordinary people in such  a disadvantaged environment. Truly it needed to build the institutions that would  deliver human rights to its citizens - in effect the institutions of good governance.

In my role as Special Representative, I had no blue helmets to enforce the  recommendations in my reports. Initially, all of the soldiers of the UNTAC  Peacekeeping Force had withdrawn by the time I arrived. My only sanction was  published reports delivered in New York and Geneva in which I described candidly  the achievements and failings of the Royal Cambodian Government, measured  against the standards of the United Nations human rights instruments.

In performing this function, I observed the interaction between economic growth  and the improvement of human rights. I saw how, although economic development  is not necessarily an assurance of improvement of human rights, it is difficult to  provide the environment for respect for many human rights without the basic  necessities that a modern economy can provide to the people37. This insight  concerning the inter-relationship of economic progress with human rights reinforced  the accuracy of the statement in the Vienna Declaration on Human Rights of June  1993:

"All human rights are universal, indivisible and inter-dependent and inter-related ...  While the significance of national and regional peculiarities and various historical,  cultural and religious backgrounds must be borne in mind, it is the duty of States,  regardless of their political, economic and cultural systems, to promote and protect  all human rights and fundamental freedoms".

It was in my work as United Nations Special Representative that I threw off the  lingering belief that human rights were effectively about what happened in police  stations, polling booths and courthouses. They are involved. But for most  Cambodians, the urgent questions that they addressed when speaking to me of  human rights were the issues concerned with the protection of women and girls,  including in education; the access of all to drinking water; the provision of basic  healthcare; and the removal of landmines. Such fundamental human rights issues  cannot be assured without the establishment and maintenance of institutions of  good governance. It is simply not possible.

Corruption in various forms was endemic in Cambodia after the breakdown of  government. But it is a complex issue. Corruption cannot be addressed only by  enacting punitive laws. For example, the underpaid soldiers, living on a salary  pittance, took to charging informal "tolls" on the roads that they were guarding. The  amounts charged were comparatively small. In a society of efficient governance, the  tolls would doubtless be levied with the authority of Parliament, paid into  consolidated revenue and disbursed towards proper military salaries. Were these  exactions corruption? By the letter of the law they were. The soldiers, after all, had  guns. Yet looked on in another way, they were an interim self-help means of making  the "user pay". "User pays" is an idea Western societies embrace, although they do  not normally back it up, as such, with guns.

The rigidities and inflexibility of governance in many developing countries are the  reason why corruption flourishes. When I studied undergraduate economics, I was  taught that sometimes, where laws are out of date, harsh and inflexible and  incapable of being changed, corruption can be justified economically as a means of

market substitution for the breakdown of the lawmaking process. It seemed an odd  theory. Yet I have no doubt now that many gay clubs in Australia in former times  were probably maintained by the passing of money to police who turned a blind eye.  Such instances demonstrate the need to tackle questions of human rights and  governance together.

ANOTHER PERSONAL EXPERIENCE: TASMANIA

The inter-connection between protecting human rights and good governance has  been brought home to me, in Australia, by the remarkable way in which the defence  of human dignity and fundamental freedoms has sometimes been reinforced by

institutional initiatives. Putting it bluntly, it is not enough to enact fine laws and  proclaim worthy sentiments. These must be followed up by institutional and  attitudinal changes. Law is important. But it is not enough.

A good case in point, demonstrating the link between human rights and good  governance, can be found in the treatment of homosexuals in Tasmania. By the  early 1990s, that State was the last bastion opposing attempts in Australia, by  criminal law, to stamp out sexual minorities, to belittle their human dignity and to  force them into shame and silence. Shame and silence is the most effective means  of ensuring the maintenance of the status quo in power balances. "Don't ask, don't  tell" is commonly a formula for discrimination and entrenched injustice. Dialogue  and openness are the instruments of rationality and progress, not to say ordinary  human kindness.

In 1988, support for the decriminalisation of adult homosexual conduct in private  was 15% lower in Tasmania than the national Australian average38. Yet, by the  time decriminalisation occurred in that State in 1997, because of the campaign of  civil society organisations, it had risen to 15% above the national average. It was  even higher in Hobart than in Sydney, sometimes described, from within the ghetto,  as the "gay capital of the Pacific". Who would ever have thought this of Hobart?

The way reform was achieved was itself a story about good governance. Citizens of  every sexual orientation campaigned publicly and in the media for change in the  criminal law. Their efforts were at first ridiculed. Premier Robin Gray declared that  homosexuals were not welcome in Tasmania. Arrests, public vilification, censorship  and direct discrimination were much in evidence. It looked as if change had reached  a dead-end. Even attempts to link decriminalisation with legislation to address the  new and urgent problem of HIV/AIDS failed to pass the Tasmanian Upper House.

It was at this stage that two campaigners for gay law reform, Rodney Croome and  Nicholas Toonen, telephoned me. They said they were thinking of taking the case of  Tasmania to the United Nations Human Rights Committee. They asked for my  advice. I told them not to waste their time. Fortunately, they politely but firmly  ignored my advice. In the struggle to achieve human rights, progress belongs to the  courageous.

Rodney Croome and Nick Toonen took Australia to the United Nations Committee  established under the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. The  Committee found that, in the criminalisation of private conduct by homosexual  people, Australia in Tasmania was acting in breach of the International Covenant39.  This finding led to the passage through the Federal Parliament of legislation over-riding the Tasmanian law, based on Australia's treaty obligation40. The  constitutional validity of that legislation was challenged in the High Court41. But  then, reflecting the shifts of public opinion, the Tasmanian Parliament repealed the  old laws. The legislation now has an undiscriminating law punishing nonconsensual  sexual conduct, whatever the gender of the perpetrator and the victim42.

Interestingly, following these symbolic changes in the law, publicity about them and  greater openness by homosexual people themselves, attitudes began to alter.  Recent polls in the northern rural communities of Tasmania, such as Deloraine, La  Trobe and Ulverstone, showed support for equality in the treatment of samesex  couples to be as high as 70%43. Good governance in Australia has contributed to  such changes.

One of the first governmental agencies to challenge internal antagonism against  people on the grounds of their sexuality was the Tasmania Police. Its stance  changed in 1992, possibly because of new leadership and stimulated by the work of  the State Equal Opportunity Commission. The police initiatives were soon joined by  those in the Department of Education. And in 1999, the Health Department  established its own committee, followed in 2001 by a forum of Tourism Tasmania.  Nowadays, school-based antihomophobia poster competitions and the provision of  resources to teachers in the State has helped turn attitudes around.

It is in the schools, in the homes and in the media that phobic attitudes against  Asian Australians and people of colour, including indigenous people, were altered in  earlier decades. Tackling discrimination against women, refugees, homosexuals,  disabled people and other vulnerable groups is work in progress in this country. The  point to be noticed is that a turnaround is possible. It can be achieved in a relatively  short time. But it needs a commitment to human rights, leadership in politics and  the engagement of the institutions of governance.

In 1994, in Tasmania, the Secretary of the Department of Education issued two  memoranda banning materials on, and discussion of, homosexuality in public  schools throughout the State. Three months later, he issued another memorandum  granting an exception from the first, but only to permit promotional materials from  organisations that promised to "convert" students' sexuality from gay to straight44.  Shortly after the Criminal Code of Tasmania was reformed, the Education Secretary  resigned. His repressive memoranda were revoked by his successor.

In their place rational policies were instituted. A course, originally developed in  Victoria for Grade 9 and 10 students, "Pride and Prejudice", was introduced in  Tasmania45. It is being trialed for introduction as a compulsory element in school  education. It has proved popular with teachers and students. It shows what can be  done in fewer than twenty years to turn a most repressive State into a leader in  enlightenment and defence of equality for all citizens. Now, the Government of  Tasmania has adopted a goal of wholly eliminating homophobic discrimination as a  State objective.

Tourism Tasmania advertises in gay conferences. What a change a decade makes.  This kind of change can only occur by a change in governance on an important  issue. Hundreds of learned lectures by earnest lecturers pointing to the irrationality  and ignorance of discrimination against people on grounds of their indelible nature -  whether gender, race, skin colour or sexuality - will not have the impact that  leadership in good governance, the legislature, politics, the judiciary and  administration will attain That is why good governance is important and beneficial.  Well deployed, it can be a vital protection of human rights and a guarantee against  the abuse of rights.

THE RESIDUAL ISSUES

My experience in Cambodia and Australia's experience in responding to homophobia  in Tasmania does not mean that the recent embrace of good governance as a  national and foreign policy goal is without puzzles that we must address. There are  at least five concerns.

The first is the occasional ambivalence that we have, as a nation, in the way in  which we preach good governance goals for others which we are not willing to  accept for ourselves. I have mentioned the local resistance to the incorporation of  the broad principles of human rights into the Australian constitutional and legal  system. Such incorporation has happened in Canada, South Africa, New Zealand  and since 2000 even in the United Kingdom from which we inherited our suspicions  of a bill of rights. A modest experiment with a human rights statute has been  adopted in the Australian Capital Territory46. In due course, this may lead to other  experiments including, eventually, at the federal level.

However, this will not be completed in my lifetime, certainly not in my professional  lifetime. Meanwhile, foreigners who hear of our commitment to fundamental human  rights as an attribute of good governance may contrast this with the occasional

incapacity of our own institutions of governance to defend basic human rights when  valid legislation arguably overrides such rights and derogates from our obligations  under United Nations human rights treaties. This was recently demonstrated in the  case of children detained in mandatory immigration detention in Australia47 and in  the case of an indefinite detention of a stateless person who could not (despite his  request) be deported to another country willing to receive him48.

When such cases arise in Australia's own governance, we should not be surprised  when others on whom we urge "good governance" accuse us of double standards  and suggest that we have need to address the weakness in our own governance  whilst we are about helping others to overcome theirs.

Secondly, we should retain a healthy scepticism concerning some of the  "governance" talk. Occasionally, it is simply a demand of more power for the  bureaucrat. As the case in the Education Department of Tasmania in the 1990s  shows, not all firm and honest "governance" is necessarily "good". Not all  "governors" are necessarily devoted to human rights and fundamental freedoms.  This point was made effectively in a recent address given by Chief Justice J J  Spigelman of New South Wales to the Convocation of the University of Sydney49.  He descried the Soviet practice of applying corporatist language across society's  differing institutions (including Universities) and how it had to be watched with high  vigilance. The "measurement of the unmeasurable" was a danger inherent in  unthinking references to "governance". The demand for "performance indicators",  common in this dialogue, is prone to easy manipulation. Chief Justice Spigelman  used a vivid example of a50:

"Soviet five year plan for the factory production of nails, measured in tons. Result:  large amounts of large nails, but inadequate numbers of more-difficult-to-produce  small nails. Problem recognised: performance indicator changed to a measurement  by quantity. Result: excessive numbers of small nails produced, and no large nails".

Thirdly, it is essential to respect the differing structures of government in different  countries while insisting upon the universality of international human rights law. The  dominant Western notions of democracy are themselves the product of a lengthy  evolution. When we look at the huge sums expended in modern electoral  campaigns, the power of media interests to run a strong editorial line, the external  backing for particular parties and candidates and the decline of actual membership  of political parties (not to say the institutional problems that arose in Bush v Gore)  we can realise that Western electoral systems are imperfect and cannot be viewed  as the last word on democratic governance51. On the other hand, human rights  without an effective democratic form of governance rests on a flimsy foundation52.  As Anthony Langlois has remarked53:

"Until the people of those States live in a democracy, Š they cannot be confident of  owning these standards or norms as fully fledged rights. Rights cannot be infringed  without recourse. Standards or norms can given to taken away depending on whim,  or more charitably put, depending on the international or domestic strategic interest  of the State in question Š China and other such states engage in such activities to  the extent that they do - not out of respect for human rights, not because they have  become liberals who believe in the individual's freedom, choice or autonomy, or the  need for economic and political environment. On the contrary, they adopt such  human rights standards as they must in order to achieve certain political, economic  and strategic interests".

Fourthly, it is important to pay attention to the criticism of Western insistence on  "good governance" by those in developing countries, who say that it is a paradigm  that has been overtaken to some extent by events. The events to which they point  include the growing power of global corporations that operate across a number of  State borders and the growing power of regional and international organisations in  which effective accountability to the individual who is affected by their decisions is  remote and problematic.

In such exchanges, mutual hypocrisy is never far away. The attacks on the  composition of the United Nations Security Council and on multinational

corporations is sometimes made by autocratic States defending their own bad  governance and undemocratic regimes, simply seeking a diversion. Nonetheless,  there is an element of truth in the criticism of developing nations of the notion that  "good governance" rhetoric today often involves only the governance of nation  states. In today's world, governance is necessarily a larger concept. Gaining good  governance in the global corporate sector and more accountable governance in  regional and international organisations is unquestionably a vital issue for the  twenty-first century. As we address and encourage "good governance" at the  national level, including in neighbouring states, we would be well advised to concern  ourselves as a nation with how to tackle effectively the governance issues of mega-corporations and of the new international and regional bureaucracies.

Fifthly, there is the connected criticism that "good governance" is sometimes being  demanded as a mask for the protection of market forces and is equivalent to the  intrusion into human rights discourse of notions defensive of finance and capital  movements that may not always coincide with the defence of individual human  rights. An instance of the tension here can be seen in the WTO demand for  observance of the international patent regime of the TRIPs Agreement at a cost of  the cheap availability of generic drugs to combat the diseases that afflict individuals  in the developing world. The involvement in the national delegations of important  Western nations of large corporate interests has sharpened this anxiety in  developing countries about "good governance" talk. This concern was expressed by  Tony Evans in his recent essay in Third World Quarterly54:

"The close relationship between WTO delegations and representatives of global  business and finance suggests that the interests of the poor are of little concern. ...  Christian Aid notes that Cargill, a company that controls half the global trade in  grains, 'was heavily involved in preparations for the US negotiating position on  agriculture before the last round of trade talks ... with some commentators claiming  that the company wrote the first draft of the US negotiating position' ... Similarly,  business groups were extensively canvassed by the European Union during the  process of drafting a proposal for an investment agreement, although other interest  groups were excluded. In a further case, the Australian delegation included eight  representatives of business but rejected all attempts by NGOs and trade unions to  gain a seat.55"

The experience of developing countries with the power of capital and finance in WTO  negotiations - specifically concerning the TRIPs Agreement and exceptions for  generic drugs for the treatment of HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis and malaria perhaps  understandably make some such countries, and their NGO supporters (such as  Christian Aid) bristle at the talk of "good governance". For them, "good governance"  often constitutes code words for the protection of the financial interests of global  corporations associated with large economies, insufficiently attentive to the basic  human rights of individuals in the Third World.

When I held my United Nations post in Cambodia, I endeavoured to interest the  World Bank in the funding of judges' salaries, as a prerequisite to the building of an  institution of governance, the judiciary, essential to social and economic revival. At  the time, the World Bank refused, declaring that it did not want to get sucked into  the "black hole" of Cambodia's national budget. But now the World Bank and other  institutions are showing interest in such questions in the name of "good  governance". Critics are sometimes suspicious that the turnaround has happened for  less than wholly idealistic reasons.

CONCLUSIONS

Good governance is today a twin theme with human rights, certainly on the  international level. I have given two reasons from my own experience, one abroad  and one at home, that show that these notions are linked. Like love and marriage in  the old days, you cannot have one without the other. But like the ripples in a pond,  the linked notions are, in turn, connected with still wider issues of governance more  generally.

How do we reform the United Nations to make it more accountable? How do we  make international regional institutions more answerable to those whom they serve  and more respectful of the human rights principles that they proclaim? How, above  all, can we render powerful transnational corporations more accountable in their  governance to the communities and individuals around the world that they affect  beyond the shareholders and investors whom they serve and reward?

The last issue is the hardest because the United Nations Development Programme  estimates that of 40,000 such corporations currently operating in the global  economy, the top 100 control a fifth of all such corporate assets. Furthermore, a  third of all world trade is within such corporations and a further third of world trade  is between such corporations56. To say the least, the decisions of such corporations  have a much larger impact on human rights globally than the decisions of most  nation states and inter-governmental bodies. In today's world to focus only on  national good governance may miss the main game. We should not give up on  transnational corporate governance, national corporate governance and  international institutional governance because they are harder for us to pick on or  the influence.

Human rights are more than the proclamation of splendid international instruments.  Good governance and institutional reform within each nation are vital to the  effective delivery of human rights. But they are not enough. Countries like Australia,  which are committed to good governance must practise at home what they teach  abroad. Otherwise, their instruction will be discounted and may be dismissed as  involving double-standards. They must also become engaged in the wider issues of  international governance affecting both international institutions and multinational  corporations. As Kofi Annan said recently, "Simply put, our post-War institutions  were built for an international world, but we now live in a global world"57. When  Australians talk of "good governance" they must take its lessons upon themselves.  They must constantly test their own institutions, their democracy and their defence  of the human rights of minorities by the best standards. And they must be willing to  apply the notions of good governance beyond the nation state to the world as it now  is; not as it once was.

Westphalian national sovereignty is gradually being eroded by global forces. We  need leaders with the insights of the founders of the Australian Commonwealth,  such as H B Higgins, to chart afresh the century ahead - taking the good ideas of  the past and adapting them to the very different world of the future. This was done  by Higgins in this University in 1896 in his lecture with profound consequences for  governance and rights in Australia in the century ahead. Good governance, in its  widest sense, is an idea of equal potential for the whole world in the century to  come.

ENDNOTES

1 H B Higgins, Another Isthmus in History, Creswick, Melbourne, 1896.  2 Pope Leo XIII, Encyclical Rerum Novarum, 1891.  3 H B Higgins, Official Record of the Debates of the Australasian Federal Convention,  Melbourne, 27 January 1898 at 182.  4 M D Kirby, "Industrial Conciliation and Arbitration in Australia - A Centenary  Reflection", unpublished address for the Centenary Convention on Conciliation and  Arbitration in Australia, Melbourne, 22 October 2004. The Conciliation and  Arbitration Act 1904 (Cth), received the Royal Assent on 15 December 1904.  5 cf J Isaac and S Macintrye (eds), The New Province for Law and Order (2004),  Cambridge.  6 As in the Harvester judgment: Ex parte H V McKay (1907) 2 CAR 1.  7 M D Kirby, "Human Rights and Industrial Relations" (2002) 44 Journal of Industrial  Relations 562 at 563.  8 "Christians attack gays", Sydney Star Observer, 7 October 2004, 1.  9 Australian Parliament, Joint Standing Committee on Foreign Affairs and Trade,  Human Rights and Good Governance Education in the Asia Pacific Region ("Joint  Standing Committee Report"), June 2004.  10 Joint Standing Committee Report, 11; cf T Weiss, "Governance, Good  Governance and Global Governance. Conceptual and Actual Challenges" (2000) 21

Third World Quarterly 5. Weiss mentions 8 definitions.  11 United Nations Development Programme, Governance for Sustainable Human  Development (UNDP Policy Document), 1997, Ch 1.  12 AusAID, Good Governance: Guiding Principles for Implementation (2000), 3.  13 Joint Standing Committee Report, 13 [para 2.16] quoting United Nations High  Commissioner for Human Rights, What is Good Governance? (2002).  14 E/CN.4/RES/2004/70.  15 T Evans, "If Democracy, Then Human Rights?" (2001) 22 Third World Quarterly  623 at 635 (hereafter "Evans").  16 Evans, 640.  17 Evans, 639-640.  18 Quoting S Gill, "Globalisation, Market Civilisation, and Disciplinary Neo-  Liberalism" (1995) 24 Millennium: Journal of International Studies 339 at 413. 19  AusAID, above n 12.  20 Ibid, Foreword, 1.  21 M D Kirby, "Upholding the Franchise- Contrasting decision in the Philippines,  United States and Australia: (2001) 21 Australian Bar Review 1 and 10.  22 A J Langlois, "Human Rights Without Democracy? A Critique of the Separationist  Thesis" (2003) 25 Human Rights Quarterly 990 ("Langlois").  23 AusAID, above n 12, 9.  24 Ibid, 9.  25 Ibid, 11.  26 Ibid, 12.  27 Australian Development Cooperation Programme of AusAID (November 2003), 9.  28 Ibid, 6; cf Meeting the Challenge: Australian International HIV/AIDS Initiative  (July 2004).  29 AusAID, Counter Terrorism and Australian Aid (2003), 4.  30 AusAID, Good Governance, above n 12, 9.  31 N Pearson, "Land is Susceptible of Ownership" in P Cane (ed) Centenary Essays  for the High Court of Australia (2004) 111, 124; cf Yarmirr v Northern Territory  (2001) 208 CLR 1; Western Australia v Ward (2003) 213 CLR 1; Yorta Yorta  Aboriginal Community v Victoria (2003) 214 CLR 422.  32 cf Al-Kateb v Godwin (2004) 78 ALJR 1099.  33 Muir v The Queen (2004) 78 ALJR 670; cf Cameroon v The Queen (2002) 209  CLR 339.  34 Attorney-General (WA) v Marquet (2003) 78 ALJR 320.  35 IW v City of Perth (1998) CLR 1; X v The Commonwealth (1999) 200 CLR 177.  36 The reference is to the provision of superannuation and like benefits and the  uniform provision of property and other protections.  37 R Croome, Address to a Union Congress, Hobart, 2003.  38 Toonen v Australia (1994) 1 Int Human Rts Reports 97 (No 3) reproduced in H J  Steiner and P Galston, International Human Rights in Context (Clarendon, 1996),  545-548.  39 Human Rights (Sexual Conduct) Act 1994 (Cth).  40 See Croome v Tasmania (1997) 191 CLR 119.  41 Criminal Code (Tas), s 123 (repealed). See now s 185. The Hon Justice Michael  Kirby AC CMG 25  42 Croome, above n 37.  43 Croome, "From Worst to Best" [Spring 2004] Refresh.  44 Ibid, 3.  45 Human Rights Act 2004 (ACT). See J Debeljack, "A Significant, Yet Incomplete,  Step Towards the Domestic Protection and Promotion of Human Rights" (2004) 15  Public Law Review 169.  46 G Williams, The Case for an Australian Bill of Rights (2004).  47 Minister for Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs v B (2004) 78  ALJR 737; Re Woolley; Ex parte Applicant M 276/2003 [2004] HCA 49. 48 Al-Kateb  v Godwin (2004) 78 ALJR 1099. 49 Reported in the University of Sydney News, 1  October 2004, 2. 50 Ibid. 51 See Evans, above n 15. 52 Langlois, above n 22. 53  Langlois, 1018-1019. 54 (2001) 22 Third World Quarterly 623 at 635. 55 Citing  Christian Aid, "Fair Shares. Transnational Companies, the WTO and the World's  Poorest Countries" (1999), A Christian Aid Report. 56 Evans, (2001) 22 Third World  Quarterly 623 at 638. 57 Report of the Secretary-General, Role of the United  Nations in Promoting Development in the Context of Globalization and

Interdependence A/54/358 (15 September 1999) quoted in A F M Maniruzzaman,  "Global economic governance and the challenge facing international law in the 21st  century" (2004) 54 Amicus Curiae 10 at 11.



