



Home Whats New Site Map Member Login Search

Australian Medical Association

Speech

Date released:   29 May 2004

**Check Against Delivery

Good morning colleagues, special guests, AMA staff and  media.

Delegates, a year ago I was honoured - and shocked,  quite frankly - to be elected your President.

As a former State AMA President, I thought the pace  and the demands would be similar to my time at AMAQ.

I can tell you today that I was wrong.

Why didn’t somebody tell me?

I have just lived one of the busiest and quickest years  of my life.

I need to wear a photo ID so my family can recognise  me.

The travel, the meetings, the crises, the challenges, the  phone calls - the bloody phone calls!

I didn’t know we had that many journalists in this  country.

And they all seem to start work very early in the  morning.  Even earlier in daylight saving time.

My friends, it has been a busy year.

An exciting year.

A stressful year.

AMA 16th National Conference 2004  - Presidential Statement AMA Annual  General Meeting by AMA President  Dr Bill Glasson, Sheraton Brisbane  Hotel - 'Confidence, Security, Access  and Affordability'

About the AMA Policy and Issues Resources  Media  Publications  Member  Services

And a very successful year.

I wouldn’t have missed it for the world.

It has been a busy year because our work - your work  - is important.

Exciting because people want to hear what we have to  say.

It has been a stressful year because it is vital that we  get the AMA message right.

It is vital that we battle for what is best for patients and  the community.

We have to get it right for our members.

We have to get it right for our patients.

We have to get it right for the towns and suburbs and  communities that depend on doctors.

And we have to get it right for the health system so it  can remain strong to serve future generations of  Australians.

It has been a successful year because when it comes to  health, the AMA matters.

Our opinions and our views matter - and make a  difference.

We influence health policy.

And you should all be proud of that.

Being a member of the AMA gives you a voice.

A voice that fights for the medical profession.

A voice that fights for all our patients, no matter their  means and no matter where they live.

A voice for our public hospitals.

A voice for public health.

A voice for the proper balance between the public and  private health sectors.

A voice for the health of Indigenous Australians.

A voice that reminds us of why we became doctors in  the first place and why we love being doctors today.

It’s the same voice that convinced me I really want  another year in this job.

Dr Mukesh Haikerwal, my loyal deputy, will join me for  another year of leadership and hard work...and a  wonderful sense of achievement and fulfilment.

Yes, we have the permission of our families.

There is a lot of important work ahead for our  profession and our patients.

Once the smoke settles from the Federal election we  will have a better idea of the specific challenges.

But first, a look at the year just gone.

When looking at my first year as President, four words  readily spring to mind:

z Confidence

z Security

z Access, and

z Affordability.

These four words have pretty well characterised the last  twelve months.

Our priorities have been:

z Achieving a situation where doctors have the

confidence and security to continue practising  medicine

And

z Ensuring that our patients have access to

affordable high quality medical care and services.

Just about everything we have done has revolved  around these two goals.

Medical indemnity and medical workforce issues have  defined our advocacy.

Our advocacy has worked.  The public welcomes our  messages.  The politicians heed them.

Medical Indemnity

You can’t have a year in medical politics these days  without medical indemnity being a hot topic.

While we had broken the back of it this time last year,  there was still a lot to do on confidence, security and  affordability.

You will have heard much of the detail from Andrew  Pesce yesterday, but I will recap some of the highlights.

Twelve months ago, progress on national tort law  reform was slow and uneven.  It still is.

We were working on fixing the ‘blue sky’ claims problem  with Government.

We were trying to inject some security into the death,  disablement and retirement concerns.

Despite the Government assurances that all would be  OK, the tension and uncertainty among doctors was  palpable.

UMP was still in provisional liquidation.

Doctors were ceasing high-risk procedures and retiring  prematurely.

Communities were losing specialists.

Then Government was more interested in levying  doctors than bedding down reforms.

They were sending the wrong messages in a volatile  environment.

Then whammo - the HIC issued IBNR levy contribution  notices.

To say it was like a red rag to a bull is an  understatement.

It was the proverbial last straw.

It was Monty Python’s ‘wafer-thin mint’.

There were doctor rallies all over the place.  A big one  here in Brisbane, then the monster rally at Randwick  Racecourse in Sydney.

More than 4000 doctors sent a message that one day in  September that registered on the Richter Scale at

Parliament House in Canberra.

In no time at all we had a new Health Minister.

And we had action.

Andrew Pesce and I joined Tony Abbott’s small medical  indemnity review panel and we all got to work.

The Government’s Medical Indemnity Rescue Package  was announced just before Christmas, but the fine  detail is still being attended to.

We have only just seen the Run-off Cover Scheme  legislation - known as ROCS - and we’re still chasing  the Government over portability issues.

And, as we all know, some States and Territories still  have a way to go on tort law reform.

We have not given up on the long-term care scheme for  the severely injured.  In fact, we’ve only just begun.

The Government is with us on this in-principle, but we  are yet to be knocked over by their enthusiasm.

But what of affordability?

The subsidies will help but we still have to see the  actual premiums come down.

You also asked us to preserve the MDO structure, and  we have.

We have managed to obtain cover akin to ‘claims  incurred cover’ without affecting affordability.

We have achieved an independent peer review  mechanism for disputes between doctors and their  insurer.

Greater efficiencies in the industry should see benefits  flow to members and, ultimately, this will flow on to  patients.

Already we are hearing of possible MDO mergers.

But I think the important thing is for all of us in this  room to recognise the enormity of our achievement.

I know there are some doctors out there who still think  we should somehow have got more.

That is absolute rubbish.

Senior political commentators have told me that the  AMA advocacy on medical indemnity has been an  outstanding achievement.  And it has been.

The Government didn’t have to come along for the ride.

The AMA made it impossible for them not to.

The grudging reluctance of the former Health Minister  was replaced by the boundless energy of Tony Abbott  who made it his mission to fix the medical indemnity  problem.

With the support of the Prime Minister and Assistant  Treasurer, Helen Coonan, Tony Abbott has delivered on  his commitment.

And the AMA’s Medical Indemnity Task Force has  delivered on their commitment, too.

All doctors are indebted to the hard work of this group,  especially the effort put in by Andrew Pesce.

They have provided the security - and the indemnity  affordability for the long-term should follow.

They have given hope to the access and affordability  problems confronting patients and communities.

There is now greater confidence in the system.

I said a couple of weeks ago that the long-running  medical indemnity crisis is all but over.  I stand by that  statement.

There are still things that must happen in tort reform  and long-term care but the settings are in place.

The AMA will participate in the Government’s review of  the medical indemnity arrangements in 2005.

If it has all gone pear-shaped by then, you can elect a  new President!

Another feature of the past year has been the punch  and counter-punch on Medicare policy.

The Government ditched the Fairer Medicare package

Medicare

when nobody could find the fairness.

It was replaced by Medicare Plus, which is better and  fairer - but still not Best and Fairest.

As the election draws nearer, expect more Pluses to be  tacked on to Medicare Plus.

We have already seen geography-based incentives and  higher rebates for cardholders and kids.

The quantum of these add-ons may have made a  significant and enduring difference if they had been  made years ago when Medicare started seriously  haemorrhaging.

We are seeing catch-up Medicare reform.

We are seeing patch-up Medicare reform.

There is no RVS-style vision.

Labor has said it will Save Medicare, but we are yet to  see the detail of this rescue mission.

GP after-hours clinics and GP teams who will pop up all  over the country when needed - like Batman and Robin  - may work in some areas and in some situations, but  the evidence seen so far has not been good.

Rather than improve services, the GP after-hours clinics  in Perth are threatening existing after-hours services.

They are limiting access, not expanding it.

Some more thought is needed.

But I have to say this - you cannot question the  intellect and the energy of both Tony Abbott and Julia  Gillard.

I can’t remember a time when both sides of politics had  such good listeners on health policy.

You will see them in action later this morning.

The great Medicare policy auction is not over yet.

The final products from the Government and the  Opposition are still in the workshop.

It is clear that both sides will commit more money to

Medicare and health.

We have just got to make sure it is spent properly and  that any investment in health is for many years, not  just election years.

The AMA will remind them every step of the way that  their policies will have no little or no impact if they do  not address the medical workforce shortages in a  meaningful way.

Unfunded bonded medical places are not meaningful.   They are counter-productive.

Building a medical workforce must be a national  priority.

Without doctors and nurses and other health  professionals in the right numbers in the right places  with the right skills, the policies simply will not work.

Medical Indemnity.  Medicare.  Medical Workforce,  especially General Practice.

That’s a pretty handy trifecta to take to an election if  you’ve got them right.

But if you want to win Government, your health care  vision has to be broader than that.

As I have found, the AMA vision is very broad indeed.

Let me take you through just some of the issues and  activities that have involved your Executive Councillors,  Federal Councillors, Committees and grassroots  members this year.

On tobacco control, we have pushed for cigarette shock  packs, anti-smoking messages in cinemas and, in  conjunction with the States, we have sought smokefree  workplaces and public places.

The AMA Child and Youth Health Committee - especially  Dr Michael Rice - has been at the forefront of the  community debate on pneumococcal childhood  immunisation.

We have campaigned strongly about the health of  Asylum Seekers, with an emphasis on the health of  children in detention centres.

Public Health

An area close to my heart is Indigenous Health.  Why  can’t we get this right in Australia?

Here we are in the 21st Century and the health of  Aborigines and Torres Strait Islanders is going  backwards.  It’s getting worse.

It is not good enough for political strategists in an  election year to say there are no votes in it.  Well, I’m  sorry, but there are lives in it.

Votes or no votes, I will be doing my best to raise  Indigenous Health as an election issue this year.

The AMA’s Indigenous Health Report Card has become a  respected measure of progress or lack of it in this area.

We aren’t updating the Report Card this year but in a  couple of months the AMA will be issuing another  groundbreaking report into Indigenous Health.  Look  out for that one.

The gateway to health care in this country is General  Practice.

Our GPs are the frontline troops and, like all frontline  troops, they are suffering the most casualties.

General Practice is a tough old school these days.  The  sacrifices are many, but the rewards are few...and  getting fewer.

The AMA has been fighting the good fight for GPs and  their patients again this year.

Our many successes include:

z Elective, supervised, pre vocational GP terms for

junior doctors

z A patient rebate that enables the GP to supervise

and direct a practice nurse in the delivery of  specific primary care activities

z Removal of compulsion to bulk bill concession

cardholders that was a feature of the original  Fairer Medicare Package

z Financial infrastructure incentives for hooking up

to HIC online available to all practices

General Practice

z An improved Medicare safety net under Medicare

Plus

z The AMA played a major role with other GP

Groups in convening the GP Summit in Canberra  in August 2003.

z The AMA has taken the lead role for the medical

profession in the development of e-health  initiatives.

z And the AMA has been a leader in getting

increasing rebates for patients of non-vocationally  recognised (Non VR) doctors.

We will continue to shift the focus away from bulk  billing to the more important issues of access and  affordability.

We keep telling politicians that bulk billing is not a  measure of the success or failure of the health system.

There was a slight rise in GP bulk billing last quarter as  a result of the new incentives under Medicare Plus, but  it won’t last.

We expect further increases for the next two or three  quarters before the drop starts again.

Inflation and practice costs will soon gobble up short-term incentives.

Our major push in the year ahead will be  implementation of a fully funded and appropriately  indexed 7-tier GP consultation item structure as  developed by the Attendance Item Restructuring  Working Group (AIRWG).

To help fund it, we will seek abolition of the disease  specific PIP items.

The AMA will continue to lobby for a more appropriate  method of indexation for the MBS.  Expect a major  announcement on this soon.

Other major themes will be increased GP workforce and  decreased GP red tape.

We have been very busy on the ‘bigger picture’ medical  practice issues too.

Medical Practice

We pushed for the health reform agenda not to be lost  in the political bun-fight in the lead -up to the August  signing of the Australian Health Care Agreements.

The reform agenda is included in the Agreements and  parts of it are being rolled out now.

For example, there are now GP after-hours clinics in  public hospitals in areas where there are no other  available services - unlike the mess they have made  with it in WA.

There was also the transitional care proposal in the  budget, along with other aged care initiatives we had  supported.

There is no stronger advocate for public hospitals than  the AMA and you will hear more detail this afternoon.

You will hear also an important announcement about  the AMA’s commitment to our public hospital system.

We continue to support the private health insurance  rebate.  Without it, there would be mayhem, bedlam  and problem after problem.

Our strong opposition to abolition of the 2nd tier default  got results.

We didn’t get everything we wanted but we settled on a  reasonable compromise whereby independent hospitals  of 75 beds or less would continue to be covered by 2nd  tier default.

We have achieved a more positive outcome on  prostheses. Thanks to the work of the AMA, there will  be a full range of no gap prostheses for each MBS item.

We ran an aged care summit in February to show  leadership in the industry and to make aged care an  election issue.

The Government's $2 billion package in the budget is a  good first step.

We are making steady progress in making it more  attractive for GPs to provide medical services in  Residential Aged Care.

We have a Comprehensive Medical Assessment item  and further items are on the way.

The AMA has defended the Pharmaceutical Benefits  Scheme from possible attack under the Australia-US  Free Trade Agreement.

We have developed a policy on Overseas Trained  Doctors, which will be released later this year.

Workforce

As always, we have worked tirelessly in the Workforce  Policy area.

z We lobbied the Royal Australasian College of

Surgeons to reconsider its time expiry policy for  Basic Surgical Trainees, which would have ended  the surgical careers of 101 trainees

z After a sustained AMA campaign and the

withdrawal of around 400 specialists from the  Repatriation Private Patient Scheme the  2004/2005 budget saw a $158 million lift in  funding for payments to specialists treating  veterans under the scheme. From January 2005,  Specialists will get a 15 per cent increase for  consultations and 20 per cent for procedures

z In November 2003, the AMA Federal Council

approved the policy statement “Flexibility in Work  and Medical Training Practices for Doctors in  Training”

z In May this year, the AMACDT and Committee of

Salaried Doctors prepared a detailed list of  proposals for the AMA to work on in order to  further improve work life flexibility for doctors  z We released the "Best Practice Rostering -

Training and Resource Kit" in conjunction with the  Australian Health Care Association, and

z Working with AMSA, we continue to slam bonded

medical places at every opportunity.

Our hardworking Treasurer, Allan Zimet, will give a full  rundown on the business side of the AMA shortly, but I  will make brief mention of an important corporate  initiative.

We took a major step forward during 2003 to reinforce  our long-term financial position with the establishment  of a new subsidiary company - AMA Commercial Pty

Corporate

Ltd.

This company will be instrumental in the years ahead in  providing substantial revenue streams to the AMA,  while providing a wide range of competitive products  and services to members.

AMACOM, as it is known, is vital to our future.

It will provide the necessary financial underpinning that  will allow us to grow in numbers and maintain our  reputation as THE BEST professional member  organisation in the country.

It takes teamwork to build a successful AMA.

Teamwork between the Federal and State and Territory  AMAs.

Teamwork between Federal Councillors.

Teamwork between Executive Councillors.

Teamwork between the Executive and the Secretariat.

I have put a lot of time and effort into promoting  teamwork in this organization.

We consult regularly.

The key issues are discussed and responses agreed.

I think we are working well as team.

I’d like to thank all the Federal Councillors for their  input this year - at Federal Council meetings and  through the Committees and in the media.

My special thanks to my Executive.  They are not just a  team, they are more like family.

Mukesh Haikerwal, Dana Wainwright, Allan Zimet,  Rosanna Capolingua and Choong-Siew Yong have  served the AMA membership admirably all year.

My thanks, too, to the AMA Secretariat in Canberra.

Under the leadership of Rob Bain for most of the year,  and Robyn Mason more recently, the people in the  Secretariat provide us with the material that makes us

Teamwork

look good.

They provide the ammunition of strong advocacy.

Special gratitude goes to the more than 28,000 AMA  members around Australia who make this job  worthwhile.

The grassroots doctors out there who just love being  doctors and caring for patients - despite all the  pressures and disappointments - are one of this  country’s great assets.

Last but not least, my thanks to my wife, Claire, and  my kids - Gemma, Nicola and William.

These guys have put up with a lot this past year and  they have supported me all the way.

It has been my honour and privilege to serve you as  AMA President.

I hope I have met your expectations.

Now that I know the ropes, I promise bigger and better  things in the year ahead.

Thank you.

Top of Page

Â© 1995-2003 Australian Medical Association Limited  All rights reserved | Privacy Statement

Australian Medical Association ABN: 37008426793

42 Macquarie Street, BARTON ACT 2600 PO Box 6090, KINGSTON ACT 2604 TEL +61 2 6270 5400 Â· FAX +61 2 6270 5499 EMAIL ama@ama.com.au

