Mea Culpa and the ‘Backflip’:

Two Strategies in Peter Beattie’s Arsenal of

Crisis Management

Dr Paul Williams

Department of Politics and Public Policy

Griffith University

Paper presented to

the Australasian Political Science Association

Adelaide

30 September 2004.

(Draft Only - Not for Citation)

1

Mea Culpa and the ‘Backflip’:

Two Strategies in Peter Beattie’s Arsenal of Crisis

Management

Introduction

We live in an age in which voters - primed by an increasingly intrusive media

- demonstrate a growing awareness of, and cynicism towards, the ‘spin’ now  commonly employed by party leaders as they announce and defend public

policy decisions. To remain credible before an increasingly sophisticated

electorate, leaders have been compelled to re-invent key elements of their

operational leadership. This is particularly the case with major party leaders

who, in the past two decades, have found strong competition from insurgent

minor parties and independent candidates. The emergence of One Nation

and the rise in support for the Australian Greens are but two obvious

examples of minor players successfully capitalising upon voter

disenchantment. This need for inventiveness - in the quest to re-engage

increasingly jaded voters - is never more apparent than in leaders’

management of emerging political crises, and never more so than in the

treatment of unfavourable public policy decisions.

. In the past, crisis-ridden leaders often preferred to ignore and ‘crash through’

criticism, or justified their policy choices while stubbornly maintaining their

position or, at best, paid lip-service to voters’ concerns by making only

superficial concessions. But, today, leaders faced with hostile voters are

more likely to demonstrate enormous flexibility when articulating, and

modifying, public policy. Indeed, even when faced with moderate electoral

resistance, leaders today are likely to amend - or wholly reject - the firmest of

policy commitments. Such actions, of course, are invariably labelled by the

media as policy ‘backflips’. Interestingly, as gymnasts will attest, this term is

an inaccurate description of a policy ‘about-face’. Where a policy reversal

implies a government turning 180 degrees, a literal backflip would, instead,

2

see a leader completing 360 degrees and, therefore, returning to one’s

original (policy) position. Irrespective of this imprecision, the term remains a

meaningful descriptor and is used in this paper.

The causes behind voters’ increasing disenchantment with the party system

are well established. First, the major parties in recent decades have

“converged” to the ideological centre to become what have been infamously

described as the “Tweedledum” and “Tweedledee” of Australian . politics

(Catley and McFarlane 1974). Second, they have also become “catch-all”

organisations whose first priority is to win and maintain office by sewing

together broad coalitions of support from often widely disparate constituencies

(Jaensch 1993: 246). Third, electoral behaviour has become increasingly

volatile with more voters likely to abandon traditional party identifications and

vote, instead, for oppositions, minor parties or independent candidates.

Fourth, the parties’ - and especially the ALP’S - internal organisations have

evolved into ‘electoral-professional’ machines in which party elites -

especially leaders - today exercise unprecedented policy-making autonomy

at the expense of grass roots memberships (Sharman 1994: 132; Williams

2004c: 85). Leaders, then, have been forced to placate sceptical and volatile

electors with a degree of flexibility that at least gives the impression of them

listening to constituents’ demands. But, despite significant journalistic

coverage of the policy backflip, there has been little scholarly interest in this

increasingly common phenomenon, despite the fact its propensity clearly

indicates a seismic shift in the way governments engage voters.

The purpose of this paper is to meet this need and to examine the anatomy of

the policy backflip. While precedents have been set by a number of leaders,

this paper focuses on the rhetoric and action of Queensland Labor Premier,

Peter Douglas Beattie, as a prime case study of a ‘modern’ State leader

willing to meet electors’ demands (Williams 2004a). Of course, the backflip is

hardly a new political phenomenon. Instead, it enjoys a long, if spotted,

history trailing back to at least the lgth century. New South Wales Premier

George ‘Yes-No’ Reid’s infamous prevarication over the Federation referenda  is an early and obvious example (Bennett 1975: 148). But, despite this long

3

history, there is little doubt that the backflip - as demonstrated below - has

enjoyed its greatest indulgence only in recent years.

This paper advances two arguments. The first is that, while Beattie’s backflip

strategy is clearly a means to an electoral end, it is equally plausible that it

remains wholly consistent with at least two of Beattie’s five’ core Government

Priorities, namely “Safer and More Supportive Communities” and, of course,

“Community Engagement and a Better Quality of Life” (Queensland Treasury

2001). Put simply, Beattie treats policy flexibility as a cog central to his

community engagement machinery. In this sense, the backflip - in meeting

constituents’ concerns - simultaneously meets twin objectives: it repairs and

galvanises damaged electoral support and, second, rebuilds public trust in

government. Second, the paper argues that Beattie has moved beyond the

mere backflip to adopt the novel - indeed pioneering - strategy of mea culpa

in which he anticipates, and then circumvents, media criticism with a pre-

emptive admission of wrong-doing, an unambiguous acceptance of personal

responsibility and, most effectively, a humble apology delivered most usually

at an open press conference. Moreover, Beattie’s mea culpa is almost always

accompanied by his commitment to “fix” the problem to prevent its recurrence,

often via a public commission of inquiry on whose report the government

promises to act.

The Origins of Beattie’s Crisis Management Strategies

The approaches described above have invariably seen Beattie tagged “Mr

Fixit” (Northern Miner 9 January 2004). Despite this glib label, there is strong

evidence that Beattie’s strategies have rebuilt public trust in government or, at

least, in his government. At the 2001 Queensland State election, for example

- held just weeks after damning allegations of vote-rorting in the ALP were  made - Beattie’s Labor Party secured a landslide 66 of the Legislative

Assembly’s 89 seats (an increase of 22) with 48.9 per cent of the primary vote

(a swing to it of 10.0 percentage points) (Williams 2001a: 368). Three years

’ The remaining three Priorities are “More Jobs for Queensland - Skills and Innovation - the Smart  State”, “Building Queensland’s Regions”, and “Valuing the Environment”.

4

later, at the 2004 election, the Beattie Government was again returned with 63

seats on 47 per cent of the primary vote (Williams 2004b).

It should not be surprising that Beattie should be so finely attuned to electoral

sensitivities. Indeed, when we consider Beattie’s long political involvement in

the public eye, it likely that he long ago determined the backflip and the mea

culpa to be the most efficacious strategies to defuse and deflect the usual

criticisms fired off by the media and Opposition. Beattie, of course, served in

the 1970s as Queensland Railways’ Union Secretary and, in the 1980s,

Queensland ALP State Secretary. Beattie also boasted a strong

Parliamentary and Ministerial profile before attaining the Premiership. Elected

to the seat of Brisbane Central in 1989, he served as the first Chair of the

Parliamentary Criminal Justice Committee, a post from which he clashed

repeatedly with his own Premier, Wayne Goss, over the latter’s reluctance to

liberalise prostitution laws. Later, in the dying days of the Goss Government,

and after suffering years of isolation on the backbench, Beattie was appointed

Health Minister, a portfolio that presented particularly thorny policy problems.

By most accounts, Beattie was a successful Minister who regularly placated

hostile stakeholders through a reconciliation of fiercely competitive interests.

These experiences, together with his apparent determination not to ape the

‘aloof‘ style of Goss, allowed Beattie to decide early in his Premiership that it

is better to ‘disarm’ one’s critics with an apology and open admission of fault

than it is to obfuscate or deny wrongdoing.

Beattie’s mea culpa, like his backflip, appears primarily geared to ’shoring up’

electoral support in times of political crisis. But this paper argues that the mea

culpa, too, can be described as a legitimate strategy designed to re-engage

disenchanted constituents; one that is, moreover, wholly consistent with the

Westminster principles of ministerial accountability. This paper concludes that

the backflip and the mea culpa have proved enormously successful for Beattie

as crisis-management strategies and that they may, in fact, signal a turning

point in the way ‘modern’ leaders need to engage electorates. As such,

Beattie’s strategies may well serve as models for other leaders, including

Federal Opposition Leader Mark Latham, who already has mirrored much of

5

Beattie’s “everyman” style, complete with plain speech and loose delivery

(Williams 2001 b). Indeed, Latham during the 2004 Queensland State election

campaign openly conceded his desire to mould Beattie’s style into his own,

one that Kelly describes as a “mixture of modernisation, nationalism and

populism” (Kelly 2004).

The Backflip Precedent

As outlined above, it is clear that the policy backflip option has been exercised

in recent years at an exponentially growing rate, with elected representatives

from all tiers of government now prepared to rescind previous commitments

as a first response to crisis, rather than as the last. Prime Minister John

Howard is no exception, albeit one less inclined than Beattie to trumpet a

policy reversal as a symbol of ‘good’ leadership. Perhaps Howard’s most

infamous example was his endorsement in 1998 of a Goods and Services Tax

(GST) despite his passionate 1995 pledge that a consumption tax would

“never, ever” be party policy. Another example arrived in 2002 when Howard

softened his asylum seeker policy to allow unaccompanied children to enter

foster care (Gordon and Shaw 2002). In 2004, he also demonstrated a rapid

change of heart over changes to MPs’ superannuation entitlements: where

previously he had rejected Latham’s push for reduced benefits, Howard, in the

face of massive community support for Latham, soon reversed his position.  Howard completed other backflips over consumer levies to fund retrenched

workers’ payouts (Coorley 2001), over the broadcast of anti-domestic violence

television advertisements (Morris 2004), over the location of a nuclear dump

site in South Australia (Shanahan and Di Girolamo 2004) and in reversing his

original mantra of “no sugar, no Free Trade Agreement (FTA) deal” (Murdoch

2004).

While, as argued above, Queensland Premier Beattie appears to be the only

Australian leader to regularly and genuinely indulge in the mea culpa, it is  equally true that Howard has made a few perfunctory attempts to apologise

or, rather, to express “regret”. During the 1998 federal election campaign, for

example, Howard claimed the greatest “regret” of his first term was over his

6

refusal to apologise to the Indigenous community for “past wrongs” (Rose

1998). Howard attempted another quasi-apology in 2004 over his

“misleading” the public over the extent of the Australian military’s knowledge

of the abuse of Iraqi prisoners at Abu Ghraib prison. Interestingly, though,

Howard refused to accept full culpability and instead sheeted home most

blame to Defence Chief Peter Cosgrove and Defence Department Secretary

Ric Smith (Kerin 2004).

Importantly, the backflip is not confined to those occupying the Treasury  benches and Opposition leaders, too, have changed policy tack for political

expediency. Mark Latham, for example, executed a significant policy reversal

in mid 2004 when he moved to support in the Senate - after previously fierce

opposition - the Government’s long-stalled amendments to the

Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) (Mitchell 2004). But perhaps

Latham’s most colourful backflip to date has occurred in response to

Australian-U.S. relations. In early 2003, Latham described U.S. President

George W. Bush as “the most incompetent and dangerous president in living

memory”. In late 2003, two days after his accession to the Labor leadership,

Latham backed away from this description with the explanation that, in the

past, “many passionate statements were made” (Shanahan 2004). The fact

that Latham’s press conference was conducted beneath an American flag

underscored his tempered position.

State leaders, however, have appeared more likely than their federal

counterparts to exercise flexibility. In 1995, for example, New South Wales

Labor Premier Bob Carr reversed his 1991 pledge not to tighten gun laws

(Humphries and Sharp 1995) while, in 1997, he abandoned his unpopular

proposal for a “bed tax” in the lead up to the Sydney Olympic Games

(Humphries and Coultan 1997). Other premiers have demonstrated similar

agility, although not always in the quest for popular approval. Victorian Labor

Premier Steve Bracks, for example, backflipped on his previous pledge not to

impose a toll on the Mitcham-Frankston freeway (Edmonds, Dennehy and

Danaher 2004) while South Australian Liberal Premier, John Olsen, executed

a “double-pike somersault with a twist” in 1998 when he reneged on a

7

promise not to sell government assets (Advertiser 18 February 1998). The

Bracks and Olsen examples, then must sit in a different category: these

reversals appear to have cost - rather than gained - support for each

govern men t .

Beattie’s Backflip and Mea Culpa - Down to a Fine Art

Despite the above precedents, it is evident that Queensland Premier Peter

Beattie remains the preeminent Australian example of a politically ‘elastic’

leader. Not unexpectedly, it has been the National-Liberal Party Opposition

which has been most vociferous in its condemnation of Beattie’s flexibility as

an example of weak leadership. During the 2004 Queensland State election

campaign, for example, the Coalition - despite a commitment to run a positive

and non-personal campaign - produced a series of television advertisements

ridiculing Beattie’s predilection for apology. Dubbed the “re-Pete” campaign,

the advertisements repeated ad nauseurn Beattie claiming to be “sorry”. But,

of course, the print media have also targeted Beattie’s flexibility as an

example of something less than “strong” leadership. Undoubtedly, the

alliterative temptation of “Beattie Backflip” as a headline is too strong to resist.

Beattie’s most spectacular reversal occurred during his Government’s

implementation of the long-awaited State Ambulance Levy. In 2002, the

Premier announced the levy would be collected through local council rates.

The plan generated enormous political difficulties for the Government, not

least of which emanated from the powerful Local Government Association

(LGA) which refused categorically to comply. In the face of the LGA’s

intransigence - and in the last year of the Parliament’s electoral cycle -  Beattie was forced in early 2003 to arrange an alternative method for

collection via quarterly electricity accounts. Importantly for this discussion,

Beattie made a subsequent backflip when those consumers connected to

multiple supplies - most commonly farmers and small business operators -

protested an injustice at having to pay the levy more than once. To

ameliorate, Beattie conceded in late 2003 that 50 000 consumers would be

exempt from multiple billing. Interestingly, the Ambulance Levy crisis also

8

saw Beattie exercise his mea culpa. Beattie conceded: I had better ’fess up

and say we could have done it better ... we clearly got it wrong in relation to hot

water and we’re going to fix it” (cited in Odgers 2003).

A previous backflip of almost equal sensation occurred in 2000 when Beattie,

in full populist mode, claimed oil companies were “ripping o f f  consumers

(Balogh 2000). To alleviate, Beattie proposed scrapping the State’s 8.3 cents

per litre petrol subsidy and replacing it with an annual $150 rebate on vehicle

registration (Balogh 2000). Pressure groups and motorists alike responded

angrily in a way that reminded the Premier that Queenslanders’ petrol

subsidy, like their hospitals, is sacrosanct. Beattie, accused of arrogance,

abandoned the plan within days. Another backflip emerged in 2002 when

another proposal stirred similar sentiment. That year, the Premier pledged to

introduce tough anti-discrimination legislation to prevent non-government

schools from excluding from their ranks non-religious and gay teachers. In

the face of fierce opposition from private schools and, more significantly, from

a conservative electorate uncomfortable with gay teachers, Beattie reversed

his position. Interestingly, Beattie on this occasion denied this was a

“backdown” but, rather, “a clarification of [his] position” (Jones and Potter  2002). Beattie completed two other recent backflips with varying levels of

success. The first was in 2003 over his view of the costs and benefits of the

FTA. Where Beattie had originally claimed that the FTA would “rip the heart”

out of Queensland’s primary industries, he later softened his opposition and

supported the signing of the deal, despite the omission of sugar (Emerson

2003). Strangely, a more recent backflip over the so-called “Winegate Affair”

appeared to fail and, indeed, cost his Premiership a degree of credibility,

Immediately after the 2004 State election, it was revealed that a small aircraft

had landed on the tarmac of a “dry” North Queensland Aboriginal community

in which alcohol is strictly prohibited. On board were a new Minister, a new

local Member, their staff and a single bottle of wine. In an effort to be seen as

wholly intolerant of the flouting of the alcohol prohibition, Premier Beattie

determined that Minister Liddy Clark’s advisor, Theresa Mullan, was

responsible and dismissed her accordingly. To Beattie’s chagrin, the media,

rather than praising him for quick action, condemned the sacking as political

9

‘overkill’. To amend, Beattie reversed his decision and re-employed Mullan in

his own office. In offering his usual mea culpa, Beattie conceded that he had

“acted too swiftly” and that “perhaps [he] should have known better” Wilson

and Roberts 2004). Numerous other examples of Beattie’s backflips exist,

including his reversals over vegetation management (Innisfail Advocate 24

April 2004), over Gold Coast land taxes (Lapperman 2003), over ALP

fundraising from the business community (Wardill 2003), over secret ballots

for unions (Franklin and Potter 2002), and over amendments to prostitution

laws (Franklin, Doneman and Sommerfield 2001). Of course, there have

been rare occasions on which Beattie has refused to “back down” - such as

his resolute commitment following the Shepherdson Inquiry into vote rorting

that he would push ahead with plans to democratise the ALP’s internal

plebiscite rules (Franklin and Olsson 2001). But such exceptions have

emerged only when they remained consistent with Beattie’s overall populist

style. Clearly, in the case of managing the vote-rorting crisis, Beattie

determined there was more electoral capital in remaining resolute than in

buckling to internal factional pressure.

Beattie’s use of his mea culpa strategy is no less frequent or any less  spectacular than his backflips. Indeed, as argued above, no Australian leader

has demonstrated such willingness to apologise for policy error or political

gaffe as has Beattie. For example, in regard to the Tugun Bypass fiasco that

plagued the ALP’s 2004 campaign, and which cost a former Minister her seat,

Beattie apologised after the election for “distressing” Gold Coast residents

whose homes had been targeted for resumption (Parnell 2004). Similarly, in

2000, when Beattie excluded from a garden party the wives of soldiers

returning from East Timor, Beattie apologised and conceded that “this [was

his] stuff up” (Breitkruetz 2000). Beattie also apologised when Families  Minister Judy Spence inadvertently named a family at the centre of a child

abuse investigation (Parnell and Wardill 2003). Despite Spence’s culpability,

Beattie apologised on her behalf and claimed the “buck stops with [him]”.

Interestingly, the Premier adopted a similar position in mid 2004 when he

unexpectedly intervened in a press conference given by an embattled Energy

Minister anxious to dampen down claims that power blackouts had occurred

10

because the Government had “asset stripped” from the Energex and Ergon

electricity providers. Again, Beattie accepted full and personal responsibility,

with yet another pledge to “fix it”. In early 2004, Beattie apologised after

offering the family of 93 year old former Premier Joh Bjelke-Petersen a state

funeral, despite Bjelke-Petersen being alive (Geelong Advertiser 7 January

2004). Most recently, during the 2004 Queensland election campaign, Beattie

apologised when he jested that, to play the role of Opposition Leader

Lawrence Springborg, he would need to undergo a lobotomy.

There are two points common to the above examples. The first is his

willingness to accept full and personal culpability for Government error, even

when the indiscretion was not his. Compare this to Howard’s attribution of

blame for “failed” intelligence to Defence Department personnel. A second is

Beattie’s preparedness to stand tall before press conferences and announce

policy reversals with an often silent Minister by his side. Compare this to

Labor’s PBS backflip in which the responsibility for its announcement fell

solely to Shadow Finance Minister Bob McMullan. In either case, it is clear

that, in addition to undertaking a pragmatic ‘vote-catching’ exercise, Beattie

also demonstrates a commitment to Westminster conventions of ministerial

accountability. Moreover, as discussed below, the nature of Beattie’s

personal intervention in crisis management bears significant implications for

the type of leader under which Beattie might be best classified.

The Backflip and Mea Culpa: Legitimised by Theory?

From the above discussion it is clear this paper is not a study of public

management in Queensland or of the administrative dimensions of public

policy. It does not seek to describe the role of public servants, or identify new

processes of public policy-making. The existing literature on public

management - with its emphasis on “community engagement”, “bottom-up

approaches”, “stakeholders” and “community forums” - remains an accurate

description of public policy-making as it today exists in Queensland (Hendriks

2002). Instead, this paper is a study of operational leadership and the political

11

dimensions of recent Queensland public policy, particularly in terms of

amendments articulated by the Premier in his quest for electoral advantage.

The purpose of this section, then, is to test Beattie’s crisis management

against theories of public policy and leadership. As such, this section

comprises two sub-arguments. First, rather than conflicting with the received

wisdom on public administration, Beattie’s backflip and mea culpa strategies

remain entirely consistent with public management’s ‘community engagement’

focus. It is argued that much of the literature - with its emphasis on values,

responsiveness and community needs - supports the thesis that Beattie’s

policy backflips and penchant for apology are legitimate processional

practices in the delivery of flexible public policy. Of course, it can be argued

with equal vigour that, if governments initially conducted adequate

consultation with key community stakeholders, then policy backflips would be

unnecessary. But this, of course, assumes an ideally pluralist world in which

all stakeholders enjoy equal resources and equal access to government. In

the absence of such idealism, governments will always need to negotiate

amendments in their public policies. Second, this section argues that, rather

than diminishing his leadership to the point of weakness, Beattie has instead

demonstrated a form of “strong” leadership by wresting control of the political  agenda.

As suggested above, it superficially appears that Beattie’s strategies are

diametrically opposed to those public management theories which prescribe

due process and transparency in all public policy formulation. Di Francesco

(2000: 36), for one, reminds us that it is standard practice for public policy

options to pass through a formalised system in which professionals can test

the efficacy of choices against objective criteria. Weller (2001) also attests to

such the formal process with his description of Policy Management Reviews

(PMRs). The goal, of course, is to ensure uniformity and objectivity in policy

making, with ad hoc or partisan choices excluded. Yet such a sterile

construction of policy-ma king ignores two realities: first, that values - however

determined - play a large role in governments’ adoption of one policy choice

over another and, second, that community values, like other variables, are

12

always subject to change. If it is accepted that values are integral to policy-

making, then it is similarly plausible that flexibility in policy articulation is

equally legitimate as governments seek to meet changing community values.

Indeed, numerous theorists support the integral role of values and flexibility in

policy-making. Martin (2000: 25), for example, insists that “values”, together

with “facts”, remain at the heart of policy formulation. Davis, Wanna,

Warhurst and Weller (1993: 72) also describe “values” as critical to the policy

process and, in underscoring the need for elasticity, further assert that

“elected Ministers need to be conscious of what ‘the people’ want” (Davis,

Wanna, Warhusrt and Weller 1993: 88). Kane and Bishop (2002: 88) go

further and argue that “a government that loses all touch with public opinion in

its decision-making inevitably forfeits some of its democratic credentials.”

This is particularly true today as governments enjoy a “politicised” senior

public service that draws increasingly upon the advice of professional

consultants. Importantly, Martin argues, such advice must remain flexible so  as to “reflect their client’s political values and be based on a comprehensive

understanding of the broader context within which the government and

administration work’’ (2000: 25). Compare this values-based approach to the

‘contractual’ approach which, in eschewing flexibility, is not interpretative but,

rather, “mechanistic” (Martin 2000: 25). Increasingly, then, consultants build

into their advice packages a degree of flexibility to meet both the community’s

values and, more significantly, the political values of the government as an

instrument to meet the community’s changing needs and wants.

O’Faircheallaigh, Wanna and Weller (1 999: 89) support this conception and,

in advising that a similar plasticity be extended to senior public servants,

argue that “frontline managers.. . [need to]. . . be given sufficient flexibility to

meet constantly changing challenges”. It is clear, then, that flexibility is a

legitimate component of public policy as the formulation process necessarily

includes “managing the relationship” between government and people and, of

course, “solving problems” (Martin 2000: 25). Once again, because the

inclusion of values is legitimate in policy-making, so, too, is the incorporation

of flexibility to meet changing community values (Consadine 1994). Indeed,

13

Hogwood and Gunn (1984) argue that, in the inherently evolutionary nature of

policy-making, the integral concluding step must be “adjustment or

termination”. Di Francesco (2000: 36), too, concedes that “calibration” is the

key to sound public policy and that policy formulation is “essentially an

informal process grounded in.. . rulers’ political instinct.”

By definition, notions of values and flexibility in policy-making must include

processes of negotiation. Importantly for this discussion, negotiation

processes can be ‘mapped’ on a matrix. Matheson (2000: 44), for example,

argues that policy-making has a “vertical axis” on which are found the

“relationships of authonty” that “stress instrumental action and rational

choice.” Yet he also reminds us of a horizontal axis on which exists the “cross

or intra-organisational relationships which involve negotiation, cooperation

and continuing interaction” (Matheson 2000: 44). Interestingly, Colebatch

(1998) has also explored the axis theory but, instead, labels them

“dimensions”. For Colebatch, the vertical dimension “comprises relations of

command and obedience” whereas the horizontal “comprises relationships of

persuasion, negotiation and bargaining’’ (1 998: 45). Given that persuasion,

negotiation and bargaining are processes at the heart of electoral

manoeuvres, it is probable that sensitivities to voters would sit, with other

‘informal’ variables, on the horizontal axis. Pragmatic electoral

considerations, therefore, can be considered legitimate components of public

policy-making. By extension, it can be deduced that Beattie’s backflip and

mea culpa strategies would sit at the juncture of the two axes.

It has been a recurring argument in this paper that Beattie’s strategies of crisis

management have served to rebuild public trust in government in

Queensland, particularly as they have come on the heels of two phases in

recent Queensland history - the Fitzgerald Inquiry in the late 1980s and the

economic rationalist reforms under Goss - during which public trust was

severely shaken. Indeed, there is little doubt, as Hindness (cited in Bishop

and Davis 2002: 15) has argued, that the decay in public trust in government

institutions amounts to a significant “democratic deficit”, one that Bishop and

Davis (2002: 14) suggest has been exacerbated by the practice of public

14

servants labelling constituents as “customers”. Again, it can be argued that

such trust-building exercises as Beattie’s Community Cabinets - while geared

primarily to the shoring up of regional electoral support - are also consistent

with current public management theory. Adams and Hess (2001: 13) appear

to support this in their assertion that the current discourse now centres on

“partnerships, mutuality, social cohesion, solidarity, identity, trust, reciprocity,

community building social capital, and inclusiveness”. In meeting this demand

of ‘new’ politics, it can be argued that Beattie, rather than being a “weak”

leader, has conversely demonstrated “Strong” leadership - as defined by

Graham Little (1985: 3) - in that Beattie has sought to “stimulate enterprise”

by resuming command of the political agenda. Yet Beattie might also be

described as a “Group” leader in that he prefers consultation, remains “self-

effacing” and, above all, remains “always ready to listen” (Little 1985: 3).

More broadly, we might also paint Beattie as an “Inspiring” leader in that his

role is “above all to communicate” (Little 1985: 4). Under any definition,

Beattie’s profile as a “Mr Fixit” and conciliator appears to maximise his

electoral appeal by allowing him, much like former Liberal Prime Minister

Robert Menzies, to remain above the ‘sordid’ political fray. Such a mantle is

evident from Beattie’s own interpretation of “mandate” in which he holds the

“will of the people” as sovereign (Beattie 2001).

Conclusion

Australian political leaders today face increasingly sophisticated, cynical and

volatile electorate. In order to re-engage jaded constituents, leaders,

especially those from the major parties, have been compelled to re-craft

elements of their operational leadership, particularly in the way in which they

manage political crises, and especially those emerging from unfavourable

public policy decisions. This paper has explored the case of Queensland

Premier Peter Beattie as a ‘modern’ leader who has successfully engaged

voters through two strategies designed to manage political crises: the backflip  and the mea culpa. The paper has argued that, while the primary motivation

behind each has been the pragmatic galvanising of electoral support, the

backflip and the mea culpa also remain consistent with the principles of ’good’

15

governance and ‘responsive’ public policy formulation. It can be concluded

from this discussion that each of Beattie’s strategies has been eminently

successful in meeting its objectives, with Beattie’s two election landslide

victories - against a backdrop of acute political difficulties - as compelling

evidence.

Beattie’s crisis management strategies are likely to engender three future

developments. The first is that other leaders, keenly observing Beattie’s

electoral success, are likely to emulate the Queensland Premier in their own

strategies for managing political crises. As outlined in the introduction,

Opposition Leader Mark Latham has already aped some of the Beattie style.

Second, if such strategies are universally adopted by the leaders of the major

parties, then a resurgence of such minor players as One Nation - with their

support base of disenchanted voters - are likely to be kept at bay. Last, if

Peter Beattie is to remain credible before an increasingly sophisticated

electorate, then he, too, will need to regularly re-invent his operational

leadership. Whether even Beattie can achieve this degree of flexibility is yet

to be seen.

16

List of References

The Advertiser. 18 February 1998.

Balogh, S. 2000. “Beattie ditches petrol subsidy”. The Australian. 14 June.

Beattie, P. 2001. Queensland Parliamentary Debates. 17 May.

http://www.parliament.qld.aov.au/Hansard

Bennett, S .  1975. Federation. Cassell Australia: Melbourne.

Bishop, P. and G. Davis. 2002. “Mapping Public Participation in Policy

Choices”. Australian Journal of Public Administration. March. Vol. 61, No. 1,

pp. 14-29.

Breitkruetz, G. 2000. “Beattie sorry for soldiers’ wives left out in the rain”.

AAP. 19 November.

Catley, R. and B. McFarlane. 1974. From Tweedledum to Tweedledee: the

new Labour government in Australia.

Company: Sydney.

Australia and New Zealand Book

Colebatch, H. 1998. Policy. Open University Press: Buckingham.

Considine, M. 1994. Public Policy: A Critical Approach. Macmillan Education:

Melbourne.

Coorley, P. 2001. “Howard changes tune on levies”. The Hobart Mercury, 20

September.

Davis, G., J. Wanna, J. Warhurst and P. Weller.

Australia. Znd ed. Allen and Unwin: Sydney.

1993. Public Policy in

17

Di Francesco, M. 2000. An Evaluation Crucible: Evaluating Policy Advice in

Aust ra I ia n Central Agencies”. Australian Journal of Public Administration.

March. Vol. 59, No. 1, pp. 36-48.

Edmonds, M., L. Dennehy and C. Danaher. 2004. “Box-on over freeway toll”.

Emerson, S. 2003. “Beattie change of heart on trade”. The Australian. 8

May.

Frankiln, M. and K. Olsson. 2001. “Beattie refuses to back down on rort

expulsion”. The Courier-Mail. 6 March.

Franklin, M., P. Doneman and J. Sommerfield. 2001. “Beattie backflip on

brothel laws”. The Courier-Mail. 4 April.

Franklin, M. and D. Potter. 2002. “Beattie backflip on ballot”. The Courier-

Mail. 5 July.

The Geelong Advertiser. 7 January 2004.

Gordon, M. and M. Shaw. 2002. “PM changes tune on asylum seekers”.

The Age, 4 December.

Hendriks, C. 2002. “Institutions of Deliberative Democratic Processes and

Interest Groups: Roles, Tensions and Incentives”. Australian Journal of

Public Administration. March. Vol. 61, No. 1, pp. 64-75.

The Herald Sun. 30 March.

Hogwood, B. and L. Gunn. 1984. Policy Analysis for the Real World. OUP:

Oxford.

Humphries, D. and M. Sharp. 1995. “Car backflip on gun laws”. The Sydney

Morning Herald, 11 July.

18

Humphries, D. and M. Coultan. 1997. “Carr backdown on bed tax”. The

Sydney Morning Herald. 15 July.

The lnnisfail Advocate. 24 April 2004.

Jaensch, D. 1993. The Politics of Australia. Macmillan Education:

Melbourne.

Jones, C. and D. Potter. 2002. “Beattie backflip on gay teachers”. 25

November.

Kane, J. and P. Bishop. 2002. “Consultation and Contest: The Danger of

Mixing Modes”. Australian Journal of Public Administration. March. Vol. 61,

NO. 1, pp. 87-94.

Kelly, P. 2004. “Latham, culture warrior”. The Australian. 21 April.

Kerin, J. 2004. “I’m sorry I misled on abuse: Howard.” The Australian. 2

June.

Lapperman, S. 2003. “The ‘s’ word is paying of for Beattie”. The Gold Coast

Bulletin. 7 May.

Little, G. 1985. Political Ensembles. OUP: Melbourne.

Matheson, C. 2000. “Policy Formulation in Australian Government: Vertical

and Horizontal Axes”. Australian Journal of Public Administration. June. Vol.

59, NO. 2, pp. 44-55.

Martin, J. 2000. “Policy Consulting and Public Policy”. Australian Journal of

Public Administration. March. Vol. 59, No. 1, pp. 24-35.

19

Mitchell, A. 2004. “Latham’s PBS backflip: smart or just stupid?” The

Australian Financial Review. 28 June.

Morris, S. 2004. “Backflip on violence ads”. The Australian. 20 February.

Murdoch, S. 2004. “FTA not quite all it seems”. The Adelaide Advertiser. 14

February.

The Northern Miner. 9 January 2004.

Odgers, R. 2003. “Beattie backflip on ambo charges”. The Courier-Mail. 12

November.

O’Faircheallaigh, C., J. Wanna and P. Weller. 1999. Public Sector

Management in Australia: New Challenges, New Directions. 2”d ed. Macmillan

Education: Melbourne.

Parnell, S. 2004. “Beattie vow stank of cynicism”. The Courier-Mail. 25 May.

Parnell, S. and S. Wardill. 2003. “Beattie sorry for naming family”. The

Courier-Mail. 31 July.

Queensland Treasury. 2001. P riorities in Progress Report, 2001-02.

http://www.treasury.qld .qov.au/off ice/knowledqe/docs/priorities/2001-02/pip-

2001-02.pdf

Rose, R. 1998. “Leader changes tune on Aboriginal apology”. The West

Australian. 28 September.

Shanahan, D. 2004. “Polls erupt as Latham goes softly softly - 100 days of

Latham”. The Australian. 10 March.

Shanahan, D. and R. Di Girolamo. 2004. “PM caves in over N-dump”. The

Australian. 14 July.

20

Sharman, C. 1994. “Political Parties”, in Developments in Australian Politics.

Eds. J. Brett, J. Gllespie and M. Goot. Macmillan: Melbourne.

Wardill, S. 2003. “Beattie backflip on cash donors”. The Courier-Mail. I

March.

Weller, P. 2001. Australia’s Mandarins: The Frank and the Fearless. Allen

and Unwin: Sydney.

Williams, P. 2001a. “The Queensland Election of 17 February 2001:

Reforging the Electoral Landscape?” Australian Journal of Political Science.

Vol. 36, NO. 2, pp. 363-71.

Williams, P. 2001 b. “Metapopulism: Peter Beattie and the Reinvention of

Queensland Populist Discourse. Paper delivered to the Australasian Political

Science Association Conference, Griffith University, Brisbane.

http://auspsa.anu .edu .au/proceedings/2001 /Australian-Politics-Papers-W - Z.

htm

Williams, P. 2004a. “Beattie’s Sympathy Vote”. The Australian. 14 January.

Williams, P. 2004b. “The Queensland Election of 7 February 2004: The

Coming of the Second Labor Hegemony?” Australian Journal of Political

Science. Forthcoming .

Williams, P. 2004c. “Australian Political Parties and Business Interests”, in

Governing Business and Globalisation. 2”d ed. Eds. E. Van Acker and G.

Curran, Pearson Longman: Sydney.

Wilson, A. and G. Roberts. 2004. “Beattie backflips on wine sacking”. The

Australian. 11 March.

