THE COUNTRY, THE CITY AND THE STATE

Judith Brett, Politics La Trobe University, j .brett@latrobe.edu.au

Paper for APSA, Adelaide, October 2004  DRAFT ONLY - NOT TO BE QUOTED (End notes incomplete)

This paper is an elaboration of a line of argument I began in the Symposium on the Australian settlement in  the March issue of AJPH. In my contribution I argued that there was a 6th pillar to the Settlement as Paul  Kelly outlined it in The End of Certainty which. like Kelly's other 5 pillars, was built in the decades after  Federation and dismantled in the neo liberal 1980s. In essence, this was a settlement between the country  and the city. mediated by the state, to compensate people living in the country for the costs of remoteness  and sparse settlement. I will begin to day by recapping that argument. and then move on to the substance of  today's paper - which is to look at the arguments that justified this trade off - and why these no longer work.  I am using the terms the country and the city deliberately - rather than say, rural and metropolitan, or  densely and sparsely settled. This is a reference to Raymond Williams The Country and the City, published

in 19 which argues that around these two places of habitation have formed a rich cluster of moral and  cultural meanings which exist in a continuing and historically situated dialogue with each other. Both the  country and the city have views of their own and the others virtues and vices, whch come into play in  political conflicts over the allocation of resources - both symbolic and material.

My thinking about this topic began when I was listening to the ABC's Country Viewpoint. The speaker was  Bruce Evans, a retired National Party member (state or federal) for ??? and his topic was Competition  Policy, in particular the question of whether user pay principles were likely to be applied to electricity and  the impact of this on remote customers. Here is what he said,

Electricity may become a luxury they can't afford. If the costs aren't passed on then who will cross  subsidise them. Will it be other not quite so remote customers living in country towns? We all live  in a big country , why should city people be exempt? ... Is there an imaginary line around a capital  city beyond which there are no essential services? Is there no community service obligation to share  the costs of living in a big country? (ii February 2002 ...)

Embedded in the central claim - 'We ail live in a big country and should all share the costs' - is a view of  the relationshp between the city and the country in Australia as one of interdependence and mutual  obligation within a shared political space. Note the ambiguity in the term country between non-metropolitan  Australian and the nation as a whole. It is a claim - we should all share the costs. It's directed towards policy

makers in the first instance and beyond them to Australians living in the cities. What interests me is why  Bruce Evans makes this claim with such conviction. and why today it falls on so many deaf ears amongst  both politicians and their metropolitan constituents.

THE COUNTRY CITY TRADE-OFF

Since Federation the essential political problem for the Country in Australia has been one of numbers. By  the time of Federation the pattern of population distribution was clear - population concentration on the  south eastern coastal fringe and in the SW comer - with high levels of urbanisation by world standards. By  1891 one third of the Australian white population lived in settlements of 10.000 or more', and the colonial

capitals were already dominating their states. At Federation 1/3 of the population of NSW lived in Sydney

and half of the population of Victoria lived in Melbourne." From Federation to about 1970 the cities  continued to gain population at the expense of the country and then stabilised - with not quite two-thirds of  the population living in cities of more than 100,000 people."' The drift to the cities stopped about 1970; and  there is now a slight drift back - though mainly to the coastal areas of NSW and QLD - with the inland and  the dry sheep wheat belt continuing to lose population." But it's only in Qld and Tasmania that the majority  of the population live outside of the capital cities.' The problem of numbers is of course compounded by the  thinness of the population concentrations across most of the continent, which makes the cost of the delivery  of services per head of population - by both governments and private enterprises - much more expensive  than the delivery of services to the closely settled cities.

In the first half of the twentieth century there was a policy settlement between the city and the country. an  agreed understanding of their distinctive contributions to the nation and the terms of their interdependence,  and in particular an agreement that country people should be compensated for the costs of living outside the  metropolitan centres. Of course, this was not without tension - like the better studied trade off between  manufacturing capital and labour there were still clear conflicts of interest between rural and urban interests.  in particular rural producers and urban consumers. between people living in the country and those in the  city.

Since federation an important part of the Australian commitment to equality has been a commitment to  regional equality - that efforts should be made to keep Australians' living standards relatively equal across  the country - that there should not be very poor and very rich regions - like the sort of differences which  once held between the north and south of Italy say. Built into the notion of what it was to be an Australian  was an idea of certain social entitlements. shared access to basic services, a shared minimum standard of

living. Of course this has not always been achieved, but it was an aim. an ideal, part of what it meant to be  an Australian which could be invoked by groups their deserts. Alan Davies remarked in the 1950s that the  most common political form in country Australia was the deputation, and that nine times out of ten the  demand was for equal treatment or uniform provision - and for the state to intervene in some way to ensure  it."'

By the 1920s various political mechanisms had been established which compensated for the unevenness of  Australia's population distribution, and which moderated the differences in standard of living between the  city and the country. First there were various compensatory means built into electoral systems at both state  and federal level. With capital cities so early dominating the rural hinterlands of the colonies and then the

states, country people have long been worried that their interests would be neglected by city-based  politicians responsive to the more numerous city-based electorates. Majoritarian politics did not work for  the country. and various forms of electoral malaportionment were devised to protect rural political  representation. The grossest of these have gone. a clear indication of the weakening of the country's political  clout, though. as Stokes points out in his rejoinder, the equal representation of states in the Senate reflects  the concern to protect the interests of the more sparsely settled and poorer states from the concentrations of

urban population in Victoria and NSW.""

Second there was the reliance on the state for the provision of many basic services and infrastructure which  allowed cross subsidisation through taxation and pricing mechanisms. The instrumentalities established by  the new commonwealth cross subsidised from the city to the country. For example, the Post Master  Generals department. which began the twentieth century with the responsibility for delivering the mail, soon

acquired other forms of communication like telegraph and wireless. The PMG was charged with an  obligation to provide services to remote areas - new forms of communication held out the promise of

2

conquering distance for people living in Australia's remote and scattered communities - and government  action and provision was expected to realise that promise for these people and not charge them the full cost.  The two living descendants of the PMG Australia Post and Telstra still carry a version of that obligation.  Australia Post is required to carry a standard letter for a uniform price anywhere in Australia; and Telstra is

bound by a universal service obligation to ensure that all people in Australia no matter where they live have  reasonable access on an equitable basis to standard telephone services and pay phones. Similar arguments  were advanced in support of the public provision of education - that government provision of education  ensures an equality of provision between rich and poor communities, between those in the populated cities

and those in small country hamlets. If we must all share the costs of living in a big country, then it was big  government that would enable us to share those costs through various re-distributive mechanisms built into  the way it delivered and priced its services.

Third was fiscal equalisation between the states. The states had differing economies and geographies which  affected their capacities to raise revenue to meet the needs of their populations. Obviously it was more  expensive for the governments of QLD and WA to provide services to their populations scattered over huge  distances than for the governments in the closer settled SE states, yet before the minerals boom of the 1960s  they had far less revenue per head. Fiscal equalisation began with federation and was systematised in its  current form in 1933 when the Commonwealth Grants Commission was established. It aim was to enable  each state to provide the same standard of services to its population, despite different state economies and

different costs of service delivery. This too involved a transfer from the city to the country - from the urban  populations of Sydney and Melbourne in particular to their country cousins in the other states. In 1999, the  2 recipient states, Tasmania and the Northern Territory, were are also Australia's 3 least urbanised states.""'  CHECK

Fourth. There were various devices to support agricultural producers, small farmers in particular, such as the  statutory marketing boards, which were established from the 1920s onwards. When forming after World  War One Country Parties hoped they might be able to roll back the New Protection. Both tariffs on imported  manufactured goods and higher wages raised agriculturalists costs of production and so harmed their  capacity to compete on the world market. But when it was clear that this was impossible, Country Parties  and rural pressure groups dealt rural interests into a national policy of protection all round.

ARGUMENTS FOR COMPENSATING THE COUNTRY

These were some of the means. What were the arguments which supported them? In a much quoted article,  Don Aitken coined the term 'Countrymindedness' to describe the ideology of the Country Party and listed its  elements. In some ways what follows is a reorganisation of those elements into arguments. This enables us  to see more clearly I hope why this arguments were once convincing - not only to those who put them  forward but also to those who heard them. and why they are no longer so.

Country party socialism is what its opponents called it; it was at least special pleading; but to country people  it was neither of these; it was a well-justified demand that they be given their due on the basis of the  contribution they made to the nation, a contribution that was far greater than their numbers and without  which Australia could scarcely claim to be a nation at all. Country people believed then that their  contribution to the nation well justified any special treatment they received, and they supported this with  three arguments. We can sum up these arguments as - Australia rode on the sheep's back; Australia needed  to fill up its empty spaces; and the virtues of country life.

3

1. Australia rode on the sheep's back: the first and overwhelmingly convincing claim that the country  could make was economic. This is well known, but it is still worth rehearsing the figures. Until the 1950s  90% of Australia's export income was earned by agriculture. And of this. wool contributed about half. In  1950 raw wool provided 47% of Australia's export income." Australians capacities to import - for both  consumption and production thus depended on the foreign currency earned by rural exporters. But the  economic importance of the rural exporters was more than monetary. First, much of the economic activity  and hence wealth of the cities came from the link they provided between the rural industries and the world.  Australian cities as they developed in the nineteenth century were port cities, transport hubs and service  centres, providing links between the rural producers and the capitalist world economy. (ref to Malcolm  Alexander) Second. although some sections of agnculture were protected from world markets, for the most  part Australian agriculture was very efficient and it was this very efficiency that allowed the development of  protected manufacturing industries paying relatively high wages. Tariffs redistributed national income from  the unprotected to the protected parts of the economy.

2. Australia needed to fill its empty spaces. By the beginning of the twentieth century Australia was  mapped and settled. but Australians were acutely aware of the smallness of their population in relation to  the hugeness of their continent. In the first part of the century the attention was as much to the distribution  of the population as to its size. Australia needed more people not just to expand its internal workforce and  domestic market, but to fill up its empty spaces - in particular the centre and the north. Filling up the empty  spaces. peopling the continent, was first and foremost a nation building project focussed on the economic  development of the lands resources. From the beginning of settlement, bringing people here had been a  major activity of the state - first as unwilling prisoners for a convict colony - and then as assisted  immigrants. Throughout the nineteenth century colonial governments had assisted immigration from Europe  and had overseen the distribution of land to the new settlers. This attention to building the national  population continued into the twentieth century, and is still a major activity of the Australian state.

The urgency of 'filling up the empty spaces' was strongest after the two world wars. when people's sense of  national vulnerability was understandably high. After both wars there were closer settlement schemes and  renewed migration programmes. After the second there was also an expansion of the protective tariff to  build secondary industry. The protective tariff was not just a trade off between labour and manufacture. but  was also linked to the national goal of an expanding population. Tariffs helped provide jobs for a much  higher population than could be occupied in Australia's relatively efficient agnculture. It is this that explains  the passionate support for protection of Country Party leader John McEwan. Although the high tariffs were  against the economic interests of most of his constituents. in the wake of World War Two he believed it was  in the nation's long terms strategic interest to have a larger population and that protected manufacturing was  the only way to employ them. REF

The interconnection of the different parts of the post-federation settlement can also be seen in the way  tariffs were used to support the sugar industry in north Queensland after the prohibition on the use of Pacific  Island labour. When the plantation system was replaced by small family farms. a tariff was placed on sugar  to make it profitable and so keep north Queensland populated.

If everyone lived in the cities, what sort of country would Australia be? An article written in 1954  predicted that without some form of decentralisation 'Australia will cease to be a nation, and will become a  collection of city-states perched precariously on the edge of' a de-populated bread bowl'. GET  REFEFENCE Living outside the cities, country people were contributing to a widely accepted national  goal of filling up the empty spaces with people and so showing to the world - and our near neighbours in

4

particular - that we were using the land we had taken over such a short time ago. inhabiting it and making it  ours. Simply by living where they did, country people were malung good Australia's claim to be a nation for  a continent, not just for a periphery. And the further they were from metropolitan centre, the greater the  hardship and the more heroic their contribution.

3. The virtues of country life: Country People supported their claims to national consideration with a third  set of arguments about their particular contributions to the character of the nation - both its national  distinctiveness and its moral character. In this they were assisted by the ambiguity and the power in the  word country. Country can refer to both the nation as a whole - as in Dorethea McKellar's poem 'My

Country', or to its rural part.' But for many country dwellers - and even for some who lived in Australia's  cities - the real country, the real Australia, was the country. Country people in their struggle with the unique  problems of the Australian environment had been shaped by that struggle and so made what they were by  Australia. They were the bearers of the characteristics of resourcefulness, endurance and laconic, courteous

good humour which were widely seen as distinctive Australian attributes. By comparison, city dwellers  were much the same the world over, and so had made no special contribution to a distinctively Australian  c hardc ter .

As well. country people believed that the country was a more wholesome and virtuous place than the city.  The push for closer settlement had been driven not just by nation building and strategic arguments, but also  by the belief that it was better for people to live in the country than the city, that a nation filled with  hardworking farmers with their stout. capable wives and rosy cheeked children would be a better, stronger  nation than a nation of soft-bellied city dwellers. Country people lived simple, lives, close to nature and to  the real ground of existence. within close, bounded supportive communities. Country people felt they made  a disproportionate contribution to the nation's virtue. In this they drew on a long tradition of opposition  between the country and the city as contrasting ways of life with both strong negative and positive  associations. From this perspective the city was a place of decadence and corruption, of anonymity and  loneliness, of sloth and greed, and the country a place of hard work, close communities, and what would  now be called family values.

So in these three ways country people regarded themselves as making a contribution to the nation  disproportionate to their numbers: they earned most of the export income; they endured hardship and  relative isolation to fill up the land: and they contributed more than their fair share to the achevement of  national virtue. A majoritarian politics based on sheer numbers would always favour the cities, but this.  country people argued, would not be in the national interest. Their disproportionate contribution to the  nation should be recognised in policies which compensated them for the disadvantages of living in the  country: the lack of access to the services and amenities available to city folk, the unreliability of incomes  based on the weather and fluctuating world prices. And it was in the interests of the city to look after the  country.

WHY THESE ARGUMENTS NO LONGER HOLD

From about 1970 - or perhaps earlier - these arguments have become progressively less persuasive. A range  of economic and social changes have undermined the conditions of their plausibility. The country viewpoint  continued to have a powerful political presence until the end of the Fraser government. John McEwan. and  then Doug Anthony were Deputy Prime Ministers at the heart of government. and Fraser. himself a primary  producer, was close to the National Party ministers in his Cabinet, primary producers. including himself.  When the Coalition regained government in 1996 the position of Treasurer had supplanted that of Deputy

5

Prime Minister as the 2nd most important position in the government. And the conditions underpinning the  country's argument for special treatment had fundamentally changed.

1. Australia no longer rides on the sheep's back.  Agricultural products are no longer the mainstay of Australian exports. The first challenge was from the  rapid expansion of mineral exports from the mid 1950s. By 1975 agricultural products were earning less  than 50% of Australia's export income; in 2003 it was 16% though this figure was slightly depressed by  drought.xi In 1990 coal passed wool as Australia's chief commodity export; wool was down to 8% and still  falling. In 2003 it was our 9th largest merchandise export.x" By 1980 however, the contribution from  manufacturing had not changed. It was still only at about 10% with minerals substituting for declining

agricultural exports. Thus primary commodity exporters could join forces against the city and continue to  argue that the city depended for its wealth on those living outside its environs, even if the farmers were now  joined by the miners.

The dramatic change since the mid 1980s has been the rapid expansion of exports in elaborately  transformed manufactured goods, and in services. In 2003 manufactures and services combined earned  about half of Australia's export income. Rural products were down to 16% and resources, including gold  were 30%.""' This was the result of deliberate policy on the party of the Federal Labor government. The  long slow decline in Australia's terms of trade. the fall in value of the dollar, the growing foreign debt all  came to a head in the mid 1980s when Paul Keating exploded with his warning that Australia risked  becoming a banana republic. The urgent and overwhelming policy goal became to diversify Australia's  export base - beyond primary commodities, beyond shipping wool, wheat and dirt to the world. The city  had to join the farm and the quarry as a producer of goods and services for export to the rest of the world.  For the first time in Australia's history the city is now making a substantial. independent contribution to  Australia's export income. Rural exports of course continue to be important in earning export income, but  they are no longer virtually the only player. The city has started to become self-supporting. and so can begin  to turn its back on its rural hinterland. or at the very least re-negotiate its relationship with it. Agricultural  exports have been transformed from the mainstay of the Australian economy to a sector and with it one of  their major arguments for special, compensatory treatment has dissolved. No longer can the problems of the  country be represented as problems for the country.

2. Living in the county is no longer a contribution to nation building

The economic, social and cultural processes undermining the nation building role of living in the country  are complex. They range from demographic changes in the non-metropolitan population to  environmentalists' criticisms of agricultural practices. It is a two-pronged process. On the once hand. the  basis of the older understandings of what it meant to live in the country are in decline; on the other new

understandings are developing which challenge these once taken for granted understandings.

Here I will sketch in the ones I see as most important.

i) Changed population mix and location in rural Australia Australia's agriculture is very efficient by  world standards; as a consequence it needs fewer and fewer people to produce the same amount of product.  Even as agnculture modernises and adapts to maintain its economic role. it undermines its capacity to fill  Australia with people. Farm numbers have been declining since the Second World War. An estimate for

1997 puts farming families at about 3% of the Australian population;"" the number of people employed in

6

agriculture has been falling all last century and is continuing to fall. Farm employment which accounted for  28% total Australian employment in 1933 and 15 per cent in 1954 was down to 5 percent by 1988."" Small  family farms are being replaced by larger farms, and by agribusinesses. NOTE Agnbusinesses embody very  different economic and social relations from farming communities of independent producers. This opens up  a gap between the economic performance of the rural sector and its capacity to sustain rural towns and  communities. Arguments about economic importance no longer flow easily and naturally into arguments  about the social and cultural importance of country people and their way of life.

As I said earlier, the non-metropolitan population is no longer in decline. In particular the spectacular  population growth of the coastal strip of northern NSW and southern Queensland arrested the decline, to be  joined by strong growth in some regional centres, and in the rural fringes of the capital cities. The vast  majority of this new population have no links with agriculture, being retirees. small business owners and

service providers. People living on the rural fringes of the cities may well work in town. This new mixed  population has made once secure National Party seats like Richmond and .., marginal.

Although the non-metropolitan population is now growing slightly, it is mainly in areas close to the coast  and the capital cities. The further inland one goes, the fewer the people, with the exception of areas with  growing indigenous populations. Population is declining in the dry farming areas of the wheat sheep belt in  western Victoria, central western NSW and Qld. South western WA, and in SA, as well as in the pastoral  areas of central Australia. Agriculture has failed to fill the empty land. Around the coastal rim the land is  being filled by others, but across vast inland areas it is emptying.

And no one is very worried about ttus.

ii) Strategic fears have waned

This argument is somewhat speculative. The long peace has, I think, made us rather relaxed about the  vastness of our thinly populated north and west. The debates about Australia's population still include  strategic arguments, but these generally focus on the size rather than the location of the population. Malcolm  Fraser regularly puts forward a population target of 50 Million for Australia, and supports it with the

argument that this is the size we need to be a credible middle power. He says nothing though about where  this population should be located. CHECK There is little fear that any threat to Australia would come as a  land based invasion so the location of the population makes little difference. The arrival of refugee boats on  the north western coast has focussed attention on the long unprotected coast, but it has not been

accompanied by calls for closer coastal settlement. Terrorists come by plane, or attack us when we are  abroad.

These first two points are about the decline in the conditions which once made people living in the country  key contributors to Australia's nation building project. We are now more likely to see people living in the  country as the result of their personal history than of the nation's, as a life style choice, rather than as a  contribution to any sort of nation building or defending project. The third point is about new understandings  of the country which directly challenge the meanings that once underpinned the nation building commitment  to fill up the empty land and the way it was done.

iii) The new country

Since the 1980s Australia has been renegotiating its understanding of its interior and its tropical north.  Australia is no longer seen as an empty land. There are 2 interrelated aspects of this process. First is the new

7

understanding of indigenous history, and second the deeper understanding of Australia's varied  environment, in particular its arid inland.

Settler Australia is slowly accommodating its understanding of the country to the knowledge of 40,000 may  be 60.000 years of indigenous habitation and to the claims and interests indigenous people still have in the  land. It is also slowly coming to terms with the fact that opening up an empty land for settlement by  Europeans was also the invasion of already occupied territory. The implications of both these for settler

history and for current land tenure and practices are of course contested, but it is a contest which  problematises country Australia's role in a nation building project once taken for granted.

Similarly the growth of environmental and ecological sciences has questioned the long term sustainability of  standard agricultural practices, at the same time as the damage to and frailty of these is becoming apparent.  for example in soil salination, and declining water quality. But environmental stress is not just evident in the  country, and competition is developing between the country and the city over water. At present this is most  apparent the struggles over the water in the Murray Darling rivers system, with the quality of Adelaide's  water affected by water policies which support irrigated agriculture.

Parallel to this is the growth of an environmental movement which values non-agricultural over agncultural  land and sees the latter in terms of what it destroys rather than what it produces. Recently this has been  accompanied by attention to possible economic uses of non-agricultural land for recreational purposes - in  particular eco tourist services, but it represents a fundamental challenge to the worth of the activities of the  agnculturalists. At the same time Australians have been discovering the beauty of the inland. There has been  an explosion of domestic tourism. But more importantly for my argument images of the settled agricultural  lands have been overwhelmed by the imagery of the inland. This has been partly driven by globalisation  which demands unique imagery to brand the nation but whatever the reasons the result is a sidelining of  rural, small farm Australia in the national imagery. To put forward just one piece of evidence. compare  Slim Dusty with Kasey Chambers. Where Slim's first recorded song, the rain tumbles down in July was  about the tribulations of the small farmer. in Nulllabor Chambers sings about the space and light of the  desert where she grew up. And interestingly, Chambers is the first Australian country artist to cross over  out of the socially limited and relatively closed world of country music into mainstream popular success.

Mark McKenna in an interesting article on 6 draft preambles sponsored by the Australian Republican  Movement notes the role that the land played in all of them - but this was the land of the ancient continent.  with its expansive light and high skies.""' It was not the land of the farmers.

3. The virtues of country life: The city never fully accepted the country's claims to be the major fount of  national virtue, however there were sufficient shared cultural understandings to make the claim at least  plausible. In the past 20 years or so. however. a new sort of social gap has opened up between the city and  the country which has strengthened the hand of those in the city who want to dismiss the county's claims to  a special place in the nation. Country Australia is far less ethnically diverse than the city. Although post war  migration has increased the ethnic diversity of both metropolitan and non-metropolitan Australia. the  increase in diversity has been greatest in the cities. Between 1947 and 1996 the proportion of the rural  population who were born overseas increased from 7.6% to 12.1 % whereas the increase in urban areas was  from 11.6% to 29.1%. Asian migrants in particular haave shunned the country. Only 2.5% of Vietnamese  live outside the major cities. and 5.4% and 5.1% of people born in China and Hong Kong respectively."""

8

This difference has acquired given national significance because of the increasing prominence of ethnic  diversity in Australia's understanding of its national distinctiveness. One powerful representation of what  makes Australia unique among the nations of the world highlights its ethnic diversity - Australia the  multicultural nation. And it is in the cities not the country that this multicultural diversity is most to be

found. Again this represents a turning to the tables. Once Australian cities recognised that they were simply  provincial cities much the same as provincial cities the world over and that whatever was nationally  distinctive about Australia was in the country. They are now able to claim to be distinctive as cities. and  hence that they make a major contribution to Australia's national distinctiveness.

More than this, the role of diversity in the city's definition of the nation gives them a stick with which to  beat the country. City based commentators are quick to see the country's independent farmers as backward  rednecks, bearers of ignorance and prejudice. This was abundantly apparent in the media commentary on  Pauline Hanson and One Nation. Now this is of course all in flux - part of a continuing argument between  the country and the city that has been going on for centuries about the balance between them of vice and

virtue. but at the moment in the national debate it seems to me the country is on the back foot.

ARGUING FOR THE COUNTRY IN A NEO-LIBERAL STATE

The loss of the persuasive power of these three arguments has substantially weakened the country's capacity  to defend itself. More critically for rural interests, these arguments have weakened just when they were most  needed, when the Australian state has been attempting to change its relationship both with producer groups  and with citizens to make them more independent of government support. One of Paul Kelly's five pillars

was state paternalism - the belief that the state's central purpose is to look after its citizens. This belief has  deep roots in Australia's nineteenth century experience of colonisation. From this perspective the state  offering assistance to producer groups, subsidies and support to protect them from the rigours of market  competition, was entirely appropriate. The state might not always be able to afford the support it would like  to offer, but there were few who doubted that if it could such support should be forthcoming and that the  nation would be a better, stronger and fairer place because of it. In the 1970s powerful arguments started to  be put against such assumptions. These arguments were developed in the United States and in Britain. both  of which had very different historical experiences of state formation from Australia's. But they fell on  willing ears here never-the-less, and appeared to address compelling current problems, in particular the  difficulties of financing the demands citizens continued to make of their governments. The result was a  switch in the way of understanding the relationship between groups and government.

Instead of governments being seen as doing their job when they listened to and responded to demands from  the people, groups, particularly producer groups, were seen as so many greedy mouths demanding to be fed  - snouts in the trough '- and an unholy alliance was posited between politicians wanting to be elected and  groups who demanded various and ever-escalating forms of support. Public Choice theory put all traditional  claimant groups on the back foot - from manufacturers who had received protective tariffs, unions with

wages and conditions protected by arbitration, people who received various forms of welfare payments,  people living in the country who benefited from cross subsidised government services and so on. All the  traditional relations between Australians and their governments were up for grabs as the political elites  attempted to remake the relationship between the state and the people from above. Instead of trying to work  out ways to help and support various groups, the government was suspicious of demands, telling us we

should be helping ourselves not looking to them.

To sum up: Once the problems of the country were seen as problems for the country - or the nation - as a

9

whole. If country Australia were in trouble, then the rest of Australia would soon be in trouble too. But this  is no longer the case. The problems of the country are now seen as problems of the rural sector, problems of  the part, which are unfortunate for those affected but not likely to have much impact on the rest of us. The  country continues to make a contribution to the nation as a whole, but it is only a contribution, one amongst  others, and the urgency of its demands and problems will be weighed agains other demands in a quite  different way from the past. This I think is one reason why there has been so much sense of grievance on the  part of many country people and why they feel abandoned. They have not been abandoned by government,  but they are not attended to quite as carefully as they once were either.

i, Powell, p. 31

ii. Aitkin, Countrymindedness, p. 52.

iii. Powell, p. 213

iv. Graeme Hugo, Regional Australia: Definitions, Diversity and Dichotomy, Paper to Social Poli  Research Centre, Universty of New South Wales, June 2001.

v. Impact of competition policy on urban and regional Australia, p. 18

vi. Alan davies, ‘Decentralisation in state government‘ in Melbourne Studies in Education, 195E  59, ed L.French, MUP 1960, p. 157.

vii. Stokes, ‘A Rejoinder, AJPH, 39/1, March 2004, p .  45.

viii. Productivity Commission, Impact of Competition Policy Reform on Rural and Regior  Australia, Inquiry Report, no 8, 1999, p 18.

ix. Hugh Emy Remakina australia, p. 49

x. Raymond Williams, The Country and the City, p. 9.

xi. Emy, remaking australia, p. 49;

xii. Composition of Trade Australia 2003, DFAT Commonwealth of Australia, May 2004, p .  10.

xiii. ‘Australia’s Trade Performance;, in Trade 2004, Ministerial Statement, Mark V a j   (www.dfat.gov.au/trade/trade2004/chapter-O7.html, accessed 21/9/2004)

xiv. Lawrence and Gray, Land of discontent, p .  38

xv.P. Nixon, National Party of Australia: The Future, Committee of Review in the Futl  Directions of the National Party pr Australia, Canberra, p,??

xvi. Mark McKenna, ‘The Poetics of Place: Land, Constitution and Republic’ in Dialogue, Acadc  of the Social Scineces in Australia, vol 23, 1/2004, pp. 27-33.

xvii. Hugo, pp. 16-19.

10

