

Media Release | Conference Reports |Photos

Conference Papers

Go back

Church and State

By Tony Abbott 25 October, 2004

Thanks very much Jennifer for that warm, but slightly embarrassing  introduction. There’s not much I can remember about my university days. I hasten to add.  But what I can remember I often rather forget. Anyway, it is great to be here.) I  feel both uplifted and humbled. I feel humbled by being in the presence of so  many people who are doing so much to deliver the services which  Government claims credit for. Thank you for making us look better than we  deserve.

But I also feel uplifted in the presence of some of the most inspirational people  in our country. I have to say to His Eminence: ‘thank God we have a few  chaperones here so that no one can misconstrue the nature of this meeting of  ours tonight. Not even Lateline could get it wrong!’

But Ladies and Gentlemen, you’ve had a long day. You’re here as part of a  significant conference. It’s an important conference because you’re not just  here to talk about your professional role in the administration of various  Catholic organisations. You’re also here to draw nourishment and inspiration  from each other. Yes as professionals, but also as people who are doing, may I  say God’s work, in a world which doesn’t always appreciate God’s work.

I am a politician; I belong to a class of people who are very happy to take  advantage of the hard work of the Church in the world affairs, but are not so  happy to listen to the voice of the Church when it comes to human values and  so it is important that you come together. It is important that you talk about the  things that make you effective professionals and effective service deliverers.  But it’s also important that you should talk about the values that make what  you do special and different from that which others are doing, what might on  the surface look like similar things, the values that those people have.

I want to do four things tonight. First of all I want to thank you, for the work you  do for your fellow Australians. Second, I want to touch briefly on some of the  alleged moral defects of the Government which I serve. Third, I want to raise  an issue, where I think the Church might be able to do more, to build an

ethical and a just society. But most of all I want to acknowledge the necessity  of the work of the Church, calling all of us, to be our best selves. All of us need  to be reminded, not just of what we are, but of what we could be. That, at the  human level at least, is what the Church does, and what the Church does  better than any other institution that I’m aware of.

First of all let me thank you. For the way you deliver government funded  services to the Australian people, in health, in education, in employment and  in the relief of material and spiritual poverty.

Catholicism Inc. spends millions of dollars, employs tens of thousands of people  and serves million of Australians. The Catholic school system educates some six  hundred thousand children, employs some thirty thousand teachers, and is  funded to the tune of two and a half billion dollars by the Federal  Government. Catholic Health employs some thirty thousand people and is  funded by the Federal Government to the tune of more than one billion dollars  a year. Catholic welfare employs more than five thousand people and similarly  is funded by the federal government to the tune of hundreds of millions a year. You do all these things but it’s not all Martha… It’s Mary too. And what I think  makes the work that the Church does so special, is the spirit, the special spirit  that it brings to the job that it does. Because it’s not just a job, it is a vocation, it  is a calling, it’s not just a task. It is a mission. You’re not just delivering services  but you are trying to produce better human beings. You are always trying to  touch, what Abraham Lincoln once described as the better angels of our  nature. We are far from perfect, as a society and as a culture, but we would  be far more imperfect but for the work that you do, and I am very pleased to  be here tonight to salute you for it.

But I do want to talk about some of the issues which people who take their  faith seriously sometimes hold against the government which I serve.

The Howard government is often accused of a certain hardness of heart. I  would be the last to say that everything we always say is perfectly well chosen.  I would be the last to say that we don’t from time to time strike a false note  because we are human, just as everyone else is.

If you look at the record, unemployment has come down from over 10% to  about 5.5%. We have done things like ban semi-automatic weapons. East  Timor is free as a result of the intervention of the Howard government. The  government has defied orthodoxy and helped to restore order and peace in  various troubled countries in the South Pacific. And of course we over-ruled the  Northern Territory’s ‘Right to kill’ legislation.

I would not say for a second, because it would be wrong, and you wouldn’t  believe me because you are intelligent people, not for a second would I say  that the Howard government is consciously motivated by Catholic social  teaching. But never the less, I believe we have done more to put aspects of  Catholic social teaching into practice, than any other government in recent  Australian history.

Now it’s not all a happy story, I know. There are many things which we have  done which have been difficult and hard. Even for people who might  otherwise be sympathetic to us. One of the cries that I often heard on the street during the recent election  campaign was - “how could you, as a Catholic, be part of a government  which has waged what was described as an unjust war against the people of  Iraq.” Now I want to say, that there have been many conflicts in human  history, many conflicts in recent human history from World War II, to the relief of  Kosovo, which have not had international sanction. But that doesn’t mean  that they were unjust, or unjustified. It’s important for us to remember in the  difficulties of post war Iraq, that Saddam Hussein was the world’s worst despot,  since Poll Pot. He was the most genocidal ruler since Pol Pot and I don’t recall  any great international outrage when the communist government of Vietnam  moved to remove Pol Pot and his genocidal colleagues from power in  Cambodia. Of course a post war Iraq has been an extremely difficult place.  But it has become a focus for international terror. Let us not pretend for a  second that the kind of people who would saw someone’s head off on  television are the kind of people who would go back to farming and retail, but  for the presence of American, British and Australian troops in their country.

The fact is that Australia is playing a small but significant role in trying to create  a liberal order in Iraq, in trying to demonstrate that peaceful co-existence  between different peoples and different faiths is possible in the Middle East.

And to suddenly abandon that campaign wouldn’t be moral principle, it  would be moral posturing. A difficult, difficult issue, because no one likes to  support the use of armed force and yet what is the alternative that we  realistically face in this extremely difficult situation? The next issue I want to raise is the vexed question, again raised with me on  numerous occasions during the last election campaign of children in  detention.

Now who could blame someone in one of the more wretched countries of the  earth for wanting to build a better life for his/her family? Who could blame  people for wanting to leave countries that are torn by war, injustice and  oppression? Why wouldn’t they want to come to a country like ours to live? But  the government of Australia has an obligation to it’s citizens as well as  obligations to those who arrive here in breech of our rules, and if any of us  were suddenly to arrive without appropriate authorisation in another country,  we would be detained, and we would be sent back at the earliest possible  opportunity, and the difficulty that people who argue for life Australia have, is  that almost none of those who are currently in immigration detention are  people who have come to Australia as a country of first asylum. All of them  have come here from somewhere else where they had first asylum. If they do  come here with their children, we detain the family or we break the family up.  Neither option is very palatable. But I can say that we have at all times done  our best to try to ensure that wherever possible there are no children in  detention and despite the still current view that the government is portraying  human decency in this area, there are only 53 children in immigration  detention in Australia today and in fact there is only one child of boat people





currently in immigration detention on mainland Australia. I’m not happy about  that. No one could be happy about that. But again the question is - what is  the alternative? And it is difficult to be a credible critic of a policy without  having an alternative that brings about just as much good with as little  difficulty as the policy which is being criticised.

The third thing I want to do is to invite representatives of the Church, leaders of  the Church, to consider the Church’s role in combating the great tragedy of  abortion in Australia today. I’ve just taken issue with some of the statements  which have been made over the last few years by people associated with the  Church. Please don’t let me give anyone the impression that the Church  should hold its tongue. No. When the Church speaks, if people disagree, they  will say so. But please, speak out, about the things that the Church believes in.  Speak out about the great truths of Christian faith.

It seems to be undeniable that we have a terrible problem in this country.  There are about 75,000 Medicare funded abortions every year. There are  about 100,000 abortions a year in total. There are about 250,000 live births  which mean that more than one quarter of pregnancies in Australia end in  abortion.

We will be a better country, we will be better people and frankly, we will have  better governments if the Church speaks its mind clearly and unambiguously  on this and on the other great moral truths which Catholics and Christians  believe in.

The problem of abortion is not a question on which Christians of good will  should differ. This is morally clear cut in a way that, for instance the application  for just war theory is not. There is in fact a just war theory. There is no just  abortion on demand theory which any serious Christian thinker has ever  advocated.

The last thing anyone would want to do, in my view, is criminalise people who  are party to abortion. Still, abortion is a stain on our national character that  can and should be reduced. We can and should do something about it. I  respectfully put it to the leaders of the Church that are here tonight. If on a per  capita basis, Catholics devoted as much moral energy to the 100,000  extinguished lives as we do to the far smaller number of children in detention. If  senior Catholics were as morally indignant about the unambiguous moral  tragedy of abortion as we are about the less clear cut question of immigration  detention, then there would be change. And change we should have.

If only as a culture we were as clear cut as even John Kerry, the US presidential  candidate who says that abortion should be safe, that’s what he says.  Available, that’s what he says, and almost never chosen. And that’s the issue.  It should not be chosen. If as a society we put as much effort into discouraging  premature sexual activity as we do into discouraging drink driving or cigarette  smoking. If as a society we re-established adoption as an alternative to  abortion or sole parenthood. If as a society we cherished and celebrated  motherhood as much as we cherish and celebrate success in the work place,

there would be far fewer abortions. And we would be a happier and better  society. It seems to me that the greatest gift which any human being can give  to another is the gift of life, and that having children is the ultimate vote of  confidence in the future. Those of us who believe that Jesus came… that we  should have life and have it to the full can go through a single day without  being haunted by the missing million of Australians is beyond me. There is a call  there for all of us to do what we can and to try to tackle this issue.

The best that can possibly be said, by anyone, for abortion, is that it might be a  necessary evil, but it is an evil that is now taken for granted in our society in a  way that not even the most convinced feminist could have imagined possible  35 years ago.

At the very least, we should surely be reminding people of just what is going on  in our midst by adding a prayer of intercession against hardening our hearts  against new life.

Finally I want to say that this is supposed to be an irreligious age. And it’s true,  that amongst very many influential people in our society, religion is alright  between consenting adults in private, but heaven help us if it should make a  difference to the way we actually live. It seems to me that if our society lacks idealism, it is because idealism is so  rarely expected of us. And I don’t believe any of us, least of all people in this  room, should underestimate the strength of Australians Christian commitment,  if that commitment is called for. We shouldn’t underestimate what Australian  Christians can do. Roughly as many people attend Church on a Sunday as  participate in organised sport on a weekend, and as a culture we would never  treat sport and sporting values with the condescension with which we have  treated Christian values and Christian pieties over the last generation.  Christians certainly can’t expect the world to reflect Christian values, but  certainly can seek to have the world better reflect human values and to pose  the question - “how are the best human values advanced by Australia’s  abortion epidemic?”

So Ladies and Gentlemen, as a politician who is doing his best to try to be a  better politician, in at times difficult environments, I would find it easier to do  my job well when you as Catholics and as the reps of organised Catholicism  state your values clearly. Yes it is important, on occasions such as this, at a  conference such as this, that we remember the role that all of you have, as  professional managers in organisations which are there to deliver services  according to professional standards. But we should never forget the values  and the example which gives the Church its sublime calling. So thanks very  much indeed for having me. It is, as I said, both inspiring and a little humbling  to be in your presence this evening. May you go forth from this conference,  strengthened in your professionalism, fortified in your faith and resolved to  make an even bigger difference to the world than you currently do.

return

