

Whitlam Oration, 2004

Delivered by Senator John Faulkner, Leader of the Opposition in the  Senate and Shadow Minister for Public Administration and  Accountability

At the Sutherland District Trade Union Club, Kingsway, Gymea

Embargoed until 7.30 pm Friday March 19 - Check against Delivery



From Blue Poles to Red Fans

Well, to Gough and Margaret Whitlam, to Senator Mike Forshaw,

and thank you very much indeed Mike for those kind comments, to

candidate Greg Holland, to Les Johnson, former member for Hughes, to

State parliamentary and local government colleagues, ladies and

gentlemen.

Well, tonight is a first for me.  Of course it’s an honour to deliver my

first Whitlam oration but I’m also going to make a speech tonight about a

subject on which and about which I have never spoken about publicly

before.

So I want to start by reminding you of a recent event.

1

2

As part of a vitriolic attack on the National Museum of Australia, the

Howard- biographer-turned-historical-“expert” David Barnett singled out

for criticism a very specific part of the outdoor event space at the

Museum, “The Garden of Australian Dreams”.  It was an installation of

telegraph poles painted blue, and Barnett was infuriated by this

“monument to Gough Whitlam”.

Thirty years on, Blue Poles still enrages the Tories.

For those who hate both progressive art and progressive politics, the

abstract and seemingly chaotic whorls and splatters of paint on Jackson

Pollock’s canvas symbolise the Whitlam Government.

Don’t expect me to disagree!

I’m happy for Blue Poles to be seen as a symbol of the Whitlam

Government.  A painting that cost $1.3 million in 1973 was by 2003 the

subject of an American purchase offer of $100 million - plus a

replacement Pollock.

Consider the great innovations of the Whitlam Government - such as

universal health insurance, independent foreign policy, equal rights for

women and university admittance based on merit, not on money.

Like Blue Poles, all initially controversial and considered too

expensive.  Like Blue Poles, all proved to have a value to Australia far

beyond their cost. And like Blue Poles, these Whitlamite building blocks

of an independent and egalitarian Australia hold a special place in the

heart of the nation - although the conservative forces in our society will

never admit it.

3

Barnett’s attack was a perfect demonstration of the way John

Howard and his cultural commandos approach Australian history, art and

culture.

It’s quite clear they have neither a sense of humour nor a sense of

proportion.  From Barnett’s reaction, you’d have thought the National

Museum had erected a monument celebrating Attila the Hun’s human

rights achievements instead of a quirky visual joke.  And Barnett must

have sensed that his outrage would be viewed with a certain bemusement

by the wider public, because he tried very hard to keep his views secret -

despite the fact they were contained in a submission to a public review of

a public institution.

And then there’s the way any mention of Gough Whitlam sends the

Tories into a frothing rage.  That mob will bend any fact, ignore any

evidence, and invent any argument to deny the achievements of the

Whitlam Government.

For example, the same Barnett had also objected to an exhibit

celebrating the 1967 referendum, a crucial step in the recognition of

indigenous Australians, because it contained photographs of - yes, you

guessed it - Gough Whitlam campaigning for a Yes! vote. Barnett

complained that the photo should be of a Liberal minister campaigning

for the Yes! case, since it was the Liberal Government that introduced the

referendum.

Unfortunately for Barnett, no such photograph could be found.

Mere historical reality, however, was not enough to stop Barnett’s

outraged protests!

4

David Barnett’s meticulous examination of the National Museum is

typical of the intense interest that Howard’s acolytes take in art, culture

and history.  More than thirty years after Whitlam united the politics of

the suburbs with the politics of Australian cultural maturity, art and

culture remain deeply rooted in the Australian political landscape.

Gough has been remembered for his vital engagement with

Australian cultural life and the socially progressive nature of his

Government’s programs. And equally, we must never forget the

importance of the concrete steps the Whitlam Government took to

remedy inequality through the provision of services.

In many ways, Gough was the first Prime Minister of the suburbs.

He led Labor to victory on a platform that contained a great many prosaic

commitments - transport, health, housing costs, education, telephone

services and sewerage.

In his 1972 Policy Speech, he set out a program for arts and culture

that united the practical and the romantic, the suburban and the

international.  Gough described four objectives: to promote excellence, to

widen access, to express our Australian identity and to make the world

aware of our unique and diverse culture.

We are too often told that the life of the suburbs and the life of the

mind are incompatible.  It is often though not always the Tories who tell

us this.  Interest in Australia’s cultural life is derided as the province of

the privileged and the so-called “chattering classes”, alien to the real

concerns of real Australians.   The ‘culture wars’ and the ‘history wars’

are justified as a strike against self-indulgent elites on behalf of long-suffering ‘battlers’.

5

This ignores the pride Australians feel in our culture.  It disregards

our interest in Australian stories told in every kind of cultural and artistic

form.  And it is breath-takingly hypocritical when you consider how

much effort the Tories put in to trying to remake our culture in their own

image.

The life of the suburbs and the life of the mind are not inevitably

separated.  They are inextricably linked.  As Gough has written:

“In any civilised community the arts and associated amenities must

occupy a central place.  Their enjoyment should not be seen as something

remote from everyday life.  Our policies for the arts have therefore to be

judged in conjunction with our broader policies for education and social

reform.  They were part of the same processes; they embodied the same

values.”

Ladies and gentlemen, art and culture are not optional add-ons to the

core business of government. Despite his assumption of the reverse-snobbery persona of sports fan and cultural boor, John Howard knows the

importance of art very well.

He’s stacked the boards of our cultural institutions with obedient

flunkeys.  He’s slashed the budgets of institutions that fail to follow the

Howard agenda despite overall increases in arts funding.  His loyal

henchman Bill Heffernan put an end to the plan to commemorate the

centenary of women’s suffrage with a sculpture that was actually visible.

His chosen successor Tony Abbott  and that self-styled “fairly

unreconstructed conservative” Ross Cameron successfully forced a

change to the Parliament House art collection policy of buying works by

living Australian artists.

6

Our art and our culture reflect our national identity back to us.  What

kind of reflection we see depends on the perspective of our cultural

institutions, of our media, of our artists.  Our art and culture offer ways to

interpret our lived experiences, and for that reason there’s real political

currency in influencing the kinds of interpretations available.

The Howard Government won the 2001 election on the back of lies

about asylum seekers and the manipulation of national security issues.

Howard’s ‘dark victory’ was made possible by the compelling but

counterfeit portrait he painted of queue-jumping, child-tossing illegals.

Broad brush paintings of dole-bludgers and job-snobs taking advantage of

hard-working tax-payers prepared Australia for the Howard

Government’s cruel and punitive approach to people in receipt of

Government assistance.  Public health and public education were recast

as safety nets, not universal services.  Caricatures of ‘cappuccino courses’

gave moral justification for attacks on university funding, for increased

fees and attempts to extend government control over academic and

intellectual life.

John Howard is pursuing an agenda to change Australia.  In its own

way, it’s as sweeping a change as was brought about by the Whitlam

Government.  But when Gough spoke of ‘reform’, he was making a

promise to the Australian people.  On John Howard’s lips the word

‘reform’ is a threat.

7

Howard’s ‘reforms’ have seen job insecurity rise.  More than thirty

years after the Whitlam Government put equal pay for women on the

Federal Government agenda, John Howard has overseen a widening gap

between men and women’s earnings.  Under Howard, it’s harder to see a

doctor or get into hospital unless you can cough up the fees; and it will be

harder to get in and stay in university unless your financial statements are

as good as your report card.

John Howard is pursuing an aggressive cultural agenda, but even if

he weren’t, Labor’s own vision must be clear.

The differences between Liberal and Labor run deeper than just

policy differences.  They run to the very heart of what our Party is and

what it seeks to do.  As Gough Whitlam said at his campaign launch on

November the 13, 1972 (you’ve just heard it in that film) :  "Our program

has three aims. They are - to promote equality, to involve the people of

Australia in the decision making process, and to liberate the talents and

uplift the horizons of the Australian people.”

Ladies and Gentlemen, the Labor Party was formed out of the

struggle for dignity and decency for workers and their families: dignity

and decency not only in the workplace, but in all aspects of life.  We are

not the Party of “an extra sixpence in somebody’s pocket”.  We are the

Party with “a great objective - the light on the hill”.

We will always strive for that greater objective, and we will always

strive to uplift the horizons of the Australian people.   It is necessary for a

government to satisfy the accountants, but a nation cannot thrive on

economic rationalism alone.  As Gough said:

8

“I would argue that all the other objectives of a Labor Government -

social reform, justice and equity in the provision of welfare services and

educational opportunities - have as their goal the creation of a society in

which the arts and the appreciation of spiritual and intellectual values can

flourish”.

Ladies and Gentlemen, our national cultural and artistic life is an

essential part of the generous, cosmopolitan, vital nation that we know

Australia to be.

We have, after all, come a long way since the official campaign

opening for the 1964 Victorian State election, when (as Barry Jones tells

it) Dinny Lovegrove, the Deputy Leader of the Victorian ALP, described

the class struggle by saying, and I quote Dinny: “We know who our

enemies are: the kind of people who have two cars in the garage, central

heating and a sprinkler system in the lawn.  And on their walls, they have

something that looks as if two cockroaches have been crawling about in

Indian ink, a piece of so-called modern art!”

And it probably won’t surprise you to hear Labor lost that election

and stayed in opposition in Victoria for another eighteen years.

Ladies and Gentlemen, in December 2002 the Howard Government

announced a review of our national cultural institutions such as the

National Museum, the National Gallery of Australia and ScreenSound.

Labor believes that this report is the battle-plan for the Howard

Government’s cultural wars.  It is certainly the blueprint for Howard’s

attacks on institutions from the National Museum to the National Library

and ScreenSound.

9

This report is secret, and the Government refuses to release it to the

public.  This is typical of the Howard government’s culture of secrecy

and lack of accountability.  However, we can guess at the contents of it

from some of its results: nearly 8 million dollars in funding and dozens of

jobs have gone from National Gallery, the National Archives and the

National Library.  The National Museum has also been under sustained

attack.

The National Archives has lost 10 staff last year and expects to lose

10 more by the end of this financial year.  Funding cuts have forced a

‘prioritisation’ of preservation activities.

There’s no question that very mundane aspects of the National

Gallery of Australia have attracted close political attention.  Hours of

Senate Estimates questions have been taken up with the state of the air

conditioning at the Gallery and the health and safety concerns of staff.

More recently we’ve scrutinised the attempt to build a new front door for

the Gallery - an attempt that’s foundered for four years with millions

spent and no design or designers selected.

The management of the Gallery’s physical and human resources is

important, and is worth scrutiny, but not to the exclusion of any debate

over the National Gallery’s mission, or its collection policies or its

exhibits.  Under Brian Kennedy’s directorship all three have changed

markedly.  The changes are not necessarily for the worse.  I do think,

though, that a dramatic shift in the direction of a national institution is

worth a little more discussion and debate.

10

Instead, we obsessed about gallery air-conditioning but took no

notice of the Gallery passing the hat to buy a new work after more than

$330,000 was cut from their budget, money that had to be found from the

acquisitions budget.   Betty Churcher has been moved to comment

publicly that the National Gallery is in danger of losing its national

stature. I haven’t asked her, but I doubt she’d believe a new air-conditioning system would solve the problem!

Ladies and Gentlemen, artists in all disciplines have suffered under

the Howard Government’s cultural chill.  A report released in early

November 2003 titled Don’t Give Up Your Day Job - I suppose with a

title like that I hardly need to go on - but it found that half of all artists

earn less than $7,300 as artists in a year.

At the same time funding for regional arts programs stagnates.

Under the last round of Playing Australia grants, regional centres had

their funded productions reduced from 26 down to only a lucky 13.  This

had a negative impact on nearly fifty regional centres.  Albury, Mackay,

Bathurst, Ballarat, Mildura, Hamilton, Launceston, Bendigo, Frankston,

Bunbury, Alice Springs, Geelong, Rockhampton, and Cairns are only

some of the regional centres that lost performances.  Having slogged their

guts out building audiences, I might add successfully, these regional

performing arts centres found their forward programs and subscription

seasons decimated and their financial future grim.

Public reaction forced the government to reconsider, restoring

funding to raise the number of productions to 23.  However, the total

funding is still at the same level as it was in 1997.

11

The National Museum of Australia has repeatedly been the victim of

Howard’s meddling and sabotage.  Its popular and successful director,

Dawn Casey, oversaw the completion and opening of the Museum on

time and to a tight schedule.  On her watch over 2 million Australians

visited the Museum.  Nonetheless, in 2002, she had her term renewed for

only one year, and at the end of 2003 she was let go.

She revealed - but only after her term expired, for Ms Casey was the

soul of discretion during her tenure as director - she revealed that she felt

she had been white-anted by some members of the Museum Council.

The culprits?  David Barnett - the Prime Minister’s authorised biographer

and Christopher Pearson - the Prime Minister’s former speech-writer.

The Council was then, and is still now, chaired by Tony Staley, former

President of the Liberal Party.

And a brief look at the recent history of the National Museum shows

that Ms Casey had every reason to feel undermined.

In 2001, the government commissioned a funding review of the

Museum and in early 2002 a report was delivered.  This report was kept

secret, despite notes on the file stating that it was in the public interest

that it be released, until the Australian newspaper fought a twelve month

Freedom-of-Information battle to obtain it in August last year.     This

suppressed report warned the Government that choosing to fund the

Museum at a minimal level would lead to a decline in quality and a drop

in visitor numbers.  Regardless, the Government chose that minimal

funding option.

12

Meanwhile, David Barnett’s complaints that the exhibit labels at the

Museum were ideologically biased prompted a review by Professor

Graeme Davison in March 2002.  Davison found no bias.  He reported to

Staley: “David [Barnett] gives the impression - which I am sure he does

not really hold - that the museum should follow the historical views of the

government of the day”.  It was Barnett, we should remember, who told

former director Dawn Casey (herself the child of a stolen child) that the

removal of children was beneficial and benevolent.

A finding of no bias, of course, from Davison, was not what the

Government wanted.  Since Professor Davison had, in the view of the

Government, got the review wrong, another review was commissioned,

this one without any troublesome historians who might have the expertise

and confidence to rebut the conservative complaints.   It was headed by

John Carroll - a sociologist who had publicly expressed the view that

“since the last federal election the Howard Government has hardly put a

foot wrong”.

Meanwhile the negative effects of inadequate Government funding

were beginning to materialise - just as the funding review had foretold.

The Museum was forced to cut exhibitions by a third, and visitor numbers

fell by over 200,000.

The Minister for the Arts, Senator Kemp, announced that Dawn

Casey would be reappointed - but for one year only.

The Carroll review reported in July 2003, and called for an increased

focus on narrative history and the achievements of white men.  The

Museum Council responded that the review panel’s vision for the

museum could only be achieved if the Howard Government reconsidered

the low level of funding to the Museum.

13

Despite the majority of Council members supporting Dawn Casey’s

continuation as director, her term was not renewed beyond December

2003 - nor were the terms of her supporters on the Council.  Religious

broadcaster John Fleming and conservative historian John Hirst were

appointed and Casey’s detractors had their terms extended.

While the National Museum has suffered continual interference,

other institutions are fighting for their very survival.

Last December, the Australian Film Commission announced that as

a result of the merger between ScreenSound Australia and the Australian

Film Commission, several key functions of ScreenSound would be

abolished. In the long term, as many as 80 jobs were at risk of being

abolished or relocated to Sydney and Melbourne.   The ‘Directions Paper’

from the Australian Film Commission essentially proposed to absorb

ScreenSound within the Film Commission, ignoring its independent

culture and unique mission.

Less than 24 hours after being served with its death notice,

ScreenSound Australia won a national cultural award for its work in

rescuing and publishing films from the silent film era.

Five days of public demonstrations forced the government to

reconsider, but only as far as a consultation process limited to invitation-only forums.  There’s still no move to make ScreenSound an independent

statutory authority and protect its role in safeguarding our film heritage -

as Labor has committed ourselves to do.

14

Ladies and Gentlemen, the most popular and widespread cultural

expressions in Australia today are film and television, but our film and

TV industry is struggling. The Australian Film Commission released its

annual National Drama Production Survey in November 2003, and it

showed that Australian feature film production dropped from 30 films in

2001-02 to just 19 films in 2002-03 - a drop of a third.  The total

expenditure on feature film and drama production in the same period is

down by 23% to $513 million.  There were no Australian feature films

with budgets over $10 million this year and only one in the $6-10million

range.

TV drama co-productions made primarily for the international

market - productions where Australians are telling Australian stories to

the world - halved, down from $102 million in 2001/02 to $51 million in

2002/03.

The state of the Australian Film and Television industry won’t be

improved by the Free Trade Agreement with the USA.

Labor argued Australia should be able to make sure both existing

media (like free to air television) and new media (like interactive video)

have meaningful levels of local Australian content.

Local content protection is about jobs for Australians working in

film, television and new media, but it’s also about who tells Australia’s

stories.  Unfortunately - but unsurprisingly - the Howard Government

was unable or unwilling to obtain an ‘exclusion clause’ for our culture.

15

Howard’s negotiators have agreed to a deal which may leave 80% of

future digital channels without any minimum Australian content.  Our

ability to require Australian content on Pay TV channels is now capped

for adult drama at 20% and children’s, documentary, arts and education at

10%.  Any increase requires consultation with the Americans.

We’re all thrilled by the international success of Australian actors

like Nicole Kidman, Russell Crowe, Anthony La Paglia and Cate

Blanchett, but Hollywood productions should not be the only place we

can see our home-grown stars, and a convincing American accent should

not be their employment prerequisite.

Jack Thompson’s shearer in Sunday Too Far Away or Bill Hunter’s

cinematographer in Newsfront have become iconic Australian images. So

too have Toni Collette’s Muriel, David Wenham’s Diver Dan and Pia

Miranda’s Josie Alibrandi.  A wide range of Australian film and

television means a wide range of Australian stories told - and a

celebration of the diversity of Australia’s national identity.

Ladies and gentlemen, our national identity has always included

celebration of the egalitarian and democratic instincts of Australian

society.  One of the manifestations of that ethos was the achievement of

universal suffrage in 1902 - that is, universal for white Australians -

which made Australia only the second country in the world where women

could vote for a national government and the first where women could

stand for election to the national Parliament.

16

On December 16 2003 we celebrated the centenary of Australian

women voting in federal elections and the centenary of women standing

in federal elections.  The Office of the Status of Women got a $600,000

government grant to commission a major public artwork to commemorate

the centenary; a steering committee was appointed; and a design of a 14-meter moving red fan won the design contest.

That was until Senator Bill Heffernan found out about it.  I’m sure

you’d remember Senator Heffernan from his attacks on Justice Kirby two

years ago.

According to some reports, Heffernan’s objections were not to the

sculpture itself, but to the fact that it could be seen from Parliament

House.  Certainly, after Heffernan began raising vocal concerns with the

Prime Minister, the then Minister for the Status of Women, Amanda

Vanstone, suddenly found she was concerned over possible budget

overruns.  The fan was canned.

Women’s suffrage will, instead, be commemorated by a low-lying

fountain, tastefully picked out in a floral motif. It will be placed near the

‘ladies rose garden’ at Old Parliament House but should not ‘materially

affect’ the site.

The most charitable interpretation of this fiasco is that the Howard

Government is not interested in public space, public art, or any history

without meat pies, kangaroos, Captain Cook and cricket caps.  So

disinterested, that it allowed a slipshod process to produce a politically

vulnerable sculpture at enormous cost to the taxpayer - and then, didn’t

have the guts to defend the outcome.  The result? A hasty cancellation

and the rapid commissioning of another, smaller, cheaper, less visible

work.

17

We should not be surprised that a giant abstract sculpture was found

too confronting for some members of the Government.  After all, we’ve

just had a review of the artwork collections policy at Parliament House

after coalition MPs complained that the current artwork, all by living

Australian artists, is ‘avant-garde crap’ and the products of sick minds.  I

have to say that it is possibly the only subject on which Dinny Lovegrove

and Tony Abbott probably would agree.

What Tony Abbott and his co-complainants have asked for is a few

more old - or at least old-fashioned - oil paintings, and if possible, oil

painting of distinguished white men.

Now you’ll be please to know that former Governors General now

adorn Tony Abbott’s walls.

This review, prompted by complaints from - yes, you guessed it,

Ross Cameron again - has recommended that the collection abandon the

convention of buying work by living artists and correct the under-representation of the more ‘traditional’ forms of art.  One contribution to

the review by an anonymous MP suggested that we needed “More

portraits and landscapes - [it is] time to discard political correctness.”

Accusations of political correctness abound from the art collection in

Parliament House to the National Museum, our universities, our theatres,

our national broadcaster and certain of our newspaper columnists.  It is an

easy way to discredit and dismiss any argument for an expansive and

tolerant viewpoint.

18

We have all witnessed the repeated attacks on the ABC for so-called

‘political correctness’ and bias - attacks which, whether or not borne out

by independent inquiry, bully journalists and producers into compliance

with the Government’s agenda and lack of criticism of the Government’s

actions.  Howard and his cronies know that state censorship is

unnecessary if self-censorship can be coerced.

There is disturbing evidence that this is beginning to happen.

Richard Flanagan’s preface to his book-reading on Radio National made

reference to the ‘fiction’ of children overboard - a less polite novelist

than Flanagan might have called it a ‘bald-faced lie’.  Between recording

and broadcast his remarks were cut out.

Last November, the ABC’s music video show, Rage, informed local

act Deepchild that their music video could only be screened if they

removed an image highly critical of the Howard Government’s refugee

policy.

Richard Alston continues his vendetta against the ABC over its

reporting of the Iraqi war even in retirement. Two months after -

mercifully - he resigned as Communications Minister and a week before

he retired from politics altogether, he’s still complaining.  He formally

lodged an appeal with the Australian Broadcasting Authority over the

ABC’s Iraq coverage.  He indicated to the Broadcasting Authority that he

wanted his complaint kept confidential - so it wouldn’t be interpreted as

proof of an obsession with the ABC.

I couldn’t imagine why anyone would come to that conclusion!

19

Compare the attacks on the ABC by Alston, by former Liberal Party

Director Lynton Crosby and others on the conservative side of politics

with the Whitlam Government’s transfer of the ABC from the Post

Master’s General Department to a newly-formed Department of the

Media.

Before the transfer, the Post Master General was the direct

departmental boss of the ABC - a situation I suppose the Tories would

feel a certain nostalgia for!  This apparently innocuous step by Whitlam

was, fundamentally, about the independence of the ABC.

It illustrates a most important yet most overlooked aspect of

Whitlamism - the constructive use of existing institutions to widen

Australian’s horizons of the possible.  The liberation of the talents and

energies of our people by making existing institutions work better.

To the extent that Whitlam has influenced the history of our country,

Australians are a broader, more outward looking people; and to the extent

that Howard has tried to influence our course, Australians are a narrower,

more inward-looking people.  It is the oldest contest in our history:

between creativity and the cringe.

John Howard and the members of his government are not simply

trying to curry populist favour with their attacks on Australia’s cultural

and artistic institutions.

20

Howard’s goal is to steer public opinion, not to reflect it. He wants

to persuade the more than two million Australians who have visited the

National Museum that the exhibits they enjoyed so much are biased and

‘black arm-band’.  He wants us to believe that our historians are part of a

vast conspiracy aimed at corrupting our view of the past; that adventurous

modern art is a foolish waste of money; that it is unreasonable for

indigenous Australians or migrants to expect Australia’s national cultural

institutions to reflect them or their experience; and that neither women’s

history nor women’s current concerns - like pay equity - need be visible

on the Australian political landscape.

Howard is acutely aware of the importance of art and culture.

The stories we tell ourselves about who we are justify how we live

and what we do.   The challenge for Labor is to match Howard’s tale of a

narrow, punitive, inward-looking country with our own story of the big,

expansive, inclusive independent nation that we know Australia can be.

Only then will we close the book on the Howard Government.

