

SPEECH  MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS ALEXANDER DOWNER

1 April 2004

Conference on Afghanistan and the International  Community - Berlin

31 March - 1 April 2004

This conference is a timely opportunity to take stock of progress in Afghanistan and to focus  the efforts of the international community - in partnership with the government and people of  Afghanistan - on taking this work forward.

I congratulate our hosts, the government of Germany, and its co-chairs, the government of  Japan, the United Nations, and above all the Afghan Transitional Administration, for bringing  us together at this important juncture.

Australia has been encouraged by the transformation Afghanistan has begun over the past two  years under the leadership of President Hamid Karzai.

After the devastation of 23 years of civil war and the brutality and regression of Taliban rule  that marked the final stages of that bleak period, the people of Afghanistan have realised some  outstanding achievements.

They have successfully laid the foundations of a democratic system of government, with  elections due later this year.

They are forming a national army and police force as a new basis for national security.

They have begun the process of social and cultural rehabilitation, especially in the area of  women's rights and empowerment.

They are proceeding to rebuild infrastructure and the economy to improve the daily lives of  ordinary Afghans and have already welcomed back to Afghanistan millions of their fellow  countrymen who had fled abroad in earlier years.

Afghanistan has once again become a respected member of the community of nations, and has  restored constructive relations with its neighbours.

Afghanistan is no longer a safehaven for international terrorism that it was under the Taliban.



For all that, as the report on Securing Afghanistan's Future outlines for us, a host of difficult  challenges remain - in the area of security, of economic development, of institution building,  and of social development.

The adoption of a new Constitution at the start of the year was a major milestone.

Now, the provisions of the Constitution must be implemented in letter and spirit so that  Afghanistan can govern itself effectively.

The task of building resilient national institutions must remain a top priority, given the decay  that has affected Afghanistan's institutions and human capital over the course of 23 years of  conflict.

Strong institutions are the foundation of a well-governed country which can attract the loyalty  of its citizens.

Areas where institutional strengthening remains critical include national security, the judicial  and legal sector and the area of public finance.

The militarisation and weaponisation of Afghan society undermines security and efforts to  rebuild political cohesion. The Disarmament, Demobilisation and Reintegration process must  be supported and implemented to the fullest extent.

Greater efforts are needed to eradicate narcotics production, which is increasing alarmingly.

Alternative cash crops must be found and farmers supported to adopt them.

All Afghans must have the opportunity to return home and participate equally in the life of the  nation.

Commitments to ensuring that women are able to make a full contribution to Afghanistan's  future must be pursued with vigour.

This catalogue of challenges highlights the need for us to remain committed to completing the  task we set ourselves in December 2001.

Such a commitment on a global scale will help hasten Afghanistan's stability and prosperity.

The ultimate success of our efforts in Afghanistan will depend on the effective partnership  between the international community and the government and people of Afghanistan.

For its part, Australia has given firm support to Afghanistan.

Our Special Forces participated in the critical first phase of Operation Enduring Freedom to  end Taliban rule.

Since then, we have made one of the largest humanitarian relief contributions ever by an  Australian government.

From September 2001 to the end of financial year June 2003, Australia has disbursed  approximately $62 million in assistance to Afghanistan.

Our assistance was directed at a broad range of humanitarian and developmental priorities,  including support for displaced Afghans; food aid; basic education and health; and support for  the Afghanistan Reconstruction Trust Fund.

Australia has also contributed to the campaign against opium cultivation, by supporting efforts  to find alternative crops and livelihoods for farmers through a three-year, grain seed  development and distribution program.

Recently we have announced a contribution of $2 million to UNDP to support the voter  registration process.

Today I am announcing that Australia will contribute an extra $25 million for ongoing  humanitarian and recovery efforts in Afghanistan.

This additional funding brings Australia's total commitment to Afghanistan since September  2001 to $110 million.

From this new contribution, Australia will provide a further $5 million to the Afghan  Reconstruction Trust Fund, bringing our contribution to the Fund this financial year to $9  million.

Australia's increased assistance recognises the progress being made by the Afghanistan  Transitional Administration in building the foundations of democracy and our support for the  comprehensive development plan being implemented in partnership with the international  community.

Australia's ongoing program of assistance to Afghanistan will target three key areas of need.

The first of these is Afghanistan's immediate humanitarian needs.

The second is the return and reintegration of refugees.

The third is building capacity to manage a successful transition to democratic government.

The Transitional Administration in Afghanistan, led by President Karzai, has shown a strong  commitment to confront the many challenges to Afghanistan's reconstruction.

This has not been easy, nor without cost.

Nevertheless, it has been the steadfast commitment to reform that has enabled Afghanistan to  make the progress it has and for it to attract considerable donor support.

As Afghanistan continues to move forward, its leaders will need to show the same  commitment and dedication, and the same willingness to make the difficult choices that  represent investments in Afghanistan's future.

Australia will continue to monitor progress, and looks forward to working in a continued  partnership with a government of Afghanistan.

In closing I wish once again to thank our hosts, the government of Germany, and the co-chairs  for their excellent work.

To our colleagues and friends from Afghanistan, I say that you have won our respect and our  confidence.

That respect and confidence is reflected in the broad geographical spread of countries  represented here, and in the pledges of financial support which are being and will continue to  be made.

Like our partners at this conference, we remain committed to working together with you to  overcome the many challenges which continue to face you and to assist your reintegration into  the region and the global community.



