PO  Box  522  Kings  Cross  NSW  1340  Australia Tel (02) 9356 3888  Fax (02) 9356 3021 W e b w w w . u n i y a . o r g Em  info@uniya. org

Uniya Jesuit Social Justice Centre

A Fair Go in an Age of Terror

Countering the Terrorist Threat to Human Rights and the  Australian Identity

Frank Brennan SJ AO

Jesuit Seminar Series 2004

Sydney, 16 March 2004

We are stepping into an election year both here and in the United States where the incumbents  John  Howard  and  George  W  Bush  have  led  the  initiatives  for  countering  the  emerging terrorist threat revealed and unleashed by the events of September 11, 2001.  There is the risk  that  any  consideration  or  critique  of  these  initiatives  can  be  seen  to  be  party  political  or   partisan.   That  is  not  my  purpose. I  am quite  agnostic  as  to  whether  Mark  Latham  or  John   Howard would be any more solicitous of human rights and protective of Australian identity in  response to such a crisis.  My agno sticism extends to all other conceivable inhabitants of the  Lodge  in  the  foreseeable  future.   Though  it  is  important  to  examine  the  conduct  of  political   leaders in the past, my purpose is to see how robust our democratic processes are for finding  the right balance, and how informed and committed we are in insisting that our politicians not  cut corners in the name of national security.  This is an increasing challenge in a society with  an  aging  population  who  can  be  expected  to  be  worried  about  their  security  whatever  the   inconvenience to others and with a group of youth who feel marginalised from the decision  making processes of the society.

At  times  of  national  insecurity,  there  is  an  increased  need  for  citizens  to  trust  their  political   leaders and those leaders are likely to feel very acutely any criticism of their discharge of that  trust.  There are lessons for us, without our canonising or demonising any particular political  actors.

Jim  Wolfenson,  President  of  the  World  Bank,  in  an  address  last  month  on a  return  visit  to   Australia, his home country, gave us an inspiring introduction to our seminar topic, A Fair Go  in  an  Age  of  Terror:  Countering  the  Terrorist  Threat  to  Human  Rights  and  the  Australian   Identity.  He said:

I was fascinated today in my discussions with civil society to learn that, in a poll of Australian society,  eighty-five  percent  of  people  were prepared  to  support  development  assistance,  and  some  fifty-three percent  of  them  supporting  it strongly.  But  when  asked  the  reasons  why  they  supported  it,  it  was  not   enlightened self-interest, it was not protection against terror, it was because it was morally and ethically

Uniya  JESUIT SOCIAL JUSTICE CENTRE Frank Brennan SJ AO 2

right. I  found  that  a  remarkable  statistic  and  a  great  tribute  to  the  Australian  people,  in  terms  of what drives this country, in terms of its sense of equity and social justice.

We shouldn’t be afraid to say that a ‘fair go’ or a ‘fair share’ or a sense of equity is something that drives  us. Too few people in the world are doing that today.

I have six questions to get our seminar underway.

When are we justified in going to war?   The United States now claims the prerogative for  unilateral action not only in making pre-emptive strikes against imminent threats but also in  taking preventive action to destroy a prospective enemy's capacity to become a threat.  Bush  claims  a  mandate  for  "deal(ing)  with those  threats  before  they  become  imminent".   The

bottom  line  for  Bush  with  Saddam  Hussein  was:  "the  fact  that  he  had  the  ability  to  make  a   weapon.  That wasn't right."

When  should  we  join  with  the  United  States  in  such  preventive  action,  without endorsement  from  the  United  Nations?  The  invasion  of  Iraq  was  consistent  with  the   previously published neo-conservative agenda of Mr Bush's key advisers.  Regime change in  Iraq  was  a  centre-piece  of  their  agenda. Our  own  Defence  Intelligence  Organisation  (DIO)   told our parliamentary inquiry into the intelligence operations preceding the recent war:  "We  made  a  judgement  here  in  Australia  that  the  United States  was  committed  to  military  action against  Iraq.  We  had the  view  that  that  was,  in  a  sense,  independent  of  the intelligence assessment."

When  tabling  the  unanimous,  all-party  report,  the  government  member  David  Jull  told Parliament  of  the  Committee's  conclusion   "that  there  was  unlikely  to  be large  stocks  of   weapons  of  mass  destruction,  certainly  none  readily  deployable."   We  did  not  go  to  war   because there was an imminent threat to our security. We went to war because the Americans  asked us to.  The reasons they asked us to go to war have become a movable feast.   Before  the war, Prime Minister Howard insisted, "Our goal is disarmament." "I couldn’t justify on its  own  a  military  invasion of  Iraq  to  change  the  regime.  I’ve  never  advocated  that."   The   problem  was  that  George  Bush's  advisers  had  and  that  is  what  they  got.   Howard  told   parliament  that  Iraq's  "possession of  chemical  and  biological  weapons  and  its pursuit  of  a   nuclear  capability  poses  a  real  and  unacceptable  threat  to  the  stability  and  security  of our world".   Walter Lewinc amp, the head of DIO, said this "was not  a  judgement  that  DIO   would have made."  They just weren't asked!

Even if the United Nations Security Council be not considered formally to be the competent,  relevant authority for deciding just cause for war, it remains a suitable sieve for processing the  conflicting  claims  in  determining  whether  there  is  "a  real  and  unacceptable  threat  to  the   stability  and  security  of  our world"  and  whether  or  not  war  is  the  only  realistic  resort.   The   French and Germans would ha ve a mixture of motives for their stand, just as the English and  the Americans would have for theirs.  Given the mix of motives, the elusiveness of truth, and  the  now  admitted  unreliability  of  the  intelligence,  it  would  be   better  in  future  to  have   decisio ns made  by  a  community  of  disparate  nations  united  only  by  a  common  concern  for   international security against terrorism rather than a coalition of allies who either share or are  neutral about the strategic objectives of the US administration.

Our politicians have a difficult call to make when assessing intelligence about the likelihood  of weapons of mass destruction being developed and handed on to terrorist organisations that

Uniya  JESUIT SOCIAL JUSTICE CENTRE Frank Brennan SJ AO 3

have no respect for western nations.  In times of crisis, we need to trust our  leaders.  But it  becomes  more  difficult  to  grant  that  trust  when  the  rationale  for  war  is  changed  after  the   event.   The  belated  emphasis  on  the  humanitarian  concern  for  the  Iraqi  people  was  rank   hypocrisy  coming  from  the  United  States  which  had  first  give n  Saddam  Hussein  his  WMD   capacity  for  countering  Iran  and  from  an  Australian  government  which  had  punished  Iraqi   asylum seekers who had the temerity to seek asylum within our borders.  Trust in government  would  be  better  maintained  if  Mr  Howard  simply  admitted  that  his  public  rationale  for  war   was the honouring of the US alliance no matter what the doubts about the wisdom of seeking  Iraqi  regime  change  without  UN  endorsement,  and  the  concern  about  readily  deployable   weapons of mass destruction no matter wha t the shortcomings in the intelligence.

Prior  to  the  Madrid  bombings  last  week,  many  Australians  thought  our  participation  in   the   war  was  justified   because  the  world  was  now  a  safer  place,   we  had  won  without  any   Australian loss of life, and the murderous Saddam Hussein had lost power.  Post-Madrid, we  have to question whether the world is now a safer place and whether Australia is at no greater  risk of being a special target of terrorist groups.

What is the role of religious leaders in assessing the case for war? In the lead up to the  war, the church leadership in the US, UK and Australia was remarkably united in its criticism  of  the  public  rationale  offered  for  war.   However,  there  was  a  variety  of  views  about  the   margin for error to be afforded to government.  When asked about the clear opposition from  church  leaders  such  as  the  Archbishop  of  Canterbury,  John  Howard  told  the  National  Press   Club:  "There  is  a  variety  of  views  being  expressed.  I  think  in  sheer  number  of  published   views, there would have been more critical than supportive. I thought the articles that came  from Archbishop Pell and Archbishop Jensen were both very thoughtful and balanced. I also  read  a  very  thoughtful  piece  from  Bishop  Tom  Frame,  who  is  the  Anglican  Bishop  of  the   Australian Defence Forces.  The greater volume of published views would have been critical,  but I think there have been some very thoughtful other views and the ones I have mentioned, I  certainly include in them."

Once the war commenced, Archbishop Jensen said, "For my own part I remain unpersuaded  that  we  ought  to  have  committed  our  military  forces,  but  I  recognise  the  limitations  of  my   judgment and the sincerity of those who differ."  After the war, Bishop Frame said:  "If it is  established that  the  weapons  did  not  exist  and  the  Coalition  did  or  should  have  known  this,   the war will not have been justified and must be deemed immoral. A case for war against Iraq based solely on ‘regime change’ would have been inadequate and I would have been obliged  to share this conclusion with those for whom I have a pastoral responsibility. "

Despite  the  Prime  Minister's  fudging  of  the  issue,  Cardinal  Pell  has  never  given  any  public   indication that the war was justified.  Pell did not make any clarifying statement once the war commenced.   He  left  stand  his  earlier  caveat,  "The  public  evidence  is  as  yet  insufficient  to   justify going to war, especially without the backing of the UN Security Council."   The Prime  Minister's  statements  and  the  Cardinal's  later  silence  left  many  Catholics  confused. Presumably  the  Prime  Minister  drew  solace  from  the  cardinal's  pre-war  observation, "Decisions about war belong to Caesar, not the church." Though Caesar makes the decision,  the church must discern and comment on the morality of that decision.  Church leaders must  publicly help their people make the moral assessment.  It is not good enough to suspend the  moral faculty and simply trust the government of the day.  If we do that with war, then why

Uniya  JESUIT SOCIAL JUSTICE CENTRE Frank Brennan SJ AO 4

not with any other moral issue?   When it comes to war, Cardinal Pell allows more scope for  an unformed or uninformed conscience than most other church leaders, including the Pope.

If it is not possible for our politicians to get it right every time, what margin of error is  there  for  religious  leaders  and  the  leaders  of  civil  society? Church  leaders  like  the   Anglican Primate, Peter Carnley, have received rough handling from government when they  have  publicly  questioned  the  morality  and  prudence  of  our  strong  alliance  with  the  United   States  in  an  Age of Terror. Two days after the Bali bombings in October 2002,  Archbishop  Carnley  promptly  published  a  letter  pledging  prayers  and  support  for  the  victims  and  their   families.   A  few  days  later  he  then  opened  his  annual  synod  in  Perth,  observing,  "The   targeting  of  a  nightclub,  which  is  known  to  have  been  popular  with  young  Australians  on   holiday, suggests that this terrorist attack was aimed both at Australia, as one of the allies of  the United States of America and, at the same time, at what is seen by militant Muslims to be  the decadence of western culture."

Does anyone now seriously doubt what Carnley was saying?  Australians were being targeted  both because we are identified with the decadent west by militant Muslims  and also because  of  our  close  relationship  to  the  United  States.   There  may  also  have  been  other  factors,   including  our  intervention  in  East  Timor.   Carnley's  remarks  greatly  upset  Anglicans  John   Howard and Alexander Downer. In the 2003 Playford Oration, Downer singled out Carnley's  beha viour  post  Bali  as  an  instance  of  "the  tendency  of  some  church  leaders  to  ignore  their   primary pastoral obligations in favour of hogging the limelight on complex political issues." Ignoring  Carnley's  earlier  pastoral  letter  of  support  for  the  victims  and  families,  Downer   falsely stated, "There was no concentration on comforting the victims and their families, no  binding  up  of  the  broken-hearted  while  a  shocked  nation  mourned."   Two  months  before   Downer's Playford Oration, the government was arguing for an expansion of ASIO's powers  in  the  Senate.   Government  Senator  Santoro  told  the  Senate: "We  know  from  horrific   experience that not only do Australians face the same level of threat as any other people but  also, as was the case in Bali in October last year, they are very specific targets."

What Santoro said is quite consistent with Carnley's position.  So what was the problem?  Are  we not permitted to speculate on why Australians are very specific targets?  Or is that no role  for reflective church leaders?  Our political leaders have readily conceded that we are a target  with terrorists because we are western.  They have also conceded that we are a target because  of  the  fine  things  we  have  done  such  as  assisting  with  the  restoration  of  peace  and  order  in   East  Timor.   But  they  get  very  testy  when  there  is  any  suggestion  that  our  closeness  to  the   Americans  or  our  commitment  to  coalitions  of  the  willing  could  heighten  the  risk  to  our   security.  There is a downside to being identified as the deputy sheriff in your region.  There  has to be room for informed and divergent debate without such vehement government attacks  on people such as Archbishop Carnley. Trust and respect are a two way street even in times of  crisis.

In the wake of the Madrid bombings, Federal Police Commissioner Mick Keelty answered the  question,  "Could  this  happen  here?"  in  words  reminiscent  of  Archbishop  Carnley: "If this  turns out to be Islamic extremists responsible for this bombing in Spain, it's more likely to be  linked to the position that Spain and other allies took on issues such as Iraq. And I don't think  anyone's been hiding the fact that we do believe that ultimately one day, whether it be in one  month's time, one year's time, or ten years' time, something will happen."

Uniya  JESUIT SOCIAL JUSTICE CENTRE Frank Brennan SJ AO 5

Though  there  was  spirited  debate  and  cabinet  resignations  in  the  UK  because  of  Mr  Blair's   ready  membership  of  the  Coalition  of  the  Willing,   Canberra  compliance  with  prime ministerial directives was complete.  It was very troubling to hear the mixed messages back  then from  Prime  Minister  John  Howard  and   Tony  Abbott  about  the  increased  risks  of terrorism  to  Australian  citizens.   Abbott,  the  Leader  of  the  Government  in  the  House,  told   Parliament, "There is the increased risk of terrorist attack here in Australia".   Next day, the  Prime Minister told us, "We haven’t received any intelligence in recent times suggesting that  there  should  be  an  increase  in  the  level  of  security  or  threat  alert."  Regardless  of  who  was   right,  their  contradictory  statements  provided  incontrovertible  evidence  that  there  was insufficient  debate,  discussion  and  discernment  within  our  Cabinet  and  political  party processes  prior  to  making  a  commitment  to  war  in  such  novel  political  circumstances.   The   thinking was done in Washington.  We signed on, presuming that our national interest and the  international common good would be served by Alliance compliance.  In these circumstances,  there is a place for unelected citizens, including church leaders, to speak out.

What now are the criteria for our part icipation in a just war in this Age of Terror?  A  post World War II settlement of the UN Security Council configuration, including allocated  seats enjoying a permanent veto cannot be determinative of any moral assessment about war. However  when  prudential assessments  of  threats  have  to  be  made  on  intelligence  against  a   backdrop of continual breaches of solemn undertakings by a rogue state, the Security Council  does  provide  a  useful  sieve  for  getting  willing  combatants  over  the  threshold  of  their  own   self- interest and ideology to a publicly reasoned rationale for military engagement.  If western  democratic members of the Security Council cannot be convinced of the need for war, there  are  good  grounds  for  citizens  to  suspect  that  the   conditions  for  a  just  war  have  not  been   fulfilled.   If  such  members  voted  for  war,  there  would  still  be  a  need  to  scrutinise  the   conditions for a just war.

There was a surprising unanimity of views amongst church leaders opposing the Iraq invasion  on the grounds that it did  not  comply  with  the  just  war  criteria. On  the  eve of war, Bishop  Gregory, the head of the US Catholic Bishops Conference said:

Our  bishops'  conference  continues  to  question  the  moral  legitimacy  of  any  preemptive, unilateral use of military force to overthrow  the government of Iraq. To permit preemptive or  preventive  uses  of  military  force  to  overthrow  threatening  or  hostile  regimes  would  create   deeply troubling moral and legal precedents. Based on the facts that are known, it is difficult to  justify resort to war against Iraq, lacking clear and adequate evidence of an imminent attack of a  grave nature or Iraq's involvement in the terrorist attacks of September 11. With the Holy See  and many religious leaders throughout the world, we believe that resort to war would not meet  the strict conditions in Catholic teaching for the use of military force.

As early as September 2002, the US  bishops had told the President, "We fear that resort to  force, under these circumstances, would not meet the strict conditions in Catholic teaching for  overriding the strong presumption against the use of military force. Of particular concern are  the  traditional  just  war  criteria  of  just  cause,  right  authority,  probability  of  success, proportionality and noncombatant immunity." The bishops maintained that view.

The suspected capacity to produce weapons of mass destruction is not itself just cause for an  attack.  Even if a state or a coalition of states is able to claim that it is the right authority to  make a decision about war, that authority must be able to produce credible evidence about the  possession  of  such  weapons  and  the  distinctive  threat  they  pose  to  those  states  wanting  to

Uniya  JESUIT SOCIAL JUSTICE CENTRE Frank Brennan SJ AO 6

launch an attack.  If you cannot convince the western democratic members of the UN Security  Council that there is a real threat to world peace or a real and distinctive threat to particular  states, it is very likely that you are not engaged in war for a just cause.  Even if the coalition  of  willing  states  be  the  appropriate  authority,  they  still  need  to  demonstrate  that  all  other   avenues  have  been  tried  to  disarm  the  rogue  state.   If  the  coalition  of  willing  states  has   provided  the  incentive  for  renewed  inspections  by  pre-deploying  troops,  the  coalition  is   entitled  to  put  a  reasonable  limit  on  the  terms  of  pre-deployment  or  to  demand  that  other   states  opposed  to  war  provide  assistance  with  the  pre-deployment  simply  to  maintain  the   pressure  for  verifiable  inspections.   Even  if  the  US  had  established  that  it  was  a  competent   authority to determine that there was a just cause for war which was a last resort, there would  still have been a need to consider the consequences of such an engagement.

The  nonchalance  and  belated  show  of  humanitarian  concern  by  the  Coalition  of  the  Willing   after  they  had  failed  to  uncover  large stockpiles of weapons of mass destruction confirms the  suspicion  that  the  Coalition's  leader,  the  United  States,  had  an  alternative  agenda,  namely   regime change in Iraq, an attempted re-ordering of the Middle East, and an experiment with a  new American  project  premised  on  preventive  intervention.   Those  who  oppose  such ideological experiments in the future will do better if they are able to articulate more clearly  the  margin  of  appreciation  afforded  governments  which  are  privy  to  sensitive  intelligence material.    Even  if  such  opponents  fail  to  agree  on  whether  the  UN  Security  Council  is  the   competent authority to determine the legitimacy of war, they ought put forward a united view  that the Security Council is the most appropriate sieve for sorting the conflicting  claims made  by  nation  states  which  may  be  the  appropriate  authority.   The  UN  Security  Council  is  well   qualified  to  sift  out  those  claims  of  nation  states  based  only  on  ideology  or  national  self-interest.

What are the checks and balances we need to maintain our human rights and Australian  identity  in  an  Age  of  Terror? Confronted  with  terrorist  threats  reaching  our  shores,   government  has  a  responsibility  to  arm  police,  defence  and  intelligence  personnel  with  the   powers  to  protect  us  while  respecting  the  civil  liberties  of  all  persons.    We  Australians  are   now on our own with no Bill of Rights to guide our judges or restrict our governments.  But  for  the  government's  incapacity  to  control  the  Senate,  it  would  be  able  to  ram  all  sorts  of   legislation through the Parliament.  Checks and balances are often time consuming, and they  often provide opportunities for minor parties and sectional interest groups to engage in petty  point  scoring.   The  Senate  and  the  parliamentary  committee  system  worked  well  when  the   government tried to bluff the Parliament into passing amendments to the ASIO legislation that  would have entrenched very draconian measures on our statute books in 2002.  Originally the  government  proposed  that  ASIO  would  be  able  to  detain  any  person  incommunicado, including  a  child. ASIO  would  have  been  able  to  detain  indefinitely  any  person without charge  or  even  suspicion.   While  detained,  any  person  could  have  been  strip searched, questioned  for  unlimited  periods  and  prevented from  contacting  family members, their employer or even a lawyer.  They would not even be able to inform loved ones  that they had been detained.  They could have been denied legal advice.

Senator John Faulkner said that "the original ASIO bill was perhaps the worst drafted bill ever  introduced into the Australian parliament."  Thanks to the Senate, the legislation is now more  protective  of  human  rights,  more  in  the  Australian  way,  while  being  adapted  to  the  present   terrorist threat.  There was a  lengthy stand-off between  the  government  and  the  Senate  over   this legislation.  Before  Christmas 2002 when the legislation was deadlocked John Howard

Uniya  JESUIT SOCIAL JUSTICE CENTRE Frank Brennan SJ AO 7

warned, "If  this  bill  does  not  go  through  and  we  are  not able  to  clothe  our  intelligence   agencies  with  this additional authority over the summer months it will  be  on  the  head  of  the   Australian Labor Party and on nobody else’s head."  The government then further delayed the  legislation so it could be added to the mix of a double dissolution election, if need be.  Having  been  introduced  in  March  2002,  the  legislation  was  passed  in  highly  amended  form  in  June   2003.   The legislation now contains a three year sunset clause so it has to be reviewed again  by  our  parliamentarians  after  the  next  election.   Sir  Harry  Gibbs  provided  an  assessment  of   the final product in his Australia Day address to the Samuel Griffith Society.  He notes that  the  powers  given  to  ASIO  are  "drastic"  and "only  experience  will  show  whether  (the)   safeguards are sufficient".   Gibbs says the law goes too far in prohibiting lawyers and others  publishing information about the questioning of any person.  This could "prevent publication  of  the  fact  that  an  abuse  of  power  or  a  serious  error  of  judgment  had  occurred."  The   government likes to portray the Senate as obstructionist but the Senate has modified national  security legislation to better protect civil liberties.

When  we  go  through  a  down  in  the  political  cycle  with  government  encountering  little   opposition in the House of Representatives or on John Laws and Alan Jones' radio programs,  it  is  difficult  to  conduct  robust  public  dialogue  about  policies  related  to  minorities  and   national  security.   Fear  and  flabbiness  take  over.   There  is   an  ongoing  deficit  in  public   honesty and rigorous inquiry when it comes to debate about the morality of our engagement  in  war,  about  the  limits  of  ASIO's  powers,  about  our  treatment  of  asylum  seekers  and  the   identification of their deprivations with national security and border protection needs.  There  is an important democratic role for unelected citizens, including church leaders,  to question  government's  public  rationale  and  private  purpose,  to  correct  the  misperceptions,  and  to   espouse rational and coherent policies that do less harm to vulnerable people and to our peace  and security.  We would all profit from more respectful and rigorous dialogue between elected  politicians and unelected community leaders, including between church and state.

Church  leaders  like  Archbishop  Carnley,  responsible  civil  servants  such  as  Commissioner Keelty, the courts, the Senate, an independent media, and a robust civil society are entitled to  express  a  contrary  view  to  the  executive  government  of  the  day,  even  if  the  majority  are   satisfied that the government will do and say whatever it takes to protect "us" against "them"  in tough times.  The morality of our engagement in the Iraq war cannot be left contingent only  on  two  self- interested  outcomes:  one,   whether  our  special  relationship   with  the  US  bears   fruit,  and  two,   whether  we  are  more  immune  from  onshore  terrorist  attack.   And  even  if  it   were so contingent, the jury is still out on both fronts.  Truth and a more coherent morality of  war may yet be even in our own short-term national interest in an Age of Terror.  Let's take  heart  from  Jim Wolfenson's  homecoming  observation  that  there  are  so  many  Australians   concerned to assist with development, and presumably peace, not because of enlightened self-interest nor for protection against terror, but because it is morally and ethically right.

