



senator.bartlett@democrats.org.au     www.democrats.org.au    www.andrewbartlett.com  News releases can also be sent by email. Please advise us if you want to join the email distribution list.

DEMOCRATS  MEDIA     Government spends millions of dollars to keep one asylum seeker locked up The Government is wasting money on lawyers, air fares and detention costs in order to keep one asylum seeker, Edriss Alsalih, locked up, Democrats Leader Senator Andrew Bartlett said today. The Australian Democrats have called on the Federal Government to release the man who is effectively stateless with no country willing to accept him. Mr Alsalih had previously spent almost three years in detention in Australia. Alsalih, who was born in Kuwait to Sudanese immigrant parents, was deported from Perth on 13 December 2003 and flown to South Africa, before being sent to Tanzania and then back to South Africa, after being refused entry to Sudan. Two weeks after he was first deported from Australia, he was returned to Perth, where he again was placed in detention.  Senator Bartlett and SA Democrat MLC Kate Reynolds visited Mr Alsalih in the Baxter Detention Centre just two weeks ago. Senator Bartlett said “First the federal government spent millions of dollars flying Mr Alsalih, accompanied by guards around the world, on international video link ups and flying a bevy of lawyers and departmental advisers into Adelaide to fight their case against Mr Alsalih in the Federal Court, where Justice Selway said that deportations were happening in a ‘legal vacuum’. “As we said when we revealed the government’s deception back in December, it is not acceptable that the federal government spends funds needed elsewhere on trying to save face. “As well as incurring additional costs keeping this man in detention, there may be further claims against the government in the future. “The Democrats are calling on the Federal Government to make the repatriation process more transparent and in accordance with all international laws."  Media Contact - Daele Healy - 0419 867 649  SENATOR ANDREW BARTLETT

LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN DEMOCRATS AND SPOKESPERSON ON IMMIGRATION

04/408  THURSDAY 20 MAY 2004

