LAURIE FERGUSON MP            SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION

FEDERAL MEMBER FOR REID



23 June 2005

NAURU - NEEDS LABOR SOLUTION

The release of the last remaining family on Nauru is long overdue and again demonstrates  the total inadequacy of the Government’s handling of these matters.

The family, including the only teenage girl to be held in detention in Nauru, were locked  up since 2001, and have been found to be genuine refugees. The question is, why has it  taken 4 years?



The Government’s uncertainty in appropriate determinations of protection visa applicants  requires serious attention, and the latest announced reforms do not go far enough.

There are 38 detainees remaining on Nauru, and return for most of them is not viable.  Reality should be faced. The people should be brought to the Australian mainland.

Releasing people in dribs and drabs after countless reviews with decisions made largely  on the level of political pressure is no solution. It destroys the credibility of the  processing system and needlessly increases peoples suffering.

This week Labor tried to legislate for a real solution which allows more certainty in  relation to TPV’s - a policy it has held since 2002.  This involves:

(i) a definitive decision on permanent residence for TPV’s after 2 years rather  than the Government’s rolling over of visas over many years and the resulting  uncertainty for the people;

(ii) a determination system which places the onus of proof on the Commonwealth  to show that ongoing protection is not required; and  (iii) if people are rejected as refugees they will be given permanent residence on  the basis of passing a public interest test which involves demonstrating

economic, social, community and family contributions beneficial to the  broader Australian community.

Unfortunately Petro Georgiou and his associates voted with the Government to block this  initiative. We now have the reality of longer detention and hopes that public disquiet will  pressure for release.



Laurie Ferguson (02) 6277 4920              23 June 2005

Aisha Amjad 0413 511 666



