



senator.bartlett@democrats.org.au     www.democrats.org.au    www.andrewbartlett.com  News releases can also be sent by email. Please advise us if you want to join the email distribution list.

DEMOCRATS  MEDIA 04/1000 SATURDAY 2 OCTOBER 2004   SENATOR ANDREW BARTLETT LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN DEMOCRATS  Democrats launch into final week push to  Keep the Senate Strong At their main election launch today, the Australian Democrats urged Australians to return a strong and independent Senate, regardless of wins Government.  "The Democrats have already released the majority of our platforms.  This final launch is to have the full team together to reinforce our unique Senate role and emphasise what we stand for," said party Leader Senator Andrew Bartlett. "Keeping a strong, independent Senate is just as important a decision as who ends up as Prime Minister, and it is only by keeping the Democrats strong that we can keep the Senate strong. "This final launch is 7 days from polling day because it is only in the last week that many people start turning their minds to their Senate vote. The Senate race does not get as much attention during the campaign, even though people's vote in the Senate is just as important as their vote for Prime Minister." The Democrats used the launch to reaffirm their commitment to pressure whoever wins Government to reverse the hike in University fees, ensure we retain a prosperous economy while getting a fairer distribution of this wealth, protect the universality of Medicare and end mandatory detention of asylum seekers.  "We will try to reverse the damage of the Howard years and pledge to continue to provide a voice for indigenous people, refugees, people with disabilities, carers and other groups ignored by the Coalition over the last 8 years," Senator Bartlett said. The Democrats also pledged to continue preventing the Senate becoming an industrial relations battleground, tempering the ideological extremes of both the major parties. The Democrats will next week release a comprehensive 'Balance of Power' package outlining the party's responses to a range of balance of power issues that have arisen during the campaign, including health, superannuation and industrial relations, and have challenged the Green Party leader to do the same. continued

DEMOCRATS    MEDIA



senator.bartlett@democrats.org.au     www.democrats.org.au  www.andrewbartlett.com   News releases can also be sent by email. Please advise us if you want to join the email distribution list.





"Despite the dishonest and misleading attacks by the Green Party, the Democrats defend our  preference arrangements with a range of minor parties as giving the best chance of avoiding either  major party gaining control of the Senate for the first time in more than two decades," Senator  Bartlett said.

"The Senate should represent a wide range of Australians' political preferences and views. Keeping  it from being a rubber stamp or a brick wall of narrow ideologies is vital.

"Only a strong independent Senate can prevent any extreme ideological initiatives like compulsory  unionism, stripping unfair dismissals protection, or even scrapping funding of independent schools or  requiring fees for public schools.

"A recent Senate Poll (Roy Morgan) showed the Democrats are still in with a credible chance to elect  Senators and ensure a responsible Senate balance of power role. The poll has the Democrats’  Senate vote at 6-7 per cent in contrast to House of Representatives polls which have had the

Democrats at 1 or 2 percent.

"This week voters will decide if they want to vote for the Democrats and for a strong and independent  Senate."

Media Contact - Daele Healy - 0419 867 649



The Democrat launch included written and spoken testimonials from a range of people and leaders  in their fields - both Democrats and non-Democrats - highlighting the value and wide-ranging nature  of the Democrats work.

The full set of testimonials and endorsements is available and can be accessed on the Democrats  website at:

http://campaign.democrats.org.au/issuesheets/236-Testimonials-Endorsements.pdf



