













Labor under Mark Latham: ‘New Politics’, Old

Dilemmas





Dr Ashley Lavelle

Department of Politics and Public Policy, Griffith University





Refereed paper presented to the

Australasian Political Studies Association Conference

University of Adelaide

29 September - 1 October 2004













Ashley Lavelle: Labor under Mark Latham

2







Mark Latham’s ascension to the leadership of the federal Australian Labor Party in

December 2003 had a significant impact on the Australian political scene.1  His bold

statements on troop withdrawals from Iraq, and his policy victories over the

Government on issues such as politicians’ superannuation, gave rise to suggestions that

the party would be moving in a radically different direction under Latham’s leadership.



This paper looks at the reality of the direction of the Latham-led ALP in the early part of

his leadership.  It assesses Latham’s ‘new politics’ and his proposals to reform the

‘plastic’ and ‘contrived’ nature of modern politics.  While these proposals if

implemented would make insignificant difference to the conduct of politics in

Australia, they are best seen as part of a populist political strategy developed as an

alternative to the  ‘small-target’ strategy of former leader Kim Beazley.



The roots of the latter lay in the absence of disagreement between the major parties on

fundamental political questions, such as free market economics and globalisation.

Lacking an alternative political program, Beazley relied on electoral discontent with the

Government to win the election.  One way in which Latham has tried to deal with the

strategic problem of how to differentiate Labor from the Coalition in the wake of the

post-Cold War consensus has been through his populist style.   Whereas Crean formally

abandoned the ‘small-target strategy’ but failed to put anything in its place, Latham’s



1 The author thanks Haig Patapan for helpful comments and suggestions.

Ashley Lavelle: Labor under Mark Latham

3

replacement of the ‘small-target strategy’ with populism is aimed at tapping into the

widespread discontent among voters towards politicians.



Yet, the viability of this populist strategy in the long-term is undermined not just by the

fact that governing ‘for the people’ is impossible in a society divided along class and

other lines, but also by a number of traditional social democratic dilemmas Labor

confronts.   The issue of how much it can deliver to its more disadvantaged constituents

without alienating business groups has been a perennial thorn in the side of Labor in

government, and all the evidence suggests that this dilemma will be even more sharply

posed under a Latham administration.  Another old dilemma for Labor is the question

as to how much its program will defer to economic conditions, which in recent years

have not been conducive to expansionist or redistributive policies.   A new twist to

these old dilemmas is added by globalisation, which according to Labor thought has

made state intervention much less viable.



These old dilemmas militate sharply against Latham delivering on his plans to reform

politics.  The irony is that if Latham fails to deliver, as is likely, it will only increase

cynicism about parliamentary politics.





Labor under Latham



Following Simon Crean’s resignation as federal ALP leader in November 2003, Mark

Latham was the surprise victor in the leadership ballot between himself and Kim

Ashley Lavelle: Labor under Mark Latham

4

Beazley on 2 December by a margin of 47 to 45 votes.  To properly gauge the direction

in which Latham is taking the party it is necessary first to look at Latham’s politics, and

then at his political strategy as leader.





Latham’s Politics



In his speeches and writings over the years, Latham has urged Labor to embrace more

fully market economics (eg 1990, 15, 16).  In his maiden House of Representatives

speech in 1994, he argued for an acceleration of ‘micro-reform and competition policy

throughout the national economy’, and for the winding back of ‘overinvestment on

other economic programs’.  Latham could see ‘no way back to the subsidies, regulation

and sheltered markets of old Australia.  The only meaningful debate is about the pace of

reform, not its direction’ (House of Representatives Hansard (HRH), 22 February 1994,

1005, 1006).



More recently in his federal political career,2 Latham has aggressively promoted the

Third Way as an alternative to both the laissez-faire capitalism of Margaret Thatcher in

Britain and the bureaucratic state capitalism of the former Soviet Union and, to a lesser

extent, Western Europe (1998a, xix).  The Third Way assumed the obsolescence of the

labour-capital divide, and celebrated the arrival of an ‘information age’.  It borrowed

heavily from the practice of Tony Blair’s New Labour and Bill Clinton’s Democrats with



2 Latham was a local politician in Liverpool between 1987-1994, and mayor from 1991-94, before being elected at a by-election for the seat of Werriwa in January 1994.

Ashley Lavelle: Labor under Mark Latham

5

an emphasis on ‘mutual obligation’ in welfare policy and education (Latham 1998a, xix,

xxx, xxxi).



A Third Way of one version or another has been advocated by all manner of

movements and politicians, including French fascists (Callinicos 2001, 4), and it is

difficult to see how Latham’s version differed from Labor policies under Hawke and

Keating.  This more recent variant associated with Blair and Clinton can be viewed as

an ‘ideological shell of neo-liberalism’ because of the primacy it ascribes to markets

(Anderson, cited in Callinicos 2001, 8).   Notably, the Old Left incurs far more criticism

from Latham than does the New Right (Clark 2003, 72).  While it is sometimes

suggested that the difference between neo-liberalism and the Third Way lies in the

latter’s more positive approach to government intervention (Loughlin 2004, 21), this

overlooks the fact that both major parties in Australia accept some role for government

in a predominantly market-based economy (see Abbott 2000, 30).



Latham’s own statements, on the other hand, suggest that he has little time for state

intervention.  He once called upon the state to ‘get out of the habit of telling people

what to do, of always trying to plan and control society’s direction, and allow more of

society’s answers to arise from community or civic life’ (HRH, 27 October 1997, 9852).

In his Budget Reply Speech in 2004, Latham affirmed Labor’s belief ‘in limiting the size

of government.  Too much spending, too much bureaucracy is bad for the Australian

economy’ (Latham 2004a).   Latham promised during his address to the 2004 ALP

National Conference not to invest in the public sector in ‘the old way’ because

government did not have ‘a monopoly on solutions in our society’ (2004b).

Ashley Lavelle: Labor under Mark Latham

6



In keeping with his neo-liberal persuasion, Latham is a globaphile.3  He once credited

free trade with engineering ‘the greatest poverty reduction program in the history of

humankind’ (2000, 29).  While he has more recently been critical of the Australia-US

Free Trade Agreement (FTA) (Lewis, Wallace & Eccleston 2004, 1), he chose in the end

to support the FTA provided that the Howard Government agreed to amendments to

the legislation aimed at protecting the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme and local

content on free-to-air television, pay television and radio (Latham and Conroy 2004a;

2004b).  Despite these amendments, the deal is likely to have major unforeseen

consequences in the future, making it much more difficult for Australian policy-makers

to reject neo-liberal policies and take decisions that threaten corporate interests

(Mathews, Thurbon and Weiss 2004, 8).



On the whole, Latham views ‘globalisation as an opportunity rather than a threat’

(2003a, 35).  Earlier he had suggested that ‘globalisation [put] too much economic

power…in the hands of big global companies’, which needed to be counteracted with

the dispersal of power to communities and regions (ABC 2002a).  However, this was not

an anti-globalisation stance, for Latham proceeded to describe his as a ‘pro-market’

rather than a ‘pro-business’ position, and he assured business that it had ‘nothing to be

scared of’ from a Labor government (ABC 2002a).  This reflected Latham’s vision of a

capitalism relatively free of abuses of market power by monopolies, and which ensures

a more competitive business environment.  His maiden speech eight years earlier had

put the case for ‘strong anti-trust laws’ to ‘prevent horizontal mergers and market



3 Neo-liberalism and globalisation are not co-terminous, but globalisation has been made possible by the neo-liberal  policies of deregulation and free trade (Weeks 2001, 281).

Ashley Lavelle: Labor under Mark Latham

7

collusion’ and to break up the entrenched interests of professions (HRH, 22 February

1994, 1007).  Like most Labor MPs, Latham generally sees globalisation as potentially

beneficial to the majority; provided, of course, that Labor is elected to federal

government (2003a, 43-47).



Latham’s politics overall are more akin to those of a liberal democrat than a social

democrat.  He treats trade unions, for instance, largely as industrial dinosaurs serving

little purpose in the new ‘knowledge economy’, or even worse as ‘producer interests’

threatening beneficial reforms (1998a, 30, 83-85).  Partly this flows from his belief that

unions are an anachronism in the new knowledge economy where workers are no

longer exploited (Johnson 2003).  Latham is probably less connected to unions than any

leader since Whitlam.4  Although fond of referring to his working-class roots in the

Western suburbs of Sydney, Latham sees the distinction between labour and capital as

having collapsed with the emergence of the ‘information age’ (Johnson 2003).   The

main division in society now, according to Latham, is between the ‘insiders’ and

‘outsiders’ of the system: that is, between elites in the media, corporate sector,

bureaucracy and parliament who control the political process, and the majority of

Australians ‘from the suburbs’ excluded from politics (Latham 2003a, 10, 11).  This

forms a central part of Latham’s populist style (see below).  As evidenced above, he has

little faith in the efficacy of government intervention, and allows even less of a role for

the welfare state than the Blair Government in Britain (cited in Johnson 2003).   Latham

professes to be a ‘progressive economic liberal and I cannot see how anyone would

believe in any other approach to economic matters’ (Latham 1998b, 16).  There is also a



4 I am grateful to Matthew Collins for this insight.

Ashley Lavelle: Labor under Mark Latham

8

patent absence of collectivism in much of his writings and speeches.  For instance, he

once argued that in an era of globalisation and insecurity, ‘each of us as individuals

plainly needs to do more to advance our own interests - to study harder, to prepare and

save more effectively for an uncertain future, to work smarter, and to

develop…competitive skills…’ (cited in Clark 2003, 66, 67; emphasis added).



On social issues, Latham is well on the right of the party.  For instance, he has

denounced the ‘illegal’ asylum-seekers as stridently as Prime Minister Howard, has

participated in the attacks on the supposed left-wing, middle-class bias of the ABC, he

was among the critics of the children’s television program Play School’s featuring of

same-sex parents, and he has frequently dismissed the ‘rights agenda’ as elitist and

irresponsible (Adams 2004, 15; The Australian 2004, 6; Price 2004, 2; Johnson 2003).



While far from exhaustive, this brief survey of Latham’s politics provides a useful

contextual background to some of his actions as leader.





Latham’s Populist Political Strategy



The foregoing analysis depicted Latham as an aggressive neo-liberal supporter of

globalisation hostile to traditional class issues.  Since becoming ALP Leader, however,

his Third Way political statements have been noticeably absent.  Latham has tried to

market himself as more down-to-earth and in touch with ordinary people than the aloof

1950s traditionalist Prime Minister John Howard.   His past use of more ‘plain language’

Ashley Lavelle: Labor under Mark Latham

9

- such as his description of Howard as an ‘arse-licker’ to US President George W Bush -

may partly explain his greater public appeal vis-ÃÂ -vis his predecessor Simon Crean.5  A

Newspoll survey in March revealed 74 percent agreement with the statement that

Latham is ‘in touch with the voters’, compared to 56 percent for the Prime Minister

(Newspoll 2004a).  Latham’s greater appeal is also probably due to his seemingly firmer

opposition to the highly unpopular Iraq war compared to Crean (see Williams 2003,

559).



More broadly, however, Latham’s success is likely to be a result of him appearing to

present a clearer alternative to Howard.  Whereas Crean failed to put anything in place

of the ‘small-target strategy’ (see below), Latham has replaced it with a populist

approach aimed at tapping into some of the latent distrust of politics and politicians in

the community.  There is as much dispute about the meaning of populism as there is

about liberalism, socialism, or conservatism (Canovan 1981, 5), and there are many

different brands.  The term populist is widely associated with the Narodnik agrarian

movement of late-19th century Russia, which aimed to go ‘to the people’ (Billington

1958).  It is also associated with the Farmers’ Alliance and the People’s Party (or

Populist Party) in the US around the same time (Hicks 1961), as well as the Peronist

regime in Argentina during the 1940s and 50s (Heywood 1998, 83).  More recently, the

‘xenophobic’ populists of Western Europe, and Australia (eg Pauline Hanson’s One

Nation), have targeted, among other things, immigrants and racial minorities (Marchart

2002).  Latham’s populism is different from the latter in the sense that his focus is not



5 The level of satisfaction with his performance as Leader of Opposition rose from 41 percent shortly after he became  leader in December to 66 percent in mid-to-late March 2004.  On the question of preferred prime minister, the  percentage favouring Howard fell from 46 to 43 percent, while the proportion convinced that Latham would be more  able rose from 31 percent to 42 percent (Newspoll 2004b).

Ashley Lavelle: Labor under Mark Latham

10

public opinion about these minorities.  Latham’s brand of populism also clearly differs

from the ‘money power’ populism that characterised Australian labour movement

thinking from the late-19th century through to the first half of the 20th century (Love

1984).  Indeed, it could be argued that so enthusiastic is Latham’s embrace of neo-liberal

corporate globalisation that the demonising of a section of the capitalist class would be

unthinkable.  At first glance, too, it would appear that the Latham model of populism

has little in common with the agrarian radicalism of the NSW ALP in the 1890s, which

embodied the interests of small landholders rather than workers (Markey 1987).



Yet Latham shares with these different types of populism a desire to frame policies in

accordance with the beliefs and attitudes of ‘the people’ (Heywood 1998, 301).  His is in

the broad, but distinct category of what Margaret Canovan calls ‘politicians’ populism’,

which refers to ‘certain styles of politics that draw on the ambiguous resonances of “the

people” - to politicians who claim to speak of the whole people rather than for any

faction’ (1981, 260; emphasis in original).  As we shall see below, ‘the people’ are the

focus of much of Latham’s rhetoric, which might also be related to Latham’s conviction

that class division is largely a thing of the past (see above).



One can also discern in Latham’s recent speeches and writings, particularly since

becoming leader, a certain ‘antipolitics’ which has enjoyed a global resurgence in recent

years with the so-called ‘decline of ideology’ (Schedler 1997, 1).  Antipolitics can be

divided into two main groups: those seeking to ‘dethrone and banish politics’, and

those with ‘pretensions to conquest and colonize politics’ (Schedler 1997, 1).  Whereas

the former questions the worth of politics in any form, the latter accepts the ‘functional

Ashley Lavelle: Labor under Mark Latham

11

value of politics but denies that it ought to be conducted according to its own laws and

logic’ (Schedler 1997, 9, 10).  Latham’s antipolitics is in the latter category since he does

not question politics in itself, but instead argues for a ‘new politics’, which ‘give people

a direct say in the decisions which affect their lives and values’ (cited in Bishop, Kane

and Patapan 2002, 24).  In some ways, Latham’s style bears some resemblance to that of

the populist 1992 US Presidential candidate Ross Perot, whose main message was that

Washington had been overrun by self-interested politicians, lawyers and public officials

- Latham’s ‘insiders’ - who had forgotten the needs and interests of the people (Brown

1997, 117).  Indeed, Perot presented himself as ‘the consummate outsider’ (Brown 1997,

121).  Although there might be important differences between the two, including

Latham’s leadership of a major party whereas Perot was largely independent, both

sought to tap into the mood of cynicism and distrust of politicians with promises to

restore ‘the people’s’ ownership of the political process.  Like Perot (Brown 1997, 143,

144), Latham was in favour of more direct democracy to get ‘the people’ involved: ‘if in

doubt, let's have more democracy, more direct voting, more public participation’

(Latham 2004b).  One could argue that direct democracy is not the same as populism.

Yet, it has been argued that the ideal of democracy, namely democracy as ‘government

by the sovereign people, not as government by politicians, bureaucrats or judges’, itself

contains significant populist elements (Canovan 2002, 30-43; see also Ware 2002).

Furthermore, the gulf separating elites from the masses in representative democracies

enables populists to portray themselves as the true democrats (Meny & Surel 2002, 4, 5).

Some populists’ penchant for direct democracy can be seen as a manifestation of the

tension between the ideology of democracy (government by the people) and its actual

operation (decision-making by elected elites) (Meny & Surel 2002, 8).

Ashley Lavelle: Labor under Mark Latham

12



Latham’s populism is exemplified in his promise to govern ‘for the people, not the

powerful’ (Latham 2004b).  He nominates as the ‘number one issue facing our

democracy’ the ‘loss of public trust and confidence in the political system’, and the fact

that ‘the democratic process has somehow divorced itself from the public interest’

(Latham 2004e).  In a speech to the Queensland ALP State Conference in June 2004,

Latham argued that the best form of political campaigning was being ‘on the ground,

out among the people’, which allows one to get ‘away from the spin doctors and control

freaks’.  He praised Queensland Premier Peter Beattie’s Community Cabinets as places

where ‘the public can talk face-to-face with their elected representatives’, and where a

‘real dialogue’ can be had about the ‘problems we need to solve as a nation, the

challenges we face as Australians’ (Latham 2004f).  The Howard Government, in

contrast, had ‘joined the elites and moved beyond the everyday concerns of the

Australian people.  Beyond the common good’ (Latham 2004f).



Another example of this populist style is Latham’s attack on Paddington-dwelling

media elites Phillip Adams and Piers Ackerman, who might claim to be very different

politically, but in reality have in common their estrangement from the concerns and

circumstances of Australians ‘from the suburbs’: ‘They are both out of touch’.  Thus

Labor’s job is to ‘fight for the underdog’ or the ‘outsiders’ (Latham 2003a, 10).

According to Latham, emphasis will be on similar themes in Labor’s federal election

campaign in 2004, which will ‘talk about the every day life of the Australian people.

Their needs and experiences.  Their aspirations and opportunities.  The new politics of

personal connection’.  The Coalition, on the other hand, desires a campaign in which

Ashley Lavelle: Labor under Mark Latham

13

‘politicians spend their time talking about other politicians…a real insider’s job’

(Latham 2004h).  Canovan’s observation of ‘politicians’ populism’ appears particularly

apt in light of the latter comment by Latham: ‘Politicians (so the argument goes)

squabble among themselves over unreal issues and create divisions where none need

exist.  What is therefore needed is a party that will set aside both doctrine and selfish

interest and put the people first’ (1981, 262; emphasis in original).



Many of Latham’s policy statements and proposals also embody this populist style.

Take, for example, his demand that politicians’ superannuation entitlements be brought

into line with community standards.  In justifying raising the issue, Latham argued that

a change was ‘essential in restoring public trust in politics’, and that parliamentarians’

superannuation entitlements had become a ‘major source of public dissatisfaction and

cynicism in modern politics’ (Latham 2004g).  In defending Latham’s stance, Shadow

Health Minister Julia Gillard referred to Latham’s ‘discussions at street stalls where

people who clearly are finding it very difficult to make ends meet would raise with him

the superannuation that…politicians’ were getting.  Latham was merely reacting, she

said, ‘to that kind of conversation out on the road, in the community’ (Gillard 2004).

Here was a politician not raising an issue brought from his advisers, spin-doctors or

fellow parliamentarians, but apparently directly from the concerns of the people

themselves.6



It is also possible to see Latham’s push for a directly elected republic as another instance

of his populist approach.  The republic issue in 1999 was constructed as a debate



6 In the event, Latham backed down on the plan to amend the superannuation entitlements for future Prime  Ministers and Opposition leaders, provoking the charge from Independent Peter Andren that Latham’s actions  constituted a ‘stunt from beginning to end’ (Shanahan 2004a, 4).

Ashley Lavelle: Labor under Mark Latham

14

between genuine monarchists and nationalists wanting to remodel Australia in the

Asian region in order to improve the nation’s competitiveness.  Latham no doubt hopes

to tap into popular disaffection with the elite republic model offered at the 1999

referendum by supporting direct election.  His populist appeal to ‘the people’ on this

issue was brought out in response to his rhetorical question of whether another

National Convention would be required, ‘No, the Australian people will be our

convention.  They will decide the best model for Australia, not a bunch of powerful people

sitting around in Old Parliament House’.  He stated that he did not ‘want this to be a

politicians' Republic. It must be the people's Republic’ (Latham 2004b; emphasis added).



Some of Latham’s foreign policy pronouncements also contain some populist elements.

Labor’s policy of withdrawing Australian troops in Iraq by Christmas, 2004 may not be

in this category in itself (Latham 2004c, 1; Latham 2004d).  Yet, the accompanying

rhetoric often is.  For instance, in his 2004 ALP National Conference address he declared

that ‘your travel budget doesn’t teach you how to stand up for Australia.  Your love of

this country does.’  He further promised to never call Australia a ‘Deputy Sheriff’: ‘I

know who we are - strong, proud and independent.  We’re nobody’s deputy’ (Latham

2004b).  He defended his use of ‘common language’, as in his description of John

Howard as an arse-licker to US President George W Bush, in the following terms:



Look, this idea that politics can be too rough and too personal is a bit rich.  I can take you to any

sports field any Saturday morning and show you parents getting stuck into it.  Having a go at the

ref, yelling abuse.  It’s part of the Australian way.  We’re not a namby-pamby nation that hides

our feelings.  I think we’re a nation that’s willing to call a spade a spade and, if need be, to pick

up the spade and whack someone over the head with it (McKew 2002).

Ashley Lavelle: Labor under Mark Latham

15





Latham’s aim in all these examples is to present himself as in touch with the people, as

one who speaks their language, in contrast to his political competitors.









‘New Politics’



A key aspect of Latham’s populist strategy is his grand ambition to institute a ‘new

politics’: to restore the public’s trust, which he describes as at an all-time low because of

the ‘plastic’ and ‘contrived’ nature of modern parliamentary politics (Latham 2004e, 1).

According to Latham, politics is ‘artificial.  I think we’ve got too much reliance on

polling, spin doctors, professionals telling people what to say, and not enough straight

talking and straight shooting’ (Latham 2003b).  In his 2004 National Conference address

he committed Labor to nothing less than ‘reinventing and revitalising our democracy,

opening up greater public participation, cleaning out the excesses of the political

system, governing for the people, not the powerful’ (Latham 2004b).  As part of ‘new

politics’ he pledges to undertake as prime minister ‘democratic reform’ based on the

principles of open government, higher ethical standards, greater public participation,

and ‘comprehensive’ parliamentary reform (Latham 2004e, 2). This would involve, inter

alia, reforming Freedom of Information (FOI) laws, scrapping special superannuation

arrangements and reducing general entitlements for parliamentarians, greater

Ashley Lavelle: Labor under Mark Latham

16

transparency of corporate lobbyists, the holding of ‘Community Cabinet meetings and

forums’, and proposals to reform parliament.  These proposals sound significant

enough but when examined closely, they amount to rather token changes.  This is

further evidence that they form part of the overall populist strategy.



Take, for instance, the FOI proposal to release government information unless it would

cause ‘substantial public harm’ (Latham 2004e, 2, 3).  Not only has it historically been

the case in Australia that parties promise FOI reform from Opposition only to then

wind back the FOI provisions they introduce in government (Ricketson 1996, 27), it is

also the case that variations in what constitutes ‘public harm’ would allow all manner of

things to be withheld from public view in the same way that current restrictions on the

basis of ‘national security’ enable governments to withhold politically damaging

information.   Latham has little to say about what, if anything, he intends to do about

the threats posed to the effectiveness of FOI legislation by the increasing proportion of

government activity outsourced to the private sector (Lane & Young 2000).  Given his

neo-liberal bent (see above), it is unlikely that he will he reverse these trends.  This

suggests that his FOI reforms are unlikely to have much impact.



Community Cabinet meetings are no doubt based on those used by the Labor

government in Queensland headed by the populist Peter Beattie (see Williams 2001), on

whom Latham appears to have modelled his leadership style (see Latham 2004f; Webb

2004).  Latham trumpets the ‘town-hall meeting’ tour he embarked upon after gaining

the leadership as ‘democracy in the raw’ - a ‘chance to listen and learn, a chance to talk

to people face-to-face’ (Latham 2004a).  Yet simply committing to Community Cabinet

Ashley Lavelle: Labor under Mark Latham

17

meetings or public forums is not proof of a government’s openness.  For instance, the

Beattie Government has frequently been accused of hiding government information for

political reasons, such as on the occasion when it brought documents into Cabinet

meetings relating to improper use of ministerial vehicles in order to prevent their

release (Parnell 2004).  Holding regular Community Cabinet meetings might allow

Latham to promote his government as open and accountable and in touch with voters,

but they do not, contrary to Latham, oblige politicians to ‘give straight answers, instead

of just dancing around the issues’ (Latham 2004f), much less fundamentally change the

relationship between rulers and the ruled: the majority will remain divorced from the

political process.



Latham’s parliamentary reform proposals include the election of an Independent

Speaker, changes in the Standing Orders to empower the Speaker to ensure Ministers

answer questions in full and to make rulings on whether ministers have misled the

House, and a reduction in the number of Dorothy Dix questions allowed (Latham

2004e, 5, 6).  As with FOI reform, these concerns about the lop-sided nature of

parliamentary proceedings are those of a frustrated party enduring a lengthy term in

Opposition.  Thus, Labor renewed its calls for an Independent Speaker after the Liberal

Speaker Neil Andrew ejected several ALP members from the House of Representatives

in mid-2002 during a fiery debate (ABC 2002b).  One test of these proposals therefore

will be the vigour with which they are pursued when Labor once again occupies the

Treasury benches.  It is also doubtful that reforms such as an Independent Speaker

would reverse the trend towards ‘responsible party government’ where the executive

Ashley Lavelle: Labor under Mark Latham

18

dominates the legislature to a large extent, and where traditional parliamentary checks

and balances on the government have largely ceased to be effective (Summers 2002).



Latham’s democratic reforms taken together capitalise on the widespread distrust of the

political system, but his proposals, even if implemented in full, would fall far short of

transferring ‘political influence from the powerful to the people’ (Latham 2004e, 4).

Putting aside the ambiguousness of ‘the people’, carrying out such a transferral of

power would require an acquaintance with a politics much more radical than liberal

democracy, which imposes significant constraints on the possibilities of major social

reform.7



Latham’s ‘new politics’ are best seen as part of a political strategy developed as an

alternative to the now much maligned ‘small-target strategy’.  The latter was a

consequence of this absence of fundamental disagreement between the parties post-

Cold War (Lavelle 2003, 250, 251), for Labor’s acceptance of neo-liberalism and

globalisation pose real strategic dilemmas for social democrats aiming to defeat a neo-

liberal government.  The effect of the almost universal adoption of liberal capitalism

among mainstream political parties after the fall of the Berlin Wall and the collapse of

the Soviet Union was to take ‘the politics out of politics…political debate could only

centre around minor technical issues and the presentation of personality’ (Callinicos

2003, 3).  This helps explain the parties’ growing use of spin-doctoring, marketing and

opinion polls to distinguish themselves from their rivals (Hamilton 2003, 20).  In

addition to the increasing intolerance of dissent and debate inside Australia’s major



7 There have in recent years been a number of attempts to develop alternative democratic models to free market  liberal democracies (see Albert 2003; Danaher & Burbach 2000; Burrows 2001; Callinicos 2003; Maheshvarananda  2003).

Ashley Lavelle: Labor under Mark Latham

19

parties (Barnes 2003, 1, 2), this is an important factor in the ‘plastic’ and ‘contrived’

nature of parliamentary politics cited by Latham.



Herein lies the origins of the ‘small-target’ strategy.  When Labor lost the 1996 election,

it was in large part due to its loss of support amongst traditional Labor voters (see

Singleton, Martyn & Ward 1998, 4; Bean 2000, 76-79).  While Labor sought to regain

some of this loss of support with an emphasis on economic security and a repudiation

of ‘economic rationalism’, it largely retained its commitment to neo-liberalism and

globalisation (see Lavelle 2003, 190-194).  In a landmark speech in 1998, Kim Beazley

pledged to deliver three balanced budgets during Labor’s first term of government.

Labor, he said, would preside over neither ‘large public sectors nor high-handed

centralism’, and he scoffed at suggestions that Labor stood for ‘some antipodean

version of the Supreme Soviet’; rather, the ALP offered ‘parsimonious social

democracy’! (Beazley 1998).  This signalled Labor’s continued belief in the small

government approach of Hawke and Keating.   It also imposed drastic limits on the

policy choices available to Labor under Beazley.  Lacking a distinctive political

program, Beazley was reliant on electoral discontent with the Government to catapult

him into power.



When Simon Crean assumed the leadership after the 2001 election loss, he formally

abandoned the ‘small-target’ approach, but failed to put a genuine policy alternative in

its place (Scott 2003, 461).  He also continued his predecessors’ neo-liberal stance.  In a

speech in 2002, Crean called for a further ‘modernizing’ of the economy through, inter

alia, more improvements in productivity, and the achievement of ‘[t]rue labour market

Ashley Lavelle: Labor under Mark Latham

20

flexibility’ (2002, 5, 6).  On one occasion he stressed his belief in ‘fairness’ and

‘opportunity’, while simultaneously promising small government, ‘competition,

efficiency and productivity in our economy’ (Crean 2003).  The impression that Crean

presented little alternative to Howard is likely to have been a major factor in the low

levels of popularity that led to his demise as leader.  His stance on the 2003 Iraq war, for

instance, was notoriously vague, for which he was roundly jeered at the February 16

anti-war demonstration in Brisbane by protestors chanting ‘No war [at all]’ (Williams

2003, 559).



One way in which Latham has tried to deal with the problem confronted by Beazley

and Crean - how to differentiate Labor from the Coalition in the context of

bipartisanship on free market globalisation - has been through his populist style.   As

Hans-Geog Betz has noted, populist parties tend to lack ‘grand visions or

comprehensive ideological projects’ (cited in Canovan 2002, 31).  If it were not already

the case, under Latham Labor is becoming more like such a party.   Like all versions of

populism (Love 1984, 6), Latham’s reduces complex political systems to the actions of a

few individuals conspiring to subvert the common good.   Yet, the viability of this

populist strategy in the long-term is undermined not just by the usual problem of

governing ‘for the people’ in a society riven by class and other divisions, but also by a

number of old social democratic dilemmas Labor faces.





Old Dilemmas



Ashley Lavelle: Labor under Mark Latham

21

Latham’s lofty ambitions to institute a ‘new politics’ devoid of the cynical and

superficial nature of modern politics has been dealt a blow by recent events, including

the parachuting into the safe Labor seat of Kingsford-Smith of former musician Peter

Garrett - who proceeded to abandon tout court certain long-held beliefs in order to

become a Labor MP - at the expense of local candidates, and the poll-driven decision in

May to support the Government’s outlawing of gay marriage (Priest 2004, 4).  More

importantly, however, Latham’s ‘new politics’ do not allow Labor to escape a number

of old social democratic dilemmas including, pre-eminently, the difficulty of appeasing

both the ALP’s traditional supporters as well as big business, and operating within the

constraints of market capitalism.



The issue of how much Labor can deliver to its more disadvantaged constituents

without alienating business groups has been a perennial thorn in the side of Labor.  Ian

Turner has written of the ‘contradictions and conflicts of loyalty which have proved

endemic to Labor governments in Australia’ (1979, 76).  A classic case of Turner’s

observation was the Whitlam Government.  Although Whitlam commenced his Prime

Ministership by rapidly implementing his program of social reform, his period in office

ended with the Government fighting desperately in the face of the worst economic crisis

since World War Two to restore business confidence by jettisoning the program (see

Lavelle 2003, 120-141).  At the 1975 ALP National Conference in Terrigal, Whitlam

lamented that ‘we find ourselves now in a position of seeking ways of restoring

profitability’ (cited in Rydge’s 1975, 35).  Then-Treasurer Bill Hayden’s ‘horror budget’

concluded Labor’s ‘expansionist phase’ (Whitwell 1986, p.216), and with its emphasis

Ashley Lavelle: Labor under Mark Latham

22

on public sector restraint and controlling inflation, it commenced the ‘era of economic

rationalism’ in Australia (Strangio 1999, 43).



Whitlam Labor was not the first to abandon reform in the face of economic crisis:

witness the Scullin Labor Government's adoption of the wage and pension cutting

Premier's Plan in response to the Great Depression (Denning 1982).  Hawke may have

dealt with the problems created by the Whitlam legacy by promising ‘no miracles’

(cited in Maddox 1989, 84), but this was not enough to wholly dampen the optimism

with which many Labor supporters greeted the end of Malcolm Fraser (Beilharz 1994,

xi).  Needless to say, such hopes were dashed by 13 years of painful economic ‘reform’

that delivered major gains to business (Johnson 2001, 151).



All the evidence suggests that the ‘contradictions and conflicts of loyalty’ would be

even more sharply posed under a Latham administration.  Latham’s rhetoric might

inspire some hope that an end to Howard will be a precursor to something better.  Yet,

the commitment to ‘fiscal responsibility’, to ‘smaller government’ than the Coalition,

and the retention of the Government’s tax cuts for higher income earners, impose

significant limits on the extent to which Labor can be ‘anti-establishment’ or ‘transfer

income and influence to the vast suburbs and regions of the nation’ (Latham 2003a, 12).

Labor’s decision in June to back the Government’s proposed price increases for drugs

on the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme was a clear case of these ‘old dilemmas’ coming

home to roost.  As Dennis Shanahan commented:



[W]hen you are trying to tell people you are against big banks, multinational corporate

advertising and are involved in the daily lives of Australians, there is a jarring note in telling

Ashley Lavelle: Labor under Mark Latham

23

them you've decided to finance tax cuts and spending promises by putting up drug prices that, in

Labor's words, affect the "poorest and sickest" and certainly those on incomes of less than $52,000

(Shanahan 2004b, 13).





This example might also indicate some continuity between the neo-liberal Mark Latham

identified in the early part of this paper, and the populist leader of more recent times.



The contradictory nature of Labor’s stance - ‘new politics’ and some promises of

increased spending on public services, combined with ‘fiscal responsibility’ and a neo-

liberal approach - can best be explained by the two main sources of pressure to which

the party has been exposed in recent years.  On the one hand it has been under pressure

from its own supporters since the 1996 election for a return to more traditional social

democratic policies.  Yet, business groups expect Labor policies that would not upset

investor confidence, expectations which Labor would be reluctant to ignore given

recent evidence of high business dissatisfaction with the ALP (Skeffington 2000, 40, 41).

This is reflected in Labor’s receipt of less than a quarter of the $29 million donated by

Australian businesses to political parties in the three years from 1995-96 to 1997-98,

compared to 64 percent for the Liberal Party (Dodson 2000, 3).  This trend has continued

in recent years.8   The Business Review Weekly implored its readers to reject Beazley at the

2001 election because of doubts about Labor’s capacity to manage the economy

effectively (cited in Henderson 2001, 17).  As a result of this, Labor is likely to feel under

pressure to impress business.  Social democratic parties may not require the support of

business to get elected, but they must earn the ‘confidence’ of business to govern

8 See the Australian Electoral Commission’s website for a detailed account of the differences in party funding from  business (http://search.aec.gov.au/annualreturns/)

Ashley Lavelle: Labor under Mark Latham

24

(Miliband 1974, 137).  We saw earlier Latham’s efforts to assure business that it has

nothing to fear in a Labor government.



Globalisation adds a new twist to this old dilemma, further undermining the ability of

Labor to offer policies that would make a difference to its traditional constituents.  A

contradiction in Labor’s program is that it believes globalisation has made state

intervention much less viable, while at the same time arguing that in government it can

make it work fairly for the majority (see Lavelle 2004).  Latham in particular has a rather

apocalyptic view of the effects on state power wrought by globalisation:



On every front, the social democratic promise of interventionist government is now under siege.

The state of the state is weak.

The increased mobility of capital has eroded the economic powers of the nation-state,

especially with respect to macroeconomic policy (Latham 2003a, 40).





This is a considerable overstatement of the decline in the policy-making abilities of the

modern state (Keating 2000, 45; Weiss 1998).  It is true that global financial markets have

a major capacity to exert influence over government policies (Eiley 1994; Grahl 2001, 8),

witnessed most recently in the case of the sharemarket rout that followed the Indian

National Congress’s success at the May 2004 election.9  But there are instances of social

democratic governments succumbing to these pressures that long predate globalisation

(Callinicos 2001, 23-28).  As Fred Argy has pointed out, there are a considerable number



9 The Indian stock market fell 16 percent - further than it has ever before in its 129-year history - and trading was  suspended twice in response to the election result.  A senior Congress Leader quickly buckled to this pressure,  issuing a statement pledging to support ‘privatisation where it is called for in the national interest’, and promised  that fiscal policy would aim to ‘create a favourable climate for enterprise’ (Reuters 2004, 9).

Ashley Lavelle: Labor under Mark Latham

25

of policy tools available to fund an expansionary program, including hypothecated

taxes, clamping down on tax rorts, and retargeting of existing spending (Argy 2001, 11).

These would be unlikely to engender capital flight nor seriously spook the financial

markets.  Bill Mitchell has calculated that a Labor government could achieve close to

full employment for around $6.2 billion per year in spending - just 1.2 percent of GDP

or around half of defence spending - most of which would be recouped in the

corresponding fall in transfer payments to the unemployed, extra tax revenue, or

increased goods and services (1999, 42, 43).



However, the pressure on nation-states to boost investor sentiment does push

governments to deregulate, cut business taxes, produce budget surpluses, and continue

economic ‘reform’ - in short, the so-called ‘race to the bottom’.   Governments’

prioritisation of the health of the economy above all other policy issues (Castles 2000) is

explained by the fact that competition among nation states to attract capital has

intensified against the backdrop of the underlying weakness of the world economy (see

Tables One and Two below).  Thus, at the annual World Economic Forum meeting in

Davos, it is the politicians who court business leaders, rather than the reverse (Handy

1997, 52).  Labor’s capitulation to global economic pressures may not be inevitable, but

as Harman notes, social democrats ‘accept the constraints of the system’, and to the

extent that they try to overcome them, they do so with a state machine ‘built on the

assumption of collaboration with capital, not opposition to it, and dominated at the top

by those who identify with the interests of capital’ (1996, 25).



Ashley Lavelle: Labor under Mark Latham

26

Labor’s belief that globalisation has deprived the state of many of its policy-making

powers, however overstated, reduces the options available to tackle disadvantage.

Furthermore, if the achievement of ‘transfer[ing] income and influence to the vast

suburbs and regions of the nation’ always was impossible given the vast class and other

inequalities existing within the ‘suburbs’ it was made even more so by an assumption

that state intervention was made much less viable by globalisation.



Another ‘old dilemma’ for Labor is the question as to what is possible within the

constraints imposed by economic conditions.  Johnson writes of the difficulties Labor

governments experience in ‘reconciling the need to support wage-earners and the need

to sustain private profitability and investment’ (2001, 147).  Labor governments often

come to power at the point of economic crisis and find themselves severely hampered

in what they can do for their constituents.   For example, the Whitlam Government’s

reformist program was predicated on the economic buoyancy of the 1960s (Freudenberg

1986, 135, 136, 143).  When the post-war boom ended, so too did Labor’s commitment to

major social reform (see Whitlam 1977, 7, 8).  Because Keynesianism’s orthodoxy during

the post-war boom had allowed the ALP to avoid having to choose between

mainstream economics and intervening in the market to raise living standards, the

collapse of the boom made Labor’s dilemma even more acute (Johnson 2001, 147).



The world, and Australian, economies have never returned to the post-war growth

levels that underpinned Whitlam’s Platform (see Tables One and Two below).  As Table

One shows, the performance of the Australian economy in the 1990s was only a slight

improvement on the 1980s, and equal to the recessionary 1970s, while largely the same

Ashley Lavelle: Labor under Mark Latham

27

can be said for the world economy.  Table Two reveals that the major economies of the

world recorded over the last three decades of the 20th Century significantly worse

economic growth levels compared to the preceding two decades.  Economic growth

levels in most Western countries did not reach anywhere near those achieved during

the 1950s and 60s.  The much-hyped ‘Goldilocks’ US economy of the 1990s managed to

post an average annual growth rate of just 2.2 percent, compared to 3.5 percent and 4.5

percent during the 1950s and 60s respectively (Kidron 2002, 92).  The commitment by

modern ALP leaders to fiscal austerity thus is indebted to the political belief that

globalisation has rendered state intervention less viable, but also to the much more

restrictive economic circumstances in which they operate.  These place major obstacles

in the path of any pledge to govern ‘for the people, not the powerful’ or to ‘transfer

income and influence to the vast suburbs and regions of the nation’.











Table One: Australian and World Economic Performance, 1960s-1990s (annual average

percent)



Australia  1960s  1970s  1980s  1990s

Real  GDP  Growth  5.3  3.5  3.3  3.5

Unemployment  2.2  4.2  7.6  8.9

Ashley Lavelle: Labor under Mark Latham

28

Inflation

(quarterly)

2.5  10.1  8.3/8.110  2.3/2.811

World GDP

Growth

5.0  3.6  2.8  3.012





Sources: (Gruen & Stevens 2000, 3; Thurow 1996, 1; IMF 2001).





















Table Two: Economic Growth Rates for Six Major Nations (annual percentage increase)



Country  1950-73  1973-97

USA  3.8  2.5

UK  3.0  1.8



10 Excluding interest.  11 Excluding interest.  12 Based on figures in IMF (2001).

Ashley Lavelle: Labor under Mark Latham

29

Germany  6.0  2.1

France  5.0  2.1

Italy  5.6 2.4

Japan  9.2  3.3



Source: (Kotz 2001, 94)





Conclusion



Latham deserves credit, if for nothing else, for putting focus on the current malaise in

the political system.  This paper has, however, raised serious doubts about whether he,

or the ALP, is able to implement policies capable of dealing with the problem.  Labor’s

commitment to ‘fiscal responsibility’, to tax cuts, and to smaller government more

broadly, not to mention the strictures of the global economic order, stand in the way of

the development of policies that would make a significant difference.



The grand plans to institute a ‘new politics’ face some old dilemmas, such as how to

appeal to both its traditional working-class constituency while at the same time

assuaging big business.  Labor’s policies are constrained by the needs of the capitalist

economy, which in recent years has not been conducive to fiscal expansiveness.  To

these old dilemmas a new twist is added in the form of globalisation which, in Labor’s

eyes at least, has made state intervention much less viable.  This further suggests that

any reforms under a Latham Labor government would be very minor.

Ashley Lavelle: Labor under Mark Latham

30



Latham’s ‘new politics’ are part of a populist political strategy aimed at tapping into

cynicism and anger towards politicians.  In this sense, there is nothing new in Latham’s

populism.  The ‘small-target strategy’ of one of Latham’s predecessors Kim Beazley

flowed from the post-Cold War ideological consensus on free-market globalisation.

Because Crean retained his enthusiasm for this agenda, he struggled to replace the

‘small-target strategy’ with anything new.  Latham’s strategy has been to substitute

Beazley’s approach for a populist strategy, but because of his commitment to economic

rationalism and globalisation, he also is hamstrung in his efforts to develop

substantially different policies.



Given Latham’s track record as a neo-liberal supporter of globalisation, it is unlikely

that he is a sincere populist committed to transferring power to ‘the people’.  It is more

likely that he is using populist rhetoric to gain political support.  However, Latham’s

very use of such a strategy is indicative of the political dilemmas faced by a social

democratic party committed to free-market globalisation, but which strategically must

find a way to distinguish itself from its neo-liberal rival.   What is more, if Latham fails

to deliver on his promises to govern ‘for the people, not the powerful’, this will only

increase public cynicism about parliamentary politics, and potentially lead people to

look elsewhere along the political spectrum for solace - possibly to the xenophobic

Right, but preferably to the Left of Labor with the Greens or other minor parties

committed to real social change.



Ashley Lavelle: Labor under Mark Latham

31



References





Abbott, T. 2000. ‘We’re Not Economic Rationalists.’ Australian Financial Review, 21

December.



ABC 2002a. ‘Labor Should Give Business Hell: Latham.’ ABC Insiders, 24 November,

http://abc.net.au/insiders/content/2002/s733524.htm



ABC 2002b. ‘Renewed Calls for Independent Speaker.’ Australian Broadcasting

Corporation News, 5 June, http://global.factiva.com/en/arch/print_results.asp



Adams, P. 2004. ‘Danger Signs from the Bomb.’ The Australian, 24 February.



Albert, M. 2003. Parecon: Life After Capitalism. London: Verso.



Argy, F. 2001. ‘The Difficult Choices Facing Labor.’ Dissent, No.6, Spring.



Barns, G. 2003. What’s Wrong with the Liberal Party? Cambridge University Press.



Bean, C. 2000. ‘Who Now Votes Labor?’ In The Machine: Labor Confronts the Future, Eds.

J. Warhurst, & A. Parkin. St Leonards: Allen & Unwin.



Ashley Lavelle: Labor under Mark Latham

32

Beazley, K.C. 1998. Address to CEDA, Regent Hotel, Sydney, February 18.



Beilharz, P. Transforming Labor: Labour Tradition and the Labor Decade in Australia.

Cambridge University Press.



Billington, J.  1958. Mikhailovsky and Russian Populism. Oxford University Press.



Bishop, P., Kane, J. & Patapan, H. 2002. ‘The Theory and Practice of E-Democracy:

Agency, Trusteeship and Participation on the Web.’ International Review of Public

Administration, 7 (2): 21-31.



Brown, G. 1997. ‘Deliberation and its Discontents: H. Ross Perot’s Antipolitical

Populism’.  In The End of Politics?  Explorations into Modern Antipolitics, Ed. A. Schedler.

Great Britain: Macmillan.



Burrows, P. 2001. ‘Is There An Alternative to Capitalism?’ Edited from a rough

transcript of a talk given as part of the SMAC forum on ‘Alternatives to Capitalism’,

Wednesday, April 11th, http://www.newcolonist.com/altcap.html



Callinicos, A. 2001. Against the Third Way: an Anti-Capitalist Critique, Cambridge: Polity

Press.



Callinicos, A. 2003. An Anti-Capitalist Manifesto, Cambridge: Polity Press.



Ashley Lavelle: Labor under Mark Latham

33

Canovan, M. 1981. Populism. New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.



Canovan, M. 2002. ‘Taking Politics to the People: Populism as the Ideology of

Democracy.’ In Democracies and the Populist Challenge, Eds. Y. Meny & Y. Surel.

Hampshire: Palgrave.



Castles, F.G. 2000. ‘Putting the Economy First: or Does Postmodernization Really

Matter?’ Political Studies, 48.



Clark, D. 2003. ‘Latham and the Third Way: Radicalising Neo-liberalism?’ Journal of

Australian Political Economy. 51, June.



Crean, S. 2002. Speech by the Leader of the Opposition, the Hon Simon Crean, Towards

Opportunity and Prosperity Conference. Melbourne, April 5.



Crean, S. 2003. Address to the Australian-Israel Chamber of Commerce. 21 October,

http://www.alp.org.au//media/1003/20006139.html



Danaher, K. & Burbach, R., Eds 2000. Globalize This! The Battle against the World Trade

Organization and Corporate Rule. Common Courage Press.



Denning, W. 1982. Caucus Crisis: the Rise and Fall of the Scullin Government. Sydney: Hale

& Iremonger.



Ashley Lavelle: Labor under Mark Latham

34

Dodson, L. 2000. ‘Company Donations Heavily Favour Libs.’ Australian Financial

Review, 22 June.



Eiley, B. 1994. ‘Fast Money.’ The New Internationalist. July.



Freudenberg, G. 1986. ‘The Program’. In The Whitlam Phenomenon, Fabian Papers,

Ringwood: McPhee Gribble/Penguin.



Gillard, J. 2004. ‘Julia Gillard - Politicians’ superannuation entitlements, bulk billing

figures, private health insurance.’ ALP News Statements, Sunday 15 February 2004,

http://www.alp.org.au//media/0204/20006842.html



Grahl, J. 2001. ‘Globalized Finance.’ New Left Review, 8, March-April, cited at

http://www.newleftreview.net/NLR24202.shtml.



Gruen, D. & Stevens, G. 2000. ‘Australian Macroeconomic Performance and Policies in

the 1990s.’ The Australian Economy in the 1990s. HC Coombs Centre for Financial Studies,

Kirribilli, July 24-25.



Hamilton, C. 2003. Growth Fetish. Crows Nest: Allen & Unwin.



Handy, C. 1997. The Hungry Spirit: Beyond Capitalism - a Quest for Purpose in the Modern

World. London: Hutchinson.



Ashley Lavelle: Labor under Mark Latham

35

Harman, C. 1996. ‘Globalisation: a Critique of a New Orthodoxy.’ International Socialism,

73, Winter.



Henderson, G. 2001. ‘Why IR Rollback is Beazley’s Weakest Point’, The Age, 30 October.



Heywood, A. 1998. Political Ideologies: An Introduction.  2nd Ed., Basingstoke: Palgrave.



Hicks, J.D. 1961. The Populist Revolt: A History of the Farmers’ Alliance and the People’s

Party.  University of Nebraska Press.



IMF 2001. The World Economic Outlook WEO. Database May 2001. ‘Selected World

Aggregates.’ retrieved at http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/weo/2001/01/data/index.htm#2



Johnson, C. 2001. ‘Labor and the Left.’ In Left Directions: Is There a Third Way?, Eds. P.

Nursey-Bray and C.L. Bacchi. University of Western Australia Press.



Johnson, C. 2003. ‘From the Suburbs: Mark Latham and the Ideology of the ALP.’

Refereed Paper Presented to the Australasian Political Studies Association Conference.

University of Tasmania, Hobart, 29 September - 1 October 2003.



Keating, M. 2000. ‘The State of Play of the Nation-State’. Australian Financial Review, 7

August.



Ashley Lavelle: Labor under Mark Latham

36

Kidron, M. 2002. ‘Failing Growth and Rampant Costs: Two Ghosts in the Machine of

Modern Capitalism’. International Socialism, 96, Autumn.



Kotz, D.M. 2001. ‘The State, Globalization and Phases of Capitalist Development.’ In

Phases of Capitalist Development: Booms, Crises and Globalizations, Eds. R. Albritton, M.

Itoh, R. Westra, & A. Zuege. Hampshire: Palgrave.



Lane, B. & Young, S. 2000. ‘Current Themes in FOI and the Operation of Key

Provisions.’ Freedom of Information Seminar Papers for Queensland.  Brisbane, 16 May 2000.



Latham, M. 1990. Reviving Labor’s Agenda: A Program for Local Reform. Leichhardt: Pluto

Press.



Latham, M. 1998a. Civilising Global Capital: New Thinking for Australian Labor. St

Leonards: Allen & Unwin.



Latham, M. 1998b. ‘Competition Not a Dirty Word.’ Australian Financial Review, 2 July.



Latham, M. 2000. ‘It’s Time for Labor to Jettison the Left.’ Australian Financial Review,31

July.



Latham, M. 2003a. From the Suburbs: Building a Nation From Our Neighbourhoods.

Annandale: Pluto Press.



Ashley Lavelle: Labor under Mark Latham

37

Latham, M. 2003b. Interview with Andrew Denton, Enough Rope, 28 July,

http://www.abc.net.au/enoughrope/stories/s912731.htm



Latham, M. 2004a. ‘Budget Reply Speech.’ ALP News Statements, Thursday, May 13,

http://www.alp.org.au//media/0504/20007469.html



Latham, M. 2004b. ‘Opportunity for All.’ Address by Leader of the Opposition, Mark

Latham, to the ALP National Conference, Sydney, January 29, viewed at

http://www.australianpolitics.com/news/2004/01/04-01-29.shtml



Latham, M. 2004c. ‘Troops in Iraq, Australia’s National Interest, Mike Keelty.’ ALP

News Statements, Thursday, March 25,

http://www.alp.org.au//media/0304/20007125.html



Latham, M. 2004d. ‘Labor and the World.’ Address to the Lowy Institute, Sydney,

Wednesday, April 7,

http://www.alp.org.au/print.html?link=/media/0404/20007224.html



Latham, M. 2004e. ‘The New Politics.’ ALP News Statements, Friday, March 19,

http://www.alp.org.au//media/0304/20007093.html.



Latham, M. 2004f. ‘Mark Latham - Speech to the Queensland ALP State Conference.’

ALP News Statements, Saturday, 12 June,

http://www.alp.org.au//media/0604/20007699.html

Ashley Lavelle: Labor under Mark Latham

38



Latham, M. 2004g. ‘Mark Latham - Parliamentary Superannuation.’ ALP News

Statements, Friday, 18 June, http://www.alp.org.au//media/0604/20007752.html



Latham, M. 2004h. ‘Mark Latham - Address to Caucus on the 100th Anniversary of the

Watson Labor Government.’ ALP News Statements, Tuesday, 27 April,

http://www.alp.org.au//media/0404/20007317.html



Latham, M. and Conroy, M. 2004a. ‘Australia-United States Free Trade Agreement’.  ALP News

Statements, Tuesday, 03 August, http://www.alp.org.au//media/0804/20008104.html



Latham, M. and Conroy, M. 2004b. ‘Labor’s Plans for National Interest Safeguards on the US-

Australia Free Trade Agreement.’ Attachments. ALP News Statements, Tuesday, 03 August,

http://www.alp.org.au/dload/federal/media/free_trade_agreement_attachments.pdf



Lavelle, A. 2003. The Wilderness Years: Federal Labor in Opposition. PhD Thesis,

Department of Politics and Public Policy, Griffith University, November.



Lavelle, A. 2004. ‘Labor and Globalisation - from Keating to Latham.’ Department of

Politics and Public Policy, Griffith University, mimeo.



Lewis, S., Wallace, C. & Eccleston, R. 2004. ‘PM Hitches Our Trade to the US’, The

Australian, 10 February.



Ashley Lavelle: Labor under Mark Latham

39

Loughlin, J. 2004. ‘The ‘Transformation’ of Governance: New Directions in Policy and

Politics.’ Australian Journal of Politics and History, 50 (1).



Love, P. 1984. Labour and the Money Power: Australian Labour Populism 1890-1950.

Melbourne University Press.



Maddox, G. 1989. The Hawke Government and Labor Tradition. Ringwood: Penguin.



Maheshvarananda, D. 2003. After Capitalism: Prout's Vision for a New World, Washington:

Proutist Universal Publications.



Marchart, O. 2002. ‘Austrifying Europe: Ultra-Right Populism and the New Culture of

Resistance.’ Cultural Studies, 16 (6).



Markey, R. 1987. ‘Populism and the Formation of a Labor Party in New South Wales

1890-1900.’  Journal of Australian Studies, Number 20, May.



Mathews, J., Thurbon, E. and Weiss, L. 2004. ‘Bitter Pill for an Appendage State.’ Australian

Financial Review Review. August 20.



McKew, M. 2002. ‘Lunch: Mark Latham.’ The Bulletin, 26 June,

http://bulletin.ninemsn.com.au/bulletin/EdDesk.nsf/All/E5D0425446FA0C07CA256

BDE0016BE7C



Ashley Lavelle: Labor under Mark Latham

40

Meny, Y. & Surel, Y. 2002. ‘The Constitutive Ambiguity of Populism.’ In Democracies and

the Populist Challenge, Eds. Y. Meny & Y. Surel.  Hampshire: Palgrave.



Miliband, R. 1974. The State in Capitalist Society: the Analysis of the Western System of

Power. London: Quartet Books.



Mitchell, W.F. 1999. ‘Full Employment Abandoned - the Macroeconomic Story.’ In Out

of the Rut: Making Labor a Genuine Alternative, Eds. M. Carman, & I. Rogers. St. Leonards:

Allen & Unwin.



Newspoll. 2004a. ‘Personality Traits of Prime Minister and Leader of the Opposition.’ 10

March, cited at www.newspoll.com.au/cgi-bin/display_poll_data.pl



Newspoll. 2004b. ‘Federal Voting Intention and Leaders’ Ratings’. 23 March, cited at

www.newspoll.com.au/cgi-bin/display_poll_data.pl



Parnell, S. 2004. ‘Free to hide behind terrorist threat.’ The Courier Mail, 24 April,

http://www.couriermail.news.com.au/printpage/0,5942,9367207,00.html



Price, M. 2004. ‘Odd Couple in a Ss-single Bed.’ The Australian, 8 June.



Priest, M. 2004. ‘Labor Supports ‘Gay-Bashing’ Law.’ Australian Financial Review, 2 June.



Reuters. 2004. ‘Gandhi’s Stock Strikes Trouble.’ The Australian, 18 May.

Ashley Lavelle: Labor under Mark Latham

41



Ricketson, M. 1996. ‘Freedom from Information.’ Freedom of Information Review, No.63:

26-28.



Rydge’s 1975. ‘Gough Doffs.’ Rydge’s, March.



Schedler, A. 1997. ‘Introduction: Antipolitics - Closing and Colonizing the Public

Sphere.’ In The End of Politics?  Explorations into Modern Antipolitics, Ed. A. Schedler.

Great Britain: Macmillan.



Scott, A. 2003. ‘Meanings of ‘Modernisation’: the Distinctiveness of the Whitlam

Government in the History of Labour Parties.’ In It’s Time Again: Whitlam and Modern

Labor, Eds. J. Hocking, & C. Lewis. Armadale: Melbourne Publishing Group.



Shanahan, D. 2004a. ‘Super Deal is $85,000 Relief to PM.’ The Weekend Australian, 19-20

June.



Shanahan, D. 2004b. ‘Latham’s Reality Cheque.’ The Australian, 25 June.



Singleton, J., Martyn, P. & Ward, I. 1998. ‘Did the 1996 Federal Election See a Blue-

Collar Revolt Against Labor? A Queensland Case-Study.’ Australian Journal of Political

Science. 33 (1), March.



Skeffington, R. 2000. ‘Coalition Yes, Reith No.’ Business Review Weekly, November 24.

Ashley Lavelle: Labor under Mark Latham

42



Strangio, P. 1999. ‘Gough and Jim.’ Arena Magazine. 40, April-May.



Summers, J. 2002. ‘Parliament and Responsible Government.’ In Government, Politics,

Power and Policy in Australia, Eds. J. Summers, D. Woodward & A. Parkin. Frenchs

Forest: Pearson Education.



The Australian. 2004. ‘Latham Says No to Gay Play.’ The Australian, 8 June.



Thurow, L. 1996. The Future of Capitalism: How Today’s Economic Forces Shape Tomorrow’s

World. St Leonards: Allen & Unwin.



Turner, I. 1979. Industrial Labour and Politics: the Dynamics of the Labour Movement in

Eastern Australia. Sydney: Hale & Iremonger.



Ware, A. 2002. ‘The United States: Populism as Political Strategy.’ In Democracies and the

Populist Challenge, Eds. Y. Meny & Y. Surel.  Hampshire: Palgrave.



Webb, B. 2004. ‘Where is Latham Taking Labor?’  Green Left Weekly, 25 February,

http://www.greenleft.org.au/back/2004/572/572p7b.htm



Weeks, J. 2001. ‘Globalize, Globa-lize, Global Lies: Myths of the World Economy in the

1990s’. In Phases of Capitalist Development: Booms, Crises and Globalizations, Eds. R.

Albritton, M. Itoh, R. Westra, & A. Zuege. Hampshire: Palgrave.

Ashley Lavelle: Labor under Mark Latham

43



Weiss, L. 1998. The Myth of the Powerless State: Governing the Economy in a Global Era.

Cambridge: Polity Press.





Whitlam, E.G. 1977. Address by the Leader of the Opposition, the Hon E.G.

Whitlam, Q.C., M.P., to the ALP 1977 National Conference, July 5.



Whitwell, G. 1986. The Treasury Line. Sydney: Allen & Unwin.



Williams, P.D. 2001. ‘Metapopulism: Peter Beattie and the Reinvention of Queensland

Populist Discourse.’ Paper presented to 43rd annual APSA Conference, Brisbane,

October,

http://auspsa.anu.edu.au/proceedings/2001/Australian_Politics_Papers_W_Z.htm



Williams, P.D. 2003. ‘The Commonwealth of Australia, January to June 2003’, Australian

Journal of Politics and History, 49 (4).

