MEDIA STATEMENT  Senator Kate Lundy  Shadow Minister for Manufacturing and Consumer Affairs   Senator for the Australian Capital Territory



Saturday 23 April 2005

Canberra loses the father of multiculturalism

I am saddened to hear that the Honourable Al Grassby passed away early this  morning  after  a  long  illness  -  a  few  months  short  of  his  79th  birthday.  My   thoughts  are  with  his  wife  Ellnor,  his  daughter  Gabriella  and  their  extended   family.

Al made Canberra his home after retiring from politics and will be missed by so  many in the Canberra community. Al went out of his way to make people feel  welcome  in  Canberra,  from  refugees  to  diplomats  -  he  will  be  remembered   fondly by his many friends.

Al lived a full life - his commitment to social justice was matched by his wit  and  exuberance.  Al  contributed  directly  to  the  improvement  of  many  lives   throughout  his  life  as  a  parliamentarian,  community  campaigner  and  loyal   friend.



He burst into the federal political arena in 1969 as the member for the Riverina  after a stint livening up the NSW Parliament throughout the 1960’s.

As Labor’s Minister for Immigration in the Whitlam Government, Al campaigned  for the rights of immigrants from non-English speaking backgrounds and saw out  an end to the White Australia Policy.

The  first  to  coin  the  phrase  ‘multiculturalism’  Al’s  legacy  will  live  on  in  the   heart  and  minds  of  many  Australians.  The  idea  of  ‘multiculturalism’  has  in   redefined the nation’s cultural landscape and helped Australia and Australians  build a positive view of our diverse society.



After politics as the Commissioner for Community Relations, Al had key roles in  administering the Racial Discrimination Act 1975 and launched ethnic radio and  television.

I want to honour the memory of Al Grassby - he remained committed to Labor  principles  and  values  all  his  life  and  will  be  remembered  as  the  father  of   multiculturalism.



Contact: Taryn Langdon 0417 148 059 or 02 6277 3334

