THE FUTURE OF THE ALP   (FABIAN SOCIETY CONFERENCE,

MELBOURNE, NOVEMBER 12, 2005)



As an outsider to the affairs of the Labor Party, something that has puzzled me in

recent years, in most of the analyses of the federal party’s discontents, is the tendency

to concentrate upon what can most economically be called organisational matters.

During his ill-fated leadership, Simon Crean expended a great deal of his political

capital in reducing by a small amount the representative weight of the trade unions at

the national conference. I could never quite see the point. The national conference

plays little role in the life of the party. By spending so much time conspicuously

reducing the influence of the trade unions, the Labor leadership was playing into the

hands of those who have sought to convince the nation that, like the horse and buggy,

trade unions belong to the past. Similarly in recent years, the shrewdest analysts of

Labor’s wilderness years—John Button, Mark Latham, John Faulkner—have written

or spoken persuasively about the decline of the party member and the presently

dysfunctional nature of the factional system first established in the 1980s. I do not

doubt for a moment the accuracy of their empirical accounts or the frustrations

experienced in watching the backroom dealings of the feuding micro-factional blocks.

Nor do I doubt that in many instances these processes prevent some of the most

talented party members from standing for parliament or, if they stand, from gaining

pre-selection. Nevertheless I am sceptical about those theories of the federal Labor

Party’s recent failures which place organisational questions at centre stage.



There are three obvious objections to these theories. In contemporary Australia, the

Labor Party governs in every state and territory. Although it is probably true that the

problems of the factions multiply at the federal level, if the party’s organisational

structure was the key to its recent failure, success at state level would be difficult to

explain. Or again. In Queensland the Liberal Party, in recent times, has performed

abysmally in state elections and magnificently at federal elections. I assume that in

both kinds of election the party structure and membership is the same.  To my mind,

this raises serious questions about the relationship, under contemporary conditions,

between party organisation and electoral success. And there is another factor as well.

A more active and influential Labor party membership, at least if it were drawn

predominantly from inner city, university-educated cosmopolitan types, would, in my

opinion, not increase but diminish the prospects of Labor’s electoral success. Why?



From the time of the federation of Australia until perhaps the 1970s, the most salient

binary division in Australian society was the one that was based on class. This binary

divide had obvious political implications. During these decades there was no more

accurate way of summarising the broadest pattern of political allegiance than to say

that the working classes supported, as members and voters, Labor (including

Democratic Labor) and that the middle classes did not. From the 1970s this divide

began to lose its salience. It was gradually superseded by a new binary, the division

between what we now call the mainstream and the elites. This new binary had a more

complicated relationship to political allegiance than its class-based predecessor.



The old binary was founded on economic function and fate. The new binary was

founded, rather, on a clash of values and worldview, perhaps best described as the

clash between traditionalists and cosmopolitans.  For our purposes what is most

important, however, were the very serious problems which became obvious in he

1990s, that the gradual emergence of the new binary posed for the Labor Party. The

problems arose for two closely connected reasons. On the one hand, the new binary

caused the gulf to widen between the old working class supporters of the ALP, whose

cultural values were decidedly non-cosmopolitan, and the new groups—the left-leaning university-trained, middle class professionals—who saw in Labor from the

time of Whitlam the vehicle for the implementation of their progressivist,

cosmopolitan cultural program. On the other hand, the new binary allowed the Liberal

and National Parties, while implementing the new cosmopolitan economic agenda, to

gain the allegiance of at least a substantial part of two different parts of Labor’s

former working class constituency. The Coalition attracted so-called “aspirationals”,

tradespeople and skilled workers who had benefited from the expansion of the

Australian economy since the 1980s. They also attracted many of the economically

marginalised groups who were drawn to the Coalition for what one might call

Hansonite reasons, that is to say either because of their hostility to multiculturalism,

Aboriginal land rights and asylum seekers or on law-and-order and war-on-terror

grounds.



By utilising the principle of Ockham’s razor—reject complicated explanations when

simple ones will do—the result of the last two elections can most economically be

largely explained through a framework of this kind. In 2001, large numbers of

Hansonites and poorer voters were attracted to the Coalition because of its support for

the war on terror and its tough new policies on border control. In 2004, a new cohort

of aspirationals were attracted to the Coalition because of the very effective “interest-rates-will-rise-under-Latham” scare.



What then is to be done? The American conservative, Irving Kristol, once remarked

that while it was disagreeable for one’s hopes to be frustrated, the real problems in life

usually began when one’s wishes were fulfilled. When the Coalition unexpectedly

took control of the Senate as a result of the last election, the Howard government

could at last do what it wanted. Its first two important initiatives have been the new

counter-terrorist and new workplace relations bills. These two initiatives neatly

demonstrate the dynamic of the political framework I am sketching out today. One is

potentially of great political benefit to the government; the other poses a potentially

deadly threat.



The counter-terrorist issue plays readily into the Howard government’s hands. If

Labor were to oppose the new counter-terrorist laws on the obvious civil liberty

grounds, it would run a very real risk of a re-run of the Tampa affair, with predictable

government accusations that Beazley Labor was now as soft on terror as it had once

been on border control. If, on the other hand, Labor were to support the new counter-terrorist laws, as it most certainly will, this will deepen the discontent of those

members of the professional middle classes who look to Labor as the party of

progress.



The question of workplace relations is very different. There are very many wage and

salary earners, particularly casual and part-time, whose personal and family lives will

eventually deteriorate as a consequence of the neo-liberal determination to eliminate

trade unions and to throw human beings onto a labour market shaped exclusively by

the forces of demand and supply. Under these new conditions federal Labor has the

opportunity to reinforce its traditional role as the party which defends ordinary

Australians in their working lives. The greatest point of vulnerability for the Coalition

is the tension between its neo-liberal economic agenda, which fundamentally suits the

needs of large and small business, and the kind of voters it has taken from Labor since

1996. Labor now has the opportunity to identify and develop policies which render

less affluent Australians vulnerable in currently neglected areas like mental health,

and public provision of dental and aged care.  Yet, as is seen in the Howard

government’s scandalous expenditure of tens of millions of dollars of taxpayer funds

on propaganda, the most important of these opportunities will remain the workplace

relations bill.



The leader of the Labor Party, Kim Beazley, has been weakened by the persistent

Howard government accusation that he lacks “ticker”. He is weakened because many

Australians think that there is some truth in the charge. I am sure that these

Australians believe that Beazley will gradually abandon opposition to the workplace

relations act as he gradually relinquished his (in my opinion foolish) pledge that, once

elected, he would “roll-back” the GST. There is one way Beazley can combat this

suspicion. If he were to ask my advice, I would tell him to offer a cast-iron promise.

As soon as Labor is elected, if and when there are the Senate numbers, the workplace

relations act will be repealed, the Fair Pay Commission scrapped and a new bill

reinstating the rights of wage and salary earners introduced. Beazley should work

tirelessly for this result over the next two years. He should make it clear that there is

something, other than security, for which he stands. And, to show that he does indeed

have ticker, he should make it clear that he will not be intimidated by the Murdoch

press and that, if his party will not back him absolutely in this campaign, without

hesitation he will resign.



Robert Manne, Professor of Politics, La Trobe University







