Australian Democrats Press  Releases

Senator Natasha Stott Despoja Democrats Senator for South Australia Australian Democrats spokesperson for Higher Education

Dated: 29 March 2005 Press Release Number: 05/139 Portfolio: Children & Youth Affairs Related: Higher Education

Related: Education & Training

Youth survey: Young people given a voice

Senator for South Australia Natasha Stott Despoja is conducting a national poll of young people  on their views on issues as diverse as increases to university fees, whether they think birth  control should be free for young people, and whether they support same sex marriage.

Launching the annual Youth Poll survey of 15-20 year olds at TAFEs Adelaide South Campus,  Senator Stott Despoja said young people are often ignored by the major political parties.

"Youth Poll is the only extensive survey of young people conducted by a political party, and  aims to give young people a more powerful voice on issues important to them," Senator Stott  Despoja said.

"Last year, for example, 71 per cent of respondents indicated that HECS increases of 25 per  cent at most universities this year would discourage them from attending university."

Education emerged clearly as an issue of concern, with 85 per cent believing higher education  should be adequately funded by the Government.

Other issues highlighted by Youth Poll results were that politics and the way policies are  communicated to young people make them wary, with only six per cent of respondents trusting  politicians as a source of political information, and only seven per cent trusting the media in that  role.

"It is also important that young people who are not yet eligible to vote are able to have their  views reflected in the political process including in Parliament."

Among other questions, Youth Poll 2005 asks young people:  Should the voting age be lowered to 16? Is there homophobia where you work or study? Do you support the mandatory detention of asylum seekers?

"Questionnaires have been sent to individuals, secondary schools, youth organisations, TAFES  and universities. They are also available electronically from my website, or by contacting my  office."



