Page 1 of 17





EMBARGOED TO DELIVERY          CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY

April, 2005

Bill Shorten  National Secretary  The Australian Workers’ Union





Introduction

Thank  you  Barry  (Jones).  Welcome  ladies  and  gentlemen,  officers  and

members of the Fabian Society and ACT Young Labor. It ’s great to be part of

the debate here in our national capital about our national future especially with

the younger people who will be part of it. It is important I think that the ALP

takes the lead in being the Party of generational change in Australian politics.



Tonight I will talk about some of the major public policy issues determining our

future  as  a  nation.  In  particular,  that  is  economic  policy,  at  a  time  when

according to most signals the economy is cracking. I think we ’ve all realised

the folly of the idea around in some quarters before the last federal election

that Labor, as the Opposition should stay away from the economy because it

was  the  Government ’s  strong  point.  National  economic  policy  is  of  course

always  fundamental  to  Australians ’  living  standards  and  voting  intentions  so

should always be at the top of our public agenda. Bob Hawke was right, and

is  still  right -  if  you  can ’t  understand  economics  and  communicate  about  it

intelligently, then you ’re not in the game. It ’s like saying “let ’s play cricket, but

Page 2 of 17

without the bat.” Tonight I will touch on the areas of tax, health, education and

regional development.



But first, let me just say how affronted I felt this morning listening to the radio

about  the  Federal  Government ’s  latest  policy  initiative -  that  is,  cutting

Medicare  funding  for  IVF  patients.  It  is  just  so  small-minded  and  punitive,

considering  the  demographic  pressures  of  our  aging  population,  to  hit

desperate couples with this kind of primitive cost cutting, which in the long run

may not even save a cent. Coming on the back the Medicare Safety Net lies

and nearly eight per cent hike in private health insurance premiums, the IVF

cutback is just one more chapter in an increasingly dangerous story.



The  duplicity  of  the  federal  government ’s  whole  performance  since  the  last

election  is  symptomatic  of  a  much  larger  failure  of  national  leadership.  The

billion dollar deceptions about interest rates and Medicare rebates and health

insurance premiums betray a vacuum in comprehensive and integrated policy

making.  The  recent  collapse  in  productivity  and  economic  growth,  diving

share  markets,  exploding  trade  deficit  and  record  household  debt  are

signposts  to  an  insecure  future  for  many  Australians.  Recent  surveys  of

consumer  sentiment  and  business  sales,  profit  and  investment  expectations

confirm the trend.



There is a convergence of expert opinion on the sources of our problems: lack

of skills training and research and development, over-reliance on household

Page 3 of 17

debt, insufficient and out-dated infrastructure, poor incentives for low-paid

work - made worse by pressures from our ageing population.



Considered in this context, it is clear that the Howard Government ’s big-ticket

policy agenda for its fourth term - industrial relations - is just a political

distraction. The government ’s plan to cut working conditions, freeze minimum

wages and ban unions from organising will do nothing to solve our

fundamental economic problems. There is simply no excuse except political

expediency for legislation that will radically restrict people ’s basic democratic

rights to collectively bargain for better wages and conditions. This is just

putting the Liberal ’s ideology first, and Australians second.



The Economy



Now the last thing I want is for the economy to crack. Nobody wants to see

the  overriding  impact  that  would  have  on  the  everyday  lives  of  millions  of

Australians.  As  trade  unionists,  my  workmates  and  I  have  a  vital  interest  in

economic growth and its consequences for the employment of our members.

Most  days  we  are  involved  in  working  in  the  real  economy  to  help  set  the

wages  and  conditions  that  are  compatible  with  business  growth  in  a

competitive and increasingly international trading environment.



But  many  of  the  signs  are  there.  The  latest  Australian  Bureau  of  Statistics

figures  showed  that  in  the  wake  of  a  deteriorating  trade  balance,  in  the

December  quarter  2004,  Australia ’s  current  account  deficit  was  $15.2  billion

Page 4 of 17

(up  6  per  cent  on  the  previous  quarter)  or  6.4  per  cent  of  GDP  pushing  net

foreign debt (up by $15 billion to $422 billion) to record levels.  Apart from a

small improvement in the June Quarter 2004, the current account deficit has

worsened consecutively in every quarter since the March quarter 2002.  The

trade  balance  continues  to  deteriorate  sharply.  In  January,  the  goods  and

services trade deficit blew out further to $2.7 billion, the second-highest level

on  record -  so  no  turnaround  soon  in  Australia ’s  current  account

performance.   Declining  export  volumes  at  a  time  of  surging  imports -

including in manufacturing - is rekindling warnings of a banana republic.



The  OECD  has  noted  in  its  latest Economic  Survey  of  Australia  that  skills

shortages  and  reduction  in  the  relative  size  of  the  working  age  population

because  of  Australia ’s  aging  population  will  add  increasing  pressure  on

growth  in  per  capita  incomes  in  the  coming  decade.  In  fact,  the  OECD

observe that, Australia has only just returned to the position it already held in

the  1970s  and  remains  well  below  leading  countries  in  terms  of  labour

participation and productivity.



In order to progress up the league table, there is a need to return to a vision of

reform that started under Labor in the 1980s which was based on long-term

structural  reforms  and  a  competition  culture  and  stable  macroeconomic

policies that were both transparent and accountable.



In  the  last  four  years  vacancies  in  traditional  trades  in  Australia  have

increased by 86%, with acute shortages in chefs, construction, metal, wood,

Page 5 of 17

electrical  and  electronics.  At  the  same  time  the  number  of  cancellations  or

withdrawals from apprenticeships has risen by 60% -- up to 135,200 in 2004.

Poor wages especially in the early years of traditional apprenticeships and a

lack of support for employers are major drivers of such a high drop-out rate.

Data  released  last  year  by  the  ACTU  forecast  that  the  skills  shortage  could

cost the Australian economy around $735 million a year in lost output or up to

$9 billion over the next 10 years.



The  Business  Council  of  Australia  last  week  called  for  an  urgent  new

approach to Australia ’s infrastructure problems, warning the problem was the

single biggest barrier to the nation ’s future prosperity.  A recent study by the

Australian Council for Infrastructure Development estimated there had been a

$25  billion  under-investment  in  everything  from  roads  to  sewerage  and

drainage in recent years. A BCA study estimated that fixing export bottlenecks

as well as water, energy, road and rail transport services could mean an extra

$16 billion increase in economic growth per year. And Queensland University

academic  John  Quiggin  has  recently  pointed  out  a  major  infrastructure

shortfall - in education - and I will return to that theme shortly.



So  we  have  real  fundamental  problems  undermining  our  economic

opportunities.  There  is  something  seriously  wrong  when  health  insurance

costs are increasing by nearly eight per cent when overall inflation is 2.5 per

cent, when our relative education costs are one of the most expensive in the

developed world, when our tax system is unstable. The market can be relied

on to deliver better outcomes in many circumstances. But there are systemic

Page 6 of 17

economic  failures  and  imbalances  that  markets  cannot  fix.  I  want  to  put

forward  a  few  ideas  as  examples  what  a  federal  government  policy  makers

could be considering - instead of punishing childless couples.



Tax



The  Government  should  know  that  it ’s  created  a  monster  when  even  its

friends  are  calling  for  radical  surgery,  if  not  the  death  penalty.  So  it  is  with

Costello ’s rotten tax system. We should put it out if its misery, and so end the

financial misery it ’s foisting on so many Australians.



I don ’t always agree with Malcolm Turnbull, but we should give him his due for

highlighting the special injustice of the current tax system in giving breaks to

the better off (like Malcolm) while hitting the worse-off hardest.



A large gap between the top personal income tax rate and the company tax

rate creates an incentive to redefine personal income as company income. In

addition,  the  maximum  marginal  income  tax  rate  cuts  in  at  a  relatively  low-

income  level,  which  harms  work  incentives  and  skill  acquisition.  Effective

marginal  tax  rates  also  remain  high  for  low-income  earners,  deterring

participation by secondary earners and older workers.



In effect we have two tax systems - one for most people with marginal income

rates of up to 47% plus the 1.5% Medicare levy, superannuation taxes and, if

your family is in higher education, HECS. Not to mention the 10% GST on top

Page 7 of 17

of that. And we know that many Family Payment and welfare recipients can

face  effective  marginal  tax  rates  of  around  60%  if  they  try  to  do  some  extra

work -  with  the  absurdity  of  rates  in  excess  of  100%  in  some  cases -  an

actual negative incentive to work precisely affecting the people most needed

to participate more in the labour market - that is, mature age Australians and

parents  of  younger  children.  Meanwhile,  higher  income  earners  are  availing

themselves of negative gearing, company and family trust arrangements, and

the endless variety of new avoidance schemes.



Peter Costello will blame everyone but himself, but he cannot get away from

the fact that his GST has been a tax fraud. Workers are paying more tax than

ever,  despite  the  pilfering  of  the  LAW  tax  cuts  to  compensate  for  bracket

creep.



The  Government  has  not  delivered  the  lower  marginal  income  rates

envisaged in Keating ’s and Hewson ’s earlier GST proposals. While the GST

continues  to  grow,  there  is  no  indexation  of  the  income  rates.  The  Costello

solution to return some more bracket creep to higher earners fails to address

the injustices and distortions across the whole system. Their other proposals

are to skimp on the GST deal with the States and to punish welfare recipients

into any sort of work by threatening their benefits - hardly a recipe for the high

productivity, high skill labour market that people want and our country needs

for sustained growth.



Page 8 of 17

As a union, the AWU is doing what it can for members to combat the worst

impacts  of  this  rotten  tax  system  by  negotiating  higher  wages,  but  radical

surgery is required. Through enterprise bargaining, we are also breaking the

superannuation  contributions  above  the  minimum  9%  guarantee  ceiling -

most  recently  just  last  month  to  set  a  new  level  for  the  civil  construction

industry with an 11% agreement on the Eastlink project in Melbourne. But the

real  solution  to  a  rotten  tax  system  cannot  be  achieved  without  income  tax

relief.



Regional Australia and Infrastructure Development



I am proud that being involved with the union has taught me, a city boy about

the  economy  from  a  much  broader  perspective  than  the  view  from  Sydney,

Melbourne and Brisbane. You see how much of our GDP is created outside

the urban centres when you ’re at the bauxite and other mines in remote WA

or  Queensland,  or on  gas  and  oil  rigs  in  Bass  Strait,  or  on  the  rich  farming

areas  of  the  Murray  River  system  on  the  Victoria/New  South  Wales  border.

You also see how important it is to build in environmental sustainability for our

future growth, as well as how the lack of infrastructure is the real brake on so

much  regional  development.  Here  I ’ll  even  agree  with  Chris  Corrigan  and

Everald  Compton  in  supporting  their  plans  for  a  new  regional  Melbourne-

Brisbane rail link to bring new transport access to western New South Wales

in particular.



Page 9 of 17

The Australian Workers ’ Union has long and enduring interests in building up

our regions and small towns. The National Party is no advocate for rural and

regional  Australia,  despite  the  presence  there  of  so  many  marginal  seats.

Country Australia needs new champions in public policy - to save small towns

from dying and to build strong economic futures for our regional centres. We

need  to  protect  and  restore  the  environment,  increase  our  regional

populations and build high value trading opportunities.



Australia  faces  critical  choices  in  urban  and  regional  development.  Without

proper  policy  planning,  Sydney,  Melbourne  and  Brisbane  could  grow

unchecked  into  three  Mexico  City-style  conglomerates,  while  country  towns

continue to die off. Or else we could work towards a more European model of

regional development, with growing regional centres spreading the population

across the nation.



A comprehensive population policy based on an increased annual immigration

program of at least 200,000 migrants annually should be integral to regional

growth.  New  employment  opportunities  from  major  infrastructure

developments  will  be  essential  to  attract  migrants  from  both  overseas  and

interstate to regional Australia. Increased immigration - targeted to the needs

of  the  domestic  labour  market -  will  also  reduce  the  economic  costs  of  our

aging  population.  The  success  of  many  recent  asylum  seekers  in  becoming

productive  members  of  our  regional  communities  shows  the  potential  for

expanding  the  humanitarian  migrant  intake  as  well  as  the  skills-based

program, under which the bulk of new immigrants should continue to settle.

Page 10 of 17



I stress that the key to growing our regions will be the availability of jobs and

services based on essential physical and social infrastructure development.



Health



Reforming  our  tax  system  goes  hand  in  hand  with  rebuilding  public  health

funding  for  the  future.  The  current  private  health  insurance  rebate  system  is

effectively a subsidy to the rich, because the less well off simply cannot afford

it. Last month the Howard Government approved an average annual increase

of 7.96 per cent in private health insurance premiums, bringing increases over

the  last  four  years  to  30  per  cent.  Howard ’s  latest  health  hike  will  push

average  costs  up  to  around  $250  a  month  for  a  family  or  $50  for  a  young

single person.



These increases are simply unsustainable for both consumers and taxpayers

who subsidise 30 per cent of private health insurance premiums through the

private health insurance rebate.  It also means that the various measures and

incentives which have been implemented by the Government such as the 30

per  cent  rebate  and  lifetime  cover  have  failed  to  keep  a  lid  on  premium

increases.   In  the  face  of  these  increases  in  premiums,  and  reductions  in

coverage  by  private  health  insurers,  the  Australian  Consumers ’  Association

has  called  on  consumers  to  consider  whether  they  need  private  health

insurance.



Page 11 of 17

Apart from the diversion of billions of dollars each year that could be spent on

public hospitals, health professional training or innovative aged care etc, the

current private system is incredibly inefficient. An estimated 10% to 14% goes

into  administration  costs -  a  bonanza  for  the  multinational  insurance

companies that make the industry super funds ’ 0.2% administration costs look

minuscule by comparison. As costs rise year after year, despite Government

promises of falling premiums, more and more people will drop out of private

insurance as they learn the hard way that it ’s just not worth it.



The ALP has to make some tough decisions about health insurance as it did

with  superannuation.  There  is  no  escape  from  the  exponential  increase  in

health  costs  due  to  the  ageing  of  our  population  and  the  application  of  new

medical technologies. As reported by the OECD, across Australian health and

aged care services, average annual expenditures per person on those aged

65 and over are around 4 times of those under 65 and rise between 6 and 9

times of that for the oldest groups.



The  Labor  Party  has  got  to  draw  the  line.  We  need  a  new  Medicare  model,

based on our fundamental principals of universal and affordable public health

services based on medical need. If some of the billions of dollars that are now

going  to  insurance  companies  were  instead  invested  in  health  savings, we

could cut out the exorbitant administration costs and hedge against the rising

costs  in  the  future.  There  are  better  models.  But  these  require  working

constructively  on  tackling  the  growing  health  challenge  and  not  just  cost

shifting  between  the  Commonwealth  and  the  States.  Adequately  funded

Page 12 of 17

public  health  and  aged  care  services  requires  closer  coordination  between

State  and  Federal  Governments  and  an  overhaul  of  State  funding

arrangements.



Education



I  think  now  that  the  skills  shortage,  lack  of  investment  in  research  and

development and the Government ’s failure to support industry innovation are

contributing  to  the  rocketing  current  account  deficit,  people  may  look  more

kindly  on  the  ALP ’s  Knowledge  Nation  program  from  the  2001  federal

election. The spaghetti and meatballs was a bit abstruse, but the point is that

Kim Beazley and Barry Jones were on the right track for Australia ’s long-term

interest.  That  we  were  defeated  by  short-term  political  manoeuvring  has  not

turned out well for the Australian people.



Barry Jones has made a great contribution to our education debate by having

both the long-term vision for Australia in the global economy, as well as the

attention  to  national  policy  detail.  Plenty  of  people  hopped  into  Barry  about

Knowledge  Nation,  but  the  fact  is  he  was  so  right  in  so  many  ways.  I ’ve

always been an admirer of Barry ’s - and not just because he knew the name

of Hannibal ’s elephant. Barry deserves to be acknowledged for his thankless

work  for  the  national  good.  There  were  problems  with Knowledge  Nation  in

the way it did not translate as immediately relevant to enough voters. But our

current  circumstances,  with  the  skills  shortage  and  ever  increasing  costs  for

education - not just at university but also at schools - makes our education

agenda far more relevant

Page 13 of 17



For me, being a ‘knowledge nation ’ means being a global education resource,

as well making top-quality education accessible to all Australians. As a nation,

we  should  aspire  to  a  world-class  education  system,  with  the  best  teachers

anywhere and with an expanding number of quality campuses and available

courses  and  positions.  We  want  to  be  a  place  that  the  world  comes  to  for

education,  like  Harvard  or  Cambridge.  We  should  be  the  country  that  smart

kids  from  Asia  want  to  come  to  for  university.  Why  shouldn ’t  we  want  the

middle classes of Asia to send their kids to Australia to learn?



Specifically,  why  not  invite  an  additional  50,000  overseas  students  into

Australian higher education annually?  Increasing the level of foreign students

in  Australia  could  have  flow  on  benefits  for  the  Australian  economy.

Graduates who return to their home country and are familiar with Australia are

more likely to want to do business with Australia and Australian companies, or

seek  investment  opportunities here.  Australia  will  not  only  enjoy  short-term

economic  benefits,  but  also  develop long-term  strategic  international  ties

with well-educated foreigners.



We are pricing our education too high for our young people. Obviously we ’ve

got  to  fix  the  excessive  cost  of  many  university  degrees.   It ’s  not  often

appreciated  that  higher  education  costs  cause  wage  inflation.  The  more

expensive  education  is,  the  higher  wages  graduates  will  demand  in  order  to

compensate  for  that  cost.  Top  law  graduates  in  the  US,  having  spent  up  to

US$200,000  on  their  education,  are  demanding  US$130,000  in  first  year

Page 14 of 17

salaries. So businesses should support lower HECS fees unless they want to

pay more in labour and staff costs.



We can also make more efficient use of our university infrastructure. Average

courses  running  only  24  weeks  a  year  gives  us  an  opportunity  to  operate

campuses for 48 weeks a year - to deliver an efficient doubling of education

time  with  virtually  no  extra  capital  infrastructure  costs.  I  stress  here  that  we

must also invest in more lecturers and university teaching resources so as not

to create an academic “production line.” We should also consider 'fast track'

university  degrees,  for  example  allowing  ambitious  students  to  complete  a

four-year  degree  in  half  the  time.  This  could  increase  income  tax  revenue,

decrease government assistance and reduce the opportunity cost of university

study.



An  expanded  TAFE  stream  should  be  an  integral  part  of  the  education

system,  not  its ’  poor  cousin.  Again,  that  means  more  teachers  and  more

students,  including  an  emphasis  on  overcoming  and  preventing  existing  and

future skills shortages.



The long-term costs to Australia will be great if we fail to invest in our people ’s

education and training and in our social infrastructure of schools, universities

and  TAFES.  Like  health  and  aged  care,  a  cooperative  model  is  required

between  the  Commonwealth  and  States  to  adequately  fund  education  and

training in order to invest in our future. The private sector will have to share

the costs. Employers have a responsibility to invest in training, and should be

Page 15 of 17

encouraged  whether  through  new  incentives  or  through  the  tax  system.  The

OECD has called on the Government to give higher policy priority to training

and  up-skilling  of  workers  already  in  work  [Economic  Survey  of  Australia,

OECD 2004].



One anomaly in the tax/education system that we can certainly do without is

the  provision  allowing  people  to  claim  a  tax  deduction  for  training  that  will

improve their skills in their current job, but not for education costs designed to

get a new job. This is contrary to the idea that workers will probably have to

reskill  a  couple  of  times  during  their  lives.  Surely  the  deduction  should  be

available for legitimate employment training for future work.



Let  me  add  here  that  the  ALP  should  dump  forever  the  idea  of  financially

punishing  a  few  rich  private  schools.  However  popular  the  plan  might  seem

from  a  few  opinion  polls,  it  is  simply  a  symbolic  distraction  from  the  real

issues. Building a knowledge-based economy and society is about billions of

dollars, not the millions to be picked off some private schools. The State Aid

furore  died  in  the  1970s  and  should  stay  dead.  I ’m  sure  that  Bob  Hawke

would have thrown out this silly idea in a few seconds.



Conclusion



It is a truism of Australian history that the Labor party is the only political party

capable of biting the bullet on long-term policies in the national interest. Early

last century the ALP led the world in making Australia a uniquely democratic

Page 16 of 17

and  egalitari an  State;  after  World  War  II  the  ALP  built  an  industrialised

economy based on mass migration; then in the 1980s and ‘90s Labor opened

up  the  economy  to  the  world  in  time  to  lock  in  years  of  sustained  national

growth.



It is time for us to start making our  own history again. Our economic priorities

demand  a  fair  tax  system  with  real  incentives  for  working  people,  a  public

health  system  based  on  medical  need,  and  a  world -class  education  system

available for all, from children to older Australians. These prio rities fit with our

broader  vision  for  an  Australian  Republic,  with  vibrant  and  growing  regions

linked into the world economy - a nation that respects its Indigenous people

through a lawful treaty and that treats international refugees with humanity.



So the next time you hear John Howard or Peter Costello of Kevin Andrews

talking about freezing minimum wages, banning union organisers from visiting

workplaces or outlawing collective bargaining activity, just think how relevant

those  changes  are  to  building the  future  of  our  nation.  The  Coalition ’s

industrial  relations  agenda  is  a  narrow -minded,  short-term  political  attack  on

organised  labour,  which  will  add  to  the  financial  and  personal  pressure  on

many working people and their families. Not one piece of evi dence has been

put  forward  that  demonstrate  how  the  Liberals ’  workplace  changes  will  help

secure  our  future  economic  prosperity:  that  is  a  lot  to  ask  for  laws  that  will

undermine the historic egalitarianism of our society.



Page 17 of 17

Australians  know  about  their  ico nic  heroes -  from  James  Cook  or  Benelong

through to Ned Kelly, General Monash and Kathy Freeman. But there is still

something  lacking  in  our  sense  of  national  celebration -  partly  perhaps  a

laconic scepticism of demonstrative patriotism, or partly our rela tive historical

immaturity compared to our European and American allies.



We  look  forward  to  a  time  when  Australia  Day  really  is  a  proud  national

holiday, resonant with the common values that have united our society for two

centuries - a democratic sense of fairness and opportunity for all, justice for

the  disadvantaged  and  the  overcoming  of  failure  through  collective  struggle.

Only  Labor  can  build  the  future  that  Australians  deserve.  It  is  our  task  to

deliver that change.



ENDS

