“THE ROLE OF THE  PRESS IN THE  MAINTENANCE OF THE  RULE OF LAW”

Session 2

Stephen Kenny

2

1 .  INTRODUCTION

In my 25 years of practice as a lawyer, I have always had a strong belief in the “Rule of the  Law”.

As an Australian, practicing in an English based legal system, I have always considered that  one of the cornerstones of our law is the 121 5 English Charter known as the “Magna Carta”.

Of the 63 clauses, it is clause 39 and 40 that I consider to be the most important.

Clause 39 reads:

“No free man shall be taken or imprisoned or deprived or outlawed or exiled or in  any way ruined, nor will we go or send against him, except by the lawful judgment of  his peers or by the law of the land”.

Clause 40 reads:

“To no one will we sell, to no one will we deny or delay right or justice“.

The need for prompt due process to protect the liberty of individuals, I believe, was not a  matter for debate. Nor was it something uniquely Australian or English.

In his inaugural address on the 28th of January 1961, President Kennedy stated:

“Let every nation know, whether it wishes us well or ill, that we shall pay any price,  bear any burden, meet any hardship, support any friend, or oppose any foe in order  to assure the survival and success of liberty”.

Strangely enough, I later discovered that liberty and freedom were important to the guards of  the prisons at Guantanamo Bay, despite their activities there. In December 2003, when I  was first able to visit my then client David Hicks, the guard answering our summons at the  green shade cloth covered wire gate of Camp Echo, saluted smartly and stated “honour

bound”‘. The salute was returned by our escorting officer, with the statement “to defend  freedom”.

2. DAVID HICKS

During my summer beachside holiday of January 2002 I was astounded to read press  reports that the United States Government were intending to take individuals captured in  Afghanistan, including a local Adelaidian, David Hicks, to Guantanamo Bay in Cuba a place  previously unknown to most Australians. Apparently Guantanamo Bay was chosen for the  deliberate purpose of ensuring that the prisoners were “beyond the jurisdiction of the United

States Courts”.

I was surprised, as I did not believe there was a place in the world that was “beyond the law“

other than in isolated lawless parts of the world where no government effectively



3

exercised control. For a government such as the United States to be attempting such a thing  was to me, a reminder of the Readers Digest stories from my youth of imprisonment in the  former USSR.

In reading the press reports, I realised there was no comment from his Adelaide based  family. After discussing the case with a number of lawyers and academics, and my partners  in my legal practice, it was decided that I should approach the Hicks family and offer them  support and advice if they required any.

It was an approach that was gratefully and gracefully accepted and I soon learnt why I had  not heard from the family before.

It was because they had been told by the Australian Federal Police not to speak to the press.  According to Terry Hicks, the AFP Officer, during the raid on their home, had received a  phone call confirming these instructions.

At that time, the Australian Government and the American Government, making good use of  the media, embarked on a concerted campaign to demonise not only David Hicks, but all of  the others in Guantanamo Bay.

You may recall that a Minister of the Australian Government called David Hicks “one of the  ten most dangerous men in the world‘.

President Bush went further describing them as “the worst of the worst” and claiming that all  in Guantanamo Bay were “killers”. These and other comments, particularly from the  American administration, were widely reported in the Australian and US press. There was  no dissenting voice.

Considering the position David Hicks was in, we debated whether quiet diplomacy and polite  requests to the Government may bring a positive result. In this case, given the Australian  Government’s position, we did not believe it was an option and it was decided to speak out  strongly.

I thought that the failure to follow the Geneva Convention or conventional law was generally  viewed as unacceptable. I believed that a concerted campaign through the media would  bring enough pressure to bear on the Australian Government, and hopefully through them,  the United States Government to either declare David Hicks a prisoner of war or alternatively

if he was not to be considered within the Geneva Convention, to be properly charged and  provided an opportunity to defend himself. I was naive.

The response we received from the United States Government was not one of recognition of  the Rule of Law and prompt action, but rather deliberate lies presented as facts by unknown  members of the US State Department to influential journalists in the United States who duly  repeated them. You may recall those early allegations, that David Hicks had threatened to

kill an American, that he had slipped his hands out of his handcuffs on the way to  Guantanamo Bay and other matters. Those lies were maintained to supportive members of  the United States Congress who visited Guantanamo Bay and there was memorable  television footage of one Congresswoman who on being told that David had threatened to kill  an American had “practised her evil eye upon him”.

The American lawyers I was working with at that time on an application for a Writ of Habeas  Corpus, were so concerned about his demonisation that they recommended we include  some of the British detainees in the case and we put forward one of them as the lead Plaintiff  in the case that became Rasul v. Bush.

We now know that these allegations were not true, and they have been admitted as such by  the Military Commission Prosecution Team and I have been given permission by the Military  Commission Appointing Authority to confirm these matters were untrue.

4

3. AUSTRALIAN MEDIA COVERAGE

David Hicks’ hometown newspaper does not lie with its name. It is not called “The News”  but rather The Advertiser. It is the only newspaper, in a city of a million people and is owned  by an international news group with significant interests in Australia. The group, News  Corporation controls 7 of the 12 main newspapers in Australia and 7 of the 10 Sunday

newspapers. It controls approximately 70% of newspaper circulation in Australia and is  therefore in a position to wield considerable influence.

I was not naive enough to expect that their papers would actually take a line contrary to the

Government’s position, however I was not expecting the extent of their willingness to  continue the demonisation of David Hicks.

In February 2002 I was approached by two News Corporation journalists advising that the  group was interested in doing a feature on David Hicks. I was told that a considerable  amount of evidence had already been gathered and that many witnesses spoke positively of  David including his past employers who considered him to be a reliable, conscientious and  willing worker. Apparently most had said that they would willingly re-employ him.

The feature did not reflect anything other than an extension of the Government’s line. For 5  days the groups papers throughout Australia featured stories of David Hicks. Their claims  were sensationalist and were inaccurate in many instances. They included allegations that  there was an AI Qaida recruiter in Adelaide and it was suggested that David Hicks attempted  to form a terrorist training group in Adelaide because he had once gone with a group of

people on a paintball excursion. My favourite outrageous headline was “Psycho in need of  Holy W a f .

In my opinion, the effect of this “expose” was far more damaging than anything the  Government had alleged and deflected attention from the real issues for probably a year and  a half.

The tone and rhetoric of The Advertiser has modified in the last 3 years, not I suspect,  because of any concern about the grievous breach of the Rule of Law that Guantanamo Bay  represents nor the continuing disclosures of abuse at Guantanamo Bay but rather because  those who purchase the paper to maintain its circulation for the advertisers are now  beginning to view Guantanamo Bay in a different light.

4. CAMP ECHO

Prior to my first visit to David Hicks, I was required to sign an Undertaking with the United  States Military Commission Appointing Authority, that included a clause preventing me  making any statement without prior approval from the Appointing Authority.

In an early request we sought authority to describe the then place of David’s detention in  Camp Echo. It was refused on security grounds.

On the second visit to Camp Echo, I realised that the almost half an acre of white gravel that  surrounds the isolation huts had been neatly raked. When I enquired if they had been  allowing prisoners additional exercise time in excess of the then 15 minutes, 2 times a week,  I was informed that it was raked by the guards as the press were coming to visit.

The press did come and visit and duly described the “white walled hell of solitary  confinement” as it was described by a British detainee.

I later spoke with a journalist who visited Camp Echo, who informed me that they had been  told that the visit was allowed as the detaining authorities were concerned about the negative  press created by the constant showing of video footage from the old Camp X-ray.

5

Having actually visited Camp X-ray and probably spent more time studying the video footage  than most, I believe that they were right to be concerned. Camp X-ray was reminiscent of  the pig pens of my farming youth, without the facilities.

5. VIDEO AT GTMO

At the present stage, the full story of Guantanamo Bay has not been told but 1 believe it will,  via 500 hours of video tapes that were taken of prisoners. I believe that these videos, if they  are ever released, will be as explosive as anything from Abu Ghraib.

Let me explain. At Guantanamo Bay there was a policy of videotaping what became known  as IRFings, or an action by the Immediate Reaction Force, a group responsible for  maintaining prisoner control. Let me comment on just 2 accounts of their activities.

The first account is not from a detainee, but rather a US Military member, Specialist Baker  who had the unfortunate task of playing the role of a detainee in a training exercise for an  IRFing squad. He was dressed in an orange jump suit and the IRFing squad was instructed  that he was a detainee who had abused a guard and was to be moved to another cell.

What happened to him only came to light in Specialist Baker’s later hearing for a medical  discharge from the Military for the brain damage he suffered in the beating he received at the  hands of that trainee squad.

In another case, the British detainee Jamal AI Harith gave details of his beatings in press  interviews in March last year after his release.

In one of his statements he said “ I  could hear their feet stomping on the ground as they got  closer and closer to my cell. They were given a briefing about me refusing the injection, then  I heard them readying themselves outside”.

Apparently a five man squad, wearing full riot gear assaulted Jamul using their fists, feet,  knees and batons leaving him severely bruised. While beating him they shouted “comply,  comply, comply, do not resist, do not resist, do not resist’’.

Jamul stated they were really “gung ho, hyped up and aggressive”. “One of them attacked  me really hard and left a deep red mark from my backbone down to my knees”. This huge  back bruise was there for days after that, Jamul said. Apparently half an hour later he  received a second belting.

After his beating, Jamul was taken to an isolation unit where he suffered sleep deprivation,  bright lights left on throughout the night and was placed in cells which were kept terribly hot  in the day or freezing at night by using airconditioners.

These are the type of actions that were videotaped. The existence of the tapes became  known in June 2004. Following a request from a US Democrat Senator, to be produced, the  authorities at Guantanamo Bay handed them over to the US Southern Command in Miami,  reportedly to enable them to be transferred to a digital format for “easier viewing”. They

have not yet been produced, but on the 2nd of February 2005 in an Associated Press story  by Paisley Bond, he reported reading a “secret 6 page repod‘ prepared by the Military after  reviewing just 20 hours of that tape. It apparently identifies 10 substantial cases of abuse.  The American Center for Civil Liberties are pressing a Freedom of Information Act request to  obtain the tapes, but according to their attorney, Jamell Jaffer, the Government has refused  to release them citing “privacy concerns”.

6. ABU GHRAIB -THE POWER OF THE PRESS -WHO CARES

The exposures of the Abu Ghraib Prison abuses has been held up as a shining example of  the importance of a free press and recognition that in a democratic country, abuses will be  exposed and that people will be held accountable. Some have been charged but the

6

question is, are those who are really responsible being held accountable. I regret that I think  the answer is no.

One of the two lawyers who “set the scene” for the justification of the treatment of prisoners,  not only in Abu Ghraib but also at Guantanamo Bay was Legal Counsel to President Bush,  Alberto Gonzales. He advised the President that his war time powers gave him the  constitutional justification for ignoring almost any law that he needed to, including the  Geneva Convention.

In a memo to President Bush of 25 January 2002, Gonzales wrote that the war against  terrorism:

“Renders obsolete Geneva’s strict limitations on questioning of enemy prisoners and  quaint some of its provisions”.

The second lawyer was then Assistant Attorney General J. Bybee. He went further in a  memo urging that attempting to incorporate the International Convention Against Torture so  as to interfere with the power of The President over the detention and interrogation of  prisoners was unconstitutional. It was Bybee who claimed that it was permissible to inflict  “cruel inhuman and degrading” treatment on prisoners and that “self defence” could be a  defence to a charge of torture as they were defending “hundreds, if not thousands of  American lives”.

Has the press exposure of Abu Ghraib and Guantanamo Bay abuse brought accountability  to these people. Of course not. As you know Alberto Gonzales is now the US Attorney-  General and J Bybee has been nominated as a Judge of the US Federal Court of Appeals.

On the 11 th of March 2005 the unclassified executive summary of the report on abuse during  US interrogation operations by Naval Inspection General, Vice Admiral Albert T Church Ill  was released.

The report, while claiming 800 interviews with US personnel, makes no mention of any  interview with any detainees. Nor does it mention viewing any video tapes.

It does however mention that 24,000 interrogation sessions took place at Guantanamo Bay,  an average of 40 per detainee.

On interrogation at Guantanamo Bay, the report says:-

“When conducted under controlled condition, with specific guidance and rigorous  command oversight, as at GTMO, this is an effective model that greatly enhances  intelligence collection and does not lead to detainee abuse. In our view, it is a model  that should be considered for use in other interrogation operations in the Global War  on Terror”.

The report does review 68 detainee deaths and although not all deaths were abuse related,  the report does not indicate how many were, except for cases closed by September 2004,  when 6 out of 71 abuse cases resulted in deaths.

Incidentally, the press exposure of these abuses is well noted elsewhere. As other  commentators have noted, it is quite deliberate that victims of the insurgency in Iraq have  been dressed in orange garb prior to their murder, the colour of prisoners apparel at  Guantanamo Bay.

Press coverage of these abuses, whilst they may have been ignored by the American  Government, are seeping into our society. Last weekend, while driving a car load of my  son’s 13 year old friends to the beach, I listened in amazement as these Nike, Simpson,  basketball loving kids spoke of their extremely negative views of American foreign policy. If  this is how these kids view America, I could not help but wonder how 13 year old Muslim  boys in the Middle East view Americans and regrettably Australians.

7

7. THE HINDMARSH ISLAND BRIDGE AFFAIR

No commentary of the role of the press by me would be complete without the mention of the  Hindmarsh Island Bridge Affair.

In that matter I was instructed by the Ngarrindjerri men, 9 days before the commencement of  the South Australian Royal Commission into the matter.

What followed was 4 months of daily expose of the apparent “lies” of the Aboriginal People  broadcast by almost every media outlet in the country.

The mixture of politics, religion and secret women’s business was a formula irresistible to the  press. For politicians with an eye on the threat of Native Title, it had an extremely positive  political outcome.

At the conclusion of the Royal Commission, The Advertiser, then a broadsheet headed on  the top front page report on the findings with “Lies, lies, lies”.

The faith of the Ngarrindjerri People in the Rule of Law, and might I add my own, was  restored by the careful, thoughtful and detailed judgment of Justice Von Doussa in the  subsequent action by the developers seeking damages, not against the Aboriginal People  but against their Anthropologist and the Federal Government in the case of Chapman v.

Luminis [2001] FCA 11 06.

I have no doubt that Justice Von Doussa was convinced that the Ngarrindjerri women were  not lying about their connection to Hindmarsh Island but of course, quite properly, in his  judgment he found that it was simply that the developers had not shown any evidence or  proved any deceit or lies.

The case itself involved a great deal of detail of Aboriginal tradition, Law and Anthropology,  but it was missing a vital ingredient of politics and consequently was not well covered by the  press.

At the handing down of Justice Von Doussa’s judgment, I enquired of the leading Advertiser  reporter as to whether the headline for the next day’s newspaper might be “Sorry, sorry,  sorrf .

Unfortunately, the judgment was not headline news the next day but their editorial was  interesting. Its conclusion was that we should all now “put this matter behind us before  anyone else gets hurt“.

Today, as a result of the media coverage during the Royal Commission, most Australians  still think the Ngarrindjerri People are liars and I feel all Aboriginal People have been tarred  with the same brush as anyone working in Native Title matters would know.

The harm that the Royal Commission and the media did to the Aboriginal People during that  case should not be underestimated.

8. A NAPALl EXPERIENCE

I was fortunate enough in October 2004 to have a family holiday in Nepal, an experience I

would highly recommend. At that time Nepal was under a State of Emergency that  commenced on the 26th of November 2001 on the back of many other countries  enforcement action against terrorists. In this case it was a group known as the Maoists who  were attempting to overthrow, what they believed to be, a corrupt and unrepresentative  government .

On the 26th of November 2001 after several Maoists attacks on Military Posts, the  Government imposed the State of Emergency that suspended press and property rights and  legal remedies except a Writ of Habeas Corpus.

8

When I arrived in Nepal in October 2004 I found in Kathmandu, a city of approximately one  million people, in stark contrast to my local Adelaide situation, there were three widely  available English language newspapers and 6 Nepali language papers.

The debate concerning the position of the Maoists, the Government and the King and the  need to negotiate, seemed to be actively and comprehensively debated in the papers that I  read.

This led me to discover a survey of newspaper reporting under the Emergency conducted by  the local Center for Investigative Journalism.

In this survey, I was interested to discover parallels to the reporting in relation to Hicks.  Initially there was wide support for the Government’s position with very little independent  investigative journalism. No doubt the fact that some 180 journalists were arrested or  detained by security forces, might have had something to do with their initial reluctance.  That reluctance however to debate the issues had lessoned with time and I believe that the  competition between the papers aided the vigorous debate.

Unfortunately the new found press freedom was short lived, for on the 1st day of February  2005, King Gyanendra took over all executive authority and effectively imposed Martial Law,  ending any press freedom.

9 .  CAN WE RELY ON THE PRESS

In Australia, I would like to think that we could rely upon press reports being reasonably  accurate or at least, not knowingly false, but in many countries this is not true.

In the US it is now accepted law that there is no law, rule or regulation that prohibits the  “intentional falsification” of the news.

This was the conclusion of the District Court of Florida in a decision of the 14th of February  2004 in the matter of New World Communications of Tampa Inc. v. Arakare.

The case involved 2 employees of a subsidiary TV station of the Fox Network, itself a  subsidiary of The News Corporation.

The employees, journalists, had refused to lie in a story about synthetic bovine growth  hormone in Florida dairy cattle and was sacked by the station after threatening to complain  to the US Federal Communications Commission.

Later the journalists lodged a claim under the Florida Whistleblowers Statute but the claim  was ultimately rejected because the Court found that their employer was not violating any  law, rule or regulation in distorting the news.

Of great concern is the use of the press by those who may wish to subvert the Rule of Law

I have already commented on the various Government statements about Hicks and other  detainees in Guantanamo Bay.

Often stories are leaked to the press with a deliberate intention of taking the sting out of later  disclosures. I believe it is viewed that once a story is ”floated‘, by the time they go ahead it  is accepted as a fait accompli.

As an example of this, let me refer you to the reports of 3 January 2005 that the United  States is considering building a 200 bed prison at Guantanamo Bay to hold detainees who  are “unlikely to go through a Military Tribunal, due to a lack of evidence”. Given the  standards of evidence required before Military Commissions I must assume a true lack of  any evidence.

9

The other idea floated at that time was that the US intended to build detention centres for  Guantanamo detainees in other countries such as Afghanistan, Saudi Arabia and Yemen.  They would then allow those countries to operate the prisons, but the US State Department  Official claimed that they would ask them to “abide by recognised human rights standards”  and that the United States State Department would, “monitor compliance”.

I note this story has now appeared on later occasions, with no great opposition.

IO. CONCLUSIONS

A free press is of course vitally important in maintaining the Rule of Law. Not only does the  press need to be free, it needs to be independent and in my opinion, not beholded to any  advertiser, or any political group.

In Australia, the ABC, like the BBC, has tremendous reputation for truth and honesty but I do  not believe that that is enough.

A free press alone is not capable of defending the Rule of Law.

To me, the most important element in maintain the Rule of Law is an impartial and  independent judiciary backed by an active and alert community of lawyers.

Reading reports in the press of US decisions in political matters, and certainly in matters  relating to Guantanamo Bay, almost invariably includes a reference to the particular  President that had appointed the judges.

In the case of Rasul v. Bush, a case in which David Hicks was an applicant, I was advised by  the US lawyers that given that the majority of judges on the Supreme Court had been  appointed by Republican Presidents, it was unlikely that they would find in our favour. The  US Administration was apparently so surprised by the Supreme Court decision that

Guantanamo Bay was within the jurisdiction of the US Courts, that they did not even prepare  a press release to cover this eventuality.

On the other hand I give credit to the press for its influence in that matter, as the Abu Ghraib  scandal broke between the argument of the Rasul v. Bush case and the decision. Given that  impact, I did not believe the US Supreme Court would sanction any place controlled  exclusively by Americans to be “beyond the Lad‘.

Occasionally in Australia we may see what some classify as a political judicial appointment,  a left wing Labour supporter or a Capital “C” Conservative, but by and large, I believe their  independence on the Bench renders pointless any identification of their appointor.

I am also proud of the role Australian lawyers and in particular the Law Council of Australia  have played in maintaining the Rule of Law. It is not just in the Hicks matter but also in the  tremendous work many lawyers took on behalf of refugees and in the thousands of hours of  pro bono work that is done by lawyers all around Australia each week.

As for the media, there are times when they capture the essence of a matter such as the  editorial in the Sydney Morning Herald of 13 January 2005.

10

In relation to Mr Hicks and Habib it stated:

“At almost every opportunity, the Howard Government has been the accommodating  US ally, happy to sacrifice the rights of Mr Habib and Mr Hicks. The bitter irony is  that Australias obsequiousness has been in the name of a war against terrorism  aimed at defending the very rights and freedoms which the Guantanamo Bay  detention camp so aggressively and unapologetically seeks to compromise”.

Stephen Kenny  Barrister & Solicitor  Carnatta Lernpens Pty Ltd  Level 1  345 King William Street  ADELAIDE SA 5000

Email: stephen@kenny.id.au

