



MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS  HON ALEXANDER DOWNER, MP





TRANSCRIPTION: PROOF COPY E & OE

DATE:             21 December 2005



TITLE:   Media Conference (Following Signing of CT MOU), Kabul, Afghanistan



Dr Abdullah Abdullah (in Persian)

Mr Downer:    Thank you very much Minister and I just want to say how delighted I am to be  in Kabul today and have the opportunity to meet with my friend, Dr Abdullah Abdullah, who,  as he says, has visited Australia on two occasions, once relatively recently.  Australia is  strongly committed in continuing to provide support to Afghanistan.  We have, as you have  just heard, a Special Forces Task Group, which is doing an excellent job.  We are considering  sending a Provincial Reconstruction Team (PRT) during the course of next year - probably  around the middle of next year - to Afghanistan as part of our commitment to the country.   We also have a substantial development assistance programme here: we have provided about  $110 million so far of assistance and I am sure that assistance will continue.  But we want to  do all we can to assist Afghanistan succeed.

In that context we have been very pleased to see the evolution of democracy in Afghanistan:  the Presidential elections last year and the parliamentary elections this year and the  inauguration of the new parliament yesterday.  These are tremendously important  developments where Afghanistan can have a government that reflects the will of the people in  Afghanistan and not a government imposed on them and where people can choose in the  future to keep that government or change it if they do not like what they are doing.  It is most  heartening to see the way the people of Afghanistan have embraced the processes of  democracy.

Australia is one of the world’s oldest continuously operating democracies and so we love to  see democracy spread through the world and we have seen it in quite a number of places over  the last few years flourish and in Afghanistan, which has been through a quarter of a century  of debilitation.  We are particularly pleased to see a new Afghanistan, a new democratic  Afghanistan, emerge from those dark years.  We are proud that Australia, through our defence  forces and development assistance budget can provide help to the people of Afghanistan.   Finally, we’re very happy to conclude a memorandum of understanding on counter-terrorism  to formalize the cooperation between our governments and agencies.  The area of counter-terrorism isn’t a task that can be undertaken by any one country alone - we all need the help  of each other.  We Australians have suffered from terrorists over the last few years.  We’ve  had Australians killed on 9/11 and had a lot of Australians killed in Bali (on two occasions

Inquiries:  (02) 6277 7500 1



Australians have been killed in Bali).  Our embassy in Jakarta has been attacked by terrorists.  Our response to terrorism is that you have to confront and defeat it - not run away from it.   But you can only confront and defeat it by working with other countries: your partners and  friends and allies throughout the world.  We are delighted to commit ourselves to be working  with the government of Afghanistan.  This task and our MOU will help to bring together in a  more formal way the cooperation that we have.  So a good day for us to sign this agreement.   Thank you.

Question (ABC Australia):

To Mr Downer: When will Australia establish an embassy in Afghanistan? How long will the  troops remain in Afghanistan?  Riots in Sydney - Is the Australian Government anti-Muslim?

Mr Downer: Well first of all in relation to an embassy; both of us participated in the opening  celebrations of the Afghan Embassy in Canberra recently - in August I think it was.  We are  looking at the possibility of establishing an embassy here.  We have been having discussions  with a number of people about that and so that is still a work in progress.  In response to your  second questions, we are at a point where we had troops here initially after 9/11, which  contributed to the overthrow of the Taliban regime and that was a Special Forces contribution  - they were very active and when that task was done they went home.  We have sent back  Special Forces for a period of a year, so they came in September and that takes you to  September next year.  That is the commitment we have made at this stage whether we vary  that or not, we have not given any consideration to that at this stage - that is the size of our  commitment at this stage.  We have also said though that we would consider contributing a  Provincial Reconstruction Team. If we do and there are negotiations ongoing, not just with  the Afghan government, but also with a number of partner governments that we might work  with in a Provincial Reconstruction Team and I think that would likely be deployed in around  June or so next year.  And obviously being a PRT it would have specific tasks in terms of  assisting local people in a particular provincial area.  So we haven’t quite identified in detail  what those tasks would be, but when those tasks are completed that would be it.  I do want to  make it clear to you by the way, even though you are from the ABC, that Australia has a  Muslim population of around 300,000 and they are a very integral part of our society and it is  a preposterous suggestion from the ABC that somehow Australia is an anti-Muslim country.   We have taken generations of migrants from the Muslim world and will continue to do so.

Dr Abduallah:  Of course, Australia has been a pluralistic functioning democracy and that in  itself states what it is. And the events that took place a few of days ago by some elements, it  was dealt with through the law enforcement institutions according to the laws of the country.   As far as the presence of Afghans is concerned, Afghans as refugees have been welcome there  and they are now Australian citizens and there are no discriminations against them or  anything like it.  Even to those who have not fulfilled the status of refugees, the Australian  government has shown a lot of understanding has also been supportive - one of the examples  of this is the housing project for some of those that did qualify as refugees and have returned  voluntarily to Afghanistan.  So even in the repatriation of those people, Australia has been  helping Afghanistan.  So there is not such a question in bilateral relations between both  countries.  Those early Afghans that have come back, they have a history and that is now part  of the history of Australia.  So we have to consider it in that context.

Mr Downer:  Afghans came to Australia in the 1850s.  They have been coming to Australia  for a very long time and are very welcome.

Inquiries:  (02) 6277 7500 2





Question (Kabul Times):  What can Australia do to assist Afghanistan in counter-terrorism?

Mr Downer:  Well I think the work that the Australian Special Forces are doing, without  going into any of the details because they are Special Forces, is particularly effective in  dealing with terrorism.  So at one level Australia can assist in taking on the terrorists who are  active on the ground and it is important that we make that contribution.

The second thing though that Australia can do is help the emerging democracy of  Afghanistan: consolidate the democracy and give assistance to the democratically elected  President and government and parliament of Afghanistan.  So that for the public that have  gone out in large numbers to vote for a President and to vote for a parliament can see the  dividends that come from democratic government.  So I think our development cooperation  programme needs to be well crafted to assist and we look forward to participating in the  London Conference at the end of January and we’ll have more to say of course at the London  Conference - I am not going to say it today it would spoil the party. But the London  Conference in my view (and Dr Abdullah can talk about it with massively more authority  about it than I can) is a great opportunity for the international community to demonstrate its  overwhelming support to assist the democratic government of Afghanistan with improved  governance, with improved capabilities, improved capacity to deliver services to ordinary  people.  Because in the end the great triumph of democracy is that democratic governments,  they serve the ordinary people of their countries.  Tyrannies, they just serve their own  tyrannical elite.  Now we are a very egalitarian and a very democratic country and we would  like to help this democratic government serve the ordinary people of this country so they’ll  understand that not only does democracy give them a say, but democracy brings for them  prosperity and stability.

Dr Abdullah:  I agree with the Minister.  In every contribution to stabilize the country, to  stabilize Afghanistan, in consolidation of achievements of Afghanistan and the international  community together, it is a contribution in defeating terrorism.  In Afghanistan four years,  four and a half years ago, 90% of the soil was under Al Qaeda - direct control of al Qaeda.   So it has been with the efforts of Afghanistan with the help of the international community  that the situation has changed.  Australia in its own part has played a role, which we are  grateful for.  And as the Minister mentioned, the London Conference will be another  opportunity for the international community to renew their commitment in achieving a  common objective of us getting stability in this part of the world and supporting the  democratic process in the construction of Afghanistan, as well as combating terrorism.  One  of the areas of cooperation will also be to fight narcotics.  We consider narcotics as a threat to  the democratic system, normalcy in the country and in rule of law, aside from its impacts for  humanity, not only in Afghanistan but in the region as a whole.  We discussed this issue  earlier in quite a bit of detail, how Australia has supported us and is ready to continue to  support us fighting against the narcotics menace in Australia.

Question and Dr Abdullah’s response in Persian.

Question to Mr Downer in Persian.

Mr Downer:  Well I think in the first place the view of this region is one that is positive about  the changes that have taken place in Afghanistan.  Obviously state-supported terrorism is  completely unacceptable as we all know and there is a situation here where Australia is

Inquiries:  (02) 6277 7500 3



Inquiries:  (02) 6277 7500 4

familiar with states actively supporting terrorism.  The point is quite the contrary.  What we  need to do is to make sure that the various agencies of different states in this region, and of  course in our own region of South East Asia, cooperate with each other to track down the  terrorists and to stop the acts of terrorism.  I think, bearing in mind the particular experience  Australia has in South East Asia in dealing with terrorism and the obvious experience of  Afghanistan and of course the experience of regional neighbours with terrorism (we are  familiar with the experience that they have), we can have broadly based cooperation in  countering with terrorism.  For example, Australia does have cooperation with Pakistan in  counter-terrorism and we have had very useful discussions with President Musharraf (both  our Prime Minister and I have had very good discussions with President Musharraf about this  issue).  We have been pleased with the cooperation from the government of Pakistan in the  areas of counter terrorism.  Thinking of your neighbours, I have been to Iran and had  discussions - this is before the present President - with the previous President and the then  Iranian government about counter-terrorism.  So I think the cooperation is there and we need  to build on the foundations and cooperation that we have.

Question (Andrew Bolt)

What do you think of Australia’s role in Iraq and are we making progress?  What do you think  we should do differently?

Dr Abdullah: I think with the efforts of the international community, as shown just a few days  ago, and it was only because of that, we had a successful election in Iraq.  And that’s  progress. But by stating that I am not underestimating the challenges that are there ahead of  the Iraqi people, as well as the international community, to further stabilize the situation.  But  this is significant, very significant progress in achieving the aspirations of the Iraqi people.   This is a democratic state in this stable Iraq, in this progressive Iraq, and the Australian forces  are present there (I gather it numbers around 1000).  As far as we understand the Iraqis have  welcomed this contribution.  We had discussed this situation in Iraq as well and in the  province where your forces are based, the people there and the governor and the authorities  are asking for more support in construction and development.  That is the expectation of the  people and the authorities.  So as we move along, we hope and it is our prayers that the Iraqis  will be better able to stabilize their country with the continuation of support from the  international community and it will be able to stand on its own feet and the achievements of  democratic progress are further consolidated.  It is important that your government has been  doing that - stability is not only important in Iraq but over the much wider region.

Thank you once again Foreign Minister.

[Ends]

