LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  THE HON KIM C BEAZLEY MP



TRANSCRIPT OF DOORSTOP, PORT ADELAIDE TRAINING AND  DEVELOPMENT CENTRE, ADELAIDE, 20 APRIL 2006

E & O E - PROOF ONLY

Subjects:  Skills training/shortages; Solomon Islands; Indonesia;  Anne McEwen; Howard’s non-retirement; Uranium policy

BEAZLEY: It’s important for us to be at this training establishment here for two  key reasons and the two key messages we’re putting forward.  The first of these  is the Howard Government massively dropped the ball on skills training in this  country, in the areas of traditional trades, traditional apprenticeships.  The result  of that has been, in this country, we’re now being held back in our economic  development by a massive skills shortage.  So, what’s going here?  Well the 880  apprentices have been trained here, in the various trades, and what’s going on in  other training establishments like this is absolutely crucial to the future of our  country, that’s the first point.

The second point is this.  None of the evil industrial relations legislation that  Howard has just brought in - some of the training programs that are done here,  particularly for example in the Occupational Health and Safety area, if employers  and employees decided to incorporate them within an award or an agreement,  from this point on, the employers and the employees will be fined.  It will be an  illegal act under the new industrial relations legislation of the Commonwealth.

Now, that is, of course absurd.  But that is the depths to which Howard has sunk  in his hatred of the trade union movement that he would do that to exclude, from  awards or agreements, Occupational Health and Safety training arrangements in  union establishments.  Now, as you know the Board of Management here, the

outfit that runs this particular training establishment is union-based so that would  apply here.

So, you’ve got here represented the opposite direction in managing the  Australian economy that we would take Australia when compared with the  Howard Government.  We believe this country has got to go the high skills road  to economic success.  The Howard Government believes we’ve got to go the low  wage road and that doesn’t lead to economic success.  Simply failure and sorrow  and misery in the average Australian family.

So, this is a place, from my point of view, of total optimism here.  This is where  things are going on that this country really needs to see happen.  When there’s a  Beazley Labor Government in place, you’re going to see a focus on training  establishments like this one because we need more people passing through  them.  And we need that sense of collective responsibility that comes from  managers and unions.  Workers working together to produce the right skills  outcome - not set against each other in the way Howard wants it done.  So that’s  the message here.

JOURNALIST: Mr Beazley, the Solomon Islands situation, do you feel that  things have calmed down and perhaps is it overkill sending the troops in as  quickly as we did?

BEAZLEY:  No it’s not overkill.  It’s too early to tell whether things have  settled down there.  There is no doubt at all that the riots which have occurred  have substantially damaged the Solomon Islands economic future and of course  damaged the unity of the political system in the Solomon Islands.  I think that  John Howard, all of us, have to be guided by the people on the ground in the  Solomons and if they say that a certain number of troops or federal policemen  are needed to secure the safety of the population overall, we should respond  favourably.

We started too late, it has to be said, in this particular commitment.  But  committing ourselves in this area is where we ought to be.  This is our backyard -  this is not something from which we have an exit strategy.  Here and forever is  where our responsibilities lie.

JOURNALIST: Should we have known that what was going to happen over  there a lot sooner than we did?

BEAZLEY:  I think that this sort of thing can happen at the spur of the  moment in the Solomon Islands.  From all reports I’ve had about the way in  which our federal policemen have conducted themselves, they way in which  RAMSI, the operation which has the process and operation which has sought to  try and restore a sense of unity, cohesion and progress in the Solomon Islands,  they have their finger on the pulse.  They are doing the right thing while they’re  there and this is a break-out which I’m not sure even the best prepared could  have been absolutely ready for.  The point is: it’s occurred now - it’s got to be  fixed.

JOURNALIST: So you think they still should have gone in earlier?

BEAZLEY:  I think they may need to be going in in larger numbers than  they are now.  It often helps in these situations to have a firm hand early and  then that allows you to pull back from that point.  I do say that advisedly here in  the Solomon Islands.  The Labor Party actually advocated that we should get

involved here in the year 2000, responding to the then pleas from people in  politics and authority in the Solomon Islands, for Australian help.  We left if for  three years.  If ever there was a case of a stitch in time saving nine, this was one  of those cases.  If we’d acted then there would have been far less trouble now -  but that’s water under the bridge.  The point is: what do you do now?  And the  right thing now is to support law and order in the Solomons, in the long-term of  course to support development.  But before development can take place you’ve  got to have peace.

JOURNALIST: Does this appear to be inspired by political corruption to  you?

BEAZLEY:  There are all those sorts of issues that the process there is  trying to get to grips with.  There is no doubt the good governance issues,  corruption issues, are critical issues to be dealt with in the societies in this region.   We now know after the Wheat Board scandal that we’re not blameless in this  area ourselves and we’re not really in the finger pointing business but we do  know that for there to be any chance of progress at all, in South Pacific countries  like the Solomon Islands, there has to be a process of governance that is free of  corrupt influence.

Now, I know that the Australians who are working there, the others from the rest  of the South Pacific who are working there, are doing their level best to change  any cultural aspects of politics which are based on corruption.  Whether or not  you succeed of course is always going to be an arguable and difficult problem.  It  would not be for me, and I’m not in a position to say what exactly is involved in  this piece of trouble - we need a much closer study of it before we can.  I do  know however, what we need to do to resolve the issue immediately in the short-term and that is have the right number of peacekeepers in there to do the job.

JOURNALIST: You criticised the L’Estrange mission to Jakarta but isn’t  there some logic in taking this one step at a time?

BEAZLEY:  John Howard has gone down the wrong road as far as the  issue of West Papua and asylum seekers is concerned.  He has sent all the  wrong signals to Indonesia.  He is confused.  He’s all over the place on this, a  real fuddy-duddy performance, from John Howard.  Going down the road of  appeasement has not been the right way to go.  What John Howard should have  done at the outset is this - say to the Indonesians “I know this is a difficult  situation that you confront but the truth of the matter is we are a Government of  laws and we are doing the right thing here.  We are doing the lawful thing here.   Once you appeased the complaint that came at us, then of course you did a de  facto apology to Indonesia - that’s what John Howard did.  He did a de facto  apology to Indonesia for which the logical Indonesian response is: “well if that’s  your view why don’t you then send those people back” - that’s the next phase.

What John Howard should have done is this, and this is what I would had done if  I was Prime Minister of the country in handling the affairs of this nation with a bit  of dignity.  I would have said to the Indonesians: we have tough laws on asylum  seeking.  We have tough border protection.  All the things which have happened,  happened in accordance with those laws.  This is not a reflection of a view in this  society that we think that your society ought to disintegrate.

But I would have done it myself.  I would not have sat in coward’s castle like  Howard and Downer.  Back here, sent a public servant out to a democracy, to  explain to them what the Australian Government’s doing. You see some cowardly  acts in your time and this is one of the worst performances I’ve seen in a very  long time - this effort of Howard’s. The Indonesian political system now’s got  Parliamentary Committees; it’s got the opportunity for press conferences; it’s got  the opportunity to meet with Ministers; it’s got the opportunity to meet with the  President, all these things. Those are opportunities for politicians - they are not  opportunities for public servants. All he can do, is go, in reality to talk to the  people in the Foreign Affairs Department in Indonesia and I’d strongly suggest  that that’s the one part of the Indonesian political structure at the moment that  actually understands what Australia’s been doing- it’s the other people who need  to.

Howard and Downer are needed to do it.  So instead of appeasing, they should  have been explaining.  Instead of apologising, they should have been going there  and doing the heavy lifting themselves, explaining that our system is fair, it is  right, it is reasonable and it’s not for changing on the say so of anyone outside  the Australian political process.

JOURNALIST: What do you know about the case of the 43rd asylum seeker  who hasn’t been granted status yet?

BEAZLEY:  Well the whole point about this process is it has to be a  judgement about each individual.  You have to take each case and work each  case through properly.  I don’t know anything at all really, about the status of the  43rd asylum seeker.  All I know is this: what ought to be happening to that person  is they ought to be going like all the other forty two, through an absolutely  rigorous process of analysis of each case.  Frankly, if they’re not justified, they  should be sent home.

JOURNALIST: Nick Minchin has had (inaudible)

BEAZLEY:  I’m sorry someone was on Papua here and I’m very happy to  get up and give up Nick Minchin a serve as I’ve given John Howard one.

JOURNALIST: The Papuan women who’s been hiding in PNG at the  moment - what should the Government be doing to ensure her welfare?

BEAZLEY: Well, we are humanitarian people but we are also a people of laws  and we have to act in accordance with our laws on all occasions.  Anyone who is  within our area of responsibility, we ought to deal with in the framework of our  legal structure.  In somebody else’s area: that’s a matter for them.

JOURNALIST: On another matter Mr Beazley, Nick Minchin has had a bit of  fun at your expense, your short term memory loss this morning regarding  Senator McEwen- did that embarrass you? Have you spoken to her today?

BEAZLEY:  Poor Anne - no I haven’t spoken to her today but I certainly  owe her an explanation - there’s no doubt about that.  But my temporary  amnesia on that subject is as nothing, when we compare it with the amnesia of  Howard, Downer and Vaile in their performance before the Wheat Board.  That  was a piece of amnesia that really counted and one of the more disgraceful  episodes in Australian society - that act of collective amnesia on their part.  So  I’ll pay my dues with Anne McEwen when I next see her in the Parliamentary  gym, which I tend to do every day, when Parliament is sitting. But when are  Howard, Downer and Vaile going to get their memory back sufficiently to  apologise to the Australian people, for trashing our international reputation and  for betraying the efforts made by Australian sailors, soldiers and airmen to uphold  the sanctions regime in Iraq?

JOURNALIST: Nick Minchin said that they had forgettable performances -  is it a reflection on McEwen’s performance?

BEAZLEY:  Look you have got, from South Australia, an excellent Labor  Senate delegation - all five of them and an unusual one, I have to say. This must  be the first time in Australian history that the five Senators that come from the  Labor side in South Australia, and aside from one of the major political parties  are all women and they’re terrific.

JOURNALIST: But Mr Beazley was it a forgettable performance - has she  not done enough?

BEAZLEY:  No, no she’s done plenty.  It’s one of those occasions when  you can see a person in your mind’s eye and their name just slips your memory.   I see Ann just about every day.  She is a diligent attender of the Parliamentary  gym because she’s big on being fit and I have recent commitments in that  regard.  So I have a chat to her every day - it just slipped my mind.  But that is  nothing - the collective amnesia of the Howard Minister’s on the Wheat Board  scandal is a damaging thing to this nation.

JOURNALIST: Talking of Mr Howard twice on Brisbane radio today he said  he’s still not considering even retiring so you’re going to have to go up to him a  long way down the track aren’t you?

BEAZLEY:  Look if you don’t mind my saying it’s a matter of greatest  indifference to me whether at the next election we confront either Howard or  Costello or Downer for that matter.  The fact of the matter is this is a Government  now which is showing its incompetence to the Australian people - it’s lost the plot  on things like Industrial Relations - it’s lost the plot on tax reform - it’s lost the  plot on what’s happening to ordinary Australians families. I mean the Howard  Government have turned out now to be home wreckers. They’re home wreckers  on the industrial relations system - they get out there and they make it difficult for  people to get access to holidays, to penalty rates, the sorts of things that mean  that ordinary Australians can pay for their houses and live a decent family life.   So up against this home wrecker bunch who are now in office, I’m happy to take  any of them on or all of them

JOURNALIST: On Honeymoon, does the Federal Labor Party believe that  the South Australian preliminary approvals are in breach of the no new mines  policy?

BEAZLEY: No. Under the position that was adopted by the Labor Party some  years ago now, about a decade ago…

JOURNALIST:  A  bit  less…



BEAZLEY:  Which was a change, everybody assumes that we have a  three mines policy - at least you don’t - we haven’t had that for about ten years.   Honeymoon would be approved.

JOURNALIST: And have you had any legal advice that they could sue if it’s  not approved?

BEAZLEY:  Well we wouldn’t take the risk.  The whole point of changing  the policy as we did then, was to ensure that there was no sovereign risk issue  associated with a uranium mine.  So we would not run a sovereign risk issue in  relation to Honeymoon.  Can I say this about uranium mining generally?  To my  mind it’s not a question of who digs it up but it is absolutely a question of the  terms and conditions under which it is sold.

Uranium is not a mineral like any other. It’s not like a piece of coal, it’s not like  iron ore, it’s not like the many other minerals that we export from this country. It’s  got the capacity to be used for very great good in relation to power generation.   It’s also got the capacity to be used for evil in the hands of evil people.  We have  to be careful about the terms and conditions under which we export this and  that’s expected by the Australian people.  So whatever our policy changes to, at  the course of the next federal Conference, it has to take into account the fact that  we are a major supplier of a material that may well be dangerous and therefore  we have to accept responsibility as a nation for the non-proliferation of nuclear

weapons and for assuring that the people who receive our uranium also know  how to dispose of it properly.

JOURNALIST: So the no new mines policy could be changed at the next  Conference?

BEAZLEY:  It will obviously be a matter for debate at the next federal  Conference.  So, when you’ve got the number of people that have been talking  about change, all of whom are delegates, you must expect that it will be raised  and discussed at the next federal Conference.  I will take a recommendation to  that federal Conference and that recommendation will be properly reflect the  character, the substance uranium and the role that we need to play in  international affairs to ensure that it’s safely used.





ends







