



MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS  HON ALEXANDER DOWNER, MP   TRANSCRIPTION: PROOF COPY E & OE   DATE:   27 February 2006   TITLE:  Doorstop, Jakarta, Indonesia    MR DOWNER: ….. and there will be a press conference a little bit later which is of a more general nature, so, bear with me while I focus a bit on bilateral issues. I had a very successful breakfast meeting this morning with my Indonesian counterpart Hassan Wirajuda and we discussed a wide range of bilateral issues. I’ll just touch on some of the ones we discussed.   The first is that from Australia’s and I think Indonesia’s perspective we’re very anxious to make sure that we do what we can to deal with the problem of illegal fishing - obviously from Australia’s point of view is a very significant issue. We are now beginning a process of outreach to the fishing communities in Indonesia to make sure that Indonesians understand that there are laws in relation to transgressing into Australian territorial waters. Secondly, the Foreign Minister and I have agreed that Australia and Indonesia should explore the idea of joint naval patrols. I think joint naval patrols would - if we can bring this about - if both of us can find the resources for these joint naval patrols - be a very substantial disincentive for illegal fishing and other illegal activities. I’m glad the Indonesians are positive about this idea - I’m certainly positive about it as well. I know that our Defence Minister, Dr Nelson, is interested in the idea, so we’re going to start working up this proposal over the next few weeks and see what is practical, but I think it’s a very good outcome that Indonesia is positive about joint naval patrols, so we can - between the two of us - make sure that we have a more effective system of patrolling than just one of us doing it. I mean, Indonesia has joint patrols with the Philippines and with Malaysia, so there’s absolutely no reason why we can’t extend that to Australia.   The second thing is that I made the point that Australia supported Indonesia’s tough laws on drug trafficking - we have no argument with the Indonesian courts. The fact that Australians have been sentenced for drug trafficking is an effort by Indonesia to stop drugs being transferred through Indonesia and for that matter, drugs transferred into our country. And we appreciate it if the Indonesians assist in stopping heroin being trafficked into Australia. I’ve said that in relation to the two Australians who have been sentenced to death that once the appeals process is completed, and if those sentences stand at the end of the appeals process when applications then are made for clemency, the Australian government would support those applications for clemency, and for the sentences to be changed to custodial sentences, rather than capital punishment. Obviously the Indonesians well understand our position on that, but I did emphasise that in making that point the Australian government isn’t of the view that the Indonesia’s should go soft on drug trafficking - Indonesia shouldn’t. Indonesia should have tough policies and tough laws on drug trafficking and we appreciate very much that President Yudoyohno has done that because Indonesia, from our point of view, is helping to stop heroin coming into Australia and drugs coming into Australia. Inquiries:  (02) 6277 7500 1



We had a discussion about the proposed security framework agreement between Australia and  Indonesia and we’ll be sending a team up here to - in the next few weeks - to progress those  negotiations now that the processes of internal consultation in Indonesia have gone forward.  This is obviously going to be a very good opportunity for us to strengthen our overall  relationship - that will take some time to finalise, but we’re now getting into a process of  real  discussions about it and I’m pleased about that.

Finally, in relation to people from Papua who are seeking asylum in Australia - I explained to  the Minister two things - first of all - that we have due processes in both International and  Domestic Law which have to be followed - Australia is a signatory to the 1951 Refugee  Convention of the United Nations and we have obligations to the United Nations under that  convention which we must fulfil and which are written into our domestic laws. Those  applications will be considered in the normal way and we’ll obviously communicate any  decisions with the Indonesians government - I spent some time explaining precisely how that  process works. But, whatever the outcome of the Department of Immigrations consideration  of their applications, I made this point and I make this point while I’m in Jakarta - no  decision in relation to these applications will have any implications for Australia’s approach  to Indonesian territorial integrity. We fully support Indonesia’s territorial integrity, we fully  support the province of West Papua remaining part of the Republic of Indonesia. We offer no  sympathy for - or support for - secession from Indonesia. We obviously hope that throughout  the Republic of Indonesia the President’s policy of upholding human rights will be a policy  that will be maintained, but, we certainly don’t support the breaking up of the Republic of  Indonesia - we don’t support secessionist movements - wherever they may be in Indonesia -  we certainly don’t support the secession of Papua from the Republic of Indonesia. No, that’s  any important point to understand here in Jakarta - because there are some people who think  that Australia might support independence for Papua - I just want to make it absolutely clear  that Australia does not.

JOURNALIST: Did the issue of Abu Bakr Bashir come up, he’s going to be released in a  couple of weeks, or in a matter of weeks?

MR DOWNER:  I don’t think he’s scheduled to be released until June. Well that would be  the end of his sentences, I mean - he’s served his sentence, he was sentenced. There have  been remissions provided and the Indonesians government in relation to the remissions issue  more broadly is still giving considering for how to handle that.



JOURNALIST: {Inaudible}… accessing the Papuans?

MR DOWNER:  In relation to access to them, look I’d only make this point - that we have  obligations under the United Nations Refugee Convention - we also are signatories to the  Vienna Conventions - if these people wish to have access to an Indonesian Consular Officer -  then we of course would give them access. If they don’t wish to have access we will not give  them access.

JOURNALIST: Mr Downer, {inaudible}… Bali 9?

MR DOWNER: Yeah, but I’ve explained all of that. I’ve done it once already. I’ve said this  once before, but, just for the benefit of time I don’t want to have to repeat what I said. But I  did, is the answer.

JOURNALIST: {Inaudible}… clemency….{inaudible}?

Inquiries:  (02) 6277 7500 2



MR DOWNER: No.

JOURNALIST: Mr Downer, there’s been a strong criticism in Australia today of AusAID  for their operations in Aceh - have to seen that?

MR DOWNER: Well, I’ve seen the newspaper report - that an organisation called Aid  Watch has criticised AusAID. Well, first of all - AusAID has asked Aid Watch for a copy of  this report in the interests of transparency, to see what these allegations really are, and Aid  Watch has refused to provide AusAID with a copy of the report, so I mean, given that Aid  Watch is into transparency, I think it would enhance their credibility and the credibility of  their work if, on putting out a media release about a report, they actually provided AusAID  with the report. Secondly, it is a criminal offence for any Australian aid money to, or aid  projects - this is project aid - we’re not handing out cash - but for any projects to, in some  way or another, be corrupted and we would obviously ask Aid Watch if they have any  evidence to refer that evidence to the Australian Federal Police. But just to make an  allegation, then refuse to release the paper - I mean, give us a copy of the paper - and let us  examine what the allegations are. Well, it’s not very helpful. It gets a media story, but there’s  not much we can do about it, and certainly we have no evidence of their being any corruption  in relation to AuasAID projects in Aceh and we’re totally opposed to any such corruption.



JOURNALIST:  Minister, is it your understanding that the Bali 9 ..{inaudible}..will not be  able to ..{inaudible}..?

MR DOWNER: No it’s not my understanding. We had a good discussion about the prisoner  transfer agreement - that has to be negotiated, so that hasn’t been discussed. So, there is no  understanding one way or the other about that.

JOURNALIST: How long… {inaudible}?

MR DOWNER: Well, up until now Indonesia has wanted to conclude an agreement with  France first, and their having some difficultly in concluding an agreement with France - and I  won’t go into that - you can discuss that with them or the French, but, I would like to feel that  we could negotiate our agreement in parallel or even ahead - rather than wait until the  agreement with France is concluded and so I think they - look, I don’t know - I think they’re  sympathetic to that idea and I hope that we can progress that reasonably quickly.

JOURNALIST: Senator Hill last time he was here was talking about the idea of observers on  Australian patrol boats - is that the kind of thing that you’re looking at?

MR DOWNER: No, we’re talking about joint - well, we don’t have a problem with  observers on - Indonesians observers - on Australian patrol boats, but, as Senator Hill said -  and I think I repeated that when I was last up here too come to think of it - I think we’re  looking here at a different idea - we’re looking here at the idea of joint patrols involving  Australian and Indonesian vessels, and I think that would send a very strong signal and I think  it would be an effective form of cooperation to re-enforce our territorial integrity, if I could  use that phrase, and in particular, I want to do everything I can to try to stop this problem of  illegal fishing and I think this would be a very helpful and very positive way of addressing  this.  Thank you.



ENDS

Inquiries:  (02) 6277 7500 3



Inquiries:  (02) 6277 7500 4



