

JULIA GILLARD M.P.  Shadow Minister for Health  Manager of Opposition Business



TRANSCRIPT DOORSTOP INTERVIEW  8:15AM TUESDAY 15 AUGUST 2006  PARLIAMENT HOUSE   CANBERRA

ISSUES: Childhood obesity, David Hicks, defeat of John Howard’s appeasement Bill

JULIA  GILLARD:  Today’s  newspapers  reveal  shocking  new  statistics  on  childhood   obesity  in  Australia.  Amazingly,  Australia  has  the  fastest  rising  rate  of  childhood   obesity in the world.



Our rate is double that of the United States and triple the rate of the United Kingdom.  With this amazing statistic, that we have the fastest growing rate of childhood obesity  in the world, it is now time for the Howard Government to act.



There has been no national leadership on the obesity epidemic. This is the looming  health crisis for this country for the 21st century. But the Minister for Health basically  wanders  around  saying  government  doesn’t  have  a  role  and  in  the  last  Budget,   despite there being money for many things, there was no new money for childhood  obesity programs.

This  isn’t  good  enough.  Australia  is  going  to  reap  the  legacy  of  these  childhood   obesity statistics in 20 and 30 years time when we are battling a crippling burden of  chronic  disease.  Because  we  all  know  childhood  obesity  tends  to  lead  to  obesity  in   adulthood which increases people’s rates of type 2 diabetes, cardiovascular disease  and many forms of preventable cancer.

So  let’s  get  real  with  these  new  and  shocking  statistics  and  finally  see  the  Howard   Government get something done on the question of childhood obesity.

JOURNALIST:  It  is  tough  to  level  all  the  criticism  at  government  isn’t  it,  it’s  parents   and families that should be…

JULIA GILLARD: This is a society wide issue. There is no doubt about that. It has taken  us  a  number  of  generations  to  get  to  these  shocking  statistics  and  it  will  take  a   period of time to fix. It needs national leadership, it needs parents, schools and local

communities  all  playing  their  part  but  it  is  not  the  kind  of  issue  the  national   government can just turn a blind eye to and say it is nothing to do with me.

JOURNALIST: There are suggestions that David Hicks could be back by the end of the  year if the US don’t set up a new tribunal or charge him by December that Ruddock  might seek his repatriation, would you welcome that?

JULIA GILLARD: Look I have seen those reports and obviously the aim has been for  David Hicks to be properly tried. Obviously, if he has committed any offences then he  should have a hearing about those matters and if he is guilty of any such offences,  should be punished.

The issue for David Hicks has obviously been that he hasn’t been tried yet, over a 4  year  period.  Our  Attorney  General,  Nicola  Roxon  has  made  constant  statements   about this issue. It has been a long time without him getting the opportunity of a fair  trial.

JOURNALIST: It’s a substantial and somewhat surprising shift isn’t it in Government  policy or in the Coalition’s policy?

JULIA  GILLARD:  It is a change of policy, if what Mr Ruddock is saying does come  about, absolutely.

JOURNALIST:  What  did  you  make  of,  as  an  observer,  in  an  area  that  you  are  quite   familiar with the immigration portfolio, what did you make of the development of the  last few days in terms of the Government having to pull it from the Senate?

JULIA  GILLARD:  Well  this  Bill  was  obviously  always  cobbled  together  to  appease   Indonesia. It wasn’t about good immigration policy, it was about appeasement.

I think members of the Howard Government understood that and had the courage to  stand  up  to  John  Howard.  That  is  why  we  saw  the  events  of  yesterday  with  the  Bill   being  withdrawn.  So  it  is  a  defeat  for  the  Prime  Minister,  but  this  was  about   appeasing Indonesia. It was always a weak move by the Prime Minister and I believe  it has been exposed as such.

JOURNALIST:  Newspoll  has  the  primary  vote  for  Labor  at  37  per  cent,  do  you  think   that is an aberration or is it a sense the security and UK and issues like that might be  involved?

JULIA GILLARD: As I always say, on these Tuesdays, poll numbers go up and they go  down. There is no great significant in one fortnightly poll number. Obviously, this poll  was taken in the shadow of the events in London which startled the world and would  have startled Australians. But we don’t worry about fortnightly poll numbers, what we  are doing is we are building for the next election.

ENDS





