











PRIME MINISTER



25 January 2006

TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER  THE HON JOHN HOWARD MP  ADDRESS TO THE NATIONAL PRESS CLUB  GREAT HALL, PARLIAMENT HOUSE

** CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY **

A sense of balance: The Australian Achievement in 2006  Tomorrow, with a simple yet eloquent pledge, about 14,000 people from more than 70  countries of origin will become Australian citizens.  This Australia Day celebration of  citizenship embodies a profound truth and a simple irony.

The truth is that people come to this country because they want to become  Australians.  The irony is that no institution or code lays down precisely what that  means.

Such is the nature of our free society.  No one sits a test of Australianness.

It would, however, be a crushing mistake to downplay the hopes and expectations of  our national family.  We expect all who come here to make an overriding  commitment to Australia, its laws and its democratic values.  We expect them to  master the common language of English and we will help them to do so.

We want them to learn about our history and heritage.  And we expect each unique  individual who joins our national journey to enrich it with their loyalty and their  patriotism.

Australia is a magnet for people from all corners of the globe not because of what it  might become, but because of what it has become.  It harvests the hopes and dreams  of mankind because of the quality of life it offers the ordinary citizen - lives of  opportunity and belonging; of growth and of balance.

This achievement is higher, rarer and more precious than we commonly suppose.

1

Not so long ago, the Economist Intelligence Unit released a ranking of life in major  cities around the world.  It found that of the 12 most liveable cities on earth, five of  them are in Australia.

Of the top dozen, almost half in one country, this country with only a third of one per  cent of the world’s people.  This remarkable achievement went largely unnoticed in  our public debate.

Yet it evokes what, to my mind, is the secret of Australia’s greatness - our sense of  balance.  Today I want to locate this nation’s sense of balance at the centre of the  modern Australian achievement and to explore its character.

! the balance in our economic life between the public and the private;   ! the balance in our national identity between unity and diversity;   ! the balance between history and geography in our global strategy; and    ! the balance in our politics between rights and democratic responsibility.

Balance is as crucial to a well-ordered society as it is to a full human life.  It should  not be mistaken for taking the middle road or splitting the difference.  Nor does it  imply a state that is static or a nation at rest.

Quite the opposite.  A sense of balance is the handmaiden of national growth and  renewal.  It helps us to respond creatively to an uncertain world with a sense of  proportion.

Keeping our balance means we reform and evolve so as to remain a prosperous,  secure and united nation.  It also means we retain those cherished values, beliefs and  customs that have served us so well in the past.

Our political economy

The great struggle of Australia’s first century of nationhood was to reconcile a market  economy with a fair and decent society.  At the start of the 21st century, we have  found a healthier balance in our political economy between public and private - one  in keeping with the times and the contemporary character of the Australian people.

We encourage individual achievement and self-reliance without sacrificing the  common good.  We value our independence and chafe against bureaucracies that deny  us choice and the capacity to shape our daily lives.  Yet we are determined not to let  go of the Australian ethos of a fair go for all.

The permanent challenge for Australia is to avoid the extremes of big, overbearing  government on the one hand and laissez-faire indifference on the other.

There is much in American society which I admire, but I have long held the view that  the absence of an effective safety net means that too many needy citizens fall by the  wayside.  That is not a path that Australia will tread.

Nor do we want the burdens of nanny state paternalism that now weigh down many  economies in Europe.

2



After more than two decades of reform, our economic performance is better than in  the past and better than in most comparable countries.

Fifteen years ago, Australia’s income per capita had fallen to 19th in the developed  world.  Today it has recovered to be about the 8th highest.

Total household disposable income has grown in real terms by more than a third over  the last decade.  Over the same period, real private sector wealth per capita has more  than doubled.

Broader measures of our national well-being are even more striking.  Australia is now  3rd out of 177 countries on the United Nations’ Human Development Index which  takes account of achievement in education enrolment, adult literacy levels, per capita  GDP and life expectancy.

And it’s not just statistics that tell the story of Australia’s economic renaissance.  A  report released last year on Australian Social Attitudes found that Australians are  much more confident in the economy than they were a decade ago.  Eighty per cent of  people surveyed said that they were now proud of Australia’s economic  achievements.

Strong economic management has given Australia a government that, in comparative  terms, is lean but not mean.

As a share of GDP, this country now has the second lowest level of general  government outlays in the OECD (36 per cent); slightly lower even than in the United  States and Japan and significantly lower than the average in Europe.

The elimination of net government debt by this Government compares with average  government debt across the OECD at around 50 per cent of GDP.

Yet the real genius of modern Australia is an ability to scale new hurdles of reform  without leaving behind the most vulnerable members in our society.

Work done at the OECD has shown that the distribution of social benefits in Australia  is so progressive - and the level of taxes paid by the poor is so low - that this nation  redistributes more to the poorest 20 per cent of the population than virtually any other  developed country.

This Government has reinforced Australia’s safety net, but we also believe in the  principle of mutual obligation.

By this I mean not only that individuals ought to do something in return for the  support they receive from society, but also that in order for society and the  government to help people in need, they need to be willing to do something to help  themselves.

Far from undermining social protection, policies that promote responsible behaviour  and self-reliance are essential pillars of a compassionate Australia.

3



We strike the right balance between state support and personal responsibility in the  provision of human services.  Our health and education institutions are not perfect.   But by global standards their quality is high and they are well-resourced.  In the years  ahead, we must continue with reforms that make our hospitals and schools respond to  the needs of individuals and not those of bureaucracies.

The great test of our policy balance in coming decades will be our ability to reconcile  inexorable demographic change with demands of Australians for even greater choice  in education, health, family support and work opportunities.

This will only be done by staying the course with reform to the way we work and to  our welfare arrangements.

The first of the baby boomers are now turning 60.  This milestone roughly coincides  with the beginning of an expected decline in Australia’s labour force participation rate  over coming decades.

Today, there are roughly five working age Australians for every Australian over 65.   In two generations that figure will have fallen to around 2.5.

To sustain our prosperity in the face of this trend we must ensure that young  Australians have skills for a lifetime.  And we must reward them when they work.

Our sense of nationhood

The social attitudes report that I mentioned a moment ago also had something to say  about what ordinary Australians think of the Australian Achievement.  It found that,  compared with a decade ago, fewer Australians are ashamed of Australia’s past.

I welcome this corrective in our national sense of self.  It restores a better balance  between pride in our past and recognition of past wrongs.

Australians have not lost sight of the mistakes and injustices of our past, especially in  the treatment of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples as the first Australians.

We know there is further to go on the road to Reconciliation with indigenous  Australia.  As I’ve said before, as a Government we are willing to meet the  Indigenous communities more than half way on this road.

By sharing responsibility, governments and communities can help indigenous  Australians build better lives, free from welfare dependency and based on solid  economic foundations.

If sometimes slow, progress is being made based on indigenous and non-indigenous  Australians working side by side.  With the 40th anniversary of the historic 1967  referendum approaching next year, our aim should be to deepen this legacy.

At the Centenary of Federation five years ago, I said that Australia’s crowning  achievement, borne of its egalitarian tradition, is its social cohesion.

4



I still believe that.

No country has absorbed as many people from as many nations and as many cultures  as Australia and done it so well.  The strength of a culturally diverse community,  united by an overriding and unifying commitment to Australia, is one of our greatest  achievements and one of our greatest national assets.

Some have questioned my optimism, especially in the wake of the violence in Sydney  earlier this summer.

These events brought shame on all involved.  Australians, whatever their background,  deserve to be treated with tolerance and with respect.

Racial intolerance is incompatible with the kind of society we are and want to be.   Within limits, all Australians have the right to express their culture and beliefs and to  participate freely in our national life.  And all Australians have a civic responsibility  to support the basic structures and values of Australian society which guarantee us our  freedom and equality.

The criminal behaviour of last December should be met with the full force of the law.   I do not believe it calls for either national self-flagellation or moral panic.

Our response should reflect this nation’s unswerving commitment to racial equality,  coupled with an absolute determination to ensure that all sections of the Australian  community are fully integrated into the mainstream of our national life.

On these bedrock principles rest both rights and responsibilities that apply to all  Australians.

In the 21st century, maintaining our social cohesion will remain the highest test of the  Australian achievement.  It demands the best Australian ideals of tolerance and  decency, as well as the best Australian traditions of realism and balance.

Australia’s ethnic diversity is one of the enduring strengths of our nation.  Yet our  celebration of diversity must not be at the expense of the common values that bind us  together as one people - respect for the freedom and dignity of the individual, a  commitment to the rule of law, the equality of men and women and a spirit of  egalitarianism that embraces tolerance, fair play and compassion for those in need.

Nor should it be at the expense of ongoing pride in what are commonly regarded as  the values, traditions and accomplishments of the old Australia.

A sense of shared values is our social cement.  Without it we risk becoming a society  governed by coercion rather than consent.  That is not an Australia I want to live in.

Again, our goal must be to strive for a balance in questions of national identity and  cultural diversity.  And for the most part I think we achieve it.

5

We’ve drawn back from being too obsessed with diversity to a point where  Australians are now better able to appreciate the enduring values of the national  character that we proudly celebrate and preserve.

We’ve moved on from a time when multiculturalism, in the words of the historian  Gregory Melleuish, came to be associated with ‘the transformation of Australia from  a bad old Australia that was xenophobic, racist and monocultural to a good new  Australia that is culturally diverse, tolerant and exciting’.  Such a view was always a  distortion and a caricature.

Most nations experience some level of cultural diversity while also having a dominant  cultural pattern running through them.  In Australia’s case, that dominant pattern  comprises Judeo-Christian ethics, the progressive spirit of the Enlightenment and the  institutions and values of British political culture.  Its democratic and egalitarian  temper also bears the imprint of distinct Irish and non-conformist traditions.

Of course, each wave of new settlers to Australia influences our culture and character,  helping to forge new attitudes and traditions.  From our art and literature to our  scholarship and diplomacy, greater cultural diversity has changed how we see  ourselves and how we view the world.  It has contributed to our more enterprising and  entrepreneurial society.

We should have faith in what we have achieved and what we have become.

Quite separate from a strong focus on Australian values, I believe the time has also  come for root and branch renewal of the teaching of Australian history in our schools,  both in terms of the numbers learning and the way it is taught.

For many years, it’s been the case that fewer than one-in-four senior secondary  students in Australia take a history subject.  And only a fraction of this study relates to  Australian history.  Real concerns also surround the teaching of Australian history in  lower secondary and primary schools.

Too often, Australian history has fallen victim in an ever more crowded curriculum to  subjects deemed more ‘relevant’ to today.  Too often, it is taught without any sense of  structured narrative, replaced by a fragmented stew of ‘themes’ and ‘issues’.  And too  often, history, along with other subjects in the humanities, has succumbed to a  postmodern culture of relativism where any objective record of achievement is  questioned or repudiated.

Part of preparing young Australians to be informed and active citizens is to teach  them the central currents of our nation’s development.  The subject matter should  include indigenous history as part of the whole national inheritance.  It should also  cover the great and enduring heritage of Western civilisation, those nations that  became the major tributaries of European settlement and in turn a sense of the original  ways in which Australians from diverse backgrounds have created our own distinct  history.

6

It is impossible, for example, to understand the history of this country without an  understanding of the evolution of parliamentary democracy or the ideas that  galvanised the Enlightenment.

In the end, young people are at risk of being disinherited from their community if that  community lacks the courage and confidence to teach its history.  This applies as  much to the children of seventh generation Australians or indigenous children as it  does to those of recent migrants, young Australian Muslims, or any other category  one might want to mention.

When it comes to being an Australian there is no hierarchy of descent.

Whether our ancestors were here thousands of years ago, whether they came on the  First Fleet or in the 19th century, or whether we or our ancestors are amongst the  millions of Australians who have come to our shores since the Second World War, we  are all equally Australians - one no better than the other.

So tomorrow let us indeed celebrate our diversity.  But we should also affirm the  sentiment that propelled our nation to Federation 105 years ago - one People, One  Destiny.

Our place in the world

Australia’s standing in the world has never been higher.  We are seen as a fair-minded  and generous country.  We are seen as a country that stands up for what it believes in.   We are respected for who we are, for the quality of our ideas and for the unique  perspective we bring to our region and to the world.

The divisive, phoney debate about national identity and what it means for our  influence in the world has been finally laid to rest.

Australia is a liberal democracy with global political and economic interests and a  proud history of defending freedom against its enemies.  We do not have to smother  or apologise for our place in the Western political tradition in order to build our  relationships in Asia or in any other part of the world.

To grasp what I mean when I say that Australia occupies a unique intersection of  history, geography, culture and economic circumstance is quite simple.  Simply look  at what we do.

Last December, Australia was at the centre of the inaugural East Asia Summit in  Kuala Lumpur, a symbol not just of our geographic proximity or trade links with Asia  but of the values and relationships we bring to regional engagement.

Two weeks ago, we convened the first meeting of the Asia Pacific Partnership on  Climate Change in Sydney, illustrating our capacity to build regional coalitions and to  lead on issues of global significance.

7

In a couple of months time, Melbourne will host the Commonwealth Games - an  event that combines our history, our passion for sport and Australia’s unrivalled  capacity to stage major events in a friendly and sophisticated environment.

In August, the Trade Minister will host a meeting of the Cairns Group, marking two  decades of Australia’s crusade to free up world agricultural trade.

And in November, Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors of the Group of 20  nations will gather in Australia as the Treasurer leads efforts to update and strengthen  the world’s financial architecture.

The Government’s commitment to capture and harness the opportunities of  globalisation for the betterment of all our people is a major driver of our international  strategy.

In the 21st century, for the first time in history, we are witnessing the emergence of a  global middle class.  Of all the deep trends in global politics, few will match this one.

Previously, the vast bulk of the world’s middle class citizens lived in the  industrialised countries - in the United States, Canada, Western Europe, Japan and  Australia.  This is no longer the case.

It’s estimated that India and China combined could easily produce middle classes of  400-800 million people over the next two generations - roughly the size of the current  middle-class populations of the United States, Western Europe and Japan combined.

Based on what we know about the relationship between income growth, health  standards, political participation and environmental stewardship, the growth of this  global middle class represents an enormously positive development for the world and  for Australia.  It also illuminates the historic nature of the Australian Achievement as  a global pioneer of good government and human development.

Of course, our world is also fragmented and in conflict.  This is the fifth year that we  have lived under the shadow of global terrorism and nothing suggests that shadow is  lifting any time soon.

Terrorism remains the defining element in Australia’s security environment.

Australians and Australian interests continue to be a terrorist target, both abroad and  at home.   This tests our sense of balance no less than our resolve.

We know what our enemies think and what they are capable of.  They hate our  freedoms and our way of life.  They despise our democratic values.  They have  nothing but contempt for a diverse society which practises tolerance and respect.

Australia must continue to work with friends and allies in the fight against global  terrorism.  And in 2006, living with the threat of terrorism also means recognising that  national security begins at home.

8

Our social cohesion and national unity is pivotal in enabling Australia to contribute  effectively to the international effort to combat terrorism, and to safeguard Australians  domestically.

This Government will do what is necessary to protect the Australian community, but  we will do it in a way that does not diminish us as a community or as a nation.

Our democratic culture

This means finding the right balance between the legitimate interests of the  community on the one hand and individual civil rights on the other.  And inevitably  this will be a matter for passionate debate.

Some Australians have argued in recent times that the balance has moved too far.   They want to shift it in the other direction, principally through a Bill of Rights.  I  believe this would be a big mistake for our democracy.

A Bill of Rights would not materially increase the freedoms of Australian citizens.  It  will not make us more united, indeed I believe it would lessen our ability to manage  and to resolve conflict in a free society.  It would also take us further away from the  type of civic culture we need to meet the challenges of today and tomorrow.

No matter how skilfully crafted, a Bill of Rights always embodies the potential for  misinterpretation, unintended consequences or accidental exclusion.  History is  replete with examples of where grand charters and lyric phrases have failed to protect  the basic rights and freedoms of a nation’s citizens.

The strength and vitality of Australian democracy rests on three great institutional  pillars: our parliament with its tradition of robust debate; the rule of law upheld by an  independent and incorruptible judiciary; and a free and sceptical press of the sort  politicians simply adore.

I’ve called this trilogy the real title deeds of our democracy, a political inheritance  that has given us a record of stability and cohesion that is the envy of the world.

I have never been persuaded by those who claim that the road to good government is  via taking more and more decisions out of the hands of the people’s elected  representatives.

In our parliamentary democracy, politicians are elected to make decisions on behalf of  the community.  They are elected by the people and, ultimately, they are answerable  to the people for the decisions they make.

To draw these decisions away from the legislature and the executive and to invest  them in the hands of the judiciary would irrevocably change our democracy.  And it  would hamper our ability to respond to changes in a way that reflects the realities we  now face.

9

10

And incidentally, does anyone seriously contend that we can improve the education of  our children, raise our national productivity, or better care for older Australians by  further entrenching the language and culture of rights in our public discourse?

Together, responsive democratic institutions and an active civil society provide more  effective protection for the rights of Australian citizens than any charter of rights  could hope to achieve.



Let me again cite the Australian Social Attitudes report on the state of our civil  society.  Contrary to the pessimism of some commentators, it found that Australians  are not losing trust in each other.  The voluntary sector - the lifeblood of active  Australian citizenship - remains strong and healthy with 86 per cent of respondents  belonging to at least one voluntary association.

Australians have lost none of their volunteer spirit or the democratic temper for which  they are renowned.  Our ability to poke fun at those in positions of power is  undiminished.  We cannot abide pretentiousness in our public officials and we laugh  at those who take themselves too seriously.

Warts and all, I believe in our unique democracy because I believe in the virtue of  politics.  The political philosopher Bernard Crick put it well when he said that: ‘The  moral consensus of a free state is not something mysteriously prior to or above

politics: it is the activity (the civilising activity) of politics itself.’

With all its compromises, parochialism and imperfections, this place of mere politics  works as the great balancing wheel of our national life.

Conclusion

Australia is one of only a handful of nations to have carried the torch of democracy  through a turbulent 20th century.  We began that century the first nation ever to come  into being following a people’s vote on a democratic constitution.  We ended it  staging the most successful Olympic Games of all time.

So far in this new century, we’ve made a good start.  Our economy is strong.  Our  society is cohesive.  Our nation is respected around the world.  Our democracy is  robust.

If there is a lesson I’ve drawn from the last decade it is that Australia’s greatness is  not found in its Gross Domestic Product, the size of its defence budget or its  international standing - important though all these things are.



It is found in the good and decent and generous character of the Australian people.   Tomorrow, let us renew our faith in the Australian Achievement.  We have great  cause for optimism, if we keep our balance.

[ends]

Page 1



This transcript is taken from a recording, and freedom from errors, omissions or  misunderstandings cannot be guaranteed.





NATIONAL PRESS CLUB  (Questions and answers only)  Wednesday, 25 January 2006





KEN RANDALL: Thank you, Prime Minister, for this first National Australia Bank  address  of  the  year,  and  I’m  glad  that  the  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  National   Australia  Bank,  John  Stewart,  was  here  to  hear  it.  As  usual  we  have  our  period  of   media  questions  and  the  first  of  those,  as  you  so  nicely  put  it,  free  and  sceptical   questions today, is from Tony Wright(?)

TONY WRIGHT (The Bulletin): Today’s speech perhaps could be re-entitled by a  headline writer Howard’s Australia, and I understand of course that you’re probably  not  going  to  enlighten  us  as  to  when  that  era  may  end.  However,  we  can  probably

assume  that  there  will  come  a  time  when  Prime  Minister  John  Howard  is  no  longer   the Prime Minister of Australia.

When Peter Costello was in the United States of America just recently he mused that  we don’t honour our leaders in Australia, or haven’t up to this point, in the same way  that the United States honours its presidents with things like libraries and great efforts  put  into  museums  and  all  the  rest  of  it.  I  just  wonder  whether  you  might  have  a   comment upon that and whether or not you would be prepared to gather together your  papers for a John Howard library some time in the future?

JOHN HOWARD: I don’t have a comment on it. I would, however, remind you that  balance in public life is important—and I spent some time talking about that—so is  the  careful  use  of  tenses  when  one  gives  answers, and I always prefer to talk in the  present tense.

MARK  RILEY  (Seven  Network):  Prime  Minister,  I  know  your  topic  today  was   National  Character,  but  I  wanted  to  ask  you  a  question  about  the  character  of  the   Nationals.  What  do  you  have  to  say  to  those  increasing  number  today  of  National   members who are threatening to vote against your government’s policy, particularly  what action would you take if a Cabinet minister were to do such a thing?

JOHN  HOWARD:  Mark,  I  understand  how  my  colleagues  and  friends  in  the   National Party feel about Senator McGauran’s resignation and application to join the  Liberal  Party.  I’m  quite  certain  that  if  a  Liberal  had  done  what  he  has  done  there

would be equal anger in the ranks of the Liberal Party. That is the nature of politics,  and  I  think  we  should  be  frank  about  that.  They  are  understandably  upset.  I  respect   that and I encourage all of my Liberal colleagues to understand that.

So  far  as  the  making  of  government  policy  is  concerned,  by  definition  the  National   Party is part of that process. It is a coalition government. The Deputy Prime Minister  of Australia is the Leader of the National Party. On Friday he will leave Australia to

go to Europe to chair a six-nation group which is dealing with the implementation of

Page  2





the  agreements  that  were  reached  in  the  context  of  the  World  Trade  Organisation.  I   have every reason to be confident that the coalition will continue and I do not believe,  difficult and sensitive though the events of the past few days have been for my friends

in the National Party, I do not believe that any permanent damage will be done. It was  a  decision  of  Senator  McGauran;  it  was  not  one  that  I  was  aware  of  until  Sunday   evening.

I  do,  again,  fully  understand  the  feelings  of  my National  Party  colleagues  and  I  ask   my Liberal colleagues to understand that. And I just remind everybody that just as the  majority party forms the government, or the majority grouping is determined by the  arithmetic  in  the  House  of  Representatives,  so  it  has  always  been  the  case  that  the   arithmetic of the two parties in coalition determines the allocation. The actual number  of  people  in  the  42  executive  positions  has  not  altered.  There’s  just  been  a  shift   because  of  the  numbers  between  the  outer  ministry  and  the  parliamentary  secretary.   Now, that is as a result of Senator McGauran’s resignation, even before any decision  is made by the Victorian division of the Liberal Party about his membership.

I understand why my colleagues in the National Party feel as they do. They do feel let  down and that’s understandable, and perfectly understandable in the circumstances. I  think  it’s  also  important  in  my  position,  and  it’s  a  view  that  others  of  my  senior   colleagues have taken, that at the end of the day maintaining our slender majority in  the Senate is important and therefore nothing is to be achieved by Senator McGauran  being  politically  stateless.  He’s  resigned  from  the  National  Party,  he’s  not  going  to   rejoin the National Party, and therefore we have to be common sense about this, but I  am optimistic.

I think we will continue to have a very cohesive coalition but it always requires a bit  of  give  and  take  and  a  bit  of  understanding  and  an  acceptance  that  people  do  have   proper sensitivities and feelings of proper dealings and they’re entitled to have those  and they’re entitled to express them. But my responsibility is the continuity of strong  and  stable  coalition  government  and  that  will  go  on  and  that  will  continue  to  be   achieved, and I do not believe that there will be any impairment of a significant kind  to that task by what has happened.

JIM MIDDLETON (ABC News): Prime Minister, I was interested in your comments  on  what  you  see  as  the  defects  of  teaching  of  history  in  Australia,  and  I  think  what   you  termed  the  post-modernist  skew  of   relativism.  Do  you  see  a  role  for  your   government  in  attempting  to  correct  this  defect  and,  continuing  that  theme,  as  a   significant figure yourself in the continuing narrative of Australian history, Sir Robert  Menzies  was  a  very  fine  prime  minister  into  his  seventies.  Do  you  think  that  you   would—not will, but would—be similarly up to the task four years from now?

JOHN HOWARD: Jim, I’m not going to answer that beyond referring to you what  I’ve  previously  said  on  the  subject—that’s  the  last  bit.  On  the  question  of  history  I   would like to enlist a coalition of the willing—if I can use a phrase—a coalition of the

willing to bring about a change in attitudes. Now, it’s not something where obviously  the  Commonwealth  has  the  first  and  prime  curriculum responsibility but I’ve read a  few  things  that  the  former  New  South  Wales  Premier,  Mr  Carr,  had  said  on  this   subject.  I  mean,  I  don’t  know  that  the  balance  in  the  curriculum  would  be  quite  as

Page  3





heavily skewed to the history of the American Civil War as Mr Carr might like, but I  think there is a real case for a lot of people across the political divide to try and tackle  this issue.

And what I want is a recognition that you cannot get people to understand the history  of a country unless you have some kind of chronological narrative teaching of history.  And  this  idea  that  we  should  move  away  from  sort  of  knowing  when  the  Battle  of

Hastings  was  or  knowing  when  Captain  Cook  came  to  Australia  or  knowing  when   certain things occurred, simply … that’s an old-hat rote way of learning is ridiculous.  You have to have some structure. You can’t learn history by teaching issues. You can  only learn and understand history by knowing what happened, why it happened and of  course teaching of issues and influences is clearly part of that.

But I would like to see a lot of people who share the view that I do to contribute to  this. It’s not something that I just see necessarily as a Liberal coalition versus the rest.  I  think  it’s  something  that  we  need  to  enlist  teachers.  We’re  going  to  strike   tremendous  resistance  from  some  of  the  education  bureaucracies  because  they  have   been,  some  of  them,  responsible  for  entrenching  the  approach  that  I’ve  condemned,   entrenching it in curricula.

But  I  think  it’s  a  very  important  cause.  You  cannot  understand  Australian  history   without  knowing  more  about  the  indigenous  history  of  this  country.  Equally,  you   cannot  understand  the  history  of  this  country  without  understanding  British  history,   understanding  the  way  in  which  the  institutions  we  inherited  from  Britain  evolved.   You cannot understanding it without understanding fully the political tides in Europe  and, of course, you cannot understand it without a proper structured understanding of  the  history  of  European  interaction  with  Asia  and  Africa  and  all  of  the  things  that   have shaped our experience in this country over the last 50 years. I just think we have  done very badly with this over the last few decades and I sense in the community a  desire to do something about it.

GEOFF  BARKER  (Australian  Financial  Review):  Given  the  impressive  national   economic  prosperity  that  you’ve  highlighted  and  the  values  of  tolerance,  decency,   generosity,  fairness  and  non-coercion  to  which  you’re  committed,  are  you  entirely   relaxed  with  the  way  the  government  has  dealt  and  is  dealing  with  asylum  seekers,   including  the  present  group  of  West  Papuans,  who  seem  by  default  generally  to  be   warehoused  either  in  detention  centres  or  off-shore  islands  and  left  waiting  for   extensive periods wondering about their futures?

JOHN  HOWARD:  I  don’t  know  that  ‘leaving’,  ‘waiting  for  extended  periods’  can   fairly  be  described  in  relation  to  Australia’s  treatment  of  them,  and  some  have  only   just  come.  I  think  that’s  a  little  unreasonable.  The  broad  answer  is  yes.  The  asylum  issue is hard. Once again, it’s a question of balance between humanitarian assessment  of  people’s  entitlements—and  the  people  who  have  arrived  are  all  going  to  be   properly  assessed—and  also  the  need  that  this  country  clearly  and  evidently  has  to   send  a  message  that  ad  hoc  illegal  arrivals  in  this  country  is  not  something  that  we   encourage, and I think we have struck that balance correctly.

LOUISE DODSON (Sydney Morning Herald): Just continuing on the question from  Mark Riley, what’s your message to National Party senators, not ministers, who are

Page  4





saying  that  they  may,  as  a  result  of  all  this,  withdraw  support  in  the  Senate  for   government  legislation?  And  also  another  question: I was just wondering what your  reaction  to  the  record  road  toll  over  the  summer  period  was  and  whether  there  was

going to be any move by the federal government on this?

JOHN HOWARD: Louise, in relation to the first question, I’m not going to respond  to particular comments that have been made by my National Party colleagues except  to observe, as I did, that I understand how they feel. By courtesy of your question I’m  not going to get into some kind of response. I don’t think anything is achieved by that  and I think we just all get on with life and understand the feelings but also understand  the realities of the world in which we live.

The road toll over the summer period has been incredibly distressing. I don’t propose  a particular Commonwealth initiative in relation to a particular road toll. I don’t want  to  sound  in  any  way  insensitive.  This  is  not  meant  critically  because  I  think  state   police  labour  very  manfully  to  do  everything  they  can  to  reduce  it,  but  it  is   overwhelmingly  something  for  which  the  state  police  forces  and  state  governments   are responsible. I have to express the view, just watching the news and listening to the  stream of reports that over and over again, when you see examples of cars going off  the  road  and  single-vehicle  accidents  on  a  lot  of  roads  that  are  not  frequently  used,   you  can’t  help  but  conclude  that  driver  error  and  driver  carelessness  is   overwhelmingly the reason.

And  whilst  I  accept  that  there’s  always  a  strong  case  for  more  government   expenditure at both levels on roads, I think the attempts by some people to grab hold  of  a  tragically  larger  than  expected  road  toll  as  an  argument  for  more  roads   expenditure does rather miss the point.

MARIA  HAWTHORNE  (Australian  Associated  Press): Going  back  to  the   Nationals, can you explain why the departure of one senator altered the numbers so  much that the Nationals had to lose a member of the outer ministry, and wouldn’t it  have been better to maybe hold off until the next reshuffle, whenever that might be,  rather than punishing the Nationals at a time when they were already very sensitive?

JOHN HOWARD: The truth is that prior to Julian McGauran’s departure, in relation  to  the  percentages  in  the  ministry,  there  was  already  somewhat  of  an  over-representation  and  that  was  balanced  out,  if  you  included  the  12  parliamentary   secretaries and Julian’s resignation took it even further out of  balance. And it’s quite  obvious if you look at the percentages, and I don’t want to bore everybody with them,  but you want them, they’re easy to achieve. I mean, quite plainly you have a situation  now where, if you take the 30 ministers, the representation of the National Party is as  near as you can get it to their entitlement, and if you take the 42 it’s the same.

They’re  just  the  facts.  This  is  not  something I brought about, it’s not something the  Liberal Party brought about, I want to make that very plain. And can I also make the  point very plain that if the boot were on the other foot, if say at the next election the  proportions were to change in favour of the National Party, the National Party would

be  entitled  to  require,  and  would  get  in  any  coalition  negotiation,  greater  numbers.   This is not the first time an adjustment has been made. There was an adjustment made  after the 2001 election.

Page  5





PAUL  BONGIORNO  (Network  Ten): Is  it  not  a  fact  that  if  Senator  Julian   McGauran  was  run  over  by  a  bus  tomorrow  that  the  Constitution  would  require  the   Victorian State Parliament to fill his vacancy with another National Party senator, and  does this fact not feed into the feelings of the very mild-mannered MP from Maranoa,  the Nationals Queensland President, Bruce Scott, who believes that you’ve treated the  National Party shabbily?

JOHN  HOWARD:  I  haven’t  treated  the  National  Party  shabbily.  I  think  I  have  a   long  record  of  treating  the  National  Party  in  a  very  collegiate  mood  of  mateship.  In   fact, some people in the Liberal Party have suggested over the years that I’ve been too  generous  to  the  National  Party  so  I  must  have  got  that  elusive  balance  about  right   now, and I think I probably have.

Now,  what  you  say  is  true  but  what  you  say  is  hypothetical—it  didn’t  happen.  We   often talk in answering questions about being run over by buses but we all try to avoid  those buses, don’t we Paul? The truth is that the man in question has resigned from  the National Party. I did want him to do that, I did not encourage him to do it, but he

has done it. He’s resigned now. The realistic thing is to move on. I know it’s good fun  for you fellows not to, but I just think that is the realistic situation. There’s nothing we  can do about that.

I  might  also  gently  point  out  to  you  that  he  was  elected  as  part  of  a  coalition  ticket   under an arrangement that I am very familiar with because I negotiated it during the  dying days of my previous leadership of the Liberal Party back in 1989, so I am very,  very familiar with all of the history and all of the circumstances that brought about the  arrangement.  It’s  happened  and  it  wasn’t  our  fault.  You  can’t  ignore  numbers  in   politics. And can I also make the point that Mark Vaile and I met on Tuesday night,  had  dinner  in  Sydney  on  Tuesday  night  and  all  of  these  arrangements  were  agreed.   They were agreed in an amicable fashion.

We’re both realistic men, we both understand the force of numbers in politics and we  reached the conclusion we did and it’s a fair balance, because you have to take into  account  the  desires,  obviously,  of  a  large  number  of  Liberals  who  have  been  in   parliament for a long time who feel they might be entitled to some kind of promotion  as well. You just have to achieve, once again, a balance between their interests and  the sensitivity of their colleagues. And I guess the other point I’d make is that the real  decision-making  body  in  the  government  is  the  Cabinet.  There  are  three  National   Party ministers in the Cabinet, including the Deputy Prime Minister. And if you want  to be pedantic about it, in percentage terms, that’s much greater than the entitlement  but it’s something that I adhere to very strongly.

That’s the body that takes most of the decisions and three out of those 17 are National  Party  ministers  and  will  remain  National  Party  ministers  barring  some  really  major   alteration in the numbers between the two parties.



SAMANTHA  MAIDEN  (The  Australian):  You’ve  made  the  call  today  for  greater   reform in the area of health and education and yet critics within your own government  argue  that  regulation  and  red  tape  have  grown  after  the  last  decade  and  calls  for  a

Page  6





greater simplification of the tax system, for example relieving more families from the  burden  of  putting  in  tax  returns  if  they  make  few,  if  any,  deductions,  have  gone   unanswered. What practical reforms can the government introduce in those areas: red  tape, tax? What changes would you like to see next year?

JOHN  HOWARD:  I  think  red  tape  is  an  issue  that  the  government  has  to  come  to   terms  with.  I  expect  to  have  in  my  hands  quite  soon  a  report  from  the  committee   headed by Gary Banks which I set up, you remember, two or three months ago and it  has to report I think by the end of this month or early next month. I think business has  a legitimate complaint about the volume of red tape at the present time. I think what’s  happened  is  that  the  economy’s  been  going  so  well  and  things  have  happened  and   laws get passed and changes are made and regulation is piled upon regulation and not  much notice is taken of it because everybody’s so busy employing people and making  good profits.

But there comes a time when you do a bit of a stocktake and you say: Gee, this has all  got  a  bit  out  of  hand.  And  I  think  there  is  a  case  there  and  I  think  we  do  have  a   responsibility as a government to try and do something about it. Once again, you have

to achieve that elusive balance between recognising you can have too much red tape,  yet on the other hand also understanding that there is a public interest in ensuring that  errant corporate behaviour is dealt with. But, in the end, if you over-regulate the place  the  consequences  are  far  more  serious  sometimes  than  some  of  the  corporate   behaviour.

KEN RANDALL: Prime Minister, I’m sorry, and to all those potential questioners,  that time has caught up with us. Thank you very much for that.

