

MR FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS  HON ALEXANDER DOWNER, MP





TRANSCRIPTION: PROOF COPY E & OE

DATE:   18 April 2006

TITLE:  Doorstop, National Jet Systems, Adelaide



MR DOWNER:  I know you want to ask me about Indonesia of course, but I just want to  start off by saying that the Australian Government strongly condemns the suicide bombing  that has taken place in Israel - killing 9 people and injuring quite a few others. We utterly  condemn this attack on innocent civilians and are appalled by it and we welcome the fact that  the President of the Palestinian Authority has condemned this attack, but we express concern  that the Hamas leadership parliamentary majority in the Palestinian authorities being in the  hands of Hamas - that the Hamas leadership have failed to condemn this attack - this  murderous attack, and have described it as self defence. This of course is not self-defence, this  is an act of pre-meditated murder, it’s an appalling thing to have done and the Hamas  Government - as it is gradually becoming -  will become all the more isolated from the  international community if it doesn’t join with the normal standards of humanitarianism and  condemn these outrageous attacks on innocent civilians.

I’m happy to answer your questions on Indonesia if you want to ask me.

REPORTER: Minister, Michael L'Estrange - is he senior enough to be able to smooth over  tensions with Indonesia?

MR DOWNER: Well indeed he is - he is senior enough to go to Indonesia. Michael  L’Estrange is the Secretary of the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade - he is the most  senior public servant in the Department and I’ve asked him to go to Jakarta - he’ll be going on  Friday - asked him to go to Jakarta in order to explain to the Indonesian Government, to the  Foreign Ministry and to the President’s Office and others who’ll be interested - I’ve asked  him to go and explain the changes that Australia is making to its laws in relation to asylum  seekers. These of course are our laws - we make these changes according to our own needs  and our own demands and our own requirements - not according to Indonesia’s requirements,  needs or desires. But, nevertheless, because Indonesia is a next door neighbour, I think it’s  appropriate that a very senior official from the Government will go and explain the mechanics  of how these changes will take place - what they actually mean - rather than the Indonesians  depending just on media reports or more traditional forms of diplomacy. I’ve spoken with the  Indonesian Foreign Minister myself last week about this and I made the offer to the  Indonesian Foreign Minister of sending Mr L’Estrange and I think he himself may see him -  I’m not sure - but certainly senior officials in Indonesia will have the opportunity to hear  from Mr L’Estrange first hand what the changes in our policy are going to be.

Inquiries:  (02) 6277 7500 1



REPORTER: (Inaudible) does the Government have to manage its relationship with  Indonesia?

MR DOWNER:  Well look, we just manage it in a, I think, in a mature and relaxed way.  Let me make this point about the relationship with Indonesia - it’s a relationship from which  both of us benefit. We have cooperation where we’re able to help Indonesia in a range of  different areas. They are able to help us in a range of different areas, so it’s a relationship  which over the last few years has matured into one of mutual benefit. We do have to respect  each other’s differences as well and Indonesia’s society is very different from Australia’s  society. We warmly welcome the emergence of democracy in Indonesia and Australia is the  sixth oldest continuously operating democracy on earth, so we ourselves have very strong  traditions of democracy. Our democracy - you know, all sorts of things are said and debated -  points of view challenged and so on - that’s just part of the democratic process and is an  acceptable part of it. But you know, we do have to respect each other’s laws - we have our  laws and our laws are made by our Parliaments - federal and state, and Indonesia has it’s  laws, and there have been times when Australians haven’t always been happy with  Indonesia’s laws as we saw last year. There are times when Indonesia isn’t always happy with  our laws and we have our international obligations under the Refugee Convention, and  Indonesia doesn’t have those obligations because it hasn’t signed up to the United Nations  Refugee Convention, so where there are differences between us, the important thing is that we  respect those differences.

REPORTER:  There are reports going at the very least that Amanda Vanstone (inaudible)?

MR DOWNER: Well I noticed an Indonesian MP has made that claim - if I may say so  with the greatest respect - not every claim by every MP in Australia or in Indonesia is  automatically responded to by the Governments of our two countries. I think in this particular  case it makes very good sense for our most senior diplomatic official - as distinct from a  Minister - to just explain the new laws that we’re putting in place. And, it’s important that we  do explain that to the Indonesians because they are our next door neighbours and this whole  issue of people movement has been one we’ve worked with the Indonesians on for a long  period of time. So, I think that it’s not just a question of me having communicated with the  Indonesian Foreign Minister, but I have done that - I have explained to him over the  telephone what changes we’re making - but it’s important that an official go there and explain  as well. I think that’s all been handled entirely appropriately. If we responded to every claim  and demand made by every MP on both sides - in Indonesia and in Australia - we’d be busy  running around trying to respond to their demands, so, I think the important thing is that we  put together a constructive process for handling it.

REPORTER: They’ve been a bit precious about this don’t you think?

MR DOWNER: Well, I think you’ve got to understand this question of Papua is a very  sensitive issue in Indonesia and it has been for a long time - there’s no doubt about that. Now,  we’ve made it clear over and over again that we do not support independence for West Papua  - we don’t support the secessionist movement there - no Australian Government will in the  foreseeable future support secession in West Papua. And this decision made in relation to the  42 Papuans has no bearing on Australia’s position in relation to Papua being part of the

Inquiries:  (02) 6277 7500 2



Inquiries:  (02) 6277 7500 3

Republic of Indonesia- it has no bearing on it at all, and it has not been the basis of the  decision. That somehow in Australia we support independence for West Papua - we  absolutely do not, and there is no danger of the Australian Government changing its policy in  relation to that. This is a sensitive issue for Indonesia - I can understand why they feel  sensitive about it, but also I hope they understand that we have no intention of changing our  current policy.

REPORTER: There have been reports that the Indonesian Trade Minister has cancelled the  trip here next week or month - do you know anything about that?

MR DOWNER: I’ve just seen a newspaper report but I’ve seen no confirmation of that.

REPORTER: What if any discussions have you had to investigate the return of the 4 year old  West Papuan girl whose custody is in dispute?

MR DOWNER: That is something that the Immigration Department is looking into -  the Indonesians of course have raised their concerns about this and that’s something the  Immigration Department will have to look at - very sensitive issues custody disputes of

course, as we all know.

REPORTER:  What do you think of backbench concerns over the Immigration changes?

MR DOWNER: Well, no backbenchers have raised those concerns with me - I mean  I’ve seen media reports but I don’t really know more than that at this stage.

ENDS

