Annette Hurley, MP  Shadow Minister for Citizenship and  Multicultural Affairs

15 September 2006

Howard Government stops people from  integrating quickly

The Howard Government has indicated that there will be a strengthening of  English testing for migrants.

“People need to be able to speak English to integrate and participate fully in  Australian society. For that to happen, and for migrants to pass any English test,  the Howard Government needs to get its Adult Migrant English Programme  (AMEP) in order,” stated Senator Annette Hurley, Labor’s Shadow Minister for

Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs.

“The Howard Government has cut funding to English programmes by $10.8  million, only 11% of people are exiting with functional English and 62% are  participating because the programme is inflexible and can’t cater for migrants  who have found work. Many centres are also unable to provide effective  childcare and this stops families from learning English.”

“This reduces the opportunities for people to integrate.”

“I support a requirement to learn English, but a means must be in place to  achieve that,” she said.

The Howard Government’s call today to force potential citizens to sit outside of  society for 4 years will also delay integration by migrants.

“This decision directly conflicts with John Howard’s call for all people to integrate  into Australian society. This will actually stop them from doing that,” Sen. Hurley  said.



“We should actually be encouraging people to pledge their allegiance to Australia  and our values within a reasonable amount of time.

“It is unlikely we would support people sitting outside Australian society for four  years,” she concluded.  - Ends -





For further comments contact:        Andrew Plimer   0418 851 403



More Information re:   AMEP [Adult Migrant Education Programme]

Improve current outcomes of 11%

- Currently only 11% of the 36, 000 AMEP students exit with functional  Level 3 English  - 53% completed the maximum number of hours of tuition they were  entitled to receive—that is 510 hours  - Approximately 36% cent exited the programme before completing the  510 hours due to family, health or work commitments. AMEP is not able to  cater for this and a commitment to improve retention rates is needed by  the Government.

Adult Migrant English Programme (AMEP) facilities in rural and regional areas

- more consistent service delivery to rural areas so that migrants can enter  the workforce more rapidly instead of waiting for classes to begin  - a greater focus on incorporating the English language programme with  the major skill shortages which are being experienced in rural and regional  areas



- Improvements to childcare

- A number of AMEP venues are unable to provide childcare  - This stops migrant parents from attending English lessons which results  in them being unable to integrate effectively

- Fast-track literacy programme for refugees

- Many refugees arrive with poor literacy levels  - The AMEP programme does not cater for them effectively (because it is  based on the English as a Second Language (ESL) model which assumes  literacy in one language at least)  - A more specialised scheme than the current Special Preparatory  Programme (The SPP currently only offers 100 hours) is needed so that  they can integrate more rapidly than is currently possible under the  Government’s existing system.



………………………………

