LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  THE HON KIM C BEAZLEY MP

TRANSCRIPT OF DOORSTOP, MAY DAY RALLY, BRISBANE, 1 MAY 2006

E & O E - PROOF ONLY

Subjects:  May Day Rally; Beaconsfield Mining Disaster; Proposed  Welfare Changes; Uranium; East Timor; Private Kovco

BEAZLEY:  I’m here to tell the workers of Queensland that the next  federal Labor Government, in 18 months time, will rip up these unfair Industrial  Relations laws.  We will put in place instead a system which protects people from  unfair dismissal, which gives them a fair umpire, which ensures that they have  access to a decently based wage with penalty rates, overtime rates and the like,  ensconced in legislation so they cannot be removed and taken away from them  by anybody else.  And we’ll ensure their right to be represented by a union in the  bargaining process and a collective agreement if that is what they want.

This May Day rally occurs in the shade of what we hope will be a May Day  miracle - a May Day miracle for the miners in Beaconsfield in Tasmania.  We  have them in our prayers.  We, of course, pray deeply for the family of Larry  Knight who is lost.  But we have the greatest hopes now for the families of the  Russell’s and the Webb’s because it looks as though they are going to be  rescued soon.

I want to say this about those two men who are there fighting for their lives and  their comrades who are fighting to get to them.  They are trained men.  They are  capable men.  They understand occupational health and safety issues, they  understand rescue issues.  That training that they have received over the years  stands them in good stead.  It is absolutely critical that in all industrial relations  agreements that are in employment where great danger is entailed, that those  should be able to stand within awards and with agreements - absolutely essential  that that happens.  We’re learning that lesson here again today as we witness  those brave men, those brave men struggling for their lives and those brave men  struggling to rescue them.

JOURNALIST: Mr Beazley, just on the size of the crowd here, [is it]  indicative of the feeling in the community about the IR reforms?

BEAZLEY:  These IR changes have raised the passions of the Australian  people and their understanding that the Howard Government no longer stands  with middle Australia.  They have changed.  They do not care what happens to

ordinary Australians in the workplace.  They’ve demonstrated that with these  laws and this is the Australian people reacting.

JOURNALIST: Just on the Beaconsfield situation, are you linking the two,  the May Day march and the plight of the two men?  You were saying that people  won’t get the necessary training under these sorts of reforms?

BEAZLEY:  There is absolutely no doubt that Todd Russell and Brant  Webb have been advantaged by the training that they have received.  There is  no question that the miners who are cutting through to them have crucially  amongst their skill sets, the ability to do these sorts of rescue operations and to  understand how to appropriately respond when you’re in a situation where you  need to be rescued.  This is part of their agreements and their training over the  years.  It’s this sort of activity, action, this sort of understanding which the  Howard Government wants to rip out of Industrial Relations’ laws.

JOURNALIST: Just on the welfare changes proposed by Mal Brough, what  do you think of the direct debit idea that he’s put forward?

BEAZLEY:  Apropos Brough’s welfare changes, this Government could  not organise a kick in a street fight.  Fair dinkum, do you seriously believe that  this incompetent government would be able to deliver as complex a set of  arrangements as they’re proposing here?  Of course they couldn’t.  They would  make a complete botch of it if they were to proceed with this.  So, we’ll have yet  another Howard Government mess on our hands if this legislation goes ahead.

JOURNALIST: Just on the uranium article in this morning’s Sydney Morning  Herald, what’s new in that?

BEAZLEY:  I’ve been saying repeatedly for the last three months these  things.  With regard to uranium, it’s a dangerous substance.  It’s not a question,  however, of who digs it up, but the terms and conditions under which it is sold.   The terms and conditions under which it is sold now are not tough enough.  They  need to be tougher.  We need to pay far more attention to the way in which the  people who receive our uranium deal with problems of waste.  We need to pay  much more attention to the issues of nuclear non-proliferation.  Uranium is not a  substance like any other.  It has its good side - the fact that it can generate  reasonable and environmentally secure energy.  But it also has its downside - its  waste product is very difficult to dispose of and the possibility of nuclear  proliferation is very substantial.  So, we have to get appropriate policies in place  and we will.

JOURNALIST: Would you like to see Peter Beattie change his view on  uranium mining?

BEAZLEY:  Peter Beattie’s view on uranium mining is Peter Beattie’s  view and he’s entitled to pursue it as he sees fit.  My concern is this: the terms  and conditions under which we sell it.  The terms and conditions under which we  sell it are not good enough.

JOURNALIST: You are proposing, though, that we should reconsider mining  it in (inaudible) proportions?

BEAZLEY:  I will put my view to the Australian Labor Party at the time it  is appropriate - that’s when the next Conference is held.  My view will be related,  principally, not to who digs it up but to where it goes and under what conditions it  goes.

JOURNALIST: This does seem to be splitting the Labor Party, though. How  are you going to mend that rift?

BEAZLEY:  No, no.  I’ll tell you what; the Labor Party knows what its  responsibilities are.  We have before us the fight of our lives on industrial  relations.  All other issues for the Labor Party, though important, are secondary.   We are united in our absolute determination to win the next election so we can  tear these laws up and put fair laws in place.

JOURNALIST: Mr Beazley, just one more question on the refugees in Dili.   What should the Australian Government be doing about that?

BEAZLEY:  The people in Timor - our hearts go out to them - they really  struggle in difficult poverty-stricken circumstances.  I hope that the Australian  Government will persist with, what has been to this point of time, a generous aid  policy.  These crises all arise out of one fundamental cause - and that’s poverty  - and we have got to continue to assist the people East Timor out of their  poverty-stricken circumstances.

JOURNALIST: Is there any need to increase our troop presence in Timor  now?

BEAZLEY:  No, I don’t believe so and I certainly wouldn’t contemplate  doing that unless invited to do so by the Timorese authorities.  As I understand it,  that situation has not arisen.

JOURNALIST: With the Kovco family, what do you make of the Prime  Minister’s response, given, I think, it was about 48 hours before he came out and  actually spoke to the Australian public.

BEAZLEY:  They have made a complete mess and a complete botch of  that issue.  It is an extraordinary thing that we cannot move from the Middle East,  one of our honoured dead, leaving them in the hands of our services.  Thankfully,

that part of the situation has now been resolved.  As to the circumstances of  Private Kovco’s death, we really have to wait for a proper inquiry to conclude  before we can draw any conclusions ourselves from it.

JOURNALIST: Do you think the Prime Minister’s response, though - the  fact that he didn’t come out for two days?

BEAZLEY:  The Government’s response to this has been incompetent,  frankly, when high competence was required.



ends



