Peter Garrett -  Transcript of Doorstop, Parliament House, Canberra, 27 February 2007

Subject: Howard Government’s Nuclear power plans

PETER GARRETT: Today’s report in the ‘Herald Sun’ that three of Australia’s  richest men are planning to set up a nuclear reactor raises a number of serious  questions about the Howard Government’s plans to have 25 nuclear reactors

dotted around the country. I noted the report identified that discussions had been  had with Mr Walker, a former Liberal Party treasurer, and the Government and  the Prime Minister must make clear whether or not Mr Walker has had  discussions with the Prime Minister, the Treasurer, any senior cabinet ministers  or their staff, in relation to these proposed plans.

Australians are very clear that they don’t want nuclear energy and nuclear power  in this country. The Switkowski report made clear that under the Howard  Government’s plans, we’ll have 25 nuclear reactors in Australia, but an increase  in greenhouse gas emissions to 2020 of some 33%. Australians have made clear  today as well that they want to see investment in renewable energy, not in  nuclear reactors. It seems that Mr Howard’s plans for bringing nuclear reactors  into this country are advanced, and I think it’s important that the Prime Minister

answer these questions and inform the Australian people on whether or not his  government has had discussions with Mr Walker about these proposals.

I additionally want to make the comment that if we are serious about climate  change, we are not going to deal with climate change and produce solutions by  producing nuclear waste. If Australians want serious action on climate change,  they want to see action to reduce greenhouse gas emissions now, they want to  see investment in energy efficiency. They don’t want to see nuclear reactors  dotted around this country. Nuclear reactors produce radioactive waste, they’re  expensive, they take a long time to come into being, and Australians want

immediate action on climate change now.

JOURNALIST: That ‘Herald Sun’ report said that Steve Bracks would take the  issue to a referendum. Previously, he’s ruled it out straightaway. Is the Labor  opposition to nuclear plans fraying at the edges?

PETER GARRETT: Our position on nuclear power in Australia is clear. We’re  opposed to it, we think it’s too expensive, too dangerous, and it’s not the right  climate change solution for Australia.

JOURNALIST: Do you suspect that this trio have some sort of insider  knowledge?

PETER GARRETT: Well, the Prime Minister has to answer the question as to  whether or not there have been any discussions with Mr Walker about this

nuclear reactor plant with any of his ministers or any of his staff. That’s a  question that the Prime Minister has to now answer.

JOURNALIST: Would it be the case that even if Australia was going down that  policy direction, there would be an open tender process anyway for construction?

PETER GARRETT: Well, I think this report raises a number of really important  questions, and that is, will the Prime Minister now make clear whether or not he  or any of his senior ministers or staff have had any discussions with Mr Walker  about this proposed plan? I mean, let’s be clear about this - Mr Howard says that  nuclear power is the solution to climate change in Australia. We say he’s wrong.  We say that the solution to dealing with climate change is to have a national  emissions trading scheme, to reduce greenhouse gas emissions now, to have  lots of renewables, to invest in energy efficiency. Mr Howard’s plans are  completely out of touch with the Australian electorate, and under his proposal, we  will have 25 nuclear reactors dotted around this country, and an increase in  greenhouse gas emissions at the same time. Mr Howard is wedded to an old-time dirty solution on meeting climate change, Labor’s wedded to reducing  greenhouse gas emissions, investing in energy efficiency and getting on with the  job now.

JOURNALIST: What was your reaction when you saw the report - were you  surprised, outraged?

PETER GARRETT: I was very surprised to see that plans had advanced this far,  and that discussions it seems from the report were already underway, and I think  it just raises questions that the Prime Minister now needs to answer about  whether or not the former Liberal Party treasurer has had any discussions with  either the Prime Minister, senior cabinet ministers, or any staff, about these  nuclear reactor plants.

JOURNALIST: What’s your response to Julia Gillard’s endorsement of Mr Rudd’s  push to end the three mines policy?

PETER GARRETT: Well, I’ve made my position clear on how far into nuclear we  are in this country, including uranium mining. I think we’re in as far as we ought  to go. I’ll continue to put those views in a discussion which we have up to  National Conference, and there will be differences of opinion, and that’s a healthy  and a natural thing within the party. Let’s have that discussion, let’s go to

Conference.

JOURNALIST: Do you think the Government should end the uncertainty for the  80-odd asylum seekers from Sri Lanka - any uncertainty that they might be  returned back to their country of origin?

PETER GARRETT: Look, I note that the shadow minister responsible, Tony  Burke, has already addressed that matter this morning. I’ll leave those comments  to him. I’ll refer your comments to him. Thanks very much, everybody.

Ends.



