





ROBERT MCCLELLAND MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS

Speech to Lowy Institute for International Policy  Sydney  14 March 2007



TIME TO REPAIR OUR REPUTATION: THE RISE AND FALL OF

AUSTRALIA AS A GOOD INTERNATIONAL CITIZEN



Introduction

Upon coming to power in March 1996 the Liberal National Coalition removed

reference to Australia being a “good international citizen” as an objective of

Australian foreign policy.  Examination of the Coalition’s 11 years in office

confirms that omission was deliberate.



Coalition documentation prior to the 1996 election reflected a disdain for

“multilateralism” and the “middle power activism” of the Hawke Keating years.

According to its election commitments, the Coalition intended that the focus of

its foreign policy would be pursuing Australia’s “national interest” seen

primarily in terms of “security and economic interests”.



I will argue that the Howard Government’s foreign policy doctrine has

essentially been an extension of its domestic political objectives.  It is a policy

platform that has been short term, reactive and has failed to address a range

of broader national security issues.

1



In particular the Government’s foreign policy approach has ignored a broad

range of human security issues including the vitally important issues of

climate change, disarmament and the effective functioning of international

institutions to respond to new security threats and potential humanitarian

crises.



Australia’s reputation as a Good International Citizen - a high but

rapidly descending base

As the current Federal Member for Barton it with pride that I note next year

will be the 60th anniversary of the signing of the Universal Declaration of

Human Rights.  The former Member for Barton, Dr H V Evatt, was a driving

force in the creation of that document.  Australia shared his pride in the fact

that the Declaration was signed during the currency of Dr Evatt’s Presidency

of the General Assembly of the United Nations.



Evatt laid a solid foundation for Australia’s reputation as a good international

citizen. Until the last decade, that reputation had been supplemented by

successive governments admirably fulfilling the role of Australia as a middle

power. The role of the middle power has been described as pursuing

multilateral solutions to international problems by embracing compromise

positions in international disputes consistently with the notions of good

international citizenship.i



2

The former Labor Government with other like minded nations achieved

tremendous success in strengthening international regimes for non-

proliferation, peace-building, environmental protection, human rights and

trade liberalisation. The world, including Australia’s citizens, is still reaping the

benefits of many of these initiatives.



In terms of specific hot spots, Australia developed the concept of civil and

military cooperation in its humanitarian intervention in Somalia.ii  Australia

also drove the peace plan for Cambodia. The plan struck new ground in

utilising the mechanisms of the United Nation to assume administration of

Cambodia and primary responsibility for organising and conducting elections

as distinct from merely monitoring them.iii



Labor saw Australia’s position as a good international citizen as being

fundamental to our national interest.  As former Minister for Foreign Affairs

Gareth Evans pointed out it was not the “foreign policy equivalent of boy scout

good deeds”iv.  Evans described the concept as being “enlightened self

interest” recognising the interdependence of the world and the need for

Australia to have input to how to solve global problems. Labor also recognised

the spin-off benefits of a good reputation in terms of trade and influence.



Fundamentally, Australia’s impact on external events will rarely be influential if

pursued on our own.  Instead, the many examples of good international

citizenship displayed during the Labor years demonstrated how influential we

3

can be.  That success occurred as a nation working within the international

system rather than outside it.



A decade of decline in Australia’s international reputation



Lack of respect for international law

The most glaring example of bad international citizenship has been Australia’s

participation in the invasion of Iraq. Australia made the decision to participate

in the invasion of Iraq in March 2003. The decision was made without utilising

international legal mechanisms such as humanitarian intervention, UN

Security council authorised or self defence to justify the invasion.  Instead, the

Howard Government abandoned the system before it was given a chance to

succeed.  This was despite the fact that the passage of resolution 1441 at the

Security Council had set the UN on a track to dealing with Saddam Hussein if

the WMD claim against his government could be proven.  It was later shown

that it could not.



This action has seriously undermined the UN as an organisation. The invasion

has undermined the code of international law as a viable frame work for

governing the actions of nation states.  It has meant that the international

community is reluctant to own the disaster that the invasion has produced.

The invasion has also undermined the goodwill necessary for the international

community to effectively deal with profound threat to our mutual security

posed by the Iranian nuclear program.  Iraq will go down as one of the biggest

setbacks to international cooperation of our time.  It will also go down as one

4

of the most damaging events to Australia’s reputation as a good international

citizen.



Australia’s diminished human rights reputation

Under the Howard Government Australia has become disengaged from the

international community in the promotion of human rights.



European states were apparently baffled by the Howard Government’s refusal

to enter into an Australian - EU Trade Agreement because it required

Australia to sign a framework agreement that contained a clause requiring

compliance with human rights norms.v



Australia’s role at the 1997 Kyoto Conference was described by the Irish

Times as being “something of a pariah”.vi  Australia’s on going refusal to ratify

Kyoto, which the United States has also said that it will not ratify,vii has been

described as the actions of a “veto state, preventing positive change”.viii



More broadly we see a churlish attitude on the part of the Howard

Government in respect to criticism by international human rights bodies.  The

Government’s reaction has included allowing our membership of the United

Nations Commission on Human Rights to lapse.ix  The Howard Government

also dished out ferocious criticism to a key adviser to the United Nations

Human Rights Commissioner, Mary Robinson, when Australia’s policy of

detaining asylum seeking children was described as being “inhumane and

degrading”.x  Australia also refused to sign the optional protocol against

5

torture because of fear that our detention centres would be the subject of

inspection by international experts.xi



Undermining international labour standards

The Howard Government has ratified just two International Labour

Organisation conventions in its time in Government and has left the Labour

attachÃÂ© position vacant for most of its period in office.



Since 1997 every report by the ILO’s Committee of Experts has concluded

that Australia’s Federal labour laws do not comply with the ILO Conventions

Relating to the Right to Organise and Collectively Bargain in (Convention 98)

or the convention Relating to Freedom of Association and Protection of the

Right to Organise (Convention 87).



On four occasions Australia has been called to account before the

Conference Committee on the Application of Standards in relation to our laws.

This process is reserved for the worst breaches and indicates the seriousness

with which the global community views our non compliance with these

important standards.



Isolation from inconvenient truths

Australia’s international standing has also been diminished as a result of the

Government’s incompetent response to allegations of impropriety.



6

In the first instance, the government ignored advice from its own personnel

regarding allegations of abuse at the Iraq Abu Ghraib prison.  This was

despite concerns that the treatment had violated international human rights

laws regarding the appropriate treatment of prisoners.



More recently in the case of the Australian Wheat Board, a complete lack of

ministerial oversight resulted in $300 million worth of bribes being paid in

subversion of a United Nations sanctions regime.  The bribes sustaining the

regime of Saddam Hussein occurred at a time when Australian personnel

were risking their lives to enforce those very United Nations sanctions.



The episode has bought international condemnation onto Australia and has

also effected our international trading position by giving rival agricultural

suppliers an excuse to lobby for Australian divestment.



Failure to defend the rights of its citizens to due process

The Federal Government’s tolerance of the proposed military commission trial

of David Hicks is a dangerous abandonment of international human rights, the

laws of armed conflict and domestic criminal law.  Adequate provision exists

under international law to prosecute both regular enemy combatants under

the laws of armed conflict and those who do not come under this definition for

unlawful acts of belligerencexii.



By supporting the Guantanamo detention regime, the Howard Government

has demonstrated how its blind loyalty to the policies of the current United

7

States administration has been placed above its defence of the right of a

citizen to due process.  This is particularly short sighted given the seriousness

of the charges and hence the need to be scrupulous in ensuring fair process

so that any potential penalty has legitimacy.



On any criteria, the Howard Government has tarnished our international

reputation as a “responsible member of the international community”. This is a

reputation that the Department Foreign Affairs Trade itself has recognised as

being of fundamental importance.xiii



Benefits of regaining Australia’s international reputation as a Good

International Citizen



The range of issues challenging the global community are immense.

Nevertheless, by focusing on areas of particular expertise Australia has

demonstrated that it has and can achieve history-changing outcomes.  In the

not too distant past, outcomes have been achieved by working with like-

minded countries to incrementally but significantly advance the cause of

humanity including, of course, Australian citizens.  The areas of greatest

notoriety include climate change, disarmament and international security.



Climate change

Labor is committed to working with the international community to address

one of the significant challenges of our time - climate change.



8

Labor played well and truly above its weight in working with likeminded

nations to protect the ozone layer. From the early 1980s, Australia led the way

on this issue.  The Labor government supported diplomatic efforts to place

international controls on chlorofluorocarbons (or CFCs) which are ozone-

depleting chemicals.  The draft control article presented by the Toronto group

of countries in 1984 was supported by Australia, as was the Vienna

Convention for the Protection of the Ozone Layer in 1985.  Both of these

proposals were critical in progress towards a final mechanism for controls,

which took the form of the Montreal Convention in 1987.



The Montreal Protocol has been described by the Australian Conservation

Foundation as an excellent template for a post-Kyoto agreement to address

climate change.  In particular, the Montreal protocol provided differential

targets based on the capacity of individual nation states. It also implemented

a regime to assist in reducing CFCs.



It is regrettable that the Government’s refusal to ratify Kyoto has effectively

locked Australian scientists out of the tent when it comes to contributing to

solving one of the greatest issues facing mankind.



Leading the way on non-proliferation

Non proliferation has become a significant issue with the recent crisis in

North Korea and Iran.  In that context, the last years of the Keating

Government could have produced a much better-prepared international

9

community.  Regrettably Labor’s policies were not followed through by the

incoming Howard Government.



Spurred by the increased nuclear tensions caused by French nuclear testing

in the Pacific, Foreign Minister Evans was able to use his international

reputation and proactive approach to convene one of the most impressive

panels of eminent persons and experts to ever discuss methods of controlling

nuclear proliferation.  It became known as the Canberra Commission.



The Commission, with the vital secretariat support of DFAT and the

Department of Defence, was able to recommend a number of practical

measures to reduce the chances of imminent nuclear exchange while driving

the agenda of disarmament.  The topics addressed by the Commission

included horizontal proliferation (ie. more countries “going nuclear”) the

possibility of nuclear terrorism and the need to eliminate ballistic missiles as a

form of nuclear weapons delivery.  The findings of the Canberra Commission

were critical to the drafting of the Non-Proliferation Treaty.



Keating intended to personally launch the report of the Canberra Commission

on the floor of the United Nations General Assembly and the Government had

begun lobbying for the endorsement of its recommendations.  Instead, the

Howard Government merely presented the report to the relevant bodies.  As

UN Under-Secretary for Disarmament Affairs and former Canberra

Commission panel member Jayantha Dhanapala said:



10

“The Canberra Commission report received lukewarm support from the

Government that inherited it after Keating’s party suffered an election

defeat and did not do more than absolutely necessary.”xiv



As Jayantha Dhanapala argued, the Canberra Commission provides a

template for the international community to deal with weapons of mass

destruction.  Dhanapala has proposed the establishment of a new

commission that would have a mandate that covers nuclear, biological and

chemical weapons.  The mandate he has advocated should explicitly extend

to both non-proliferation and disarmament.  The mandate would also cover

possible terrorist uses of such weapons and deal with specific strategies to

address the threats.xv



Significantly, in a speech given only last week Kevin Rudd committed a future

Labor Government to seeking international agreement for a fissile material

cut-off treaty to end the production of both highly enriched uranium and

plutonium for nuclear weapons.  Kevin Rudd also committed to driving an

international agenda to achieve disarmament of weapons of mass destruction.



The responsibility to protect

Labor is actively encouraging the international community to create a specific

convention on suicide terrorism.  This would criminalise incitement to

terrorism in much the same way as the Genocide Convention criminalises

incitement to genocide.  The offence would be a crime of universal

jurisdiction.  Signatories would be forced to implement domestic legislation to

11

either prosecute or extradite suicide terror supporters.  They would be tried

before the International Criminal Court.



Astoundingly, the Howard Government has refused to support a motion to this

effect that I moved last year in Parliament.  Presumably the Government’s

opposition reflects its ongoing disquiet about the role of the International

Criminal Court.  Nevertheless, it is an initiative that the Labor Government

would pursue with vigour.



Similarly, I am on the record as proposing great activism in utilising the

provisions of the Genocide Convention specifically. I have called for the

actions and comments of Iranian President Ahmadinejad to be referred to the

International Court of Justice for consideration of whether his conduct

constitutes the crime of incitement to genocide.  As a number of international

experts have argued, it is time that the international community prevents

atrocities from occurring rather than enlisting international law to prosecute

those who perpetrate crimes against humanity after thousands of innocents

lose their lives.xvi



Labor is of the view that greater activism in pursing individuals who perpetrate

or incite the perpetration of atrocities is consistent with recent discussion

regarding the international community’s responsibility to prevent atrocities

from occurring.  In particular the 2001 report of the International Commission

on Intervention and State Sovereignty reported that:



12

“This Commission strongly believes that the responsibility to protect

implies an accompanying responsibility to prevent.  We think that it is

more than high time for the international community to be doing more

to close the gap between rhetorical support for prevention and tangible

commitment.  The need to do much better on prevention, and to

exhaust prevention options before rushing to embrace intervention,

were consistently recurring themes in our world wide consultations, and

ones which we whole heartedly endorse”.xvii



As the International Committee noted: “the basic point of preventative efforts

is of course to reduce, and hopefully eliminate, the need for intervention

altogether.  But even where they have not succeeded in preventing conflict or

catastrophe, they are a necessary precondition for responding effectively to

it”.



The Labor Party views taking action against those who would seek to

perpetrate acts of terrorism or crimes against humanity as a fundamental

responsibility of the international community.



Particularly after the disaster of Iraq there is clearly much work for the

international community to do to realign the parameters of conflict prevention

and the circumstances in which it is appropriate for the international

community to endorse coercive action to prevent crimes against humanity

from occurring.



13

It should be noted that debating and working cooperatively to define those

parameters of appropriate intervention is to be distinguished from

circumstances in which a country or a group of countries unilaterally

determine the exercise of coercive action is appropriate in order to achieve

what they have identified as a moral purpose.



Conclusion

Australia is at a crossroads in terms of international relations.  In that context I

must take issue with my former colleague Gareth Evans who has described

how in recent years Australia has been missing in action on the international

stage.  He believes we are no longer “active players on the global scene, but

just moo cows in a paddock watching the passing traffic”.xviii



The issue I have with Gareth is that in a number of areas the moo cows have

actually strayed onto the roadway and are running interference on those who

are seeking to drive a progressive and cooperative agenda to resolve our

mutual problems.



But I wholeheartedly agree with Gareth Evans that Australia does have

tremendous international strengths.  We have political and economic stability,

leverage that our resource base gives us (particularly in respect to the

provision of energy).  We have a highly-respected professional and

compassionate military.  We have a well-earned reputation for creativity and

energy and a proven track record of playing significantly above our weight in

terms of achieving international outcomes.

14



In short, Australians do not deserve our current international reputation that

has been so tarnished after a decade of the current Government’s approach.

We can and should regain our role working with proud, decent, talented and

cooperative people around the world to achieve incremental yet significant

outcomes to advance the cause of humanity which happens to fundamentally

coincide with our national interest.



[ends]



15





i  Andrew Cooper, Richard Higgott and Kim Richard Nossal, 1993.  Relocating Middle Powers:   Australia and Canada in a Changing World Order (Vancouver, UBC Press) 1993.  ii

Kelly, MAJ Michael J. “Peace Operations: Tackling the Military, Legal and Policy Challenges”,  AGPS Canberra 1997 p8-34  iii  G Evans and B Grant, Australia’s Foreign Relations in the World of the 1990s - Melbourne  University Press p226.  iv

G Evans “Making Australian Foreign Policy”, Australian Fabian Society in association with  Pluto Press at p 42.  v  A Kent “Australia and the International Human Rights Regime” at p267 in Cotton & Ravenhill  (eds) The National Interest in a Global Era:  Australia in World Affairs 1996 - 2000 (South  Melbourne, Oxford University Press 2001).  vi

Irish Times 1997 quoted in Age, 4 December 1997.  vii  Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade Advancing the National Interest:  Australia’s  Foreign Affairs and Trade White Paper Canberra, DFAT at p67.  viii

Simon Lightfoot “A Good International Citizen? Australia at the World Summit on  Sustainable Development” Australian Journal of International Affairs volume 60 No. 3 p457-471, September 2006 at p465.  ix

Ann Kent op sit at p267.  x  “Woomera Degrades Children:  UN Envoy” The Australian 1 August 2002.  xi

“Canberra to bar UN refugees spot checks” the Australian 24 April 2002.  xii  See for instance International Committee of Red Cross “War Doesn’t Justify Guantanamo”,  article by Gabor Rona, Legal Adviser at the ICRC’s Legal Division, as published in the Financial  Times on 1st March 2004.  xiii

DFAT, in the national interest, Australia’s Foreign and Trade Policy, White Paper 1997.  xiv  Jayantha Dhanapala “The Canberra Commission:  Lessons Learnt for a Future Commission”  speech to “the Ideas - Institutional Nexus” “a conference co-hosted by the University of  Waterloo and United Nation’s University Waterloo (Ontario) Canada 18th May 2002.  xv

Jayantha Dhanapala op sit.  xvi  “Move to charge Ahmadi-Nejad over Israel remarks” Financial Times 13 December 2006  xvii

Report on the International Commission on Intervention and State Sovereignty “The  Responsibility to Protect” December 2001 at p19.  xviii  Gareth Evans QC AC “Australia’s Foreign Policy Response to Global Challenges”  International Crisis Group - Addressed by Gareth Evans, President and CEO of the  International Crisis Group to advance 100 Global Australians Summit, Sydney Opera House  19th December 2006.

16

