MEDIA RELEASE  SENATOR THE HON NICK MINCHIN  Minister for Finance and Administration  Leader of the Government in the Senate  Liberal Senator for South Australia

26 June 2007 52l2001

Senate majority used responsibly

The Howard Government has used its one-seat Senate majority responsibly, and claims to the contrary by  leftist online activist group Getup are simply part of Labor’s re-election campaign, the Leader of the  Government in the Senate, Senator Nick Minchin, said today.

“The Government will be endeavouring to maximise our Senate vote and maintain our majority in the Senate  at this year’s election,” Senator Minchin said.

“In particular, the Australian public should be very concerned at the prospect of the extreme Greens holding  the Senate balance of power after the next election with Greens Senators holding a Labor Government to  ransom to achieve the Greens’ radical agenda.

“The claims by Getup that the Howard Government has reduced the number of sitting days, weakened the  committee process and guillotined debate are all wrong.

“In 2006, a more streamlined and efficient Senate Committee system was adopted to enable more effective  scrutiny  of key issues and legislation.

“There were 100 Bills referred to Senate committees for inquiry and report in 2006 - the highest number of  bills ever referred to Committees in a calendar year and double the average number of bills referred to  Committee when the ALP was last in Government.

“The Howard Government works closely with leaders of other Senate parties to allocate adequate time for  legislative debate, and it is also notable that it is Labor which holds the record for the number of bills  guillotined - on 13 December 1990, Senator Robert Ray moved the guillotine for 52 bills, while on 16 June  1992 former Senator Bob McMullan moved it for 57 bills.

“Since July 2005, the Howard Government has used a limitation of time for 32 bills, including for time  critical bills such as the Wheat Marketing Amendment in December 2006, and has not sought to limit debate  on any bill this year.

“Lengthy and complex debates on legislation in the Senate continue unabated, contrary to the absurdity  peddled by Getup that the Senate is a “plaything of the executive.”

“The self-righteous claim by Getup executive director Brett Solomon on ABC Radio today that ‘‘I don ’t  think it was the intention of the Australian people to give the Coalition such control” reveals that Getup  thinks it knows what is good for the Australian people, when in fact the electorate itself has consistently  shown it is wiser than a gaggle of self-declared electoral experts.

“Getup variously claims to be independent or non-partisan, when it has consistently campaigned against the  Government on issues such as David Hicks, the rights of asylum seekers or the war for freedom in Iraq.

“Its latest inflated rhetoric on the Senate shows a complete misunderstanding of the role of the Senate, and  the Government will continue to ensure that the Senate remains an effective house of review while  maintaining its programme of responsible policy reforms,” Senator Minchin said.  CONTACT: Simon Troeth (02) 6277 7400/(0439) 300 335

http://vr?l71..financeministet..gov.au/

