

Teresa Gambaro MP  Assistant Minister for Immigration and Citizenship



Media Centre

New report to help African integration

02 May 2007  People involved with the integration of humanitarian entrants from Africa have  a new resource to help them understand the challenges facing these new  arrivals, Assistant Minister for Immigration and Citizenship Teresa Gambaro  said today.  A report by the Federation of African Communities Council titled Working  towards full participation was launched by Ms Gambaro and Attorney-General  Philip Ruddock in Sydney.  ‘This report is a valuable resource for everyone involved in African settlement,’  Ms Gambaro said.  ‘I also see it as a significant milestone for the Federation of African  Communities Council and the people it serves.’  Ms Gambaro said problems facing humanitarian entrants from Africa included  educational challenges due to a lack of previous schooling, unemployment,  language difficulties and negative and misleading media coverage concerning  crime rates and health issues.  ‘While there have been many successes in integrating people from Africa, I do  not deny that there are significant challenges also,’ the Assistant Minster said.  ‘The report is very worthwhile in bringing people together to talk about how we  can meet those challenges and keep improving results.’  ‘We have to spread the message among service providers, community  organisations and through all levels of government about the challenges and  opportunities that people of African heritage face in settling in Australia.’  ‘Australia has an excellent track record in integrating people from very diverse  cultural backgrounds and I am optimistic we can use our experience to  continue to develop effective responses and fresh approaches that meet the  needs of future refugee and humanitarian entrants.’  The Department of Immigration and Citizenship will spend about $250 million  this financial year to assist the settlement of new arrivals in Australia,  including humanitarian entrants from Africa.  Media Inquires:  Dean Savage (Ms Gambaro’s Office): 0438 171 330

