

Kevin Andrews MP  Minister for Immigration and Citizenship







Outreach visits come to Wellington, Lightning Ridge and  Mudgee

Wednesday, 21 March 2007

Officers from the Department of Immigration and Citizenship (DIAC) will be in  Mudgee next week as part of a regional outreach visit.

The Minister for Immigration and Citizenship Kevin Andrews said the outreach  trips were a great way for people in regional areas to sit down and talk about  immigration-related issues face-to-face with DIAC officers.

‘The Australian Government places great importance on providing services to  regional areas and these visits are a large part of that,’ Mr Andrews said.

‘These appointments attract a range of people, from farmers to small business  owners, community groups to individuals, who might want information or just  someone to talk them through a complex matter.

‘While the Department has a great deal of information available over the  phone or on the internet, some people prefer to speak to officers face-to-face,  and these visits are about meeting that need,’ he said.

‘In the past, we have found that the most popular topics relate to citizenship,  work visas, visas for family members and how to propose and sponsor  refugees.’

The DIAC team is also visiting Orange, Bathurst and Lithgow during this tour.

Wellington

DIAC officers will be available for an appointment in Wellington on Tuesday  March 27 from 1pm to 3pm.

Appointments will be held at the Wellington Information and Neighbourhood  Centre, 24-28 Swift St. Bookings are essential.  Telephone: 6845 1606

Lightning Ridge

DIAC officers will be available for an appointment on Thursday March 29 from  9am to 1pm.

Appointments will be held at the Lightning Ridge Neighbourhood Centre, 28  Morilla St. Bookings are essential.  Telephone: 6829 2014

Mudgee

DIAC officers will be available for an appointment on Friday March 30 from  8.30am to 11am.

Appointments will be held at the Mudgee Community Services Centre, 88  Market St. Bookings are essential.  Telephone: 6378 2712

Media enquiries: (02) 6277 7860



