

1



MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS  STEPHEN SMITH, MP



TRANSCRIPTION: PROOF COPY E & OE

DATE:   15 April, 2009

TITLE:  Interview on Australia Network - Fiji, Bali process, US-China relations

JIM  MIDDLETON:  Regional  conflict  and  people  smuggling  go  hand  in  hand.  The   deteriorating  security  in  Afghanistan,  Pakistan  and  Sri  Lanka,  along  with  the  Burmese   regime’s  treatment  of  its  Rohingya  minority  have  led  to  an  upsurge  in  asylum  seeker   numbers.

Just  today  another  boatload  was  detected  off  Ashmore  Reef  to  Australia's  north.  Their   apprehension  coincided  with  a  regional  ministerial  conference  in  Bali  to  review  efforts  to   combat people smuggling and to manage asylum seekers.

Stephen  Smith  is  Australia's  Foreign  Minister  and  he  co-chaired  the  meeting  with  his   Indonesian counterpart, Hassan Wirajuda.

Stephen Smith, thanks very much for joining us from Bali.

STEPHEN SMITH: Pleasure, Jim.

JIM  MIDDLETON:  First  to  Fiji  where  things  appear  to  be  going  from  very  bad  to  much   worse.  Our  own  reporter,  Sean  Dorney,  has  been  thrown  out.  Local  reporters  are  being   intimidated. The Radio Australia transmitter has been shut down. The governor of the Central  Bank's been sacked and the military regime's trying to block the internet.

This could pave the way, could it not, for repression as grievous as that in Zimbabwe?

STEPHEN SMITH: Well, we'll have to wait and see but nothing that's occurred in the last  few days in Fiji fills me with anything other than pessimism - pessimism for potentially very  adverse outcomes, pessimism for the people of Fiji, pessimism for their social and economic  circumstances.

We,  of  course,  absolutely  condemn  what's  effectively  been  the  self-imposition  of  military   dictatorship,  the  throwing  over  of  the  judiciary,  the  abrogation  of  the  constitution,  the   expulsion  and  intimidation  of  journalists,  the  vetting  of  communications  from  outside  Fiji,   either by radio transmitter or by internet. All of these things are the actions of a regime which



2

is  becoming  increasingly  isolated.  And  that  runs  the  very  grave  risk  of  Fiji's  social  and   economic circumstances for its people seriously deteriorating even further.

JIM  MIDDLETON:  The  economy  is,  as  you  say,  in  very  poor  shape  but  that  also  creates   something  of  a  dilemma  for  countries  like  Australia.  If  you  tighten  sanctions  further,  that   would make things more difficult, would hurt the local population.

But it will also give the military regime the chance to point the finger at Australia and accuse  it of being the cause of the deterioration.

STEPHEN SMITH: Which is why our sanctions regime has been aimed at the regime itself  and effected in a way which we aim and desire not to have adverse impacts for the people of  Fiji themselves.

So we have travel sanctions against members of the regime. We have limits or restrictions on  ministerial contact. But we continue to ply and apply, for example, humanitarian assistance to  the people of Fiji, and the aftermath of the recent floods is an example. We've discontinued  our military or defence contact.

So  we're  obviously  in  discussion  with  the  international  community  about  what  more,  if   anything, can be done either by our colleagues in the Pacific Island Forum or our colleagues  in the Commonwealth or in the international community generally.

But Australia has been, together with New Zealand, at the forefront of the sanctions. But our  objective is to try and bring the regime to account, not to hurt the people of Fiji.

But my very real concern is one thing we have seen, since Commodore Bainimarama came to  power, is a very severe deterioration in the social and economic circumstances of Fiji for the  Fijian people.



In the face of a global economic crisis, that could only be compounded. And in the face of the  actions of the regime, it will only be massively aggravated and multiplied.

JIM MIDDLETON: Is it coming close to a time when you would advise foreign nationals to  get out? And does your government have contingency plans to get Australian citizens out if  that's deemed necessary?

STEPHEN  SMITH:  Well,  we're  of  course  monitoring  developments  very  carefully.  Our   travel advice for Fiji remains to exercise caution, particularly if one is in Suva, if you like, the  political  capital  of  Fiji,  but  we  do  make  the  point  in  our  travel  advice  that  political

circumstances  can  change  very  quickly.  But  for  the  present,  we  simply  say  to  people  to   exercise caution.

One of the great attractions, economically and socially, of Fiji is as a tourist destination and  not  just  Australians  but  many  international  visitors  continue  to  go  to  Fiji.  But  we  keep  our   travel  advice  under  very  close  and  careful  review.  It's  effectively  reviewed  on  an  ongoing   basis and as circumstances change, if they do, that may well change.



3



But for the present, we simply advise people to exercise a high degree of caution if they are in  Fiji.

JIM MIDDLETON: Now, you've been in Bali discussing people smuggling just as, it turns  out,  another  boat  has  turned  up  off  Ashmore  Reef  to  Australia's  north.  What  does  that  say   about the effectiveness of efforts to control people smuggling?

STEPHEN  SMITH:  Well,  we've  had  about  a  dozen  boat  arrivals  carrying  400-odd  people   over the last 12 months or so. And the arrivals was one of the reasons why Australia was very  keen  to  see,  for  the  first  time  in  a  half  a  dozen  years,  a  ministerial  conference  at  the  Bali   Process,  just  as  in  the  same  manner  Indonesia  was  keen  to  see  a  ministerial  conference   because of the Rohingyas problem.

To  us  it  very  much  reflects  the  ongoing  difficulty.  Circumstances  have  changed  in  some   respects  quite  dramatically  since  2002-2003  when  the  Bali  Process  conference  last  met  at   ministerial level.

Some of the push factors have abated: for example, Iraq. But some of the other push factors  have increased and in some cases dramatically. Afghanistan and Sri Lanka fall immediately to  mind. The Afghanistan-Pakistan area falls to mind as a potential area of exodus by people.

So we know we are confronting these issues and these difficulties. We also know a range of  other  things.  We  have  to  have  our  border  protection  effected  in  a  manner  which  maximises   the prospects of the unlawful arrivals not reaching our mainland.

And the most recent arrival has been at Ashmore Reef. They'll be taken to Christmas Island  and  processed  and  it's  a  qualitatively  different  way  in  which  they're  processed  under  our   immigration laws than if they had arrived at the mainland.

But secondly, and this is really the point of the conference, we can only do this in conjunction  with our neighbours, in the first instance, Indonesia, but with other countries as well.

JIM  MIDDLETON:  Finally  and  briefly,  you  were  in  Washington  recently  for  talks  with   Hillary  Clinton  and  Robert  Gates.  How  concerned  is  the  Australian  Government  that   Washington seems more concerned about, or more worried about, low intensity conflicts like  Afghanistan,  for  example,  rather  than  the  potential  strategic  risk  of  China  as  it  grows  as  an   economic and also military power in the decades ahead?

STEPHEN SMITH: Well, we know this is the century of the Asia-Pacific. It's not just  the  emergence of China; it's the emergence of China, the emergence of India, the emergence of  the  ASEAN  economies  combined.  And  as,  for  example,  China  grows  so  will  its  economic   capacity, so will its capacity for influence in the region.

One  of  the  things  that  Australia  always  raises  with  China  has  been  the  transparency  of  its   military modernisation.



4

So  the  emergence  of  China  as  a  responsible  stakeholder  is  a  very  key  issue  in  this  century.   And fundamentally central to that is the relationship between the United States and China. I  urged the Secretary of State to ensure, or help ensure, that the United States and China have a  first class relationship.

Certainly what we've seen so far, not just the visit by Secretary of State Clinton to our region,  to  Japan,  Korea,  China  and  Indonesia,  but  also  President  Obama  meeting  with  Hu  Jintao  in   the margins of the G-20 in London. So that relationship is absolutely essential.

Of course, in the meantime, there are some very difficult issues that we confront together: the  war in Afghanistan; the difficulties on the Afghanistan-Pakistan border area; and the problems  and the difficulties that these cause us as the current hotbed of international terrorism.

And some of the corollary or collateral consequences of that is people movement and people  displacement.  And  that's  one  of  the  consequences  that  we've  seen  in  Australia  with  recent   arrivals  over  the  last  12  months  or  so,  and  one  of  the  issues  that's  very  central  to  the  very   successful Bali Ministerial Conference that we've just completed.

JIM MIDDLETON: Stephen Smith, thanks again for your time.

STEPHEN SMITH: Thanks very much, Jim. Thank you.

END





