









NO.100

Thursday 16 August 2007

Continuing to Improve Australia's Tax System

The Minister for Revenue and Assistant Treasurer, the Hon Peter Dutton MP, today  introduced Tax Laws Amendment (2007 Measures No. 5) Bill 2007 to implement a  number of improvements to Australia’s taxation system, including the following:

Public private partnerships

This Bill modifies the taxation treatment of leasing and similar arrangements between  taxpayers and tax exempt entities (including  foreign residents) for the financing and  provision of infrastructure and other assets.  The measure will apply if, broadly, a tax  exempt entity effectively controls the use of an asset and the taxpayer does not have the  predominant economic interest in the asset.  Certain relatively short-term and lower  value arrangements are specifically excluded from the scope of the measure.

If the measure applies to an arrangement, it will be treated as a loan that is taxed as a  financial arrangement on a compounding accruals basis.

The measure applies to arrangements entered into on or after 1 July 2007.  Under  transitional provisions, the measure will also apply to arrangements entered into before  1 July 2007 in certain circumstances.  In addition, section 51AD of the Income Tax  Assessment Act 1936, which denies all tax deductions in certain circumstances, will  cease to apply to arrangements entered into on or after 1 July 2003.

Thin capitalisation

The legislation will ensure that an integrity measure in the thin capitalisation rules  operates as intended by removing from the definition of ‘excluded equity interest’ those  equity interests that remain on issue for a total period of 180 days or more.

In addition, the legislation will reduce compliance costs for groups containing ADIs,  where the only ADIs in the group are specialist credit card institutions, by allowing the  head companies of such groups to apply the rules as if the group did not contain any

ADIs.

Capital gains tax marriage breakdown roll-over for small superannuation  funds

These amendments will provide a capital gains tax (CGT) roll-over on marriage  breakdown to ensure that CGT need not be an impediment to separating spouses  achieving a ‘clean break’ from each other in terms of superannuation arrangements.

Income tax treatment of the Prime Minister’s Prize for Australian History  and the Prime Minister’s Prize for Science

This Bill will exempt from income tax the Prime Minister’s Prize for Australian History  and the Prime Minister’s Prize for Science, to the extent that the prizes would otherwise  be assessable income.  The amendments apply to assessments for the 2006-07 income  year and later years of income.

Company tax losses

The company loss recoupment rules will be amended to remove the $100 million total  income cap on the same business test.  This measure will allow all companies to access  the same business test to determine whether prior year losses can be deducted against  future income and will reduce compliance costs.

Partial capital gains tax roll-over for statutory licences

A partial CGT roll-over will be provided where a statutory licence ends and is replaced  by one or more new licences and the licensee is also offered non-licence capital proceeds  such as money.  The roll-over is partial because any capital gain or loss on the  non-licence capital proceeds will not be rolled over.

The amendments will have particular application to the Achieving Sustainable  Groundwater Entitlements (ASGE) programme by ensuring that licence holders who are  also offered a cash payment under this program will obtain a partial CGT roll-over  where the access licence (and any other new licences) replaces the original bore licence  or licences.

In addition, the amendments will make changes to the existing CGT statutory licence  roll-over to provide roll-over where one or more statutory licence ends and is replaced  by one or more new licences that authorise substantially similar activity to the activity  authorised by the original licence or licences.

Australian property trusts and stapled securities

On 4 April 2007, the Government announced that it will allow certain stapled entities,  such as Australian Listed Property Trusts, to restructure with an interposed head trust  without taxation consequences.

The amendments will provide a CGT roll-over for investors in a stapled group where

there has been an interposition of a unit trust between the investors in the stapled group  and the stapled entities.

There will also be a consequential amendment made to Division 6C of the Income Tax  Assessment Act 1936 to ensure that the restructures do not result in the interposed trust  being taxed as if it were a company.  In addition, all public unit trusts will be able to  acquire controlling interests in, or control foreign entities whose business consists  primarily of investing in land outside of Australia for the purpose, or primarily for the  purpose, of deriving rent.

These amendments will improve the international competitiveness of Australian property  trusts, and facilitate their acquisitions of property and property-holding entities offshore.  The amendments will apply from the 2006-07 income year.

Deductible Gift Recipients

The legislation will update the list of deductible gift recipients (DGRs) to include the  state and territory bodies of Kidsafe from 3 August 2007, and The Bathurst War  Memorial Carillon Public Fund Trust from 3 August 2007 until 2 August 2009. In  addition, the legislation will extend the DGR status of the Shrine of Remembrance  Restoration and Development Trust until 30 June 2009.

Film production offsets

This legislation introduces a package of measures to reform and strengthen the  Australian film industry that was announced in the 2007-08 Budget.

The main element of the package is the introduction of a refundable tax offset for  Australian expenditure in making Australian films, known as the producer offset.  The  producer offset offers a generous incentive for Australian productions by providing a 40  per cent offset for Australian feature films and a 20 per cent offset for other Australian  screen media.

The legislation will also enhance the existing refundable film tax offset, now to be  known as the location offset, which aims to attract large budget productions to be shot in  Australia.  The rate has been increased from 12.5 per cent to 15 per cent.  In addition, a  new tax offset for post, digital and visual effects production in Australia, which will  significantly enhance Australia’s attractiveness as a location for this increasingly  important part of the film production process.

Research and Development

This measure extends the premium 175 per cent research and development (R&D) tax  concession to Australian companies conducting R&D activities on behalf of a grouped  foreign company.  Expenditure that contributes to the calculation of the higher deduction  will have a specific base 100 per cent deduction.

The concession will encourage additional R&D expenditure in Australia and make  Australia an attractive location for investment in R&D by multinational enterprises.

Innovation Australia

At present the administrative responsibility for the Industry portfolio's innovation and  venture capital programmes is split between two distinct bodies, the Industry Research  and Development Board and the Venture Capital Registration Board.

While the operation of these Boards has proven to be effective, the Government  considers that the administration of both innovation and venture capital programmes can  be enhanced and streamlined by combining their roles and the professional expertise of  their members within the one entity.  The Government will establish a new entity,  Innovation Australia, to take on this role.

Media Contact: Brad Emery   (02) 6277 7360 - 0414 225 638





