The Hon Stephen Smith MP  AUSTRALIAN MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS

Transcript E&OE

28 October 2009

Interview with Kerry O’Brien, ABC 7.30  Report  Subjects: Oceanic Viking, Asylum Seekers, Cooperation with Indonesia.

KERRY O’BRIEN: Foreign Minister Stephen Smith is in regular contact with his Indonesian  counterparts over the movement of the Oceanic Viking and he joins me now from  Parliament House.

Stephen Smith, hasn't it now reached the point where you've got to rethink, where it's time  to go to Christmas Island or even bring them to Australia?

STEPHEN SMITH: No, Kerry, we continue to be in discussions with the Indonesian  authorities in Jakarta to implement the agreement made between President Yudhoyono and  Prime Minister Rudd. Which was that the Oceanic Viking would proceed to Indonesia, the  Sri Lankan asylum seekers would be disembarked from the Oceanic Viking and processed in  Indonesia with UNHCR processes.

We continue to be in discussion with Indonesian officials and that's what we're doing.

KERRY O’BRIEN: What would Australia lose by bringing these people to Christmas Island  now? You'd still be denying them access to the Australian legal system, which I assume is  the real worry of the Australian Government.

STEPHEN SMITH: Well Kerry, no. This started as a rescue on the high seas. This has been  used to make or try and make by some broader implications, but I think it is important to  go back to basics.

We received a request from the Indonesian authorities to assist in the rescue of a boat in  distress. It was in the Indonesian search and rescue area. There were no Indonesian assets  or ships around. We inquired as to whether there were any commercial vessels around,  there weren't. So we did the right thing. We rescued the boat. We then had a discussion with  Indonesia.

There was no compulsion for Australia to take the boat to an Australian port, no

Page 1 of 4 Interview with Kerry O’Brien, ABC 7.30 Report

compulsion for Indonesia to receive it in Indonesian port. We had a discussion with  Indonesia. Indonesia, through the President, agreed that for good humanitarian and safety  at sea reasons it would go to an Indonesian port and there, in accordance with Indonesian  procedures which have been in place since 2002, they would be processed by the UNHCR —  the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.

KERRY O’BRIEN: Just let me interrupt you there. We understand that. That was 10 days  ago, when this started. You've heard the Indonesian foreign ministry spokesman today  saying, "We're not going to force them on to our ship. We're not going to force them into  our country. They're not cooperating. They're not going to go."

What do you do now?

STEPHEN SMITH: We're doing what we started out to do. We are going to complete a  search and rescue mission. And we are going to be patient as we have been, both with the  Sri Lankan asylum seekers on board and also in our discussions with Indonesian  authorities.

Now, it's quite clear...

KERRY O’BRIEN: Sorry, what are you going to say to the Indonesians if they continue to  say to you what they've said on ABC News and our program tonight, they're not going to  force these people to come into their country?

STEPHEN SMITH: If I was able to make this point: it's quite clear from the reports I've  received from Indonesia, from some of the commentary publicly that there is a difference  between comments made by local officials locally and Jakarta officials.

KERRY O’BRIEN: This is the Foreign Ministry spokesman who actually interviewed the Sri  Lankans.

STEPHEN SMITH: He didn't interview the Sri Lankans. What occurred, Kerry, was that he  went on to the vessel. He asked the Sri Lankan group whether they wanted to go to  Indonesia. They said, no, they want to go to Australia. And he said, "I will now go and get  some instruction from Jakarta."

It's quite clear that within Indonesia, the people on the ground, in and around the Oceanic  Viking, are consulting assiduously with Jakarta. That is not unreasonable. This is a special  circumstance, in some respects an unique circumstance, so the officials on the ground are  swapping everything with Jakarta, as are we.

KERRY O’BRIEN: But the official on the ground, who was interviewed today, is saying that

Page 2 of 4 Interview with Kerry O’Brien, ABC 7.30 Report

their advice is that it would be illegal. It would be against international law for them to  force, to compel these Sri Lankans to come to their country. Is Australia prepared to use  force to somehow compel them onto an Indonesian boat?

STEPHEN SMITH: I've said on a number of occasions in recent days that I remain hopeful  that this can be done in a civilised and dignified way. It can be done in cooperation between  Australian and Indonesian officials, and also in cooperation with the Sri Lankans on board.

There is an important point here, Kerry. It is that we very strongly support the right of  someone to make a claim for refugee status under the Convention. We robustly defend that.  But when someone is rescued and when people come to Australian territorial waters or  come to Australia either by boat or by plane, we absolutely respect that, as we should, to  discharge our humanitarian and a our international legal obligations.

But when someone is rescued on the high seas in the Indonesian search and rescue area,  and Indonesia and Australia agree where they should be offloaded, it's not a matter of the  choice of the asylum seekers on board where they make that claim.

The agreement between Australia and Indonesia is an agreement that they will be processed  in Indonesia. We remain confident that if we're patient, that we can effect that in  accordance with the agreement made between President Yudhoyono and the Prime  Minister.

KERRY O’BRIEN: But very quickly, in the meantime what you've got is an escalating  situation in terms of how you are being perceived by Australians, how you're being  perceived by Indonesians and how you're being perceived in the region and in the rest of the  world as to how you are conducting yourself with these refugees.

Are you not reinforcing the perception that Australia is dumping its asylum seeker problem,  as one of the wealthiest countries, in one of the developing countries of the world?

STEPHEN SMITH: I reject that entirely, Kerry. I think a couple of things have been merged  here. We have the special, if not unique circumstances, of a rescue at sea. At the same time  we have ongoing cooperation and discussion with Indonesia about how Australia,  Indonesia, our region, deals with the large number of displaced people that we are now  forced to confront or deal with. And that particularly applies to the most recent surge that  we've seen from Sri Lanka for the obvious reasons.

Now we have had, this Government and our predecessor, good cooperation with Indonesia.  We've seen Indonesia for example engage in over 80 disruptions of people smuggling  efforts in Indonesian territories over the last half dozen years.

Page 3 of 4 Interview with Kerry O’Brien, ABC 7.30 Report

But we're faced now with a heightened challenge and this is why we are in discussions with  Indonesia. I've had discussions with my counterpart former Foreign Minister Wirajuda. The  Prime Minister has had discussions with the President. Our officials have their ongoing  discussions; to see what more we can do with Indonesia to address this challenge.

We do not want to leave Indonesia in the lurch. We are not seeking to have them bear the  burden by themselves. We can only deal with this by working together with them, and also  other countries where it's Sri Lanka, or whether it's Malaysia, or other countries in our  region.

That's what we're doing and you can't merge that with the special and very difficult and  complicated circumstances of a rescue at sea which is now causing Indonesian officials on  the ground to deal with something they haven't previously dealt.

That's what we're trying to work our way, calmly around, patiently through. The things we  have done, Kerry, don't in any way compare with the shredding of our international  reputation on these issues in previous years.

KERRY O’BRIEN: Stephen Smith we'll leave it there. There thanks for joining us.

STEPHEN SMITH: Thanks Kerry, thanks very much.

[ENDS]

Media Inquiries: Foreign Minister's office (02) 6277 7500

Page 4 of 4 Interview with Kerry O’Brien, ABC 7.30 Report

