Ministers for Innovation, Industry,  Science and Research

INSIDE CANBERRA WITH MADONNA KING

With Madonna King and Senator George Brandis

SUBJECTS: Church of Scientology accusations, asylum seekers, same gender touring company, Sarah Palin,  sports funding

KING: Time to go Inside Canberra and all sorts of issues breaking out. From a possible resolution to the asylum seeker’s  case to really serious accusations levelled under parliamentary privilege against the Church of Scientology. Dr Craig  Emerson, a Minister in the Rudd Government, good morning.

EMERSON: Good morning to you Madonna.

KING: And Senator George Brandis, Opposition Attorney General, welcome back Senator George Brandis.

BRANDIS: Good morning Madonna, morning Craig.

EMERSON: Hello George.

KING: Let’s go to the Church of Scientology first. Has Independent Senator Nick Xenophon, he’s implicated this  organisation in all sorts of crimes from coerced abortions to violence, intimidation, blackmail. Do you believe he’s  misused parliamentary privilege here or is he doing his job?

BRANDIS: Well let me go first since these allegations were made in the Senate. I don’t think he’s misused  parliamentary privilege. Senator Xenophon is a serious person. I think he’s a person of integrity and if he makes  statements in the Senate like this I think we should assume he makes them in good faith and he’s very serious about it.  Now that of course doesn’t mean that the claims are true and we do have a procedure in the Australian Senate that if a  person is adversely commented upon in the Senate then they have a right of reply which gets published in the Hansard.  It’s not as if people can sort of willy nilly make allegations and there is no recourse by the person named. Nevertheless,  Senator Xenophon is a serious man. He’s a decent man. He’s made serious claims. He wouldn’t have made them unless  he took them seriously and I’m sure the appropriate authorities will examine them.

KING: Before we go on, Senator Brandis I know you were a lawyer in a former life, just explain to people who may not  understand how parliamentary privilege works?

BRANDIS: Well what parliamentary privilege is for the purpose of making statements in the chamber. It’s an absolute  exemption from the defamation laws. That’s the way to understand it.

KING: That means you cannot be sued for something you might say in Parliament but if you said it once you walked out  the front door or Parliament you could face legal action?

BRANDIS: Correct.

KING: To Craig Emerson.

EMERSON: That’s the case even if you repeated verbatim what you’d already said in the Parliament.

BRANDIS: That’s right.

Innovation Minister > The Hon Dr Craig Emerson MP



Transcript

The Hon Dr Craig Emerson MP

18 Nov 2009

Page 1 of 5 Minister - Innovation, Industry, Science and Research

EMERSON: There have been instances where people have incorrectly assumed that once they say it in the Parliament  they can then repeat it outside.

BRANDIS: That’s right. It’s a bit of a grey area of the law. It's called ‘effective repetition’. It used to be thought that if  you said something in Parliament and repeated it outside Parliament without elaboration you were covered but now the  law says you’re not. Even if you go further than ‘no comment’, even if you say I’ve got nothing to add to what I said in  Parliament, that is these days treated as effectively repeating what you said in Parliament.

EMERSON: I didn’t know that.

BRANDIS: Let me advise you Craig.

EMERSON: Thank you George.

BRANDIS: The only safe course is to say ‘no comment’ or say nothing at all.

KING: So Craig Emerson do you think Nick Xenophon is being a good parliamentarian in making these accusations  under parliamentary privilege or is he irresponsible?

EMERSON: I think he feels he has a responsibility and that would be based on documentation he said he has obtained.  He’s then referred material, as I’m advised, to the police, so it’s not a capricious act on the part of Senator Xenophon. I  don’t know Senator Xenophon as well as George does as I’m not in the Senate but what I see is a person I think would  qualify as a responsible parliamentarian.

KING: How would you Craig Emerson decide on whether you would raise an accusation that could be defamatory  outside Parliament inside the House?

EMERSON: I would want evidence. I would want to test that evidence, not just get an email, or a fake email, or any  other document that I couldn’t authenticate. I would want to talk to the people that provided the information to me rather  than just get something in the mail from a constituent or someone anywhere else around Australia, test it and then in  some circumstances consider whether I would use parliamentary privilege but not unless I got to the point where I was  satisfied that at least there was some sort of case.

KING: Nick Xenophon is calling for a Senate inquiry I think. Would both of you support a Senate inquiry into the  Church of Scientology?

EMERSON: This is a personal view. I don’t think Nick Xenophon has produced enough evidence for such a judgement  to be formed at this stage but I don’t criticise him for what he’s done so far.

KING: What do you mean he hasn’t given enough evidence?

EMERSON: Well he’s stood up in the Parliament and said he’s been told a series of things about what the Church of  Scientology has been up to. Now I think he’s doing that in good faith but I don’t believe on that basis alone that that’s  enough reason to instigate a parliamentary inquiry. That’s my view.

KING: George Brandis, would you support a parliamentary inquiry?

BRANDIS: Well I’m going to avoid answering your question for a reason I think you’ll understand. Later in the morning  I’ll be participating in a discussion among senior Opposition Senate colleagues in which we will make our decision on  that matter so I’m not going to foreshadow that here.

KING: Righto and for the record the Church of Scientology has said that Nick Xenophon’s speech was an outrageous  abuse of parliamentary privilege from a Senator that would not even meet with church representatives several months  ago and has obviously been pressured, says the church, by disgruntled former members who use hate speech and  distorted accounts or their experiences in the church. They are about as reliable as former spouses are when talking about  their ex-partner. That’s according to the Church of Scientology. On to another issue, asylum seekers. And finally a  resolution to the Oceanic Viking asylum seeker case but does this just mean those on board jump the queue of everyone  else waiting to be processed? Senator Brandis?

BRANDIS: Well yes it does. I mean let’s not beat around the bush here, yes it does. These people have been assured that they’ll be processed in several weeks, I think it’s within a maximum of 12 weeks. There have been people waiting in  Indonesian refugee camps for years. There are people waiting in refugee camps in much worse circumstances in Africa  for example who don’t have the capital to pay people smugglers to secure a migration outcome for Australia. This is a  terrible, terrible policy failure and it’s also a humanitarian failure. You see what happens is that Australia takes in about  13,000 or so humanitarian migrants under our various humanitarian and refugee programs each year. That is a bipartisan  policy and it’s been going for a very long time. Per capita we take in the second largest number of any country in the

Page 2 of 5 Minister - Innovation, Industry, Science and Research

world of refugees. When a queue jumper gets to the head of the queue that is a place, within that 13,000 or so, that they  take away from a person who might have been waiting in terrible conditions in the third world for years. We’re now up  to the stage where potentially as many as a third of our refugee or humanitarian places this year are going to be taken by  queue jumpers. In anyone’s language that is just unfair.

EMERSON: Well I don’t know where you get that one third figure from George. Less than 2000 people arrived by boat  in this period.

BRANDIS: Before you changed the policy it was zero.

EMERSON:  I don’t think 2000 divided by 14,000 is one third. You might be good at the law but you’re not very good  at maths. In any event the processing time for these people Madonna is, as I’m advised, around 12 weeks if they are not  already ascertained by the UNHCR as being genuine refugees. The average processing time on Christmas Island is  around the same - 12 weeks.

KING: It has been a policy failure in the sense Dr Craig Emerson hasn’t it that there has been no resolution? If this  happens we’re in exactly the same situation?

EMERSON: Well this was a rescue at sea. It was not a typical situation where asylum seekers make their way and end  up in Australian territorial waters. These were not Australian territorial waters. It was a rescue at sea. If they do come  into Australian territory and end up on Christmas Island they are processed in the usual fashion. That’s really what’s  happening for the most part. In this case it was unusual. It was a rescue at sea, outside Australian territorial waters, in  Indonesian waters.

BRANDIS: It was a rescue at sea Craig, you’re right but there is a prior question to that. Why was the boat on the sea?  Why was it on the ocean in the first place? It was on the ocean because people smugglers were able to persuade these 80  or so people to pay the money to make their way to Australia. Why were they able to do that? Because the Government  softened the policies in August last year and already this year we’ve had 51 boats. They weren’t coming before the  policy was softened but now they are.

KING: We’ve done this week in week out. Craig Emerson a quick response?

EMERSON: I have pointed out that 95 per cent of Sri Lankan asylum seekers have not sought asylum in Australia. It’s  absurd to say that those 95 per cent are seeking asylum in countries of Europe and Canada because of the Rudd  Government’s policy. It’s just laughable.

KING: We’ll just leave it there, I want to move on to another issue. A single sex travel company for women has been  stopped in Victoria. A judge has ruled that it cannot advertise women only holidays. It could breach the human rights of  men. Do you find that discriminatory? Do you care that there is a women only holiday company operating in Australia  Craig Emerson?

EMERSON: Not in the least and I think if they wanted to organise such a tour I can see a reason for that.

KING: George Brandis?

BRANDIS: I think it’s a ludicrous decision so this is an issue on which Craig and I agree. Can I quickly point out that  the reason for this decision is because the Victorian Parliament has been silly enough to enact a charter of rights. Now  the Rudd Government has before it a recommendation from Father Brennan’s committee recommending that there  should be a Commonwealth Charter of Rights. The Government, to be fair to them, has not made a decision one way or  the other about that but it will soon and this case is a very good example as to why it would be very foolish for the  Government to follow the recommendation for a charter of rights.

KING: Righto but back to this case for a moment. Men’s only clubs are not banned. They have an exemption from sex  discrimination laws. Is that also a problem, that something like this can be banned but a men’s only club is allowed?

BRANDIS: In Victoria a men’s only club can be banned because Mr Hulls, the Victorian Attorney General, is for the  moment considering the revocation of the exemption in relation to clubs both men only and women only clubs. I think all  these social and recreation clubs where people like to be with people of their own gender are at risk, certainly in  Victorian because of a review of the exemptions.



KING: So there is a men’s club operating in Brisbane. Are either of you a member of that?

BRANDIS: Yes  I’m a member for Tattersall’s club.

EMERSON: No I’m not. I’d never be a member of a club that would have me as a member.

Page 3 of 5 Minister - Innovation, Industry, Science and Research



KING: Craig Emerson, just to you. You wouldn’t be a member because it doesn’t allow women?

EMERSON: That’s right actually. Again these are personal views. I don’t see a reason for blokes to assemble in clubs  on the condition, or with the constraint, that women can’t associate with them. I personally think that’s different from a  women only tour where there are good reasons if women so choose that they don’t want blokes around, they want to be  able to talk freely, let them do that.

KING: You’ve made your point but George Brandis what is your rationale for belonging to a men’s only club?

BRANDIS: Well I don’t belong to it because it’s a men’s only club. It’s a congenial club. Can I point out where Craig  and I agree in part and differ in part. We agree there are some activities in which the discrimination laws shouldn’t apply.  We both agree, for example that this decision about the women’s only touring company is a silly decision. It’s a question  of where you draw the line. I’ll tell you where I draw the line. I draw the line at the difference between employment and  occupational activities in which I think the anti-discrimination laws should be strictly applied and recreational and social  activities in which I don’t think governments should intrude. On the same basis you would prohibit, for example,  women’s only gymnasiums.

KING: Righto. I need to leave it there for a moment. There’s some breaking news from Quentin Hull at the Alan Border  Field.

News break

KING: To another issue. Senator Brandis I know you love American politics. Do you think Sarah Palin is laying down  the foundations for a run at the US presidency in 2012? She told TV host Barbara Walters overnight that if people will  have me I will.

BRANDIS: Yeah I saw that. It looks very much as if she is. She is appealing to the far right wing religious base which  has become quite powerful in the Republican Party in the last 10 or 20 years. One of the rules of American political  prediction is that the first person in the field ends up as president. That certainly seems to be what Governor Palin is  eyeing.

KING: All right. Finally we end each morning with our dilemma. This morning it relates to the Federal Government’s  report yesterday in relation to sports funding. This morning we were talking about whether money should go into  participatory sports, sports like golf and tennis and lawn bowls, that many of us may play our whole life or whether it  should go to say archery which has 100 of participants of cricket. This report is essentially saying that should the money  go to Olympic sports where few people will benefit but we might get a few gold medals or might it be diverted more into  participatory sports, those we may play our whole life? Do either of you have a strong feeling there?

BRANDIS: Look this is an actual dilemma I confronted two years ago when I was Sports Minister. It’s a very difficult  decision where you balance the money you spend on community sport and Olympic sports. Even though funding  community sport is terribly important I think that Australians would be very reluctant to see us substantially decrease our  investment in elite sporting institutions like the Australian Institute of Sport because there is a direct cause and effect  relationship between the amount of money we invest in them and how well we do at the Olympic games.

KING: Time's running out. Craig Emerson, yes or no, keep money for elite Olympic sport or transfer it to more  grassroots sports?

EMERSON: Well I’m a supporter of the elite sports for this reason. Those who participate in the grassroots sports get  inspiration from those who succeed internationally. I think if you just move a lot of money out of Olympic sport or  globally successful competitors then the drive and inspiration that happens at that lower level may dissipate.

BRANDIS: Yeah that’s a good point. I mean it’s the role model argument.

EMERSON: That’s right. These are people’s heroes and if you don’t have the heroes you may not have the motivation,  you may not have the mass participation.

KING: All right. I understand you’ve both been practising your own talents for our Friday December 11 final broadcast  of the year?

EMERSON: Yeah I’ve got to get that guitar tuned, she's sounding pretty twangy at the moment.  (Laughter)

KING: And The Man from Snowy River, George Brandis do you know it off by heart?

BRANDIS: Perhaps something a little less familiar.

Page 4 of 5 Minister - Innovation, Industry, Science and Research



EMERSON: I think it’s got ‘diaphanous’ in it.  (Laughter)

BRANDIS: It may well.

KING: Good on you. I’ll talk to you next week. Senator George Brandis, Opposition Attorney General and Dr Craig  Emerson, Rudd Government Minister joining us each week on Inside Canberra.

ENDS









z Privacy

z Copyright

z Disclaimer













Page 5 of 5 Minister - Innovation, Industry, Science and Research

