The Hon Julia Gillard MP

Minister for Education. Minister for Employment and Workplace Relations  Minister for Social Inclusion  Deputy Prime Minister

19 November, 2009

Joint Transcript

Try A Trade, Apprenticeship Kickstart, Green skills,  CPRS, Oceanic Viking, National IR Laws, Youth  Allowance

Joint Transcript with the Hon Julia Gillard MP, the Hon Jason Clare MP and Senator  the Hon Penny Wong.

E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP  930AM THURSDAY  19 NOVEMBER 2009  PARLIAMENT HOUSE

JULIA GILLARD:  Can I say it’s been an experience to be here today with World Skills  doing the Try’a Trade demonstration. Of course, this isn’t actually about trying to teach  politicians trades, even though I am joined here by Senator Penny Wong, Minister Combet,  Parliamentary Secretary Jason Clare and of course you saw Senator Mark Arbib at work as  well.

Now Try’a Trade isn’t about us; it’s about kids right around the country getting an  opportunity to try a trade, to work out if they’d like to do an apprenticeship, to work out what  skills they’d like for their future.

As a Government we are very big supporters of Australian Apprenticeships. We want to  make sure that our young people get the skills they need for the future and we have young  people in this country who learn apprenticeships and go on to compete in the world and win  in world competitions. We should be very proud of that; very proud that in the global  competition for skills our nation came number five.

So we want young Australians to try a trade when Try’a Trade comes to their home location.  We want them to think about going into an apprenticeship and we want to urge employers  during this global economic downturn to give a young person a chance, give a school leaver a  chance and put them on as an apprentice.

The Government has invested in the Apprenticeship Kickstart Program; a special program to  bring new incentives to employers who take a school leaver on this summer and give them a  path to a future through an apprenticeship and of course as the Parliament debates the Carbon

Pollution Reduction Scheme we are changing our apprenticeships so that they are ready with  the green skills of the future.

Having a green economy, having an economy that adapts to the challenge of climate change  is about new green jobs. Jobs that we can’t even imagine standing here today that will be  developed over the next ten and twenty years but it’s also about doing the most traditional  trades in a different way which is why we are changing Australian Apprenticeships so that  green skills and green ways of working are embedded in traditional trades.

It’s been a great pleasure to be here with my ministerial colleagues today, with Ministers  Wong, Arbib and Combet and Parliamentary Secretary Jason Clare. I would like to thank the  apprentices and tradespeople who have tried to impart some skills to us. I’m not sure that  they are really going to grade our efforts all that highly, I think they’ve been very generous  working with us but there is a sense of enthusiasm here to encourage young people to try a  trade, to think about an apprenticeship for their future.

I’ll just turn and see if Senator Wong would like to say something about green skills.

PENNY WONG: First actually I want to thank Gavin Perez, the apprentice or the tradesman,  also a Skilleroo who helped me out and covered up my mistakes; I got a seven, I’m very  pleased about that.

We are, of course, very serious as a Government about the economic transformation that we  need to move to a low carbon economy and one of the parts of that is that we need to change  the skills that we have to prepare for the clean energy jobs of the future and to prepare for the  changes that traditional trades will have as a result of the move to a low carbon economy.

This is an important issue and this is an issue the Government is serious about, the Deputy  Prime Minister has spoken of some of the Government’s initiatives on this front.

It’s very exciting and I would encourage, as Julia said, young people to try a trade, it’s  certainly very interesting, it was very interesting for me.

I just want to say something about the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme. We’ve been  talking about action on climate change for a long time in this country. It was talked about a  lot before the last election and both parties went to the election saying they would introduce a  Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme, they would introduce a Trading Scheme, they would  take action on climate change.

I’m pleased to see that members of the Opposition including Mr MacFarlane have  acknowledged the Government’s mandate on this issue and we look forward to others in the  Liberal Party, in the Senate recognising that. Recognising that the Australian people said very  clearly at the last election, we want action on climate change and gave the Government a  mandate to take that action so we’ll continue these good faith negotiations in which we’re  involved. We’ll continue to press forward with our plan to take action on climate change for  the first time in Australia’s history and put a limit on how much carbon pollution we put into  the atmosphere.

Thank you.

JASON CLARE: Thanks Julia. I’ve been on the road for the last few months with Bill Kelty  and Lindsay Fox talking to employers in areas that have been hit hardest by the global  recession and the one thing that employers told us everywhere we went is that they need more  help to put young apprentices on.

I checked the statistics and it’s true. There has been a 20 per cent drop in the number of  young apprentices put on in the last 12 months. It’s a drop of around about 10,000 young  apprentices.

I went back and looked at what happened in the 1990s and we found that in 1990 there were  35,000 apprentices put on in traditional trades and then in 1991 it dropped down to 23,000.  That’s a drop of 35 per cent.

What surprised me though, was that we didn’t as a country recruit as many young apprentices  as we did 1990 until 2004. So there was a 13 year gap from 1991 to 2004 until we recruited  35,000 apprentices again and that’s what contributed to the skills shortage that we’ve suffered  this decade.

That’s why the Government has acted and introduced Apprentice Kickstart. We’re going to  triple the upfront bonus that employers get for putting on a young apprentice this summer; up  from $1500 to almost $5000. It’s what employers have told us that they need to put on young  bricklayers, carpenters, plumbers, electricians, welders and all the other traditional trades.

It’s going to help to make sure that we’ve got more young apprentices like we’ve seen here  today and help to make sure that we’ve got the skills that we need for the future.

Thanks.

JULIA GILLARD: Okay, any questions particularly for the shy Mr Combet, any questions?

JOURNALIST: A question about the state IR referrals bill, have you had negotiations with  the crossbench and are you confident it will get through despite the Opposition saying they’ll  vote against it?

JULIA GILLARD: We obviously will be working with senators to get this important piece  of legislation through but can I say about the position of the Liberal and National Parties;  they are acting here as reform vandals.

The position they are taking is not the position of Australian employers and it’s not the  position of Australian workers. Business for a long time, for decades, has said to the Federal  Government; can you sort out workplace relations so for the private sector there’s one  scheme and small businesses don’t have to worry whether they’re in a state system or a  federal system, whether they’re moving between the two what they need to change about  their workplace?

Small business doesn’t want that red tape. So in holding up this reform, seeking to hold it up,  the Liberal Party and National Party are acting in the face of what employers want. They’re  acting as economic vandals and at the same time, of course, they are leaving the door open  for a reintroduction of Work Choices which is what it’s all about.

I suspect the thing that particularly offends the Liberal and National Party about our national  scheme is that it doesn’t have pay and condition stripping Australian Workplace Agreements.  That’s what they want back; they want the ability to strip basic pay and conditions off people.

Well, we hope that the Senate won’t succumb to this kind of economic vandalism and this  kind of pro-Work Choices philosophy. It’s not what Australian employers want, it’s not what  Australian workers want; they want this bill through to finalise our Fair Work scheme so it  can start on 1 January next year for workers around the country including workers who used  to be covered by state systems.

JOURNALIST: On youth allowances you’ve rejected the Senate’s amendments because it  will cost about $1 billion extra but if you want more people going to university aren’t you  going to have to put more money on the table in any case?

JULIA GILLARD: I’ve rejected the Senate’s amendments because they will blow $1 billion  hole in the budget and because they’re bad for students.

The Liberal and National Parties were anti-student when they were in Government; they’re  anti-student now. These amendments aren’t the right scheme for the future. It’s not right for  the future to try and continue the arrangements that saw the participation rates of country kids  go down whilst there were kids living in households, $300,000 a year household income,  living at home and getting full youth allowance. That’s not the right system for the future.

We’ve developed a system for the future that’s better targeted to the homes that need the  support the most and consequently will be better for country kids. That’s why we’ve rejected  the Liberal Party’s amendments. They fail both tests; they’re economically irresponsible and  bad for students.

JOURNALIST: But to get more kids in university is going to cost you more money isn’t it?

JULIA GILLARD: Getting more kids in university is about better targeting student income  support so it goes into the hands of those students and those households who need that  income support the most. Getting more kids in university is about delivering our new higher  education reforms so places at university are no longer capped.

So there’s a real focus on getting kids from poor households through into universities and  getting them an excellent education. We’re committed to delivering that to make up for the  more than ten years of Liberal neglect and neglect that saw the participation rate of country  kids go down.

We say to the anti-student Liberal and National Parties; in Government you were anti-student, in Opposition you are continuing the same philosophy being anti-student. You now  have played your political games, it’s time to get out of the way and enable us to deliver  150,000 scholarships into the hands of kids next year and to benefit more than 100,000 kids  with new youth allowance or extra youth allowance.

Who they’re hurting here, it’s not the Government, it’s not me; it’s actually those thousands  of kids that won’t get the money they need to support their education if the Liberal and  National Party continue with the anti-student campaign.

JOURNALIST: Will we see a situation where Australia could be asked to take all 78 asylum  seekers that have now offloaded from the Oceanic Viking?

JULIA GILLARD: My colleague, Minister Evans, has already clearly addressed that point.  Obviously, the Government’s been determined to have the passengers we rescued at sea  disembark in Indonesia. That has now happened. Claims will be processed in Indonesia.

JOURNALIST: Can we just ask Penny a quick climate change question? Your state is  experiencing heat wave conditions; do you think climate change is to blame for the current  increasing temperatures?

PENNY WONG: I think I’ve always been reluctant to talk about one day’s weather as being  an indication of climate change. What we have to look at is the trend and the trend is pretty  clear.

We’ve had 13 of the 14 hottest years in history in the last 14 or 15 years. We have scientists  quite clearly telling us that the trend in terms of global temperatures has increased since mid-century very significantly, I think almost doubled since the first half of last century and we  know that the CSIRO and others have said to us that we are likely to have more extreme  temperatures, we’re likely to have much drier temperatures as well as more intense storms  and so forth.

So these are scientific opinions there for everyone to see and I think it is clear from the  science that we do need to act on climate change.

JOURNALIST: This morning Tony Abbott at the doors appeared to suggest that the  Coalition Party room would need to accept, that Labor would need to accept all of the  Liberal’s amendments to the CPRS before they would consider supporting it.

PENNY WONG: I think if you walk into the room saying you have to take everything or  else I’m out of the room, that’s not really a good faith negotiation and I have to say that’s not  how the Liberal Party thus far has conducted the negotiation.

Look, let’s understand what’s happening here; there are a range of people in the Coalition  who have spent over a decade doing everything they can to avoid taking action on climate  change and they will do and say anything to avoid taking action and we will continue to see  those people speaking out.

I hope more sensible heads will prevail. I hope that those in the Liberal Party who recognise  that the Government has a mandate and that action on climate change in necessary; I hope  those sensible heads will prevail in the Liberal Party room.

I think Australians do expect action and they do expect politicians to act responsibly.

JOURNALIST: Are you expecting a deal to be done by next week? Are you expecting the  ETS to be passed by next week?

PENNY WONG: I am not going to comment on negotiations in detail. What I will say is  this; the Government has made our timetable absolutely clear. We have been saying this is  the fortnight. We will provide further days of sitting if that’s what the Senate requires. We

want a vote on this before the Senate rises this year, we’ve been very clear about that for a  long time.

JOURNALIST: We’ve had trades such as bricklaying for thousands of years, what now  makes this a green trade?

PENNY WONG: I don’t think anybody is saying that traditional trades will disappear. What  we are saying is that trades over time will change and I went to a building site actually with  the Deputy Prime Minister some time ago and spoke to some of the tradespeople on site, a  green building, a building of very high energy and water efficiency and the bloke who ran it  said to me we’ve had to train all of our trades to get them to the skill levels that they’ll need  to do these installations to construct this building this way.

I think what we need to remember is; this will be a change across the economy but it will be a  change for the better.

JULIA GILLARD: Thank you very much.



ENDS.

Media Contact:

media@deewr.gov.au

Non-media queries: 1300 363 079



