



Tue, 3rd November 2009



TURNBULL DOORSTOP - INTEREST RATES, BORDER PROTECTION

The Hon Malcolm Turnbull MP

Leader of the Opposition

E&OE

MALCOLM TURNBULL:

The rate rise today is as expected. The reality is that while this rate rise was very much as expected, a quarter of

a per cent, the truth is that the Rudd Government’s continued reckless spending, its refusal to make any change

to its borrowing and spending in the light of the changed and much improved economic conditions that are

causing the Reserve Bank to wind back its monetary stimulus, that failure on the part of the Rudd Government is

putting upward pressure on interest rates.

And I am reminded in that context of a speech Wayne Swan gave in February 2008 when he criticised the

previous Coalition Government, saying one of the reasons the Reserve Bank has been backed into a corner on

interest rates is that “you” - meaning the Howard Government - “spent and you spent and you spent and you

spent”. That was Wayne Swan in February 2008. And now we see Wayne Swan’s rhetoric being better applied to

him. It really fits him because what he is doing is spending and spending and spending.

They went into this big fiscal stimulus, this big spendathon on the basis that Australia was on the edge of an

economic abyss. And now we see our economic conditions are stronger. We get those figures, improved figures

all the time and the Reserve Bank’s Governor Glenn Stevens has made that point today and yet the Government

is not winding back or recalibrating or changing its spending at all. In fact, as we see in the MYEFO statement

yesterday, there is actually a blow out in spending in this current financial year.

So the truth is Australians are going to pay higher interest rates thanks to the reckless spending of the Rudd

Government.

QUESTION:

It’s not a huge movement though. It’s not as if the Reserve Bank seems to be panicking in any way. It’s more of

a…

MALCOLM TURNBULL:

There is an incremental movement. This is a trend of interest rate rises which will continue for some time. That is

certainly what the Reserve Bank is getting us ready for. And the fact is that they are going up faster and higher

than they would otherwise need to be if the Government was more responsible in terms of its spending.

QUESTION:

So are you saying that, to use a phrase often used by Kevin Rudd, the inflation genie is back out of the bottle?

MALCOLM TURNBULL:

Well, I think certainly there are concerns about inflation and the Reserve Bank has made that point. When

governments are borrowing and spending, particularly spending ineffectively, that does put upward pressure on

interest rates. You have seen scathing criticism from the Business Council of Australia, from the Productivity

Commission itself about the lack of effective spending, properly costed spending.

Where are the feasibility studies? Where is the financial analysis? Where is the cost-benefit analysis? Nowhere

to be seen. Only 14 per cent of all the Rudd Government’s stimulus was spent on economic infrastructure which

actually grows GDP. This has been a government that has genuinely wasted the crisis. They have borrowed and

spent an enormous amount of money to very little effect.

QUESTION:

On today’s Newspoll, why do you think there has been such a big swing away from the Government?

MALCOLM TURNBULL:

Look we are focused on holding the Government to account. The Government is failing the Australian people in

so many areas. Their failure in economic policy we have just discussed - borrowing and spending like there is no

tomorrow, failing to properly cost, properly analyse their infrastructure spending, spending far too little on

economic infrastructure that really grows jobs and grows the economy.

And then of course we see the colossal failure in border protection policy. Kevin Rudd’s policy objective should

be, as he states that it is, to stop people smuggling and stop unauthorised maritime arrivals of asylum seekers.

That should be the objective of every Australian government.

By that test, his policy has been a colossal failure. Since he unpicked the policies of the previous government, we

have seen a surge of unauthorised arrivals and, as every day goes by, Kevin Rudd is outsourcing our

immigration policies, our immigration program to the people smugglers.

QUESTION:

How are you going to build on this good result?

MALCOLM TURNBULL:

Our focus is on holding the Government to account, setting out our own alternatives - holding the Government to

account and presenting a constructive alternative so that when the election comes, people will know that they

have a better option in voting for the Coalition.

QUESTION:

Would you put the closing of this gap in the Newspoll down mainly to the surge of arrivals that has been

happening over the past…

MALCOLM TURNBULL:

I will leave the commentary to you guys. You are much better able to do that than me.

QUESTION:

Why do you think your rating has not improved along with the party’s?

MALCOLM TURNBULL:

I am focused on holding the Government to account and you can focus on the commentary.

QUESTION:

Do you think this is the end of Kevin Rudd’s honeymoon?

MALCOLM TURNBULL:

Again, I will leave you guys to do the commentary. You are better at that than me, and if there are no more

questions on the economy, we will wrap it up.

QUESTION:

Were you happy with the Newspoll result though?

MALCOLM TURNBULL:

Again, I will leave that commentary to you. That is a matter for you. Any more…

QUESTION:

Colin Barnett says the asylum seekers on board the Oceanic Viking should be sent to Christmas Island. Do you

agree?

MALCOLM TURNBULL:

Look I am not going to provide advice to Kevin Rudd about how to deal with this very specific, very sensitive

security situation. This is a delicate situation. There are 78 people there on that vessel. We do not have access to

the intelligence or police reports about what is going on on the vessel, what is going on with the Indonesians.

There would be a lot of information that you would need to have before you could make that decision. Colin may

well have access to that information through the West Australian Police. I don’t know. I don’t so I am not going to

try and be a backseat driver for Kevin Rudd on something as delicate as that. He has got a big problem there. He

is the Prime Minister - he should fix it.

QUESTION:

Was it inappropriate for him to comment on that?

MALCOLM TURNBULL:

I am not going to make any comment on that. Colin Barnett is a head of government. He has got access to police

and intelligence information that is not available to the Leader of the Opposition, and that is why in something as

sensitive as this, I don’t want to make Mr Rudd’s task any harder. He has got a big challenge there.

He has - leaving aside the specific case of the 78 people on the Oceanic Viking - he has got a major policy

failure that he has created himself by unpicking border protection policies that worked. That was his judgment,

and he said he could unpick those policies of the previous government and it would have no impact on the rate of

arrivals. That is what he said.

Now clearly he got that wrong and we now have a major problem with the security of our borders and the fact is

increasingly, day by day, more and more of our immigration program, particularly our humanitarian program, is

being outsourced to the people smugglers.

QUESTION:

Given you think that the conditions are inhumane in the Indonesian detention centres, doesn’t that seem to mean

that you want them sent to Christmas Island?

MALCOLM TURNBULL:

You are asking the same question in a slightly different way and I give you ten out of ten for persistence but I

have already answered that question.

Okay, thanks very much.

