The Hon Stephen Smith MP  AUSTRALIAN MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS

Transcript E&OE

9 November 2009, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Colombo.

Interview - 7.30 Report, Kerry O’Brien  Subjects: Oceanic Viking, Sri Lanka.

KERRY O'BRIEN, PRESENTER: The Foreign Minister joins me now from the APEC  conference site in Singapore.

Stephen Smith, when we last spoke two weeks ago about the impasse with the Oceanic  Viking, you said, "We continue to be in discussion with Indonesian officials." Well here you  are two weeks later, in Singapore, about to meet the Indonesian Foreign Minister Marty  Natalegawa, are you really getting any closer to resolving this problem?

STEPHEN SMITH, FOREIGN MINISTER: We continue to be in discussions with  Indonesian officials through our officials on the Oceanic Viking and also in Tanjung Pinang,  and we also continue to be in discussions with the people on the boat. We've made no secret  it's a difficult and complex circumstance.

I'll be seeing the Indonesian Foreign Minister tonight. We will obviously have a discussion  about this issue, but we'll also have a broad-ranging discussion about the bilateral  relationship. But, yes, obviously I'll talk to Marty about that. But the key conversations are  occurring through our officials on the boat itself, and as the Prime Minister has made clear,  as I've made clear previously, we're not proposing to put a timetable on that. We want to get  a successful outcome.

KERRY O'BRIEN: But the Indonesians are getting closer and closer to putting a timetable  on it. Where you say you have infinite patience, one Indonesian official made the point  today that they might have abundant patience, but they don't have infinite patience. And  they're saying that Friday is the deadline.

Now, what do you do if Friday comes and the extension by the Indonesians to allow the  Oceanic Viking to stay in their waters passes and you haven't resolved the problem?

STEPHEN SMITH: I think people very clearly need to understand what Friday is about.  Friday is the diplomatic clearance timetable for the Oceanic Viking. We regard this very  much as a formal mechanistic process. The diplomatic clearance for the Oceanic Viking has

Page 1 of 4 7.30 Report interview with Kerry O’Brien

8/12/2009 http://www.foreignminister.gov.au/transcripts/2009/091110_730.html

been granted on an ongoing basis and you referred to my last appearance on your show - I  think on that occasion I referred to patience on a number of occasions. The Indonesian  Foreign Minister was on Australian TV that night and used the phrase "an abundance of  patience". We continue to proceed on that basis.

So, if the matter is not resolved by Friday, we fully expect that the diplomatic clearance for  the Oceanic Viking will again be extended. We regard that very much as an administrative  matter. We continue to want to get a successful outcome, where the people on board calmly  and peacefully come off the boat to enable their processing in Indonesia by the United  Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.

KERRY O'BRIEN: Well, here's a Foreign Ministry spokesman, Teuku Faizasyah, quote: "It's  not something we have in mind, we have," - this is about ruling out extra time. "... we have  abundant patience. We've already shown this, but we don't have infinite patience."

Another Foreign Ministry spokesman, Dr Suchet Miko, said, "A deal must be done by  Friday." It would seem that the Indonesian patience is growing thin. How long can you  wait?

STEPHEN SMITH: Well I've made the point, I think to you, Kerry, but certainly publicly,  that the reference points that Australia makes on this matter are the conversation between  Prime Minister Rudd and President Yudhoyono, and also the conversations that I myself  have had with the Foreign Minister, Marty Natalegawa, and both of those conversations  proceed on the basis that this search and rescue mission will end with the people  disembarking in Indonesia. We will be very patient about that, as long as is required to  effect the outcome.

KERRY O'BRIEN: So if in fact you're still in this state and the asylum seekers are refusing to  leave the boat a week from now, two weeks from now, four weeks from now, everyone's just  gonna sit there and wait? That's what infinite means.

STEPHEN SMITH: As I've done in the past, I'm not proposing to put a timetable or a  deadline on it. Obviously, we would want it resolved sooner rather than later. Obviously, we  would want to have had it resolved earlier than now. But we effectively want a positive  outcome. I know people have - some people have got less patience than us, I know people  want to see an outcome materialise but in the end, we'll be judged on the outcome.

The process has taken longer than we would want, but we continue to work very hard both  in discussions on the boat and elsewhere to try and get a positive outcome.

KERRY O'BRIEN: Can you confirm that Australia has already put the proposition to  Indonesia that it, Indonesia, allow the asylum seekers aboard the Oceanic Viking to live

Page 2 of 4 7.30 Report interview with Kerry O’Brien

8/12/2009 http://www.foreignminister.gov.au/transcripts/2009/091110_730.html

within the Indonesian community rather than in detention, pending being given asylum in  a particular country while their refugee claims are fast-tracked and that Indonesia rejected  that proposition?

STEPHEN SMITH: I'm certainly not going to get involved in whatever detailed suggestions  may have been made by Australia to Indonesia, Indonesia to Australia or indeed Australian  officials to the people on the boat. I'm not proposing to get into a running commentary on  that.

Obviously common sense would tell you that a range of issues fall for discussion:  timetabling for processing, questions of resettlement if positive decisions are made by the  UNHCR on refugee status, questions of detention or accommodation. Obviously all of these  issues fall for consideration, as you would expect. But I'm not proposing, either on your  program, Kerry, or elsewhere to get involved in a detailed conversation or running  commentary about that.

KERRY O'BRIEN: You won't confirm that Australia has undertaken to the people on board  that those determined to be refugees would be given fast-tracked placement in Australia,  New Zealand or another country like Canada, within a year, probably sooner?

STEPHEN SMITH: I'm not proposing to give a running commentary, nor am I proposing to  get into those detailed discussions other than to say of course questions of timetable,  timing, timelines and resettlement have and will fall for consideration and discussion.

Any resettlements out of Indonesia will of course occur in accordance with the United  Nations High Commissioner for Refugee arrangements, so far as resettlement out of  Indonesia is concerned. Australia is one of those countries, Canada, the United States, New  Zealand, some European countries, are part of those arrangements. But I don't see there's  any worthwhile point when we're engaged in these detailed conversations to make any of  those matters public or to engage in a running commentary on it. We want to get a positive  outcome.

KERRY O'BRIEN: We're having trouble with the satellite, Mr Smith, so I'll make this the  last question, if you could keep the answer brief, if possible. You left Sri Lanka this morning  after your talks there. How strongly did you raise concerns about alleged human rights  abuse and mistreatment of Tamils by the Government and what concrete promise, if any,  have they made you to take action that would stop the flow of asylum seekers from their  shores?

STEPHEN SMITH: Briefly, Kerry, two substantive matters we discussed: firstly,  heightening our cooperation on combating the criminal syndicates behind people  smuggling. But on the serious challenges that Sri Lanka face with resettlement of people

Page 3 of 4 7.30 Report interview with Kerry O’Brien

8/12/2009 http://www.foreignminister.gov.au/transcripts/2009/091110_730.html

from the displaced person's camp, we welcome very much the fact that a large number of  people have been moved out of those camps recently.

I announced further Australian assistance to assist that process for resettlement. I made it  very clear that we want to see that resettlement occur, that people who are resettled need to  have all the appropriate rights that people have in the community, in particular freedom of  movement.

So, the issues that Australia has raised privately and publicly with Sri Lanka before, I made  those points very clearly to my counterpart, Foreign Minister Bogollagama, and also to the  President. But, it's essential that Sri Lanka win the peace. They can only win the piece by a  healing and reconciliation process, a proper and speedy resettlement of those displaced  people.

KERRY O'BRIEN: Mr Smith, we're racing the clock. Thanks for joining us.

STEPHEN SMITH: Thanks, Kerry. Thanks very much.

ENDS

Media Inquiries: Foreign Minister's office (02) 6277 7500

Page 4 of 4 7.30 Report interview with Kerry O’Brien

8/12/2009 http://www.foreignminister.gov.au/transcripts/2009/091110_730.html

