

Senator Chris Evans  Minister for Immigration and Citizenship





Another baseless claim from opposition immigration  spokeswoman

The Rudd Government rejects claims made by the Opposition immigration  spokeswoman, Dr Sharman Stone, that asylum seeker processing has been  compromised by the arrest of a Sri Lankan man returned to Colombo this  week.

Dr Stone has maligned Department of Immigration and Citizenship staff and  the Australian Federal Police without any evidence or knowledge of this  matter.

The Rudd Government has made its position clear. Irregular maritime arrivals  are subject to mandatory detention on Christmas Island while they undergo  thorough health, security and identity checks.

People who are owed Australia's protection under our international obligations  will be granted that protection. All irregular maritime arrivals found not to be  owed protection and with no other basis to remain in Australia will be  removed.

The fact that the person was arrested and charged with a criminal offence in  Sri Lanka does not engage Australia's international obligations. Whether  someone has broken Sri Lankan law is a matter for the Sri Lankan courts to  determine. Australia welcomes the investigation and arrest of suspected  people smugglers.

For Dr Stone to suggest that the man's arrest has cast doubt on the  effectiveness of Australia's rigorous security assessments is absurd.

Dr Stone has a history of making hysterical and baseless allegations. Last  week she made the outrageous claim that the United Nations refugee agency  is corrupt.

The Office of the UN High Commissioner for Refugee's recommendations for  the resettlement of refugees are recognised and accepted internationally,  including by Australia. Indeed, many thousands of refugees were resettled in  Australia under the Howard Government based on the UNHCR's advice.

Australia works closely with UNHCR, both at the regional and international  level, and is currently the vice chair of the executive committee of the UNHCR  and one of UNHCR's major donors and resettlement countries.



See:  Index of Media Releases

URL: http://www.minister.immi.gov.au /media/media-releases/2009/ce09095.htm   Last update: 09 October 2009 at 17:44 AEST



