The Hon Julia Gillard MP

Minister for Education. Minister for Employment and Workplace Relations  Minister for Social Inclusion  Deputy Prime Minister

10 November, 2009

Transcript

Transcript - Sky News Interview

E&OE TRANSCRIPT  INTERVIEW  AM AGENDA (SKY NEWS)  830AM TUESDAY  10 NOVEMBER 2009

ISSUES:  Asylum seekers; Climate Change; National Conversation with Principals

KIERAN GILBERT: Acting Prime Minister Julia Gillard, thanks for your time.

JULIA GILLARD:  Good morning.

KIERAN GILBERT: More than 150 school principals in town, I want to talk about that  issue in a moment but first of all a few other matters. The asylum seeker issue remains a  complex one for the Government. Seventy-eight Sri Lankans on the Oceanic Viking remain  there, the reports of compromise almost by the day but nothing has worked yet, what’s the  latest?

JULIA GILLARD: Clearly this is a matter that started as a rescue at sea. We made an  agreement with Indonesia that we would disembark the people rescued at sea at Indonesia.  We are still committed to that course. We have an abundance of patience in getting that done.

This really remains an operational matter so I’m not intending to comment on operational  issues. But we intend to execute the agreement with Indonesia and to disembark the people  rescued at sea who were rescued in Indonesian waters onto Indonesian soil.

KIERAN GILBERT: Without commenting on the specifics, are you hopeful of a  compromise because the security clearance for that boat to be there again, only extends to this  Friday?

JULIA GILLARD: We will keep working on this patiently and methodically. It is a  complex and challenging issue. It’s an unusual set of circumstances where an Australian  vessel went and rescued people in another nation’s waters.

We did that because we were responding to our obligations under the international laws of  the sea and one of these days obviously another nation will go and assist an Australian who

needs help so those laws, the laws of the sea, are there to help people in distress on the high  seas right around the world including Australians.

We did the right thing there, it’s then presented us with this complex and challenging issue to  resolve and we’re working our way through it.

KIERAN GILBERT: The Foreign Minister Stephen Smith has signed a memorandum of  understanding with the Sri Lankans after the talks in Columba yesterday. Is the Government  worried though, by signing a deal with Sri Lanka, the place where all of these Tamils are  fleeing, that you might inadvertently block someone who wants asylum, needs asylum,  because they fear for their own safety?

JULIA GILLARD: The important thing in Sri Lanka is the Government there has won the  war now they need to win the peace. They need to do the reconstruction, the reintegration of  their society that’s necessary for everyone in Sri Lanka including the Tamil community to  pursue a peaceful and happy life there.

We have obviously said to Sri Lanka that we’re prepared to provide aid and assistance as they  go about that reconstruction and importantly Stephen Smith has executed an agreement with  them which is about people smuggling and cracking down on this vile trade.

We want to make sure that people engaged in people smuggling get brought to justice. Those  crimes happen overseas, people make the arrangements overseas. With people smugglers, we  therefore need international cooperation to crack down on people smuggling and that’s what  Stephen Smith has achieved in this agreement with Sri Lanka.

KIERAN GILBERT: But what about the other element of that trade, it’s the people seeking  asylum. By reaching an agreement with Sri Lanka, the source country, the country the people  are trying to flee from, don’t you risk blocking the escape of people who might fear for their  safety?

JULIA GILLARD: We’re a nation that honours our obligations under the Refugee  Convention but I think we would all recognise when it comes to people moving around the  globe, the best thing is if we can resolve the circumstances in their home country so that they  can pursue their lives there peacefully and without fear of persecution.

Obviously in Sri Lanka there has been a civil war, the war has been won, now the peace  needs to be won and in winning that peace it has to be a peace inclusive of the Tamil  community that should be able to pursue their lives in safety in Sri Lanka.

KIERAN GILBERT: The polls show that more than 40 per cent, both polls actually, show  that more than 40 per cent of people think you’re too soft, the Government is too soft on  border protection. Only a small amount, I think it was around 15 per cent, thought you were  too hard. Does this issue remain as divisive as ever?

JULIA GILLARD: I think that there’s a variety of views out there, I understand that. The  nature of leadership, of governing the country is that we have got to make decisions in the  national interest.

We do that not by looking at the ups and downs of opinion polls because they go up, they  come down, that’s the nature of opinion polling. We do it by looking at the issues analysing  them and making the decisions that we think are in the national interest.

On asylum seekers, we believe we are acting in the national interest. We want to be tough on  people smuggling. It’s a vile trade, profiting in human misery. We want to be tough on that  but we want to be a nation too, that honours our obligations under the Refugee Convention  and treats people who are genuinely seeking refuge in a compassionate way.

KIERAN GILBERT: On another issue, next week when Parliament returns emissions  trading is going to be one of the key issues up until the end of the year and the Copenhagen  summit. Malcolm Turnbull is obviously having some difficulties within his party bringing  them together on this matter. The Prime Minister described him as a coward though in  dealing with climate change. How can he say he is a coward when he is trying to bring a  party that don’t all agree with him across the line with this?

JULIA GILLARD: I’m not sure that we’re seeing enough evidence of the bringing across  the line and I think your question is by way of understatement.

Having seen the footage from Four Corners last night which explored the chasms of  difference in the Opposition on climate change, I think that is giving us very clear evidence  that many people in the Coalition, indeed some people in the Coalition say the majority  actually are climate change deniers. They don’t think that there’s a problem. So they’re not  even interested in designing a solution because they don’t even think that there’s a problem.

Well, Malcolm Turnbull does need to show leadership. He says he believes in climate  change, well he needs to persuade his party to believe in climate change to recognise there’s a  problem and then he needs to bring them along in the design of the solution.

KIERAN GILBERT: But what good is it calling him a coward. He is trying and he is hardly  a climate sceptic as the Prime Minister accused him of last week. It was a bit of a bizarre  accusation when he was the Environment Minister when in government that actually put  forward an ETS. So he called him a sceptic and a coward and he is trying to bring the party  along, it might not be working at the moment but at least he’s having a go.

JULIA GILLARD: What matters here is results and so far what we know is we presented  our Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme to the Parliament, it’s an important piece of what  this nation needs to do to respond to the challenge of climate change and we are a nation  particularly at risk from climate change. We’re a hot, dry, big place and that means we’re  particularly at risk.

When that legislation came to the Parliament, Coalition just voted it down.

Now, they say they want to negotiate but many of them are happy to go on TV and say  climate change doesn’t even really exist.

So we’re saying, Malcolm Turnbull, you want to be judged as someone who is prepared to  tackle climate change, well, for people to judge you as someone acting on climate change you  need to do something, not talk about it, do something. And what he needs to do is he needs to  convince his party climate change is a real problem.

That’s what Australians believe and the science is in to show that climate change is a real  problem. The Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme is an important part of the solution. He  needs to make sure that he has the agreement of his party to negotiate in good faith and to get  this legislation passed.

KIERAN GILBERT: Just finally, in your specific area of responsibility, education; 161  school principals from public and private schools in Canberra today on a range of issues.  How did you choose who would be attending?

JULIA GILLARD: This is a big day to have so many principals from right around the  country from all sorts of schools, various shapes, sizes, different school systems, here in  Canberra to meet with me.

We worked through our principals’ associations to select the principals. We wanted it to be  representatives of states, of metropolitan and regional and rural schools, of school systems.

So these principals have been brought together for a conversation today and tomorrow  directly with me as Education Minister about the implementation of our Education  Revolution.

So much is happening; new transparency measures so parents in the community will have  more information than they’ve ever had before on what’s happening in schools, new  measures for better teaching and improved school leadership, new improvements for literacy  and numeracy, new resources for schools particularly for our most disadvantaged schools and  of course, new school buildings.

It’s a big agenda, it’s all happening and being driven but we want to be working with the  people in schools who are there implementing the agenda day in, day out. I want to hear from  them about the challenges they face. I want to talk to them about our Education Revolution  reforms. They’re making a big difference for schools and we want to working in partnership  with principals to make that huge difference for every Australian child.

KIERAN GILBERT: Because there have been, you talk about the Education Revolution  and the spending and so on but some of the schools that have missed out on science and  language labs weren’t happy. There have been other hiccups along the way as well so will  that be part of the process as well; feedback on that front?

JULIA GILLARD: I’m happy to get feedback right across the board. But I would say is  when you start out to do something as big as transform Australian schools to make a  difference for every Australian child, when you want to correct the problems we inherited  from the Coalition government where Australian education was slipping behind the standards  of the world, that’s a lot of change.

When we’re making that much change, yes there are going to be stresses and strains on the  adults involved, on the principals, on the teachers but the change is worthwhile and people  who have committed themselves to education often put a lifetime into education.

Our school principals want to do the best for every Australian child and they know our  Education Revolution is about working with them to do just that and that’s what the  conversation over the next two days is going to be about.

KIERAN GILBERT: 161 principals, it sounds a bit daunting, anyway all the best. Julia  Gillard, appreciate your time. Thanks.

JULIA GILLARD: Does that mean you got into a lot of trouble with the principal at school,  is that why you’re worried?

KIERAN GILBERT: Thanks.

JULIA GILLARD: Thank you.

ENDS

Media Contact:

media@deewr.gov.au

Non-media queries: 1300 363 079



