Senator Chris Evans  Minister for Immigration and Citizenship

Protection for victims of torture and inhumane treatment

The Rudd Government is introducing new laws to better protect people at risk of  violation of their fundamental human rights which may include women and girls at  risk of female genital mutilation and so called 'honour killings'.

The Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Senator Chris Evans said the Migration  Amendment (Complementary Protection) Bill 2009 allows all of Australia's  international human rights obligations to be considered under the same visa process  as claims under the Refugees Convention.

Complementary protection will cover circumstances in which a person may currently  be refused a Protection visa because the reason for the persecution or harm on  return is not for one of the specified reasons in the Refugees Convention - that is not  on the basis of race, religion, nationality, membership of a particular social group or  political opinion.

For example, it is not certain that a girl who would face a real risk of female genital  mutilation would always be covered by the Refugees Convention, whereas she  would be covered under complementary protection.

Women at risk of so-called 'honour killings' can also potentially fall through gaps in  the Refugees Convention definition. In some countries victims of rape are often  executed along with their attackers. Again, depending on the circumstances, this  situation may not be covered under the Refugees Convention.

The Bill establishes new criteria for the grant of a protection visa in circumstances  that engage Australia's obligations under human rights treaties other than the  Refugees Convention. The criterion includes:

• arbitrary deprivation of life   • having the death penalty imposed and carried  out   • being subjected to torture   • being subjected to cruel or inhumane treatment

or punishment, or   • being subjected to degrading treatment or  punishment.

'Complementary protection is about helping vulnerable people - people at risk of the  most serious forms of harm if returned to their home country. Where such claims are  accepted as true, Australians would expect a protection visa to be granted,' Senator  Evans said.

'This Bill will enable Australia to meet our protection obligations under international  human rights treaties for people who may not be covered by the Refugees

Convention but cannot return home because they would be killed, tortured or be  subjected to inhumane treatment.

'We currently meet these obligations through reliance on personal ministerial  intervention powers which are not reviewable, transparent or subject to procedural  fairness. These changes will entrench our non-return obligations in law and provide  for all claims to be considered efficiently in one fair and transparent process.'



See:  Index of Media Releases

URL: http://www.minister.immi.gov.au /media/media-releases/2009/ce09083.htm   Last update: 09 September 2009 at 10:48 AEST



