The Hon Stephen Smith MP  AUSTRALIAN MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS

Transcript E&OE

28 October 2009

Interview with ABC Radio AM Program

Subjects: Oceanic Viking, Asylum Seekers.

TONY EASTLEY: To discuss how the Federal Government plans to resolve the impasse,  we've been joined by the Foreign Minister, Stephen Smith. He's in our Canberra studio with  Alexandra Kirk.

Alexandra Kirk: Stephen Smith, good morning.

STEPHEN SMITH: Good morning, Alex.

Alexandra Kirk: Is there any sign that the asylum seekers will be taken ashore to Indonesia?

STEPHEN SMITH: Well, what's occurred overnight is the Oceanic Viking has moved from  its port out into deeper water to desalinate. It'll come back in this morning, Indonesia time,  and then discussions will recommence with Indonesian officials about the method of  disembarking the Sri Lankans from the Oceanic Viking onto Indonesian soil.

Alexandra Kirk: The local governor has said that his territory shouldn't be used as a  dumping ground for asylum seekers, and that the Australian-funded detention centre isn't  ready to take the asylum seekers anyway. He's also refusing permission for the Customs  ship to berth. So what now?

STEPHEN SMITH: What he's also said - pointedly and advisedly - is that he will do what  the President directs him to do. The President has already made that decision. There's an  agreement between Australia and the Government of Indonesia that the people who were  rescued in the open seas will go to Indonesia and be processed by the United Nations High  Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) in Indonesia. Now, that is what will occur.

Of course, it's difficult, it's a complex operational matter, but I remain confident that with  the professionalism of the Australian officials on board and with the ongoing cooperation of  the Indonesian Government officials, who have responsibility in this area, that the objective  agreed between Prime Minister Rudd and the President will be effected: which is returning

Page 1 of 5 Interview with ABC Radio AM Program

these people to Indonesian soil for processing by the UNHCR.

Alexandra Kirk: It's clear many in Indonesia don't want these asylum seekers, they see them  as a problem - Australia's problem - and the asylum seekers, presumably, don't trust  Indonesia. They're refusing identity and medical checks and won't disembark voluntarily.  Are you prepared to leave the Oceanic Viking and the asylum seekers there indefinitely...

STEPHEN SMITH: I'll tell you...

Alexandra Kirk: ... or prepared to force the issue?

STEPHEN SMITH: Well, there are a number of things that we're not prepared to do. One  thing is that we're not prepared to leave people at risk on the high seas.

Remember, the special circumstances of this case. We were asked by Indonesia to assist in  the Indonesian search and rescue area. We knew that there would potentially be refugee  and immigration implications as a result of effecting the rescue. But we're not going to leave  people stranded.

Getting them back onto Indonesian soil is difficult and complex, but we will continue to  work with Indonesian officials to effect that.

Of course, refugee issues are emotional in Indonesia, as they are in Australia. That's why  we're proceeding calmly and methodically. But also you need to appreciate that the people  who are making comments aren't the people who have authority in this area. It is the  authority...

Alexandra Kirk: Except that they seem to be...

STEPHEN SMITH: It's the authority of...

Alexandra Kirk: ... [indistinct] what's going on at the moment aren't they?

STEPHEN SMITH: Well, they're not. The detention centre in Indonesia that these people  will go to, to be processed by the UNHCR, is an Indonesian central government-run  detention centre.

Alexandra Kirk: But getting them there is the problem, isn't it?

STEPHEN SMITH: And we're going to do that in a way where their safety is secured. This  started as a search and rescue mission on the high seas and it will end in that manner. We  are making sure that the welfare of those people on board is protected and that will  continue to be the case.

Page 2 of 5 Interview with ABC Radio AM Program

Alexandra Kirk: But they haven't, the Sri Lankan asylum seekers, the 250 that were on  another boat that are still docked on the boat in Merak in Indonesia, they're not off that  boat. If you haven't found a way to convince them to go ashore, how can you hope to  convince the 78 asylum seekers...

STEPHEN SMITH: Well...

Alexandra Kirk: ... aboard the Oceanic Viking to do so?

STEPHEN SMITH: These are two separate cases. Firstly, the boat in Merak, which has over  200 Sri Lankans was was interdicted by Indonesian officers in Indonesian waters, and the  Indonesian Government is dealing with that. They have determined that they will allow the  people to remain on the boat until such time as they choose to come on shore .....

Alexandra Kirk: And is that your view now about those 78 on the Oceanic Viking?

STEPHEN SMITH: Well, let's just deal with the two separately, because they are entirely  different and separate matters.

Alexandra Kirk: But the circumstances are the same, aren't they?

STEPHEN SMITH: If you let me finish answering, Alex. A small number of Sri Lankans  have come off the boat in Merak. That's entirely a matter for the Indonesian officials to  manage.

We've got 78 Sri Lankans on an Australian vessel, a Customs vessel. There's an agreement  with Indonesia that they will go onto Indonesian soil and be processed by the UNHCR. We  will do that in an orderly way, in cooperation with Indonesian officials. And we'll do it in a  way where the welfare of the people on board is safeguarded.

Let me make this point: it's not a matter for the Sri Lankans on board to choose where they  make their application for refugee status. We absolutely defend their right to make that  application. But they were picked up on the high seas. They were rescued on the high seas.  It's not their choice.

In the end, we want them to cooperate. But how they disembark from the Oceanic Viking, in  the end, will be a matter between Indonesian officials, Australian officials and the Sri  Lankans. Their conduct, and how they conduct themselves in this matter is also relevant  and important.

But I remain confident that the cooperation between Australia and Indonesia, and the  professionalism of our officers will see them safely off the Oceanic Viking onto Indonesian  soil.

Page 3 of 5 Interview with ABC Radio AM Program

Now, that may take some time, but I'd much rather that than leave them stranded on the  high seas.

Alexandra Kirk: Well, they're not stranded on the high seas at the moment.

STEPHEN SMITH: They're not stranded on the high seas, Alex, because we rescued them.  And when we rescued them, we knew that there would be immigration and refugee  implications. If we had our time again, we would do precisely the same thing, because it's  the right thing to do.

It was the right thing to rescue them. It's the right thing, in cooperation with Indonesia, to  return them to Indonesia. And that's what we're doing and we'll do that in a safe way. If it  takes more time, so be it.

Alexandra Kirk: You've said that disembarkation will be orderly and civilised. That means  no use of force?

STEPHEN SMITH: Well, that was my hope. On the basis of the advice I've had over the last  24 to 48 hours, I still believe that can be effected. But I make this point advisedly, in the  end, it is not a matter for the Sri Lankans on board to choose where they make their

application for refugee status.

They were rescued from the high seas because Australia wanted to discharge in unique or  different circumstances its humanitarian and search and rescue at sea obligations. We did  that. There were always going to be humanitarian, refugee, or immigration implications.  Those implications will be resolved in Indonesia on Indonesian soil, because that's the  agreement we have with the Indonesian Government.

Alexandra Kirk: And if the asylum seekers refuse to get off the Oceanic Viking and onboard  an Indonesian patrol boat, is there any chance they will be brought back to Australia to  Christmas Island?

STEPHEN SMITH: No. Because if you look at the relevant comments of Indonesian  officials, the most relevant comment of Indonesian officials today is the comment from the  spokesperson for the Ministry for Foreign Affairs. He says, these are unique and special  circumstances, but the President's decision will be effected. That may take some time, but  that is what will occur.

Alexandra Kirk: Stephen Smith, thank you

STEPHEN SMITH: Thanks Alex.

Page 4 of 5 Interview with ABC Radio AM Program

[ENDS]

Media Inquiries: Foreign Minister's office (02) 6277 7500

Page 5 of 5 Interview with ABC Radio AM Program

