The Hon Julia Gillard MP

Minister for Education. Minister for Employment and Workplace Relations  Minister for Social Inclusion  Deputy Prime Minister

19 April, 2009

Transcript

Television Interview - Today on Sunday, 840AM Sunday

E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW TODAY ON SUNDAY  8.40AM SUNDAY   19 APRIL 2009

ISSUES: Asylum seekers, border protection Building Education Revolution, stimulus  package, maternity leave

LAURIE OAKES: Good morning Deputy Prime Minister, welcome to the program.

JULIA GILLARD: Good morning Laurie.

LAURIE OAKES: What’s the last information the government has on this new asylum  seeker boat the Navy’s tracking?

JULIA GILLARD: Laurie I am afraid I am going to disappoint you. We don’t comment on  operational matters so I won’t be commenting on that.

LAURIE OAKES: Well in the past of course Ministers have commented on that kind of  thing. Why the sudden sensitivity about these boats?

JULIA GILLARD: Laurie what we’re trying to do is to make sure that all information that  gets to Australians is accurate information. You would recall Laurie, as would many  Australians, that there was a time when the Howard Government would run out with half-baked reports and make allegations that subsequently turned out to be untrue. I think that was  a very bruising time in Australian politics. What we’re trying to do is give information to  people when it’s been clearly confirmed and obviously we give information to people in  circumstances where it won’t prejudice any operational matter.

LAURIE OAKES: Look I understand what you’re saying and in fact on Thursday and  Friday I defended the government for not saying what the cause of the explosion was on  Ashmore Reef but this is four days on. After four days you should know; so what did cause  the explosion on Ashmore Reef?

JULIA GILLARD: Laurie there is an ongoing police investigation. We have 18 Australian  Federal Police officers in Darwin working with the Northern Territory Police. Obviously  when their conclusions are available they will be made public but I am not going to prejudge  what a police investigation is going to conclude. I am not…

LAURIE OAKES: I am not asking you about the police investigation. Obviously the  Defence Department has made its own inquiries, what have they found?

JULIA GILLARD: The police investigation is the investigation that’s going to get to the  bottom of this matter it’s the police that’s interviewing the eye-witnesses. The defence  personnel they will interview the asylum seekers involved. It’s the police that have the  forensic and other capabilities you would need to establish all the facts of this matter. So  we’ll let the police do their work and when that work is concluded obviously will be made  public.

LAURIE OAKES: Are you saying the Navy, Border Protection Command, that the Defence  Force haven’t done their own investigation?

JULIA GILLARD: I’m saying there is a police investigation and that is…

LAURIE OAKES: That’s not what I am asking you about.

JULIA GILLARD: Well that is the way that we are getting to the bottom of this matter;  having the police look at all of the circumstances. Of course the police are interviewing and  talking to the navy personnel who were on the scene.

LAURIE OAKES: Now this is really sounding like an excuse and a suppression of  information now.

JULIA GILLARD: I would be surprised that you would say that Laurie, because we want to  make sure all information is accurate information. I understand people are thirsty for  information and they want it as soon as it’s available but we can’t give you the conclusions of  a police investigation until the police have done their work. The police investigating it are the  people who are going to be able to establish the facts of the matter. So we need to leave it in  their hands until that investigation is concluded.

LAURIE OAKES: Ms Gillard, it’s true that the Howard Government rushed out on the basis  of rumours on the children overboard affair and mislead the Australian public, but it is also  known that the Navy knew the truth of that matter within hours and the problem was that the  government and others suppressed that information. Now three days on the Navy obviously  knows the truth and your suppressing information.

JULIA GILLARD: Laurie I don’t agree with the premise of your question. There’s a  mechanism here to get to the truth of the matter. The mechanism involves highly expert  Australian Federal Police working with Northern Territory Police and interviewing people  who were on the scene as well as doing the relevant forensic and other tests. Now Laurie, I’m  not a police expert, I’ve watched some crime shows on TV but I am not going to hold myself  out as knowing how these things are done in intimate detail. The professionals here are the  police and they are doing their work.

LAURIE OAKES: So when are we going to know, will we have to wait until someone is  charged or the Coronial Inquiry comes down with a verdict?

JULIA GILLARD: The investigation is in train. We will get information to people from that  investigation as soon as possible but we want the police to have the opportunity to do their  work and that is what is happening now.

LAURIE OAKES: Minister the Navy is about to intercept another boatload of asylum  seekers. Are you saying they will do that without knowing what caused the explosion on  Ashmore Reef? And if that’s the case isn’t it totally irresponsible if they want to avoid a  repetition?

JULIA GILLARD: There are standing protocols and procedures if a vessel at sea needs to  be boarded for any purpose. Our navy is very expert, they’re aware of risks, they’re aware of  all sorts of risks because…

LAURIE OAKES: But things go wrong as happened on Ashmore Reef they need to know  what went wrong at Ashmore Reef do they don’t?

JULIA GILLARD: The Navy obviously Laurie trains for all sorts of circumstances and  contingencies. Its people who board boats in all sorts of difficult circumstances obviously  they deal with asylum seeker vessels, they also deal with illegal fishing and they deal with  other problems in our waters. They are well trained; they are trained against all emerging  contingencies and in terms of boarding any vessel should that be necessary they will rely on  that training.

LAURIE OAKES: Ms Gillard, I’ve seen some Ministers beat around the bush on occasions  but this is pretty good now we know from the commander on one of the patrol boats that  there was a high threat warning just before the explosion on Ashmore Reef. What did that  warning say; what were they warning about?

JULIA GILLARD: Laurie these are the things that are being dealt with in the course of the  investigation and I know that you’re inviting me to speculate and that’s precisely what I’m  not going to do.

LAURIE OAKES: I am doing more than that I am suggesting the government is suppressing  information that it has and I think after three days there is no excuse for that, if the Defence  Department doesn’t know the truth after three days- that’s a scandal.

JULIA GILLARD: Laurie once again I don’t accept the premise of your question. We are  not suppressing information, we are allowing…

LAURIE OAKES: (Inaudible)

JULIA GILLARD: Well Laurie it’s easy to make chiding interjections like that but the truth  of it is we have a process here that is going to get to the bottom of all of this. And we know  from Australian politics and Australian history what can happen if a government runs out on  the basis of half-baked information and makes a series of statements, that are then accepted  by the public in good faith as fact, only to be shown months later to be untrue. Now we are  not going to get ourselves into that circumstance because the Australian people deserve  better.

The information they get should be accurate, it should be checked, it should be conclusive  and that’s the process we’re going through; I’d actually put to you Laurie that that is the  complete reverse of suppressing information. That’s making sure that when information ends  up in the hands of Australians it is defiantly information they can rely on rather than being in  the position that the Howard government was where I would suggest after children overboard  anything they said on the question of asylum seekers was doubted as very likely to be  political spin and not the truth.

LAURIE OAKES: Ms Gillard I would suggest to you that back in 2001 if you had known  the Navy had known the truth after a couple of hours you would have demanded that they  release that information but I won’t argue with you anymore. Can I ask you this, did the  government make a mistake in abolishing Temporary Protection Visas?

JULIA GILLARD: No Laurie the government implemented a policy that we took to the  election. We said at the election we would be tough on border protection and we are being  tough on border protection; indeed there are more resources going into border protection now  than there have been at anytime in Australia’s history. So our focus on border protection is  very very clear.

We also said to the Australian people that we believed in terms of dealing with asylum  seekers that it was appropriate to have mandatory detention, that it was appropriate to use the  facility of Christmas Island, it was appropriate to keep that island excised but we were going  to end the Pacific Solution which had cost so much money for so little result.

We were going to have quicker processing of asylum seeker claims and we were going to  bring a risk assessment approach so we didn’t have the spector of small children behind razor  wire which was a spector in this country under the Howard government. They’re the changes  we’ve made, we think they are the right changes, the strike the right balance between being  tough on border protection but with dealing with people in a decent way and quickly  processing their claims. So if they are genuine refugees we can deal with that, if they aren’t,  then they can be returned to their country of origin.

LAURIE OAKES: There is a report in some newspapers today that the government is about  to announce substantial increase in funding for Indonesia to help deal with a surge of asylum  seekers. Is that so?

JULIA GILLARD: We’ve already increased funding to assist Indonesia to deal with these  matters. We’ve made available more than $40 million to assist with the development of  further capacity in Indonesia to deal on with asylum seekers and these kinds of issues. So  those resources are already there Laurie and already budgeted for. Of course the Federal  government; our National Security Committee and our Cabinet generally will consider  further options as necessary but substantial investment has already been made.

LAURIE OAKES: But no (inaudible) announcement of a new amount?

JULIA GILLARD: We keep these things under close watch and close review but the new  money is there available to assist with the further development of capacity in Indonesia to  deal with these people smuggling and asylum seeking issues.

LAURIE OAKES: There’s a story in newspapers today as well about the way your money  for schools is being handled under the massive stimulus package. It suggested that primary  school principals in New South Wales are being quoted $2 million for pre-fabricated  buildings supplied through the New South Wales Education Department when in fact those  buildings could be constructed locally for half of the price. Is that true? Will you investigate  it?

JULIA GILLARD: Laurie we’re engaged in the biggest school modernisation program in  this nation’s history. It is being done quickly because we want it to stimulate the economy  and support local jobs. We’re working closely with all State and Territory governments and  the Catholic and Independent school systems. In New South Wales tenderers who are

involved in this program do have to have local employment plans and schools at their option  can choose to organise the building project themselves. If there are schools with individual  complaints or concerns, then of course our door is always open and we will work with those  schools to work through any problems that they may be experiencing. But the design of the  system and the scheme, the delivery of this money is fast because we want it to matter for  local jobs and economy stimulus and the tenderers who are delivering the money do need to  be there with local employment plans.

LAURIE OAKES: Can I ask you about the forthcoming Budget; Wayne Swan, Lindsay  Tanner and others are talking about it being a tough Budget, a horrid Budget, a shocker and  this is at a time when the government is sending out $900 cheques to all and sundry. How do  you explain that contradiction to the punters?

JULIA GILLARD: Laurie there are two different things here and we’ve got to make sure  that we end up comparing apples to apples not apples to pears. We are engaged in economic  stimulus to support the economy now in these difficult days as we deal with the consequences  of the global recession. That economy stimulus is there to support jobs as we deal with that  global recession. It’s coming in waves. There’s been money into people’s pockets, your right,  the $900 cheques. We’ve got the biggest school modernisation program; small scale capital.  The government has said that there will be some bigger capital projects to follow so that there  are waves of investments supporting local jobs. When we are dealing with the underlying  Budget we are not dealing with limited stimulus, we are dealing with the things, the factors  that will be in the government’s accounts this year, next year, five years time, ten years time,  15 years time and we’ve got to make sure they’re affordable.

LAURIE OAKES: Final question, do you think you’ll get away with it when you say sorry  we can’t afford to keep our promise on paid maternity leave when you’re splashing cash  around everywhere?

JULIA GILLARD: There is an assumption at the heart of that Laurie to which I am going to  say and this won’t surprise you, that we’ll deal with Budget matters on Budget night, but I  think Australians will understand that there is a need to urgently support our economy now  and we’ve done that through decisive action but when you are dealing with the long term  base of the Budget, the things that will be in the Budget in five, ten and 15 years time of  course you have to take a prudent approach and the government will.

LAURIE OAKES: Ms Gillard we thank you

JULIA GILLARD: Thank you.

ENDS

Media Contact:

media@deewr.gov.au

Non-media queries: 1300 363 079



