

1



MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS  STEPHEN SMITH, MP



TRANSCRIPTION: PROOF COPY E & OE

DATE:    14 April 2009

TITLE:   INTERVIEW WITH STEPHEN SMITH, FEDERAL MINISTER FOR  FOREIGN AFFAIRS, ABOUT PROTESTS IN BANGKOK AND  SITUATION IN FIJI.



FRAN  KELLY:   If  you're  planning  a  trip  to  Bangkok,  hold  your  horses.  The  Federal   Government is warning Australians to reconsider any travel to Thailand; and for those already  in the capital, to stay indoors.

Foreign Minister Stephen Smith joins us now from Perth.

Minister, thanks very much for your time.

STEPHEN SMITH:  Yeah, good morning Fran.

FRAN  KELLY:   Now,  have  you  been  briefed  on  the  latest  in  Bangkok?  What  are  you   hearing?

STEPHEN SMITH:  Well I spoke to our Ambassador in Bangkok late last night, of course  it's early in the morning in Bangkok now, and the report overnight is that circumstances hadn't  changed  significantly  from  what  they  were  yesterday  afternoon,  which  was  potentially  a   continuing very volatile situation.

And so we continue to urge Australians, if they're not in Bangkok, to consider or reconsider  their  need  to  travel  to  Bangkok.  If  Australians  are  in  Bangkok,  then  they  should  minimise   their  travel  around  Bangkok.   Effectively  as  I've  been  putting  it,  anecdotally  staying  within   house and home.  But certainly avoiding demonstrations, certainly avoiding locations where  the military have positioned themselves and certainly avoiding large gatherings, as the state of  emergency effectively outlaws gatherings of more than five people.

FRAN KELLY:  How worried is the ambassador that this could turn very very ugly? I mean,  there's about 55,000 Australians there - either living there or holidaying there. Are you at the  point where you are talking about an evacuation plan?

STEPHEN SMITH:  No. Currently the volatility or the points of conflict are in quite discreet  areas in Bangkok itself.



2

And  you're  quite  right,  we  have  anywhere  between  20  to  30,000  Australians  who  will  be   living or working in Bangkok, in Thailand sorry, and that's additional, up on anywhere up to  20 to 25,000 tourists.

So we're talking about large number of Australians. Which is why, as occurred at the end of  last  year,  we  have  been  monitoring  this  situation  and  paying  very  careful  attention  to  this   situation and looking out for the welfare of Australians.

Again  to  date,  we've  got  no  evidence  that  any  Australian  has  been  caught  up  with  it,  and   certainly foreigners aren't, on the evidence we have, being targeted.

Those  people  who  do  want  to  leave  Bangkok,  there's  no  indication  at  this  stage  that  there's   been any disruption to the airport or any difficulty in terms of scheduled flights leaving.

But  we  are  saying  to  people  who  are  thinking  of  leaving  Bangkok,  to  be  careful  how  they   travel to the airport and to give themselves plenty of time and to check with their travel agents  and with the airport before they leave their hotel.

FRAN KELLY:  Minister, is there a foreign policy issue here? I mean, what is the danger to  Australia and the region of an unstable Thailand

STEPHEN SMITH:  Well it doesn't help ASEAN.  It doesn't help South East Asia. It doesn't  help Australia and it doesn't help our region if there is instability and volatility in Thailand.

We've  of  course  welcomed  very  much  the  fact  that  over  the  last  few  years  Thailand  has   returned  to  democracy.  And  we  certainly  very  strongly  want  to  see  this  particular  difficulty   resolved in a peaceful and lawful way, consistent with Thailand's constitution.

The  last  thing  we  want  to  see  is  Thailand  again  revert  to  military  rule  or  move  away  from   democracy. But, it certainly doesn't help Thailand and it doesn't help the region.

And Thailand for example not being in a position to successfully hold an East Asia Summit  Leaders meeting is a big blow to Thailand, its standing and its reputation. But also it'll have  adverse consequences in terms of tourism, but also in terms of trade and investment.

FRAN  KELLY:   Closer  to  home  -  in  Fiji  Minister  you've  called  the  country  a  military   dictatorship.  Now,  I  recall  you  sat  down  with  the  Commodore  last  year;  he  promised   elections. Were you conned?

STEPHEN SMITH:  I've been to Fiji twice and seen Commodore Bainimarama as part of the  Pacific Island Forum Ministerial Contact Group. I think you'll find that when you look at what  the Ministerial Action Group said, we said that there was nothing standing in the way of an  election in Fiji provided the political will was there. I don't think we ever asserted, in public,  that we were convinced the political will was there.



3

We always wanted Commodore Bainimarama to hold himself to the faithful undertaking he  gave to the Pacific Island Forum Leaders that he'd have an election by the end of March this  year. Obviously, that hasn't been held.

Both  the  Pacific  Island  Leaders,  meeting  in  New  Guinea  in  January  this  year,  and  the   Commonwealth  have  passed  resolutions  in  the  course  of  this  year  urging  a  process  to   democracy on Fiji. And it's quite clear that the events of the last couple of days have seen the  regime take Fiji, you know, a million miles away from that.

FRAN KELLY: Is there anything you can do about it? I mean, Australia's already placed a  range of sanctions on Fiji, there are travel sanctions, restrictions on development assistance,  restriction on Australia's contact with the Fiji military.

STEPHEN SMITH:  Well, we are…

FRAN KELLY:  Will we go further?

STEPHEN  SMITH:   We've  been  at  the  forefront  of  those,  as  has  New  Zealand.  Other   countries haven't gone down that road. We're certainly talking to our international community  partners,  members  of  the  Pacific  Island  Forum,  members  of  the  Commonwealth  and  the   United  Nations  itself,  to  see  what  more  pressure  we  can  bring  to  bear  on  Commodore   Bainimarama.  We  are  at  the  forefront  of  sanctions,  so  we're  not  necessarily  contemplating   additional sanctions of our own.

There's also this fundamental point, which is one of the things that we've always wanted to do  is to try and get the regime to go back to democracy. We don't want to do things which have  an  adverse  impact  on  the  people  of  Fiji  themselves.  And  one  thing  we  have  seen  since  Fiji   moved  away  from  democracy  under  Commodore  Bainimarama  has  been  a  very  serious   deleterious impact on Fiji's economic and social circumstances.

And what's occurred in the last couple of days, the abrogation of the Constitution, the turning  over  of  the  judiciary,  the  intimidation  of  media,  this  just  takes  Fiji  further  away  from  the   international  community  and  will  have  further  adverse  effects  so  far  as  Fiji's  economic  and   social circumstances are concerned.

FRAN  KELLY:   Should  Fiji  be  suspended  from  the  Pacific  Islands  Forum  and  the   Commonwealth?

STEPHEN SMITH:  Well, the resolutions of the Pacific Island Forum Leaders Meeting in  Papua  New  Guinea,  in  Port  Moresby  earlier  this  year  and  the  resolution  of  the   Commonwealth  Ministerial  Action  Group,  which  met  in  London  in  February/March  of  this

year,  both  have  the  effect  that  unless  Fiji  puts  itself  on  a  process  back  to  democracy  on  a   pretty tight timetable in the first half of this year that it runs the risk of being suspended from  both.

FRAN KELLY:  Well, that certainly hasn't happened.



4

STEPHEN  SMITH:   Exactly.  And  I  think  that  unless  there  is  some  dramatic  turnaround,   which  we  haven't  seen,  from  Commodore  Bainimarama,  in  my  view  it  is  almost  inevitable   that  Fiji  will  be  suspended  from  the  forums  of  both  the  Pacific  Island  Forum  and  the   Commonwealth itself.

FRAN KELLY:  And what about, just briefly on Fiji, it's always been a popular holiday spot  for Australians. Should sanctions go as far as telling Australians not to travel to Fiji?

STEPHEN  SMITH:   Currently  our  travel  advice  is  that  people  should  exercise  caution,   particularly  in  Suva.  But  it's  not  at  a  level  which  is  for  people  to  reconsider  their  need  to   travel. And one of the reasons that we have in mind for that is that whilst people do need to  exercise  a  high  degree  of  caution,  again  we  don't  want  to  do  things  which  have  an  adverse   impact on the people of Fiji themselves.

Fiji should be a premier economy in our region. It's not. And one of its strengths, of course, is  as a tourist destination. We're, of course, monitoring very carefully developments and people  do need to be wary of the political events, and they can be volatile and turn at short notice.

But  people  should  exercise  a  high  degree  of  caution  if  they're  contemplating  travel  in  or   around Fiji.

FRAN KELLY:   Okay.  [Time  check] Our  guest  this  morning  is  Foreign  Minister,  Stephen   Smith.

Minister, you're heading to Bali later today to co-chair a meeting on people smuggling. Now,  in  this  country,  12  boats  have  arrived  since  the  Rudd  Government  took  office,  379  asylum   seekers aboard. Do we have a renewed problem here?

STEPHEN SMITH:  Well, we certainly have a very strong renewed difficulties so far as the  so called push factors are concerned. We know that displaced people are pushed, rather than  being  attracted  to  particular  locations.  There  are  a  number  of  new  emerging  difficulties  and   Sri Lanka, for example, is one. And also, we have discovered that the people smugglers, the

criminals themselves, have become much more sophisticated and better at people smuggling.

So,  Senator  Evans,  the  Minister  for  Immigration,  Bob  Debus,  the  Home  Affairs  Minister   responsible for the Australian Federal Police, and I are leaving Australia today to go to Bali to  attend  the  third  Ministerial  Conference  on  the  so  called  Bali  Process,  which  is  the  regional   process  aimed  at  people  smuggling  and  people  trafficking.  It's  chaired  by  Australia  and   Indonesia.

One of the very important things we have to do in this area is to get the regional cooperation,  not just nation to nation, government to government, but also agency to agency, whether it's  police or customs or intelligence.

FRAN  KELLY:   An  important  part  here  is  intelligence.  Do  you  have  any  intelligence  to   suggest that this renewed arrival of these boats is linked to the Rudd Government softening  the laws on detention?



5

STEPHEN  SMITH:   I  never  talk  about  intelligence  publicly  of  whatever  description.  But   what I can say to you is that there are a number of dangers, which is why we are very focused  on  this.  One  of  the  dangers  is  the  additional  push  factors.  Another  danger  is  increasing   sophistication of the efforts at people smuggling.

And it's one of the reasons that our approach is not just to ensure we don't have unauthorised  boat arrivals come to our mainland, but that we also work very closely with our neighbours.  In particular, Indonesia, but also  include  Malaysia  and  Sri  Lanka and other countries where

there are difficulties in that respect. I particularly mention Sri Lanka.

FRAN  KELLY:   And,  Minister,  just  briefly,  we've  only  got  30  seconds  or  so  before  the   news.  But  are  you  concerned,  for  instance,  that  the  surveillance  here  isn't  good  enough?  I   mean,  one  boat  arrived  last  week,  right  up  to  the  docks  at  Christmas  Island  without  being   detected.

STEPHEN  SMITH:   And  the  effect  was  exactly  the  same.  If  it  had  been  intercepted  in   international waters it would have been taken to Christmas Island. Our focus is ensuring that  unauthorised  arrivals  don't  touch  the  Australian  mainland.  When  they're  intercepted  they're   taken  to  Christmas  Island  and  the  immigration  consequences  are  precisely  the  same  as   occurred last week.

FRAN KELLY:  All right. Stephen Smith, thank you very much for joining us.

STEPHEN SMITH:  Thanks, Fran. Thanks very much.

FRAN KELLY:  Foreign Minister Stephen Smith joining us from his home in Perth.

And  he's  off  to  Bali  later  today  for  that  people  smuggling  -  it's  called  the  Bali  Process,  the   summit, and it's a regional conference on people smuggling.

[ENDS]

