

Senator Chris Evans  Minister for Immigration and Citizenship



Government committed to mandatory detention on Christmas  Island

The Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Senator Chris Evans, today welcomed  the Australian Human Rights Commission report: Immigration detention and offshore  processing on Christmas Island.

The report makes a number of recommendations in relation to Government policy.  The Government is committed to maintaining these policies as essential components  of strong border control and important elements in ensuring the integrity of  Australia's immigration program.

The Labor Party went to the last election with a commitment to maintain a system of  mandatory detention and offshore processing on Christmas Island for all irregular  maritime arrivals and these commitments are being met.

The Government does not intend to repeal or amend the provisions of the Migration  Act relating to excised offshore places or offshore entry persons.

All irregular maritime arrivals are subject to mandatory detention at Christmas Island  while health, identity and security checks are undertaken and claims for asylum are  assessed.

The Christmas Island detention centre was built as a high security facility by the  previous Government and is currently used to detain single men while they undergo  health, security and identity checks. It is an integral part of Australia's border  protection regime as the main, secure immigration detention facility available to  house irregular maritime arrivals.

It is Rudd Government policy that no child be held in an immigration detention centre  and there are no children detained in the Christmas Island Immigration Detention  Centre or any other detention centre. Children, and where possible their families, are  housed in community accommodation. The construction camp, where some children  are housed on Christmas Island, is not an immigration detention centre. It was  originally established for construction workers on the island and includes a range of  recreational facilities and ensuite rooms.

Under the Rudd Government, asylum seekers on Christmas Island receive legal  advice and assistance, access to independent review of unfavourable decisions, and  external scrutiny by the Immigration Ombudsman. While there is no statutory

obligation to process asylum claims on Christmas Island within a particular  timeframe, the vast majority of claims are being dealt with in about 100 days.

It is only right that we should treat people who seek our protection humanely and it is  right that we meet our international obligations under the UN Refugee Convention.  People found to be refugees will be granted Australia's protection. If they are found  not to be owed Australia's protection, they will be removed.



See:  Index of Media Releases

URL: http://www.minister.immi.gov.au /media/media-releases/2009/ce09098.htm   Last update: 23 October 2009 at 15:39 AEST



