

1



MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS  STEPHEN SMITH, MP



TRANSCRIPTION: PROOF COPY E & OE

DATE:   19 February 2009

TITLE:  Joint Media Conference with Stephen Smith, Minister for Foreign  Affairs, and Hassan Wirajuda, Foreign Minister of Indonesia, Sydney

STEPHEN SMITH: Can I officially welcome Hassan Wirajuda, Foreign Minister of  Indonesia, to Australia. Hassan is here for the Australia-Indonesia Conference which  commences tonight.

But in the meantime he and I have just had a formal bilateral meeting. And we jogged  our memories and reminded ourselves that we've now had formal bilateral meetings in Bali, in  Perth, in Singapore, in Canberra, in New York, in Lima, in South Sulawesi and now Sydney.  And that reflects, I think, the high degree and high level of ministerial contact between our  two governments.

Indeed, since the current Australian Government came to office I think we've now had  some 34 two-way ministerial bilateral meetings over the last 13 or 14 month period.

Can I start, Hassan, by warmly welcoming and thanking you, for the condolences that  you expressed personally to the Government and the people of Australia, to the victims of the  bushfires and their families, which you and the President have done privately.

Can I publicly thank you for the assistance which Indonesia has rendered, both  assistance on victim identification, but also the generous donation of US$1 million to help in  the rebuilding, or reconstruction, of any schools adversely affected by the bushfires.

The contribution, so far as the schools were concerned, is of course particularly  meaningful to us, given one of the great things we do by way of partnership is the school  building program that we do together in Indonesia.

The bilateral relationship between Australian and Indonesia, we believe is at an all-time high. This has not always been the case, but we believe many years of effort, the signing  in Perth of the Lombok Treaty; and the capacity for both governments and nations to  understand that there can be issues about which we might have different views, but which  don't shake the fundamentals of the relationship.



2

So, we very strongly believe that the government to government relationship, the  nation-state to nation-state relationship, is at an all-time high. The only danger in our view is  complacency or surprise; and we certainly don't want to be complacent.

And that's one of the reasons that we're holding the Australia-Indonesia Conference  where we draw together very many senior people from academia, from business, from civil  society to discuss the people to people exchanges and to enhance the people to people contact

so far as the relationship is concerned.

In many relationships between nation-states you find that the people to people contact  gets ahead of the government to government contact. It's not the case in this relationship. We  think that there's a lot more that we can do in the people to people contact to enhance our  relationship and that's the importance of the conference.

In terms of the bilateral meeting, we've discussed a range of issues.

Foreign Minister Wirajuda briefed me on the recent visit to Indonesia by Secretary of  State Clinton. We spoke about the forthcoming G20 meeting in London and the global  financial crisis.

We also spoke about the Bali Process, which is of course the process that we have in  place in our region to discuss, regionally, people smuggling and people trafficking. And we  discussed and welcomed the fact that the question of the Rohingyas will form part of the

discussion at the forthcoming Ministerial meeting of the Bali Process.

There is a senior officials meeting of the Bali process to be conducted in Brisbane later  this month and we're expecting that the Ministerial meeting will be held in Bali itself in the  course of March, or in the course of April.

And we welcome very much that the Bali Process will deal with the Rohingyas issue.

Other issues we touched upon included Myanmar, and that was also the subject of  conversations between Foreign Minister Wirajuda and Secretary of State Clinton.

I'll invite Hassan to make some opening remarks and we'll then take questions. We  have both Australian media and Indonesian media present, so we'll go by way of alternative  questions. So, when Foreign Minister Wirajuda has completed his remarks I'll invite a  question from the Indonesian side, and then from the Australian side.

We have slight time constraints, we have to go to lunch, but we'll do our best to  answer your questions. If any of the Australian media want to raise issues that don't relate to  the bilateral relationship, if you could leave those to the end.

So Hassan, again, welcome very much. Always a pleasure to see you here and to work  closely with you, and I invite you to make some opening remarks.

HASSAN WIRAJUDA: Thank you very much, Stephen.



3

So, also I like to thank you for the generous welcome that you have extended to me  and my delegations.

We have met five times in the past one year, but I assure you, Stephen, that looking  forward to meeting more often. I always enjoy my meeting with you, which I found always  very productive.

I should like to reiterate our sympathy and condolence to the families and friends of  the victim of the wildfires in south-western Victorian state. As friends and neighbours, we try  to contribute by sending a team of the disaster victim identifications. They have been in  Australia since last Saturday.

We try to contribute by providing assistance of US$1 million, a small amount, but this  is truly reflect our sense of friendships because we the Indonesian people remember very well  that Australia help us in times of difficulties such as the - on the aftermath of the earthquake  and tsunami occurred in Aceh and off Sumatra, likewise, when the disaster, earthquake

disaster that struck central Java and Jokjokarta in 2006.

We appreciate greatly the Australian initiative to call the conference, namely  Australia-Indonesia Bilateral Conference, which will be held tomorrow.

I think the conference is timely, as the conference would not only be attended by  around 100 leaders of civil society from both Australia and Indonesia, from Indonesia alone  70 leaders of civil society, or various backgrounds, including business, media, universities,  think tanks and community organisations.

We have enjoyed the excellent relations bilaterally and I share your view, Stephen,  that Indonesia-Australia's relations have never been as excellent as they are now. This is a  result of the hard work of our two governments.

But the effort to enhance the bilateral relations between our two countries and peoples  are not the business of the two governments alone, and it's too big to deal with this, manage  and handle by our two governments. We need the involvement of our people.

I'm pleased with the greater people to people contacts, and the contributions of people  of Australia and Indonesia. Our dream is to make Indonesia and Australia not just in terms of  geography, we are as neighbour, but also we are as friends and partners.

I look forward, Stephen, to join you tomorrow participating at the Australia-Indonesia  bilateral Conference.

You have mentioned about our discussions on the Bali Process, the initiative that we  jointly undertook in 2002, in dealing with then the flow of illegal migrants from Iraq, Iran and  Afghanistan heading for Australia. Indonesia feel the problems as not the problem - bilateral  problem between Australia and Indonesia but rather is a problem - as an international

problem; the fact that solutions of this problem must involve countries of origin, countries of  transit and countries of destinations. That's why the Bali Process in 2002 and in 2003.



4

I think the Bali Process had effectively stopped the flow of illegal migrants coming to  our regions, but also helped to settle the illegal migrants mainly - primarily by sending them  back to the countries of origin.

Indonesia early this month experienced another new problem of flows of illegal  migrants, mostly economic migrants from - I mean, of Rohingyas people. They landed in -  first in Thailand, coastal areas of Thailand and they were pushed back to the sea by the Thai  authorities, and they landed in the coastal areas of Aceh, both in the northern part and eastern  part of the province of Aceh.

The number is around 400. We gave them humanitarian assistance by providing  shelter, food and medical treatment. Fifty-one of them had to be hospitalised because of their  bad conditions. Thailand has proposed to organise a meeting of neighbouring countries;

Thailand, Myanmar, Bangladesh and Indonesia.

But to us, as we had the existing mechanism, the Bali Process, in which Thailand is - I  mean, Thailand chairs one of the two working groups, we were able to convince Thailand that  we're better to reconvene the Bali Process at the minister level; something that we have  discussed, Stephen and I have discussed last year, on the need to revive - I mean, or convene  the Bali Process at the minister level early this year in view of the growth of illegal migrants  passing in Indonesia water heading for Australia.

I should have mentioned that at the same time of the arrival of these boat people from  Rohingyas, our police arrested some 40 illegal migrants, Afghan illegal migrants in the  province of south-eastern Sulawesi. Four Indonesians were also arrested in these smuggling  people.

So, we see the urgency of convening the Bali ministerial meeting. We are trying to  explore - we are now exploring the agreeable date for that meeting, most probably the  meeting would be in April this year.

In our bilateral meeting just completed, we discussed regional and global issues of  concern to Australia and Indonesia: ASEAN, including Myanmar, but also the global  financial crisis, in particular our preparations for the second G20 Summit to be held in  London in early April.

So, once again, Stephen, I thank very much for your warm welcome and I'm looking  forward to a productive conference tomorrow.

STEPHEN SMITH: Well, thanks very much Hassan. Now, I'll go to the Indonesian side  first. This one here.

QUESTION: Thank you Minister. I'm [indistinct]. Minister, one of the aims of the  conference, that is to promote - that is to make the people and public perception in both  countries better, does Australian Government plan to follow the steps of Canadian and  American governments that has already lifted the travel advisory to Indonesia, so that  Indonesia will look as a normal country in Australia?



5

STEPHEN SMITH: Thank you. The travel advisory that we have for Indonesia and we have  for other countries, we regularly review, and we do that on the basis of up-to-date expert  advice so far as threatened security assessments are concerned. And that review, as I say,  occurs regularly.

But the purpose of Australian Government travel advisory is to draw to the attention  of Australian citizens matters which they take into account in determining whether or not they  travel. And so it's there for Australians to bear in mind.

I'm happy to stand corrected on the record but I think that, I’m happy to stand  corrected on the statistics, but I think that in the year just gone, 2008, we saw a record number  of Australians visit Indonesia.

So the travel advisory is there. We assess it regularly on the basis of expert advice.  And Australians bear it in mind when they determine their travel.

One of the things we'd like to see coming out of our conference, are suggestions as to  the way in which both the Australian public and the Indonesian public can appreciate much  more both Australian characteristics, values and virtues, and Indonesian characteristics, values  and virtues. And that obviously entails travelling between the two countries.

And, as I say, I think you'll find that 2008 saw a record number of Australians travel to  Indonesia.

One from the Australian side?

QUESTION: This is a question from - for Minister Wirajuda. You just met Secretary of  State Hillary Clinton in Indonesia, and she remarked that she saw your country - she saw  Indonesia as an example of how Islam and democracy can be side by side.

Are you happy with those comments and what do you think about what she said?

HASSAN WIRAJUDA: Of course we're happy with that comment which actually  reflects on the real situation in Indonesia. In the past 10 years we have proven that Islam,  democracy and modernity can go hand in hand.

And the challenge for us is how to consolidate that the achievement. And it is in this  context that during our discussions yesterday, the US see the importance of developing  stronger cooperation between the United States and Indonesia.

We agreed on promoting a comprehensive partnerships[sic] meaning an agreement to  expand and deepens all aspects of our bilateral relations. But please keep in mind that  Indonesia and Australia have developed the bilateral - comprehensive partnerships since April  2005.

STEPHEN SMITH: Can I say how much we welcome the fact that the Secretary of State's  visit is to Asia, to North Asia, Japan, South Korea, and China. But also we welcome, very  much, her visit to Indonesia. Australia's view is that the active and ongoing involvement of



6

the United States in the Asia-Pacific region is very important and we think that the visit,  particularly the visit to Indonesia, sends a very important and welcome signal and we  welcome that very much.

Foreign Minister Wirajuda referred to Indonesia as a democracy, and I think that's one  of the things which is under appreciated; that in the last 10 years or so, we've seen Indonesia  turn itself into a robust and thriving democracy, the largest Muslim populated democracy in  the world.

I've just come from the second largest, Pakistan, which as we know is currently having  its difficulties. But the importance of Indonesia as a robust, thriving democracy in our region  and in the world can not, in my view, be underestimated. And Australia welcomes, very  much, the Secretary of State's visit to Indonesia.

Now, one on the Indonesian side?

QUESTION:  [Inaudible  question]

STEPHEN SMITH: Well, you're quite right. We believe that people to people relations is  very important and that's one of the reasons we've decided to have such a high profile  conference which focuses on the bilateral relationship, but more in the non-government  context, than in the government context.

One of the areas where I think it's true to say Hassan and I both believe very strongly  we can enhance the relationship, is through education. And Australia sponsors a program  where we are currently building or repairing 2000 high schools in Indonesia. And that's a very  important program because that means many young Indonesians grow up understanding that  Australia has played some role in their education.

At the same time we'd like to see more Australians taking part in educational activities  in Indonesia itself and also studying Indonesia, not just Bahasa Indonesia as a language, but  studying Indonesia; its culture, its history, its relationship. One of the programs the Australian  Government has is a $60 million to encourage the studying in our schools and universities of  languages from our region, including Indonesian.

So I think education, further enhancing our education exchanges, making sure that in  Australia we have students who are studying Indonesia as a language, but also studying  Indonesia as a nation; a country, its culture and its people. And so we, in particular, encourage  those educational academic exchanges.

This one over here.

QUESTION: Karen Snowden from Radio Australia. Welcome Mr Wirajuda.

HASSAN WIRAJUDA: Thank you.

QUESTION: It's good to see you here. A question for you and a question for Mr Smith, if I  may?



7

One question is about the travel advisories, to Mr Wirajuda. Are you asking that  Australia remove the travel advisories during this visit [indistinct] directly. And are you  unhappy with Mr Smith's response that they're not going to do so?

And Mr Smith. The language here is very encouraging. You talk about democracy and  openness and enhancing people links between the two countries, which has been a bit of a  mantra between the two governments for some time, over several years now. But at the same  time, this conference, it seems to me is not open to the public, the general public. Some of it  isn't open to the media. And so I just wonder about enhancing those people to people links  and whether this is the way to do it effectively.

And why - there seems to be a certain sense of timidity about having an open  conference. If you could comment on that?

STEPHEN SMITH: Hassan.

HASSAN WIRAJUDA: We, at the Government level, discussed the issue of travel  advisory from time-to-time. Of course, on our side we expect that Australia should leave the  travel advice, because that - not only on the grounds in the past three years we did not

experience any terrorist bombing in Indonesia, but also in our collective efforts to combat  terrorisms in Indonesia. We do it successfully - including with the support of Australia.

Of course, it is a matter of the Australian Government, but I believe this is an issue  that has been - that has been of concern to certain quarters in Australia. It is true that as  Stephen as mentioned, that in terms of the flow of tourists to Indonesia, last year we enjoy

having more tourists from Australia than many years before. Meaning that the Australian  people, in the end, have their own judgement whether to fully observe the travel advice that  the Government of Australia issued from time-to-time.

But perhaps the exchange of a - in the field of educations that - has been much  affected by the travel advice. I was with Minister Stephen Smith in Perth last February, and  met with a number of Australians scholars, teachers who expressed their wish to visit  Indonesia as part of the educational exchange, but have experienced difficulties because of the

travel advice.

So I wish to see that the Australian Government, in line with the - our determination to  promote people to people contact, to review the policy of issuing travel advice to Indonesia.

This is something that also in line with the - not only on the progress that we have  made in Indonesia, but of the recognitions that some countries like the United States and  Canada have done by lifting their travel warning or advice last year.

STEPHEN SMITH: Thanks, Hassan. The conference I think has 140, 150 delegates to it.  They are a mix of academics, people from civil society, people from industry and commerce  from both countries, also young people who may well aspire to being leaders of their  countries in particular fields. Some sessions are open to the media; I think the session that  Hassan and I chair tomorrow morning is open to the media. Some sessions are not on the  basis of people wanting to have effectively Chatham House discussions.



8

There are some sessions where journalists have access to and there are some sessions  where members of Parliament have access to. I don't regard it being an essential pre-requirement to have a good discussion about relations between two countries, that either  members of parliament or journalists are necessarily present all time.

Indonesian side. And I think we'll probably have to make this, sort of, the last one on  either side.

QUESTION: Michael Perry from Reuters. Can you just clarify, resuming the Bali Process,  has Thailand agreed to attend this ministerial meeting? And I assume it will be Prime  Ministerial will.

STEPHEN SMITH: Yep, well…

QUESTION: Thailand has agreed?

HASSAN WIRAJUDA: Thailand has agreed.

STEPHEN SMITH: And it's a Ministerial and there are two things. There's a senior officials  meeting which prepares for the Ministerial meeting. That takes place in Brisbane, from  memory, 23-24 of this month, in the course of this month.  We'll then have a Ministerial  meeting from Ministers around the region who've been involved in the Bali process. And as  Hassan has said, we're trying to find the dates to everyone's convenience. It might be the end  of March, probably more likely some time in early April.

QUESTION: Dana Robertson from the ABC's Australia Network. I understand there was a  request several months ago for a loan from Australia to Indonesia to cope with the fall-out  from the global financial crisis. Has there been any progress on whether that loan will or  won't be made? And has there been any other discussion of how the two countries could work  together to tackle some of the problems that have been raised financially?

HASSAN WIRAJUDA: That's was agreement in principle. I recall that during that the  meeting between President Yudhoyono and Prime Minister Kevin Rudd in Washington on the  margins of the G20 Summit. In response to our request, Indonesia's request, Prime Minister  Kevin Rudd in principle agreed to provide AU$1 billion to - for the budgetary support to

Indonesia.

This is meant as a contingency fund to - for the economic package, stimulus -  economic stimulus package. And those are primarily for infrastructure developments, because  in the midst of the crisis we need to make our real economic sector works and by promoting  infrastructure building, this would absorb more job - this is job creation basically.

At the same time it would help create market confidence in our economy. In addition  to an arrangement that we have with Australia, Indonesia is also making similar arrangement  with Japan, the Asian Development Bank and the World Bank. So in total the amount of  US$5 billion is pledged to - as the budgetary support for Indonesia.



9

Indonesian Government has increased its Budget deficit from initial amount of 1.1 per  cent this Budget year to around 2.5 per cent to allow us to have space for infrastructure  projects. Our economy is expected to grow around 4.5 per cent, so actually as this year, at  least the first half of this year, we expect that the impact of the global financial crisis would  not been too severe for us.

But anyway we need a contingency fund to help boost the market, confidence of the  market, at the same time we may be [indistinct], we may use this money in the future in case  we need it.

STEPHEN SMITH: I'll have to make this the last answer, I'm sorry. Hassan has accurately  reflected that arrangement. We, as a good friend and a good neighbour and a good partner,  wanted to help. It's in the nature of a contingency arrangement and it may or not be called  upon, depending upon the adverse consequences of the global financial, now global economic  crisis. And as Hassan has indicated, it's an arrangement that Indonesia have entered into with  other nations as well.

It's something is obviously within our resources to meet in the nature of a contingency.  And Hassan has said, time will tell whether there's a need for it to be called upon.

Well ladies and gentlemen, thank you ve…

QUESTION: When was that?

STEPHEN SMITH: The Treasurer announced it, I think from memory, the last quarter of  last year. Three or four months ago.

So thanks very much ladies and gentlemen. I look forward to seeing some of you, if  not all of you, at the conference in the next couple of days.

Thanks very much.

HASSAN WIRAJUDA: Thank you.

[END]

