The Hon Julia Gillard MP

Minister for Education. Minister for Employment and Workplace Relations  Minister for Social Inclusion  Deputy Prime Minister

17 November, 2009

Transcript

Doorstop Interview - Canberra

E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP  845AM TUESDAY  17 NOVEMBER 2009  CANBERRA

ISSUES: School transparency; My School website; Education Revolution; Opinion  polls; Indonesia; Youth Allowance legislation

JULIA GILLARD:  Obviously it’s been good to be here to open up the national forum of  this important network which brings educators together from around the country.

Clearly today, one of the big issues that will be talked about in education is our drive for new  transparency, our My School website which will give parents, teachers and community  members more information than they’ve ever had before about the performance of Australian  schools.

This agenda is controversial and it’s making some people uncomfortable but shining a  spotlight on performance is something that we have to do as a nation if we are going to  ensure a great quality education for every child in every school.

The power of the My School website is it will enable parents, teachers, community members  to look at their own school and to compare it with schools around the country that are serving  similar sorts of student populations to see the difference the school is making. And I expect  we will see some fantastic schools who are making a huge difference for the most  disadvantaged kids in this country.

I also think we’ll see some schools that are falling behind. We’re standing ready with new  resources and new reforms to lift the performance of those schools. This is about making a  quality difference for every child in every school.

We’re determined to deliver this new era of transparency and then we’re determined to build  on it for the future. This isn’t about simplistic league tables but it is about the comprehensive  information every Australian should have about the performance of Australian schools.

JOURNALIST: You talk about lifting the performance in the poor performing schools, are  you worried that parents might actually leave the school before you’ve actually had a chance  to turn it around?

JULIA GILLARD: I’m actually wanting to lift performance everywhere. If a school today is  a good school I want it to be a great school, if a school today is falling behind I want to lift  that school up. And what we know in the most disadvantaged parts of our country is that  there are schools that have struggled. They’ve struggled because they haven’t been the focus  of national attention. We’re going to make them the focus of national attention.

I’m obviously a supporter of parent choice. Parents should have the ability to choose which  school they want their child to go to. But in the absence of genuine information about the  performance of schools, choice is actually just another word for guessing.

Some parents have gone to hell and back to make sure that they’ve got information about the  best school for their child. We want to make that easier. We will be focusing on those schools  that need a focus on being lifted up to ensure that they are offering a great quality education.

And I’d say to parents who are perhaps anxious about this, the worst thing in the world is to  never know that your child is in an underperforming school. It might be uncomfortable to  learn your child is in an underperforming school, but then we’re going to be ready to work to  lift the performance of that school.

JOURNALIST: How long should they keep their child in an underperforming school before  they expect to see a turnaround?

JULIA GILLARD: We are there already investing to get turnarounds. We are already  investing through our Smarter Schools partnerships in schools in disadvantaged community,  in teacher quality, in national curriculum, in literacy and numeracy. Already those reforms  and new investments are hitting the ground.

JOURNALIST: Like a semester or year or two years?

JULIA GILLARD: Our transparency measures and our new reforms are rolling out  together, side by side to make a difference to the quality of education.

JOURNALIST: Is there any more that can be done to prevent the publishing of league  tables?

JULIA GILLARD: My view is the media will make choices about what it publishes. Of  course, we know that in the past there have been media reports identifying school as  underperforming schools. That’s happened now, in the absence of objective, comprehensive  information.

After the launch of the My School website, if there is a media claim about a school, parents,  teachers, community members will be able to get on the website and check that claim against  comprehensive, objective and reliable information. That’s a better circumstance for schools.

I obviously want a great debate in this country to rage through the pages of our newspapers  and through our national media about education. I think every day we’re debating how to

strengthen our education system is a great day because this should be a national conversation  in which every Australian takes part - it’s  that important.

JOURNALIST: A bit over a year ago the Prime Minister at the National Press Club talked  about sacking underperforming principals and closing underperforming schools. We haven’t  heard much more of that sort of, extremely tough and aggressive rhetoric since, but what can  the Government do about underperforming schools? What will you do about  underperforming schools?

JULIA GILLARD: Can I say, the first thing is to have the information that enables you to  identify who’s doing well and who’s not. And for those schools that are at best practice to  then share that best practice; for those schools that are falling behind to be ready with the new  resources and the new ways of working to lift those schools up.

Of course, when underperformance is shown to the world, people are going to work through  the reasons for that underperformance and that’s where our new resources come in.

Is it a problem with teacher quality? Is it a problem with school leadership? Well there’ll be  new investments for those things. Is it a problem because there’s not enough money for  literacy and numeracy, not enough teachers who are focused on literacy and numeracy? Well  there’s new resources for that.

There’s new resources for whole school improvement plans through our Smarter Schools  National Partnerships. Our approach isn’t naming and shaming; our approach is about  encouraging and achieving a lifting quality for the kids that are in those schools.

JOURNALIST: That said, Deputy Prime Minister, can principals of chronically  underperforming schools, and no doubt there will be some, can principals of chronically  underperforming schools go on being principals or ultimately are they going to need to be  moved?

JULIA GILLARD: I think the thing you’ve got to do first is get the information as to where  we’ve got underperforming schools and then work out why are those schools  underperforming.

JOURNALIST: Which is why I used the word chronically. If they remain underperforming,  will you go on supporting principals at them or are we going to have to move them on?

JULIA GILLARD: Of course, as national Education Minister I don’t employ the principals  but I would say this; we will, through transparency, know where underperformance is. We  will be ready with new resources and new reforms. We will expect those new resources and  new reforms to be implemented and make a difference.  We will work with those schools to  achieve that difference.

If there are problems in those schools that are stopping that difference for those kids being  made, then I would expect schools and school systems to address that. But let’s remember  schools that now are underperforming are often in disadvantaged communities where there  have been insufficient resources and insufficient investment in teacher quality and  insufficient investment in supporting and developing the skills of the school principal.

They are the things that our new reforms and new resources are there to address.

JOURNALIST: The opinion poll numbers today have steadied for the Government. What do  you think the Opposition should learn in terms of its focus on the asylum seeker issue over  the last few weeks, given that those numbers have bounced back for the Government?

JULIA GILLARD: We get polls very regularly, at least fortnightly, sometimes we get them  more frequently than that and I don’t worry about poll numbers bouncing this way or that  way.

Our focus, of course, is on the big issues that matter for this nation’s future. Today I’m  talking about education because it’s central to the nation’s future. Obviously, as a  Government we’re driven by that and we’re driven by the work we’re doing to cushion  Australia from the full impacts of the global recession, we’re driven by tackling climate  change, we’re driven by the needs for reform in health.

I think the problem for the Opposition, frankly, is that they aren’t focused on and don’t have  any policies about the issues that make a difference for Australians. Take education - not one  policy.

JOURNALIST: Do you think tensions are rising between Australia and Indonesia?

JULIA GILLARD: Australia and Indonesia have a close bilateral relationship. We  obviously, work on a range of issues. We are working together on the issue of addressing  people smuggling.

JOURNALIST: What will be the consequences if the Senate votes down your student  income support changes today?

JULIA GILLARD: I’d like to be very clear about that. If the Liberal and National Parties  vote down these changes today they will be ripping scholarship money out of the hands of  150,000 Australian students.

There will 150,000 kids who won’t get the scholarships to which they’re entitled because of  the actions of the Liberal Party and we’ve got to remember that the Liberal Party in  government was no friend of Australian students and it was no friend of country kids.

Participation of country kids in universities went backwards under the Liberal Party and the  National Party. Well, we’re determined to fix that.

The Liberal Party and National Party were no friend of students when they were in  government. If they vote down these new reforms and new scholarships they will be showing  that they are still not supporters of Australian students and the ability of country kids in  particular to get a university education.

Thank you.

ENDS.

Media Contact:  media@deewr.gov.au     Non-media queries: 1300 363 079

