Adult Migrant English Program  National Forum  12 November 2009

I would like to begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of  the land on which we are gathered today, the Dharrug people, as  well as the continuing challenges faced by Australia’s Indigenous  people and our national responsibility to rectify their deprivation.

I am delighted to have this opportunity today to attend and open  this Adult Migrant English Program (AMEP) National Forum.

I would also like to recognise the work done by the Research  Centre, in collaboration with AMEP service providers.

Your publications have provided extensive support and resources  for the AMEP over the years.

The delivery of English language training is a matter of great  interest to me.

Historically the Australian Government has seen the provision of  English language training for adult migrants as a key to their social  and economic integration.

The AMEP has been going for some 60 years and is provided at  more than 250 locations across Australia.

While maintaining one’s cultural heritage and language is always  encouraged, the government considers English in the Australian  context as one of the most important steps towards successful  settlement in Australia.

Participation in the AMEP helps participants learn to appreciate  the diversity of Australia’s population.

For some it is the first experience of interacting with different  cultures. It is an experience that often brings practical  understanding that ethnically diverse people can learn together,  forge cross-cultural relationships and coexist harmoniously.

The AMEP plays a crucial role in the delivery of settlement  assistance to help migrants and humanitarian entrants who  generally access the program within the first few months of their  arrival in Australia.

It provides settlement skills, information, links and networks while  teaching English.

Every new migrant or refugee wants to get off to a quick start on  the path towards full inclusion in Australian society - for the

Laurie Ferguson MP  Parliamentary Secretary for Multicultural Affairs and Settlement Services

Page 1 of 4 Adult Migrant English Program National Forum

benefit of themselves, for their families, and for the nation as a  whole.

They focus on building self-reliance, developing English language  skills and finding employment.

In my local community, and across Australia, there are numerous  community organisation doing wonderful work to provide  settlement assistance.

They provide services that not only encourage community  harmony and social cohesion, but also support clients on their  pathway to independence.

In my recent announcement of the Strategic Settlement  Framework I spoke of how we are considering wholesale  improvements in the way in which we address our clients’  immediate and longer-term settlement needs.

We will be looking at building a flexible client centred approach  and developing and cultivating a path to education and  employment.

The review of the AMEP last year prompted the development of a  new AMEP business model.

In the new model there will be an increased settlement focus and  improved pathways for clients to education, training, further ESL  and employment.

Consistent with my recent speech on a settlement strategy in  Brisbane the Government intends the AMEP to also move in  placing greater emphasis on case management.

This will ensure clients are provided with the guidance and support  they need to select the best learning options for them.

We want clients to be fully informed of their rights and  responsibilities as participants.

As announced by the Government in the Budget earlier this year,  the new AMEP will be extended to 15 to 17 year olds who drop out  of school during their first year after arriving in Australia.

The Minister and I are focused on ensuring that the needs of  young migrants and refugees are properly met.

While the school system is naturally the preferable place for  people in this age group, many young migrants arrive at a late  stage in their schooling and sometimes with little previous history  of education.

It is difficult to imagine how hard it is to fit into such a structured  system - having missed so many years of learning.

The AMEP will offer a safety net for those unable to cope with the  school environment - it will also provide a pathway to further  learning.

Page 2 of 4 Adult Migrant English Program National Forum

English language proficiency is crucial for these young people if  they are going to find their place in the employment market and in  Australian society.

In the new AMEP, the performance and accountability framework  will be enhanced to ensure that there are more measurable client  settlement and language outcomes. This is important to  demonstrating the broad value of the AMEP within the settlement  process.

While the AMEP has always played an important ‘settlement’  function, this has in the past been implicit, rather than explicit.

The program needs to be able to demonstrate how clients are  making real gains, not just in terms of language proficiency, but in  terms of their understanding of Australian culture, services, and the  rule of law.

The new business model provides us with an opportunity to make  the program as efficient and forward thinking as possible while at  the same time improving services to clients.

Some of the challenges refugees and humanitarian entrants face  on this path as they settle into Australia result from a lack of  literacy in their main language and low levels of English  proficiency.

This requires us to develop more innovative communication and  service delivery models.

One example is the recent Employment Pathways Program and  Traineeships in English and Work Readiness Program pilots which  you as AMEP service providers have implemented at the  Government’s request.

These programs are helping people with low levels of literacy to  learn English while becoming familiar with Australian workplace  culture and practices.

Such partnerships between English language and employment  service providers and employers help humanitarian entrants and  migrants to attain their goal of successful settlement.

To inform or improve our service delivery models the government  relies on research done by experts in the industry.

Research that follows individual client real life experiences is  invaluable in being able to improve our client centred approach to  settlement services.

The longitudinal project - Language Training and Settlement  Success: are they related? - will provide insight into the  experiences of those who have come to Australia to start a new life  and settle into their new community.

This project will offer all parties more relevant information that will  assist in shaping the types and structure of English language  training that is most beneficial to those settling in Australia.

I recognise as service providers you face considerable challenges

Page 3 of 4 Adult Migrant English Program National Forum

in delivering the AMEP to an ever changing cohort of clients with  varying needs and expectations.

I hope this forum today gives you all the opportunity to discuss  these challenges and the benefits the project will provide for you in  your work.

Finally, I would like to take this opportunity to thank the Research  Centre for inviting me to speak today.

I would also like to acknowledge the good work that they have  done for the AMEP in undertaking research and the development  of resources for the program over the past years.

See: Index of Speeches

URL:  http://www.minister.immi.gov.au /parlsec/media/speeches/2009/lf091112

Last update: 16 November 2009 at 13:48 AEST

Page 4 of 4 Adult Migrant English Program National Forum

