30 March 2010

TRANSCRIPT OF THE HON. TONY ABBOTT MHR   INTERVIEW WITH RAY HADLEY,  RADIO 2GB, SYDNEY

Subjects: Port Macquarie ironman; Kevin Rudd’s failed border protection policies; Julia  Gillard’s bungled school halls programme.

E&OE……………………….…………………………………………………………………

RAY HADLEY:    Tony Abbott, g’day.

TONY ABBOTT:    G’day Ray, how are you?

RAY HADLEY:    Particularly well. Congratulations on what you achieved for the Glenn McGrath Foundation  and what you achieved personally on Sunday.

TONY ABBOTT:    Well, look, that’s very kind of you, Ray. It was an honour and a privilege to be with 1,500  gutsy athletes and I loved… I can’t say I loved every second of it but I loved finishing.

RAY HADLEY:    Well, that’s a great mark of your courage and it gives hope to us old blokes that we can still  do things that perhaps we didn’t think we could do.

TONY ABBOTT:    You can too, mate. I mean you don’t have to be an elite athlete to do these things. I was  inspired by a friend of mine from Manly who, he’s a bit older than me, and he did his first  ironman when he was well into his fifties. So there’s hope for all of us.

RAY HADLEY:    Exactly. Now, you were the hope of the side when your predecessor wouldn’t commit to a  strong policy on the ETS. It is obvious from what happened in Copenhagen you’ve been  proved right and you’ve benefited by that strength. We needed a line in the sand between you  and the Government. You provided that line in the sand and that’s why people warmed to  you. I’m concerned, I’ve read your comments and I heard your comments with my colleague  Alan Jones a fortnight ago… I know you’re going to reinstitute temporary protection visas  but why is there a reluctance from  you and others in your party to go back down the path of  what was called the Pacific Solution? Is that some sort of no no?



TONY ABBOTT:    Look, Ray, we are totally committed to offshore processing and if you had a strong policy of  deterrence I think it would be possible, it should be possible, to accommodate these asylum  seekers on Christmas Island. The problem is that the Government has effectively abandoned  deterrence when it made this public statement to the wider world that it was going to be  compassionate not tough, and that’s what we need, we need to deny the people smugglers a  product, we need to say to the people smugglers look, just because you can get someone to  Christmas Island doesn’t mean that you can get someone permanent residency in Australia  and that will be heart of the next Coalition government’s policy.

RAY HADLEY:    But you understand that people… I mean, we need to simplify things. When you mention  Pacific Solution, well, we’re talking about Nauru as opposed to Christmas Island and other  places in the South Pacific as the case may be. They can understand that. But there’s no line  of difference between you and the government because you’re still going on about Christmas  Island. You were strong on the ETS and that got you brownie points because people wanted  someone to offer an alternate position and we need an alternate position on this one because  if you go to the election, you know, saying exactly what you said, and I understand what  you’re saying, that you’re going to be tougher but they’ll still go to Christmas Island, people  will say well hang on, apart from temporary protection visas, what’s the difference between  this bloke and the other bloke, why should we vote for his party?

TONY ABBOTT:    Well because when my party was in government before we stopped the boats. We found a  problem and we created a solution. Mr Rudd found a solution and has recreated the problem.  I don’t think anyone should doubt the credentials of the Coalition on this issue of border  protection, Ray, because we’ve got the runs on the board as opposed to Mr Rudd. But the  point is that as well as temporary protection visas we’ve got to have constructive  relationships with other countries so that we don’t find ourselves being spurned by them  because they can’t trust our Prime Minister not to blab details of phone calls; the other thing  we’ve got to do, we’ve got to be prepared if necessary and if feasible to turn boats around.  Now, Mr Rudd said before the election that he would do that. In fact he’s never done that and  I think that the strongest possible signal that you could send to the people smugglers would  be to say ‘look your boat is going back to where it came from’.

RAY HADLEY:    That of course brings its own problems, you’ve got to make sure the boat is sea worthy  because under International Convention at Sea, you can’t turn a leaking boat back around and  you know what happens as we saw and this is one of the weak parts of it, he’s given  protection visas, I’m sorry not protection visas, he’s given visas to these people who firstly  sank the boat, killing five Afghans up there in the sea and then he’s given visas to the people  who wouldn’t help the coroner determine who was responsible for it.

TONY ABBOTT:

Exactly right Ray. And frankly those visas should be revoked because I would think that any  people who committed the offence or connived at the offence have failed the character test  and they shouldn’t be given visas to come to Australia.

RAY HADLEY:

I know you’ve got another commitment but quickly on the BER. I feel like and I think the  Australian newspaper is feeling the same way despite the good work by your Opposition. We  are banging our head against a brick wall because their all standing there shouldering arms,  whether it’s the Deputy Prime Minister, whether it’s Mark Arbib, the head kicker with  slippers on, whether it’s Craig Emerson - the Prime Minister’s not getting his hands dirty on  the BER  - but they’re all holding firm and so is Verity Firth in New South Wales. Their  saying it’s a very small percentage of complaints, but at the end of the day Mr Abbott it’s  $16.2 billion we’ve borrowed. We don’t have it, we’ve borrowed it and at the moment we are  seeing it being piddled up against a wall, at least half of it because we are not getting value  for money. Is there anything you can do to convince anyone in government that what  happened with insulation is being replicated in the BER?

TONY ABBOTT:

Look, you’re so right Ray. It amounts to a crime against the tax payers. I mean I went down  to Mt St Thomas school near Wollongong about 10 days ago and the president of the Parents  and Citizens was almost in tears of rage, she felt so unhappy and embarrassed about the  complete waste of tax payer money and she said, ‘look it’s hard for me to earn the money to  pay the taxes and I just hate to see it wasted like this’. Now, I think there are millions of  Australians who think that Kevin Rudd is not the genius who saved us from the recession but  the klutz who is just wasting taxpayer funds scandalously with rip off after rip off in this  programme, and every day new scandals emerge, every project that has been examined turns  out to be problematic and the news today, Ray, that Catholic school COLAs are on average at  least half the price of public school COLAs, just shows there are institutionalised rip-offs in  this system.

RAY HADLEY:

No, well I want you to grip the chair because there is a reason for that. Verity Firth has  explained it apparently on another radio station this morning. Now, you better be careful  because…no be careful. You know why this has happened, let me tell you why it’s

happened?

TONY ABBOTT:

Mother Mary MacKillop has caused…

RAY HADLEY:

No, Mother Mary’s got nothing to do with it; sainthood nothing to do with it. The ones that  are being built in the public schools have speakers and lights. Speakers and lights, therefore  we have the cost blowing out by more than double.

TONY ABBOTT:



The most expensive speakers in human history.

RAY HADLEY:

Exactly, I’ll leave you with this one on your way to another appointment. It’s a tribute to our  Prime Minister. I think you might enjoy it. Thanks for your time.

TONY ABBOTT:

Thanks Ray.

[ends]

