

LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  THE HON. TONY ABBOTT MHR  FEDERAL MEMBER FOR WARRINGAH

Tony Abbott interview on Sunrise -  Restoring integrity and fairness to  refugee decision making   07/07/10

Subjects: Restoring integrity and fairness to refugee decision making.

DAVID KOCH: Good morning to you. Now, look, what Julia Gillard was saying, under John  Howard you only managed to turn seven boats back out of over 300 that arrived here while he  was PM, the last was in `03. So, does she have a point?

TONY ABBOTT: Look, you can’t turn all of them back obviously, Kochie, but you certainly  can turn some around. The Howard Government turned boats around. Back in 2002, Julia  Gillard called for boats to be turned around and certainly you have got a lot more chance of  turning boats around than I think Julia Gillard has of ever having an East Timorese processing  centre. What we’ve heard overnight demonstrates that this was a thought bubble from the  Prime Minister, not a serious policy. She called East Timorese and New Zealand leaders just a  few hours before making her statement. They are already pouring cold water all over it. It’s  never going to happen. It’s an election fix,not a serious policy.

DAVID KOCH: Well, it does look as though she is trying to match your policy rather than  come up with anything different but you said to stop the boats you have to change the  government. Now, can you give a guarantee that you can stop the boats?

TONY ABBOTT: Well, I can certainly guarantee that the Coalition did it in the past and  there’s no reason why we can’t do it again in the future. What we know is that this  Government with Julia Gillard as Prime Minister, Deputy Prime Minister and as the author,  the self-proclaimed author of their border protection policies she hasn't been able to stop the  boats. In fact, Julia Gillard's Government has created the current armada.

DAVID KOCH: Ok, alright it is a very emotional topic. There are a lot of myths surrounding  it that we should clear up. The area that both you and the PM agree on is a return to the  Pacific solution. But, during John Howard's Pacific solution more than 1,600 people were  processed off shore, 70 per cent of those were granted refugee status. Now, doesn't that just  show that the majority of those coming here illegally were actually genuine refugees? So,  what’s the point of something like the Pacific solution?

TONY ABBOTT: Well, David, off shore processing is important but it’s only part of a range  of policies that are needed to stop the boats. In the end, what has to happen is we’ve got to

deny the people smugglers a product to sell. That is why temporary protection visas are so  important and this is one thing that Julia Gillard certainly won't embrace. You see, her  solution is all about doing stuff off shore. The only way that we are going to stop the boats is  to deny the people smugglers a product to sell and that means denying people the near  certainty once they get here or get to Christmas Island of permanent residency in Australia.

DAVID KOCH: Yeah, those people smugglers I think everyone agrees are the scum of the  Earth and are just preying on people in dire need and…

TONY ABBOTT: Well, you see, the Government has put them back in business, the  Government has put them back in business, Kochie, by giving them a product to sell. Once  Julia Gillard and Kevin Rudd abolished temporary protection visas it meant that basically  everyone who got here could stay here and that meant desperate people, obviously, wanted a  permanent life in Australia and the people smugglers were back in the game.

DAVID KOCH: Ok, you said you will set up an off shore processing centre. Where will  yours be?

TONY ABBOTT: Well, you can’t negotiate these things from opposition and unless you are  competent you can't do it from government either and what we’ve seen is another illustration  of the incompetence of the Rudd/Gillard Government, announcing policies that just can't  stand up and start to unravel as soon as they’re announced. But, Nauru did say, when we  announced that we were going to be negotiating, Nauru said they would be happy to have one  again and of course if Julia Gillard was serious about off shore processing, we’ve already got  a centre at Nauru, Nauru have put their hands up to do it, why not send people back to Nauru?

DAVID KOCH: Ok, just finally, let's put this in a bit of perspective. I know it is incredibly  emotional, myself like everybody else hates queue jumpers, we should have the right to  decide who comes into this country and when. But, when you look at the big picture, 96-98  per cent of illegal migrants come in through our airports on a tourist visa and just stay here.  Isn't that more the problem? Isn’t that what you and the Government should be focusing on  rather than the boat people issue, even though it is a vote winner by the sound of it.

TONY ABBOTT: Well, Kochie, there is a world of difference between people who come  safely with papers by air and people who come unsafely without papers by boat. I mean, no  one drowns coming to Australia with Qantas. Now, sure, they might subsequently become  illegal and that’s a problem but a much greater problem is people just, is people just arriving  unannounced on our western shores and many of them tragically drowning along the way and  it’s precisely because the Government changed the policy that this is happening and it’s  precisely because the Government’s changed the policy that we’ve now got 500 kids in  detention again.

DAVID KOCH: Alright, that’s not a bad point. If they come here through the airports at least  we know they’re safe, they’re not feeding people smugglers at all and hopefully, even though  the numbers are big we will catch them in the end. Alright, thank you very much for joining  us this morning.

TONY ABBOTT: Thank so much, Kochie.



