



BORDER PROTECTION COMMAND INTERCEPTS VESSEL

[7 May 2010] Border Protection Command last night successfully intercepted a suspected irregular  entry vessel.

ACV Dame Roma Mitchell, operating under the control of Border Protection Command, intercepted  the vessel during the evening on 06 May south west of Browse Island. The vessel had been identified  earlier by a Dash 8 surveillance aircraft, under the control of Border Protection Command.

Initial indications suggest 26 passengers and two crew are on board the vessel.

The group will be transferred to Christmas Island where they will undergo security, identity and  health checks and their reasons for travel will be established.

While their nationality is yet to be confirmed, if these asylum seekers are Sri Lankans or Afghans, the  processing suspension introduced by the Government on 9 April 2010 will apply.

This suspension was introduced because of the evolving circumstances in these two countries.  The  Australian Government believes that asylum seekers should only be granted the right to live in  Australia if they are genuinely in need of protection.

People smuggling is not just an issue for Australia - it is a global and regional problem. The  commitment of our neighbours, through bilateral cooperation and the Bali Process on People  Smuggling, Trafficking in Persons and Related Transnational Crime, is critical to addressing this most  serious issue.

The Australian Government remains vigilant and committed to protecting Australia’s borders.   Today’s successful interception by Border Protection Command, coupled with changes to the  immigration processing system, continues to demonstrate this commitment and the effectiveness of  the proactive response program in place.

An unrelated assistance operation is also being coordinated by the Australian Maritime Safety  Authority with support from Border Protection Command and Defence.

The Australian Maritime Safety Authority (AMSA) is coordinating assistance to people onboard a  vessel located approximately 160 nautical miles north-west of Cocos (Keeling) Island.

Acting in response to a request for support from AMSA a Royal Australian Air Force AP-3C Orion  maritime patrol aircraft located the vessel on the evening of 6 May.

Border Protection Command has released aircraft to assist.

Any further enquiries regarding the assistance being provided should be directed to AMSA.

Media Contact: Belinda Cole 0438 595 567 or Customs and Border Protection media (02) 6275 6793 or  Australian Maritime Safety Authority (02) 6279 5093

