







THE HON DR CRAIG EMERSON MP  MINISTER FOR TRADE





Transcript

Sky News Agenda with Kieran Gilbert  19 October 2010





E&OE

Subjects: Afghanistan; Asylum Seekers; OH&S Laws.

GILBERT: Welcome back to AM Agenda. With me now the Trade Minister, Craig  Emerson, and the Shadow Minister for Health, Peter Dutton.   Gentlemen, good morning to you both.



DUTTON: Good morning.

GILBERT: Peter, we heard from Stephen Smith there and indeed the Liberal  position, the Coalition position is, you know, in the broad is pretty  much similar. But we've heard concerns from Mal Washer MP, who  says that it's a lost cause, Afghanistan. Do you think that other  Liberals, other individual MPs, will agree with that assertion?



DUTTON: Well look, there'll be people across the political spectrum who'll have  the same view as Mal. My sense is that the overwhelming position of  the Parliamentary Wing of the Liberal Party is to strongly support the  campaign. And we supported it at the time of its commencement. We  provide unqualified support, of course, to our troops. And it's important  now to have a debate, if for nothing else to, I think, make the public  more aware of the reasons that we're there; that we are doing good  work; that we are creating a positive future. And I think that's a good  thing. Now people will have dissenting views and that's part of our  democracy. And that should be celebrated.





GILBERT: What Peter says there is, you know, we're getting signals of that  already. The newspaper today, quoting The Herald, is quoting one  Labor MP suggesting this is a chance to raise questions. And  concerns as to just when this deployment is going to end. So you

2



wouldn't be too surprised Craig Emerson, if Labor MPs expressed  similar sentiments to what we've heard from Dr Washer?

EMERSON: It's entirely possible and it's up to them. I think it is a healthy  opportunity for people, as Peter says, from both sides of the  parliamentary debate - and the Independents and the Green member  - to express their views on this. I think it's valuable not only from their  point of view, but to help inform the Australian community of the  issues.  I'm reasonably confident that we'll have a display of  bipartisanship at the end of this process. But, you know, this is the  new Parliament. These sorts of debates can happen - could have  happened before - but I think it's a good thing that…

GILBERT: Do you think that the hung Parliament has, sort of, engendered the  atmosphere for MPs to speak a bit more independently?

EMERSON: Well maybe it has. Maybe it has and that's not a bad thing - that  people can express their views as local members. I do think that it's  highly likely that there'll be a display of bipartisanship here. Peter's  absolutely right that the Coalition initiated the engagement in  Afghanistan. We've had a period over the last two or three weeks,  maybe a little longer, where the Coalition Defence spokesperson was  talking about the possibility of more troops, more equipment.

Now the leader, Mr Abbott, is saying, well he's been there and he's  content with the deployment and the equipment that's available there.

GILBERT: There's nothing wrong with that though, is there?

EMERSON: No, no. I'm just saying that…

GILBERT: There's nothing wrong with Senator Johnson saying, listen to these  noises.

EMERSON: Well, I don't want to tread the path again. But that's okay, just so long  as it isn't sort of an implied criticism that Labor is not doing enough.  We're taking our advice front the Chief of the Defence Force. We have  always. I think the Coalition did in Government. So it's refreshing to  hear Mr Abbott say that he's now come to the view that the  deployment is right. The equipment is right. So that would put an end  to that.



GILBERT: Okay, on another issue: asylum seekers. I'll just get you to respond to  this, Craig, before I get Peter's thoughts on it. The children moving  into community housing - this is something that was promised three  years ago and finally delivered. So it is a belated promise being  honoured?  The Opposition says it's not about welfare for children;  that this is about capacity constraints. That you've - it's taken three  years - a long, long time. And it's because, not because you're worried  about these children, but because the centres are full.



3



EMERSON: Well we are concerned about the welfare of the children.

GILBERT: Why not do it two years ago?

EMERSON: We've never had, as a Government, children behind razor wire. But  there have been children and there are children in what we regard as  unsuitable accommodation, such as tents on Christmas Island. And  we are very concerned that children get a good education, that their  mental health is preserved. And if you're in inappropriate  accommodation, that can put real strains on it. So I think, again, there  would be broad community support - I certainly hope so, for the notion  that children should be in suitable accommodation. Yes, there is an  issue of the number of people arriving by boat. We're not pretending  otherwise. But, fundamentally, we need to ensure that the welfare of  those children is preserved.



GILBERT: Patrick McGorry, the Australian of the Year, Peter Dutton, you know  him well. He's a mental health expert…

DUTTON: He endorsed our mental health policy during the election. I know him  very well.

GILBERT: He did indeed. Yes he did. But what he also says is that these  detention facilities are factories of mental illness. You would have  heard him describe them as such. So surely it's more, even more  acute for children?



DUTTON: Look, I'm aware of Pat's comments. And obviously he has a deep  feeling when it comes to issues of mental health. And I respect him  very much. But as you point out Kieran - and if you can deal with the  facts as opposed to the Government's spin - the fact that 106 boats  have come this year, over 5500 people. This is an amazing situation,  at the moment, when you see thousands of people in detention  centres. This is not about some compassionate offering. This is about  a Government that has mishandled the policy. They are clearly  anticipating many more boats on the horizon. And I think most  Australians would say that this is a Government that clearly has lost  control of the agenda.  If they were sincere about what it is they're  doing at the moment, they would have made the announcement  before the election, instead of a couple of weeks after the election.  This is a Government that does not have control of its borders. And  this is a Government that really is desperate, I think, at the moment, to  try and take out some of the heat, which obviously exists within some  of the centres, at the moment, because of the overcrowding. And  clearly this is not about anything else other than an admission of the  Government's policy failing. And I think, as the boats continue to  arrive, people now have greater incentive to arrive under this  Government's failure and I think that'll be underscored in the months  to come.



4



GILBERT: So why didn't the Government make the announcement prior to the  election? If it was that obvious that things were under pressure, as  Peter says, you could have done it before. And there was no  indication beforehand - in fact the focus was all about East Timor. And  there's nothing secured there.



EMERSON: And that is still the case. And we're still working - you know very well,  Kieran, and so does Peter - that Chris Bowen has been in East Timor  last week for encouraging talks about a regional solution to a regional  problem, rather than a mid-Pacific solution to a regional problem. But  I'd ask this question: who said that the push factors, the push factors  are ‘enormous’? It wasn't Julia Gillard. It wasn't our immigration  minister. It was Malcolm Turnbull. And he's right, the push factors are  strong. And we are dealing with those push factors. Mr Abbott's  response to this is a slogan: ‘I'll stop the boats’. How's he going to  stop the boats? Sitting there at Kirribilli on the boat phone, deciding  which boats he’s going to turn around and send back into the ocean?



GILBERT: But you've conceded there are pull factors as well, in the sense that  you want this offshore centre built. So obviously you believe that that  would work as a deterrent to some degree.



EMERSON: We are looking, obviously, for a regional solution to a regional issue.  And a mid-Pacific solution to a regional issue in our own area is not  the right way to go, in our view. That's our view. The Coalition has a  different view. It thinks Nauru is the way to go. We're not going to  have kids behind razor wire. We're going to ensure that kids are in  decent and reasonable accommodation.



GILBERT: But the Coalition didn't either. They had the children removed in 2005.

EMERSON: They actually did. But they removed - they did remove them after a  time. I'm saying - and I think there would be bipartisan support on that;  that is, that we believe - and I hope the Coalition believes - that kids  should be in reasonable accommodation, because they ...



DUTTON: Kieran, I just want to say a couple of points. The push, the so-called  push factors have always been there.

EMERSON: That's not right.

DUTTON: Absolutely they have, in different parts of the world, where conflicts  have existed…

EMERSON: Yeah, they're further away.

DUTTON: …there have always been pushes. What's changed and why we've  seen 106 boats arrive this year alone, is the fact that this Government  has sent a very clear message that they're weak on border protection.



5



EMERSON: So Malcolm Turnbull's wrong?

DUTTON: So this Labor-Greens alliance now is in full swing. And this is a  Government that isn't going to harden. This is a Government that isn't  going to harden up on policies that they need to. Because Julia Gillard  is looking over one shoulder making sure that Bob Brown's standing  there behind her. And the Australian public has to realise now, that  this is a very different Government.



EMERSON: This is straight out of central casting.

DUTTON: What I was happy about you before, Craig, was that you were able to  talk about East Timor without actually a smile on your face. Because  that is a big joke of a policy and Chris Bowen obviously must be  completely humiliated.



EMERSON: Go the mid-Pacific solution, it's a real winner!

DUTTON: Every time he goes to East Timor or raises that ridiculous suggestion,  he just completely undermines his own credibility.

EMERSON: And you heard straight out of central casting, this Labor-Green …

GILBERT: Well the Labor-Green alliance is…

DUTTON: It's a reality…

EMERSON: This is a Labor policy, announced by a Labor Government, following a  set of decisions made by a Labor Government…

GILBERT: Let's move on.

EMERSON: ... and your viewers will hear this time and time again from Peter  Dutton and others.

GILBERT: Okay, well let's move on because this…

EMERSON: All this cosy secret Labor-Green deal. It's Labor policy. It's Labor  policy.

GILBERT: But the Labor-Green deal is under pressure isn't it? Well on another  issue. They disagree with you when it comes to occupational health  and safety.



EMERSON: And that will not be the first time. Nor will it be the last time.

GILBERT: All right, well so tell me, will you rely then on Coalition support to get  the changes to the occupational health and safety legislation through?  Because the Greens are going to block it.



6



EMERSON: I wouldn't be confident of it. I hope that Mr Abbott will have a change  of heart. He had 12 years to implement a national occupational health  and safety system, including as industrial relations minister. Never  went near it. Never went near it. Now okay, Mr Abbott might have  found that just too hard, too challenging for him. So then they go into  Opposition. We seek to set up Safe Work Australia, a body to oversee  this national scheme. What does Mr Abbott, what does the Coalition  do to that legislation in the Senate? Knock it back. How many times?  Twice!



GILBERT: Okay, well let's get Peter Dutton's thoughts.

EMERSON: Twice, knocked it back. It finally went through. So I'm going to be fair.  It finally went through when the business community said, ‘shame on  you’ to the Coalition to try to thwart this reform.



GILBERT: I want to get Peter's response because I don't want to run out of time.

DUTTON: Craig, you should be writing fairy tales, honestly.

EMERSON: It's true. It's absolutely factually true. Tell me which part if that's  wrong.

DUTTON: I'll tell you the facts of this modern day discussion, which you've  completely glossed over. It is the case that Julia Gillard now, was  yesterday, I guess, the last remaining Australian that was to endorse  the O'Farrell Government in New South Wales. At last she's come to  her, you know, a latter day conversion.



EMERSON: We've got our own policies. We're implementing our policies.

DUTTON: She is now endorsing the O'Farrell Government. What this shows is…

EMERSON: You have missed the 27 areas of regulatory reform. The Labor  reforms, some of which you're opposing. Most of …

GILBERT: Okay let's just get Peter's response.

DUTTON: Hang on Craig. Now what this shows that Julia Gillard even believes  that this is a basket case of a Government in New South Wales. Just  like in the hospitals. The New South Wales Government across the  board is completely dictated to and run by the union movement. And  what has got you nervous at the moment is they seem to be a little  cosier with your partners, the Greens, than they do with you. And so I  don't know what happens with your donations and the way in which  your pre-selections will be run. But I'd be worried about Bob Brown  stealing some of your ground, mate. Here's your opportunity.



GILBERT: Just tell me will you back the Government's uniform OH&S laws to  circumvent the Greens?

7





DUTTON: The point that I'm making, look at our history when we were in  Government and when we were in Opposition. Before that was that  we drove reforms that made this country economically…



EMERSON: On occupational health and safety?

DUTTON: …what it is today. The regulatory system in this country…

EMERSON: You didn't answer the question.

DUTTON: …and the workplace relations system in this country, productivity in  this country, the stability of our economy, is as a direct result of  changes that we made when we were in Government. We won't be  lectured to by the likes of the Labor-Green alliance and the Trade  Minister who should be opening…



EMERSON: One more chance. One more chance. Will you back Labor's national  occupational health and safety reforms?

DUTTON: Craig, we did when we were in Government…

EMERSON: No you didn't. No you didn't.

DUTTON: We backed sensible reforms…

EMERSON: You opposed it in Opposition.

DUTTON: …and what we're worried about at the moment and the current debate  is whether or not you can get Keneally across the line. Don't throw out  these red herrings.



GILBERT: Okay, gentlemen.

EMERSON: I think the answer is no.

GILBERT: Time for a coffee. I'll let you go and grab a coffee.

EMERSON: Right. Thanks a lot.

GILBERT: Appreciate your time this morning, Craig and Peter. Appreciate it.



END

