









THE HON BRENDAN O’CONNOR MP  MINISTER FOR HOME AFFAIRS

TRANSCRIPT



E&OE PROOF ONLY

Sky News Australian Agenda with David Speers and panellists Patricia Karvelas,  Malcolm Farr and Peter van Onselen  Sunday, 11 July 2010  Topics: Border protection policy

DAVID SPEERS: With us now we have the Home Affairs Minister, Brendan O'Connor.  Thank you for joining us from Melbourne today.  There's been confusion, as we were discussing earlier, about, well a key element of Julia  Gillard's border protection plan - where this regional processing centre will go. So a simple  question to begin: where's it going to be?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Well David on Tuesday the Prime Minister outlined her vision for  border protection and how we're going to deal with irregular arrivals and how we will deal  with the region. And she outlined, I think, a comprehensive approach forward and that

included of course the regional processing centre proposal and indeed as a result of that, and  as a result of conversations she'd had with the president of East Timor and the Prime Minister  of New Zealand, she said we needed to move forward on this issue.  Now subsequent to that speech on Tuesday, the Prime Minister of East Timor spoke with the  President and charged him with the responsibility of now talking about the details of a  proposed regional centre with Australia. I think that's a step forward.   The next logical stop of course is for us to start really going through the detail because a  regional processing centre is an important part of a sustainable regional protection approach  to this matter.

DAVID SPEERS: Okay so the preference is East Timor. I can understand that you have to  get East Timor to agree to this but that is your government's preference, East Timor, clear and  simple.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: And the Prime Minister and President of East Timor have showed  a preparedness now to talk about the detail of a proposal and I think that's an important thing.  What we know is of course that the Bali Process, that was established way back in 2002, and

throughout the period of this government have been talking about the best way to deal with  irregular migration, ensuring that we remove the product that's been sold by people

smugglers, luring people on, in many cases, unseaworthy vessels on perilous journeys. How  do we do that?   Well one key plank of the regional protection approach includes a centre, which takes away  the incentive of people being lured on such dangerous passage and I think that's a good step  forward and we now want to sit down with East Timor, the East Timorese President, Jose  Ramos Horta and work through that proposition.

PANELLIST: Minister, why East Timor? Why not any number of other countries including  even this country?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Well East Timor showed us a preparedness to engage on this issue.  We believe it's important that a centre is in a location that's, and in a country, that is signatory  to the Refugee Convention. We believe it's important that we remove the incentive that  people smugglers have to lure people to a particular destination. Now the fact that we can  intercept vessels and indeed take those people seeking asylum to a centre takes away, I  believe, takes away the product that's been currently sold by people smugglers in the

region…

PANELLIST: But, but in Australia - but can I ask, sorry to interrupt, but Australia is a  signatory to that convention. This is our political problem. We're the richest nation in the  region. What are the reasons, I assume there are some, what are the reasons why we can't  house this regional processing centre?  BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Well we need to make sure that we place it in a location that's not  in those areas where, which are, I guess, defined as destination countries …

PANELLIST: So because no one wants to go to East Timor, we're going to put it there …

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: …as a resettlement country, as a resettlement country and  signatory to the convention, along with New Zealand and other countries around the world, of  course we will settle refugees if they're determined to such by the processes. But it is  important that we look at an area that is less likely to lure people on those very dangerous  vessels. And I believe the important thing here is, Peter, is that we have a conversation now.  We engage with the East Timorese on this issue and they've shown a preparedness to do that  because a key element of a regional protection approach is a regional processing centre. It  does take away, or undermine, the product that's being sold by these people smugglers.

PANELLIST: Minister, minister, accepting that wisdom, on Friday you said you were willing  to look at PNG Manus Island as another potential site. They're also signatories. Yesterday  Stephen Smith, the Foreign Affairs Minister, essentially really poured water on that idea.

Where do we stand now? That seems that there's a bit of flip flopping on that issue as well.  Do you think…

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Well I don't…

DAVID SPEERS: Well do you accept that PNG should be another option at all?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: No. Well I don't accept the premise of your question. I was asked  about the role of other countries. We have to engage multilaterally. We have to engage with  all of our partners in the region, insofar as ensuring we have a sustainable regional protection  framework…



PANELLIST: So it's about consulting PNG, but not about…

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: In relation to the PNG, the Foreign Minister's made clear that they  have not been approached and nor have they proffered any particular view. They've been  briefed by the Foreign Minister, when he was there on a regular ministerial visit, about our  Prime Minister's speech on Tuesday. Of course we want to talk to partners in the region  because we do want a regional approach, a regional solution to a regional problem. We all  share…

PANELLIST:      Is it possible that we might have…

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: We all share the problem but insofar as centres are concerned, we  have our focus now on East Timor and talking to them about the detail and we'll work  through this methodically one step at a time. This is a step forward and it's the next logical  step.

DAVID SPEERS: So it will not go in PNG at all?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Well you're putting to me hypotheticals. I can only say to you  David…

DAVID SPEERS: No, it's a direct question Minister. Will there be a regional processing  centre in PNG under this government?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: You put that question to me and the Prime Minister's made clear  that we are going to relentlessly pursue having a centre in the region for the reasons I've  already outlined and we are…

DAVID SPEERS: Which leaves PNG very much on the table.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: And we are now sitting - well look, if I can just answer the  question, we are now sitting down with a country, a country by the way that has a great  humanitarian record, a country that's led by not only a President, who has great international  standing, but a Prime Minister who understands the complexities of this issue and  understands the problems of people being displaced in the region…

PANELLIST:      This is something that's going to take ages and ages and ages. This is going  to take ages. It's going to take ages to do this, isn't it? I mean I know the Prime Minister has  said there's a long lead time involved in this. The previous government set up two similar  processing centres in a matter of months. I don't think in a matter of months you are going to  work out who you're talking to.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: And that was a failed approach, a unilateral approach, which led  to, of course, the closing down of that centre, but also…

PANELLIST: No hang on, two centres operated for quite a while and Nauru is still ready to  move into, should you wish to.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: And we've said we want a regional approach Malcolm that will  ensure we, that we, indeed ensuring that our obligations under international law are fulfilled  and that we engage the region. We don't unilaterally impose a solution on a country.

Now the fact is the East Timorese President will be sitting down with Australia and working  through the details of the centre. We do want to engage the region fully about the framework  but insofar as a centre's concerned, let's just take this one step at a time.   As for how long this will take, the Prime Minister on Tuesday said there wouldn't be a quick  fix so I was surprised when people were concerned that it hadn't been fixed by Thursday.

DAVID SPEERS: Can you guarantee Minister that there will be anything in place by the end  of next year?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Well there's no timeline but there is a determination and focus of  this government, of our Prime Minister, on ensuring that we have a regional solution to this  problem and for that reason she outlined, in her second week as Prime Minister, an approach  forward. After dealing with a very complex fraught issue in the area of the mining sector, we  resolved that matter through her intervention, providing certainty for the sector and our  economy. We're now moving onto a very complex area where there is no quick fix but there  is a determination and focus by this government to find a long lasting solution to this issue.

PANELLIST:      Minister, you have to concede that to all those Australians that the Prime  Minister talked about, that are concerned about these arrivals of unauthorised boats, they  might actually want to know about how long this might take. That's a pretty reasonable thing  for voters to want to know. How long will this processing centre take? So if you can't commit  to a time frame, what will you tell the Australian people on how long you're prepared to talk  to East Timor. For instance if it takes six months or a year, will you then walk away from  those talks and go to plan B because, you know, they've gone on for too long. How long will  you talk before you move on to another option?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Let's just at least have the first series of meetings around the detail.  The fact is on Tuesday the Prime Minister outlined that she'd spoken to the President. On  Thursday, of only this week, the Prime Minister and President of that country had indicated  the preparedness to talk through the details of a centre. That bodes well for those discussions  but in the end East Timor is a sovereign nation, it's a democracy, and of course the decisions  around these matters are entirely dependent upon their decisions as well as our own.

PANELLIST:      Minister, I'm still struggling to understand why it has to be offshore and  why it can't be in Australia. You say that there's an element there of removing the incentive to  come here, but if they come here you'd process them and send them to East Timor anyway. If  they came here, you'd process them to an onshore facility. There's really no difference in that.  You mentioned before that it had to be East Timor or that you'd look at East Timor. Is it  because East Timor is just a less attractive country than Australia so it can't be in a first world  nation like ours? I'm trying to understand why we can't house our idea in our own country.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Well in relation to the options, I mean this is subject to the  conversations we're having broadly, but the fact is that if you look at where centres have been  before, they're not normally placed in countries that would be depicted as destination

countries. The more important thing here is Peter…

PANELLIST: Why is that?



BRENDAN O'CONNOR: The more important thing here is Peter is that we have a  preparedness now on behalf of East Timor for its President to sit down and engage in the  detail. Why wouldn't we do that? It would be foolhardy not to. We are determined to discuss  these matters with the President of East Timor and we are also prepared of course and indeed  wish to continue to discuss the broader regional protection framework with all our partners in  the region.

PANELLIST: So you're happy to go to the election with absolutely no idea for how long this  might take. So will you tell the Australian people that it will happen in your second term at  least? Within a three year period?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: What we won't do Patricia is go to an election with a promise  based on a lie, like the Leader of the Opposition. What we won't do is tell the Australian  people a lie about what can be done with a simplistic slogan of turning back the boats. The  Prime Minister on Tuesday said - enough of this. We are telling the Australian people the  truth. On Tuesday she outlined who she spoke to and she's drawn criticism for that, but she's  been open and honest with the Australian people about her direction and I believe the  Australian people, what they want is honesty in this debate and they haven't had it from the  Opposition and they're getting it from this government.

DAVID SPEERS: The truth then Minister is that there is no guarantee from this government  that any regional processing centre will be delivered in the next term at Parliament.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: There's a guarantee David that we will work relentlessly to pursue  this option because it is an important element for the entire regional framework approach. It's  the only way we're going to have a sustainable solution to this complex issue.

DAVID SPEERS: Okay. Just to clarify, we may not see a regional processing centre in the  second term of the Gillard Government.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: No. You put words in my mouth David. I've said to you that we  are working this through. We are now talking with a country that happens also to be a  signatory to the Refugee Convention. We're talking to that country about this, as we speak,  we're talking about the detail. That bodes well for a centre to be established but we will, as a  government, focus our energies and as the Prime Minister said, we would relentlessly pursue  this issue as we go forward.

DAVID SPEERS: Let's go back a step to, Malcolm mentioned earlier Nauru. It was used  before by the Howard Government. It still has a centre there. It's expressed some readiness to  take on that role again. I understand this - the Labor Government does not want to go with a  country that's not a signatory to the UN Refugees Convention.   Can I ask you why not? What is the problem here? Is it a fear about sending asylum seekers

back to their troubled homeland? Why? What's the reasoning for going with a signatory  country?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Well firstly we believe we need a regional approach and we need  to make sure that when we establish a centre it actually is a centre for the region. It is not a  quick fix sort of unilateral imposition on a small nation, which drew international criticism,  raised questions of breaches of international law. This is not the approach of the Gillard

Government. Our approach is we want to remove the product that's been sold by people  smugglers, luring people on dangerous vessels, but do so that has regard to our humanitarian  and international obligations.   The best way to do that, David, is to ensure that we have direct engagement with a country  that's signatory to the convention because we will have, and not only of course a refugee  signatory, but also, also ensure that we are engaging fully with the UNHCR and the  International Organisation for Migration. We do need a holistic approach that has regard to  our international obligations. The Nauru solution is not an approach that this government

would take.

PANELLIST: Minister, if it has to be a country that is a signatory to the convention, how do  you then explain what was being termed the Indonesia Solution last year that Kevin Rudd  was promoting in the second half of last year, because Indonesia's not a signatory?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Well look I don't recall exactly the point you make but we of  course work closely with Indonesia. They are a transit country dealing with this problem  themselves and that's why the Prime Minister spoke to the President of Indonesia this week  and will continue to have conversations with them. We co-chair the Bali process with  Indonesia. They are indeed an important partner, a very important partner, in dealing with  this issue and that will continue to be the case.

PANELLIST:      Minister, could you give us a bit of a history of this policy? There's a  suggestion that it was raised last year, that the then Prime Minister knocked it on the head,  but it kept being developed. Is that true? What is the history of it?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Well can I say in relation to the regional centre, the Prime  Minister, that is the Prime Minister Gillard, believed we needed to enhance our regional  approach, we needed to consider a regional processing centre…

PANELLIST:      Before she became Prime Minister?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: I'm sorry?

PANELLIST:      Before she became Prime Minister? Was that her view when she was  Deputy Prime Minister?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: You'd have to ask her that question. I can only say to you that from  Tuesday she outlined the approach she believes this government, this country should take and  I think that was the right approach and that's what we're doing now. We are now focusing on  sitting down with East Timor and discussing the detail of the proposal.

PANELLIST: Minister do you concede that it could be possible to have more than one  centre? So there could be one in East Timor and perhaps a smaller centre in PNG on Manus  Island. Is that a potential equation that could come out of this process?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Look, I'm not going to be nominating how many or where the  centre should be. At this point in time Patricia we are now talking to East Timor on the  details…

PANELLIST:      So you're open to the possibility, which is what I'm trying to find out here.



BRENDAN O'CONNOR: After the invitation they provided us to sit down and talk and that's  what we'll be doing.

PANELLIST:      But are you open to the possibility that it might be a sort of a bigger  configuration than just having this one centre in East Timor? Perhaps for instance that would  appease some of the concerns of the East Timorese that they wouldn't be the only, the only

place where people would be parked.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Well that may be subject of the conversations that are held  between East Timor and Australia. What we said is of course we'll talk all partners in the  region about the regional protection framework. At this point however our focus is in having  detailed discussions with the President of East Timor.

PANELLIST:      If that's your view why did the Prime Minister earlier this week back away  from that? What was the concern there because you seem to be quite strongly saying East  Timor is our priority and that's fair enough. But why did she move away from that position?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Well look, I understand people have concerns about some of these  issues but the Prime Minister was not going to be making any unequivocal comments about  location. She would never have done that until there was a clear view by a country in  question that they wanted to talk to us about the proposition.   Now on Thursday the President and Prime Minister of East Timor made clear they did want  to sit down with Australia and talk about the detail and until then the Prime Minister was not  going to presume anything and we can now go forward and discuss the details as agreed by  the Prime Minister and the President of East Timor.

PANELLIST:      Minister, can I just get a handle on how long you think this is going to take?  Is it a fair characterisation to say that you are hopeful that you'll get it done in the next term  of government but there is no guarantee that you'll get it done in the next term of  government?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: It is a major priority of this government, the Prime Minister has  said there is no quick fix but it is a priority of this government and as she has said we will  relentlessly pursue it and that's all I can say on the matter and people will understand that  these things are complex but it is the focus of this government to ensure we have a  sustainable regional protection approach to irregular migration and this is the best way  forward?



PANELLIST:      Minister, other than this policy are there other policies that the Government  might be developing in this area, as interim measures, considering this might take so long? I  mean Australians are sitting there in their lounge rooms concerned about these boat arrivals.  The Prime Minister's acknowledged that. So do there need to be perhaps policy solutions that  are found before this centre eventually gets off the ground?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Well there are things already going on of course…

PANELLIST:      I mean new approaches…

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Patricia, there are - for example what seems not to have been  reported much in the speech on Tuesday was the lifting of the suspension in Sri Lanka on the  advice of well, varied advice, but including the advice of the UNHCR that was published on  Monday and other advice we received. We lifted the suspension to continue the processing of  those claims. We know now that the situation in Sri Lanka, whilst not perfect is markedly  improved and we expect to see a higher level of rejections. We also of course made comment  about the changing circumstances in some parts of Afghanistan because, as she also outlined,  we've seen a much higher primary rejection rate of applications from Afghanis. So there are  indeed changes that are leading to a greater likelihood of people being returned home.   But can I stress those people who are genuine refugees will be settled here or another  country.

DAVID SPEERS: All right Home Affairs Minister, Brendan O'Connor. On that note we will  have to leave things there. Thank you very much for joining us today from Melbourne.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Thanks David.







