

BORDER PROTECTION COMMAND BOARDS VESSEL



(12 May 2010) Customs and Border Protection patrol vessel, the Oceanic Viking, operating  under the control of Border Protection Command, provided assistance to a vessel yesterday  afternoon approximately 54 nautical miles south south west of Scott Reef.   Initial indications  suggest 48 people were on board the vessel.

The Oceanic Viking approached the vessel under the Safety of Life at Sea Convention as it  was fluctuating its course, indicative of navigation or steering equipment failure. The  passengers of the vessel signalled that they were in need of assistance. Upon boarding it was  apparent that the vessel was taking on significant amounts of water.

Passengers were safely transferred to the Oceanic Viking and are now being conveyed to  Christmas Island where they will undergo identity, security and health checks and their  reasons for travel will be established



The vessel was initially sighted by a Customs and Border Protection Dash 8, operating under  the control of Border Protection Command.  ACV Dame Roma Mitchell was also in the  vicinity and provided support to the Oceanic Viking.



While their nationality is yet to be confirmed, if these asylum seekers are Sri Lankans or  Afghans, the processing suspension introduced by the Government on 9 April 2010 will  apply.



The suspension was introduced because of the evolving circumstances in these two countries.  The Australian Government believes that asylum seekers should only granted the right to live  in Australia if they are genuinely in need of protection.



According to the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees 2009 report  on Asylum Levels and Trends in Industrialised Countries, the number of arrivals to Australia  remains very low by world standards.   In 2009, some 377,200 asylum claims were recorded  in 44 countries with Australia receiving 6,170 - less than 2 per cent of the total asylum  applications.



Australia was not alone in experiencing an increase in asylum seeker applications in 2009.   While Australia had a 29 per cent increase, Denmark experienced a 59 per cent increase,  Hungary a 50 per cent increase, Finland a 47 per cent increase, Poland a 47 per cent increase,  Belgium a 40 per cent increase, and New Zealand a 36 per cent increase.



The Australian Government is committed to implementing a comprehensive people  smuggling strategy to combat this issue. The Government has expanded its presence in the  region with the Australian Federal Police, Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade,  Department of Immigration and Citizenship and the Australian Customs and Border  Protection Service recently setting up or expanding liaison posts devoted to deterring  irregular migration.



Media Contact: Belinda Cole 0438 595 567 or Customs and Border Protection media 02  6275 6793





