Scott Morrison, MP

Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship    Media Release





Transcript - 2GB Ray Hadley Program  Tuesday 25th May 2010

Subjects: Escapes from Villawood Detention Centre



RAY HADLEY: G’day Scott



SCOTT MORRISON: G’day Ray, how are you?



RAY HADLEY: Not bad. You heard about it from our programme I believe.



SCOTT MORRISON: Yes I heard about it and I’ve just been pulled out of a meeting. I’m

happy to be on the programme. We have another six that are still at large. I understand nine

broke out last night. Now that follows similar incidents in Darwin and Melbourne, more

recently. As well as the breakouts back in March from Villawood when the Minister was

saying people were being taken there because it was more secure. Julia Gillard said at that

time ‘we don’t want to see any repeat of this’. Well we’re seeing it because the borders are

out of control and we’ve had a 240% increase in the on shore detention population since

January of this year.



RAY HADLEY: We’ve got too many of them. Now these nine Chinese nationals are not

illegal boat people. They’re breaching visa conditions or over staying their visas. Now

they’ve been rounded up by immigration and so that’s cost us money. We get them in there,

they’ve got some sort of right of appeal, even though they’ve over stayed their visas or

they’ve breached their visa conditions, so they are there while they explore their avenues to

stay here and they’re climbing fences at half past three this morning. It’s unbelievable.



SCOTT MORRISON: Well the reason they’re getting the opportunity to do that is because

there’s about 400 people now in the Villawood Detention Centre rather than about 100 or up

to 100 at the beginning of this year. Now that’s put a lot of pressure on how these centers

are run and how they were resourced and it’s because of the overwhelming impact of literally

hundreds of people who have been transferred off Christmas Island. Now this is only going

to get worse. We’ve had almost 1,000 people turn up since they had this asylum freeze

which has had no impact, now all of those people are going to come to the mainland centres,

the government hasn’t allocated one dollar in their budget to pay for how they are going to

deal with all this. They will still spend the money, it will just be another detention blowout, so

it’s just farce Ray.



RAY HADLEY: The other thing Scott, and I appreciate you coming out of a meeting to talk to

me, the Department of Immigration, I think Sandi Logan is on leave, the Minister, unless it

suits him doesn’t talk to me - and we’re to talk to him later this week because I think the 28

days for Motekiai Taufahema has elapsed, the murderer, or one of the murderers of Glenn

McEnallay to send him back to his place of birth and that will be this week - but we’re trying

to get someone to talk to us because it’s an important issue that we’ve had nine people

escape and we want to know what they’re doing to beef up security and no one is available

to us.



SCOTT MORRISON: Well that doesn’t surprise me, sadly Ray. This is a government that is

happy to go out there when it wants to spin something. When it wants to try and tell you

there’s good news about, but they won’t be accountable for their failures. But I’ll tell you what

they’ll say if they were to come on. They’d blame the contractor or they’d blame international

forces. I don’t know, blame their parents. I‘ve got no idea Ray. But they’ll certainly blame

someone else. They need to take responsibility and the cause of this problem is the fact that

the whole system has been overrun because of their border protection failures. It has put this

department into complete gridlock and until they deal with this issue of the boats, we’re just

going to see this continue and continue and continue.



RAY HADLEY: Ok Scott thanks for your time.



SCOTT MORRISON: Thanks Ray.



END



