

Transcript

TRANSCRIPTION: PROOF COPY E & OE

DATE: 18/05/2010

TITLE: MTR Radio, Mornings with Steve Vizard

TOPIC: Honesty, Politics and the Media



STEVE VIZARD: Well, shock horror, hold the presses, man the barricades, call the  cops, dial triple 0, we must be completely flattened by last night’s news that  politicians may not always tell the gospel truth. Tony Abbott admitted on The 7.30  Report last night that he sometimes doesn’t mean exactly what he says.

[Excerpt from interview]

TONY ABBOTT: I know politicians are going to be judged on everything they say but  sometimes in the heat of discussion you go a little bit further than you would if it was  an absolutely calm, considered, prepared, scripted remark which is one of the  reasons why the statements that need to be taken absolutely as gospel truth is those  carefully prepared scripted remarks.

KERRY O’BRIEN: So every time you make a statement we have to ask you whether  it’s carefully prepared and scripted or whether it’s just something on the fly?

TONY ABBOTT: Look we can…

KERRY O’BRIEN: No, seriously. This is a very serious question.

TONY ABBOTT: But all of us, Kerry, all of us when we’re in the heat of verbal  combat so to speak will sometimes say things that go a little bit further.

[End of excerpt]

STEVE VIZARD: Well, Lindsay Tanner is the Federal Finance Minister. Lindsay,  thanks for joining us this morning.

LINDSAY TANNER: Good to be with you, Steve.

STEVE VIZARD: Now Lindsay are we going to get the gospel truth from you?  LINDSAY TANNER: I hope so.

STEVE VIZARD: Lindsay, there’s the gospel truth and then there’s other truth,  presumably dispensable truth. How does this work?

LINDSAY TANNER: Well, I was astonished frankly, Steve, because everybody  knows that there’s endless argument in politics about what you said and whether you  meant it and whether it was true or whether you’ve back flipped. That’s just part of  the game but Tony appears to be writing himself an open cheque to say, well it  doesn’t matter what I say on the electronic media, it’s dispensable so don’t treat it  seriously. Now just last night on Q&A I was being probed about something I said I  think some months ago on a radio interview and I didn’t say, look hang on, I just -  that was just verbal, it’s not written down, so don’t treat it seriously, I had to defend  myself. And I think he should have to defend himself as the would be Prime Minister  about anything he says to actually allow for accountability.

STEVE VIZARD: Hasn’t he got a point though, there’s stuff that you - that’s written  that forms party policy and there’s the things you extemporise about and wouldn’t the  average citizen, the person watching telly put different weights on those two sorts of  things?

LINDSAY TANNER: To some degree I suppose that’s a fair comment, Steve but  ultimately we’re no different from sports people or anybody else, we’re under  pressure, we have to make split second judgments when we’re being interviewed.

We’re asked very difficult questions often and that’s part of the testing process of  working out who is fit for leadership and so for him to now say, look ignore  everything I say, wait until you’ve got it in writing I think frankly is treating people with

contempt.

STEVE VIZARD: Is this a version of Howard’s knot that he got himself into with core  and non-core promises?

LINDSAY TANNER: I think it’s got some similarities really but I think this is probably  more serious because let’s face it, most people get their information predominantly  from the electronic media, from stations like yours, from the TV and most people  don’t read the political stuff in newspapers. And they certainly don’t get copies of  detailed policy statements put out by political parties. So what is in effect the  dominant means of accountability, the dominant means of holding people like me to  account saying, well hang on a second, here’s what you said three months ago,  Tony Abbott’s just saying, well that doesn’t apply to me.

STEVE VIZARD: Couldn’t it be said though, Lindsay that this sort of plain speaking,  this authenticity which might resonate with the viewer, the populous, is precisely the  authenticity, though it gets him in knots, which distinguishes Abbott from K. Rudd

who appears to be overly media managed on the one hand and then quite different  from his private - from the private PM which we saw a scintilla of on The 7.30 Report  not that long ago?

LINDSAY TANNER: Well, I think that 7.30 Report is a good example of how often in  this game you can’t win, Steve. Kevin Rudd on the one hand gets criticised for being  too scripted and then he gets a bit of passion about something or I think he’s entitled  to be passionate and all of a sudden people are describing it as a meltdown. I just

thought that was astonishing. So I think there is frankly a bit of overkill when people  judge our performance and our style and that’s always going to be debatable,  everybody has got their views about different people’s style or their accent or they  use words that people don’t understand, all that kind of stuff. That’s fair game for  commentary but I think any would be political leader saying, look you can’t trust  anything I say and I’m just going to give myself a free get out of jail card that says

anything I say I can ignore in the future and just say well, look that was in the heat of  the moment don’t treat it seriously, I think frankly undermines the whole democratic  process. Because most people will go to the polls with the vast bulk of their  knowledge about Tony Abbott being what he has said on TV and radio.

STEVE VIZARD: Doesn’t that give a problem to the Prime Minister who has back  flipped on so many issues? I mean we’ve got the ETS, we’ve got the childcare  centres, we’ve got the temporary hold on asylum seekers. I mean, if you’re talking  about moral conviction and sort of - some sort of certainly and rectitude can’t we say  that in the case of Labor they’ve got the same if not greater problems?

LINDSAY TANNER: Well, first I don’t accept the analysis that somehow there is  some huge pattern of so-called back flipping here. What you’ve got with the  Emissions Trading Scheme is a deferral caused by circumstances that are beyond  our control. Now that’s fair enough that people debate that and it’s fair enough we  get criticised for that but to call it some kind of back flip I don’t think is accurate.  Secondly on the childcare centres in effect you’ve got an election commitment that’s  been partially delivered. And time has marched on from when it was first made,  which is somewhere between four and five years ago from memory, and the market  has changed dramatically including the collapse of ABC Learning and its  replacement with a new not-for-profit consortium. All kinds of things have happened  where you get to the point of saying well should you complete this process when it’s  clearly irresponsible and wasteful to do it. Now different people have different views  to that. So I think this idea that there’s some kind of big pattern of back flips is frankly  a grossly misleading and exaggerating analysis.

STEVE VIZARD: Well, it’s not how the polls are seeing it though, Lindsay. The polls  are not looking good for Labor at the moment. You’ve come back quite dramatically.  You’ve delivered, and Wayne Swan, have delivered a responsible budget but does it  come down to this, numbers which you’ve delivered on, versus moral conviction?  People are asking can we trust you on the big policies.

LINDSAY TANNER: Well, to be honest, Steve I really couldn’t say. I don’t know  because with opinion polls and you’re dead right we’ve had a pretty tough month or  so, we’ve had some rather bracing polls that suggest that it’s a real even contest for  the forthcoming election, you never quite know exactly what polls mean. There’s a  thousand and one theories about what’s moved where and what caused it and  there’s some probably more obvious theories but you never really know and I think  there’s a lot of would be experts out there who will give you cheap advice about it

means this, it means that and I’ll give you opinions from time to time too but it’s a  pretty inexact science this stuff.

STEVE VIZARD: Lindsay Tanner, we’re looking forward to Joe Hockey’s speech on  Wednesday at the Press Club and he’s going to detail his view of the Opposition’s  budget. What should we be looking for, what should be listening for?

LINDSAY TANNER: One word, Steve, detail. We’ve had this endless sequence of  dog ate my homework excuses as to why they refuse to move from rhetoric and one  liners to substantive detail. Now by this stage of the game in 2007, the last election  year, you had $3 billion worth of costed savings commitments put out by us, by me in  March of 2007. You had several specific policies with specific costing like the trades  training centres for schools that have been put out by Kevin Rudd. Early childhood  learning in childcare centres and so far all we’ve got from Tony Abbott is just these

kind of off the top of the head one liners. He’s got this huge tax on major business to  pay for a parental leave scheme where the detail is still yet to be properly finalised.  So I think it’s time they made the gear change and started actually giving the  Australian public an opportunity to make a genuine choice by actually setting out  here are the details of the spending things we’re proposing and they’ve got $15  billion worth already on the meter that they haven’t indicated where the money is  coming from and here are the spending cuts they’re going to make. All we’ve had is  a couple of one liners so far.

STEVE VIZARD: Well, we’re going to find out on Wednesday hopefully. Finally,  Lindsay, J. Gill the Deputy Prime Minister said there’s more chance of me becoming  the full forward for the Dogs then there is any change in the Labor Party. How do you  think she’d go at full forward for the Dogs?

LINDSAY TANNER: Well, probably not bad actually Steve but now that you mention  it I’ve - I still harbour ambitions of pulling on the boots for Essendon. I’m getting a bit  old, I admit but I tell you what Justin Fletcher is having a very good year at the age of  35 and I may be nearly 20 years older than that but I still reckon there’s a show and I  think they could do with a bloke of my talents.

STEVE VIZARD: Well, they…

LINDSAY TANNER: Probably at centre half back.

STEVE VIZARD: …they could. Well, I was thinking of full back and then we could  see J. Gill and you play on each other at the big blockbuster…

LINDSAY TANNER: Well, that’s right.

STEVE VIZARD: …and you think that wouldn’t pack out the G.

LINDSAY TANNER: That’s right and hopefully she wouldn’t have a good a right  hook as Barry Hall does.

STEVE VIZARD: Lindsay Tanner, thanks for your time, really appreciate it.

LINDSAY TANNER: Good to speak to you, Steve.

STEVE VIZARD: That’s Lindsay Tanner, Minister for Finance.

-ends-



Media Contact: Website:

Nardia Dazkiw - 0418 144 690 www.financeminister.gov.au



