Stephen Smith, MP  Minister for Foreign Affairs and Trade

MEET THE PRESS

4 JULY 2010

INTERVIEW WITH STEPHEN SMITH

DISCUSSIONS ABOUT THE SUSPENSION ON ASSESSING ASSYLUM SEEKERS FROM SRI  LANKA, UPCOMING ELECTION

PAUL BONGIORNO:  ...And welcome back to the program Stephen Smith. Good morning,  Minister. The Liberals have spent a fair bit of money getting an animated cartoon showing Julia  Gillard as a puppet of the ‘machine men’. They wouldn't do it unless they thought it was going to  resonate out there in the electorate.

STEPHEN SMITH:  I don't think it will. I think over the time she has been in Parliament and  particularly the time she has been Deputy Prime Minister, Julia Gillard has showed she is very much  her own person.

If Julia Gillard was a puppet of the unions, then I would assume that at the time that Julie Gillard put  industrial relations legislation through Parliament, all of the union movement would have been  applauding. They weren't. They were very pleased that we abolished WorkChoices, but there are a  whole range of issues where Julia Gillard took a view which didn’t and wasn't consistent with the  union view.

So  she is her own person and I think the community have already made the judgement that she is  smart and tough and will make decisions, balanced, reasonable decisions, in the national interest.

PAUL BONGIORNO:  Well, it is not only the Liberals who have a negative view of the ‘machine  men’. Maxine McKew, the Labor giant-slayer in Bennelong, she says “the faction warlords play  brutish politics”.

STEPHEN SMITH:  We are in a tough business. It is a tough business and often, people are on the  receiving end of it. It is part of the community making a judgement, not just about processes but also  importantly about outcomes. We can all give each other descriptions in the very tough business that

we are in, whether it is media, journalism or politics.

Maxine  makes a substantial contribution. She is in a tough seat and we hope that she holds that after  the next election. But we are in a tough business as the events of the last couple of weeks has shown  but it is also a business where there is compassion. Everyone knows that Kevin Rudd will be feeling  very much the loss that he has suffered and of course, we feel for him and sympathise for him.

PAUL BONGIORNO:  The Prime Minister is going about housekeeping, if I can keep it that way.  She signalled yesterday that asylum seekers and border protection is the next area she wants to  address. What is ticking down there is a decision this week on whether to begin processing Sri Lankan  asylum seekers. It does seem that that ban, if you like, the pause in assessing asylum seekers from Sri  Lanka, really hasn't worked. There has been 34 boats since then.

STEPHEN SMITH:  It is not a ban, it is a suspension. The Government has to make a decision  about the Sri Lankan suspension over the next few days. But, at the time, the Immigration Minister,  Chris Evans, and I made it clear that we didn't see this necessarily stopping new boat arrivals. We  have a difficult and complex problem...

PAUL BONGIORNO:  But what was the purpose of it if it? Wasn't it to send a signal that you didn't  want boats to come any more?

STEPHEN SMITH:  The purpose was, and it remains the purpose, we believe there were changing  circumstances and conditions for assessment of refugees from Sri Lanka and we wanted to make the  best and correct up-to-date assessments. In that respect, we note and we are expecting in the very

short-term, the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees to make its own judgement about  changing circumstances in Sri Lanka. We're dealing with a very difficult problem. We of course  understand the community is concerned about the frequency of boat arrivals but we're not the only

country in the world to suffer adverse consequences of large numbers of displaced people, particularly  from Sri Lanka and Afghanistan.

PAUL BONGIORNO:  The Prime Minister says it has got nothing much to do with toughness and  it’s got everything to do with effectiveness. Can you spell out what ‘effective’ will mean in this  situation?

STEPHEN SMITH:  We want to examine all of the things that we have done to date, re-double our  efforts to see whether there is more that we can do. But I do make the point, there is no magic solution  here. Those people like Tony Abbott who pretend to the Australian community that there is an instant

or magical simplistic solution, are just wrong.

We have to work not just with source countries, like Afghanistan and Sri Lanka, but also transit  countries through the region - Indonesia, Malaysia, Thailand. We have to also make sure, as we have,  by increasing the assets on the border, we have to protect our own borders. We are redoubling our  own efforts, looking at what more we can do.

But I very much do underline the point, when we are dealing with these very significant push factors,  people being driven from war-torn and conflict-riven countries, that these are difficult push  factors to  deal with.  We are not the only country in the world suffering from them and that is why we work  closely with our neighbours in the region through the Bali process, which we share with Indonesia.

PAUL BONGIORNO:  On Tuesday, Joe Hockey forecast the election would be announced this  weekend, his Leader began taking out some insurance.

TONY ABBOTT (TUESDAY): We're ready. We are ready whenever it happens, but as far as the  public are concerned, what I think they want is they want their problems fixed and they don't want  someone rushing to the polls in the hope that they can be camouflaged.

PAUL BONGIORNO:  So, Stephen Smith, if we have an election, say in August, it will be to paper  over the cracks?

STEPHEN SMITH:  It would not be the first time that ‘sloppy Joe’ was wrong about something. I  think more importantly than him being wrong about election timing is he is often wrong about the  economy and the economy’s future.

I think the best thing to do is for people to draw a circle around the first Saturday in December and  work back from that. We will have an election some time this year. There is only one person who  knows. She may well have not made up her mind and she is certainly not telling but we will have an

election this year and then people will be faced with a very simple choice between Julia Gillard and  Tony Abbott, Wayne Swan and Joe Hockey ‘sloppy Joe’, and Labor and Liberal generally.

Break

PAUL BONGIORNO: You're on Meet the Press with Foreign Minister Stephen Smith. And welcome  to the panel, Andrew Probyn, from ‘The West Australian’, and Marius Benson from ABC News  Radio. Good morning, Andrew and Marius. On Wednesday, Kevin Rudd left the Lodge after failing

to convince Julia Gillard to give him a job in Cabinet. The speculation was that he was very keen to  be given Foreign Affairs, at least he got this promise.

JULIA GILLARD (MONDAY): If the Government is re-elected I will be very delighted to welcome  Kevin Rudd into the Cabinet in a senior position.

MARIUS BENSON, ABC NEWS RADIO: Mr Smith, there is Julia Gillard guaranteeing a senior  position to Kevin Rudd, if Labor is re-elected, and everybody believes they know what Kevin Rudd  wants, the job he wants is yours.

STEPHEN SMITH:  I think there are two aspects to that. Firstly, we have election between now  and any further allocation of portfolios by Prime Minister Gillard. We are not taking that for granted.  Secondly, as I’ve said consistently, I might be old-fashioned, it is entirely a matter for the Prime  Minister of the day to allocate portfolios. I'm very happy and very pleased doing Foreign Affairs, very  pleased to add Trade to the work that I'm doing.  But we will get through the election and then I will  be, as will all of my colleagues, in the Prime Minister's hands as it should be.

MARIUS BENSON:  After the leadership change last week, you called together some senior  members of your department and you address them as “Minister” and the gist of what you said was  “this is a new day, now I can be a real Minister and you can be a real department”.

STEPHEN SMITH:  I didn't say that at all. I have seen that reported, it is completely wrong. I went  down to my department because there had been a change of government effectively, a change of  Prime Minister and I said “any new change of government of Prime Minister brings with it  opportunities”. I wanted the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade to take up those opportunities,  to return itself entirely to the centre of policy deliberations in the national capital and to make sure  that we were contesting advice and contesting views.

MARIUS BENSON:  Why was the department not at the centre of policy deliberation under Kevin  Rudd?

STEPHEN SMITH:  I think it is not just under Kevin Rudd. I think my own analysis that over the  last decade or so, particularly after September 11, there was a view, not just shared and taken up in  Australia, but internationally, that there had to be much more central co-ordination of advice to the

leader, whether it was a Prime Minister or a President, dealing with national security matters.

In that contest, often the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade stood back rather than contesting it  and I, together with the Secretary of the Department, are very strongly of the view that the

Department needs to be in the competition for advice.  That was the very strong point I made to the  Department when I spoke to them.

ANDREW PROBYN, THE WEST AUSTRALIA: Now that Kevin Rudd is gone, which is more  important under the new regime - securing a spot on the UN Security Council or hosting the World  Cup?

STEPHEN SMITH:  What is more important is making judgements about our national interest and  our national security interests which advance our nation and advance our people. We take a very  strong view that in the modern world, it is important to deal with other countries. Every challenge we  face, global financial crisis, terrorism, climate change, you cannot solve the problem by working  alone, you have to work with others.  That is why we pursue a Security Council bid. The bid for the  World Cup is a matter for the Australian Football Association. We wish them well. We hope that they  are successful. It would be a good thing to come to Australia.

ANDREW PROBYN:  You helped the bid, in fact I believe that the bid has been working in tandem  with the UN Security Council bid. Are you concerned that you have actually distorted aid program in  the pursuit of those two objectives?

STEPHEN SMITH:  Firstly, that assumption is wrong. We're pursuing a United Nations Security  Council bid. We make no apology for that. Our opponents who take a backward looking, isolationist  view, are wrong. It is in our national interest, our national security interest, our national economic  interest to pursue a Security Council bid.

We are central to, in terms of a country in the top 15 economies, central to the workings of the United  Nations. We have played a long-standing historical role on peacekeeping and peace building and we  would want to take ourselves back to the key body that makes these judgments.

On the World Cup bid, yes,we have been giving moral support and general support. I have turned up  to one of the events so far as the World Cup is concerned.  But it is a matter for the Football  Association.

We have neither been distorting our aid program for that effort nor have we been distorting our aid  program for the Security Council. Our aid program shows that we are a good international citizen and  that’s what we propose to continue.

ANDREW PROBYN:  WA MPs like yourself have dumped Kevin Rudd in your electorate material,  in fact, you dumped him before he was dumped by the party as leader. Now that he is gone, are things  looking up for Labor in WA?

STEPHEN SMITH:  Firstly, my local electorate material, since 1993, has featured me as a local  Member of Parliament. From time to time, it features other of my colleagues as it has, from time to  time, Kevin Rudd and former leaders or previous leaders. But my local electorate material is about  me, my local community and local matters. We have had a big change in recent times, a change of  Prime Minister. Obviously now, the focus of the leadership of our campaign will be on Julia Gillard.

ANDREW PROBYN:  You did agree three words that you haven't breathed for quite some time,  Swan, Cowan and Canning last week. Does that mean that you might actually pick up some seats in  WA?

STEPHEN SMITH:  I have been saying for some time, in fact I think I said either on the night of  the last federal election or the night of the last Western Australian election, that I believe there was a  good prospect for Labor to pick up seats in WA in the classic metropolitan marginal seats, Swan,  Cowan, Canning and Stirling.

The changes we have seen in the last week also, a change of Prime Minister, changes to the minerals  resources rent tax, commentators are saying that it is put the seat of Hasluck back into play for Labor.  If you put the seat of Hasluck back into play, you’re putting back into play in terms of contestability,  Swan, Cowan, Canning and Stirling.

So we will have the classic marginal seat fight in WA and given the changes we have seen in recent  days, I think we're back in the competition for those seats.

PAUL BONGIORNO:  Minister, we have a viewer question on Afghanistan, Jos Linford e-mailed,  “Why is it impossible for the government to level with the Australian people? Our contingent is doing  OK with its mission but the nation is heading in one direction, which is utter failure”.

STEPHEN SMITH:  We know it is difficult and dangerous in Afghanistan. We are not trying to  turn Afghanistan into a model Western democracy. What we are trying to do is stop Afghanistan from  being a breeding-ground for international terrorism, a hot bed for international terrorism because  Australians, regrettably and tragically, have been on the receiving end of that activity, either in South-East Asia or in Europe. It is that that we're trying to stop and that is central to our efforts training the  Afghan national army and police forces in Oruzgan Province.

PAUL BONGIORNO: Thank you very much for being with us today, Foreign and Trade Minister,  Stephen Smith.





