



The Hon Julia Gillard, MP

Transcript: Interview, with ABC AM

Julia Gillard posted Monday, 19 July 2010   E & O E - PROOF ONLY

Subjects:      Border protection; Population; BER; Climate change.

INTRO: Ms Gillard is in Queensland today.  Before she left she spoke to Sabra  Lane

PM: Well, there will be many, many polls between now and election day, but I’m  not looking at the polls.  What I know is that this election is genuinely on a knife  edge. This will be a tough, close contest between now and election day, and  Australians have a decision to make about who they want their prime minister to  be, who they want the government to be.  I’m obviously in this campaign saying  to Australians that this is an important moment to go forward, not back, and by  that I mean endorsing my vision for a sustainable Australia, for first class  services in health and education, and also, of course, making sure we keep a fair  system of workplace laws, not a return to WorkChoices.

HOST: Polls also continue to show that, particularly in marginal seats, that  voters are very uncomfortable with the way that Kevin Rudd was rolled.  How  are you going to convince those people not to punish you, and not to take a bat  to you?

PM: I think people will vote on the policies and the plans that will impact on  them and their families.

HOST: So you don’t think they they’ll be angry at you?

PM: I think people will judge on what matters for them and their families.

HOST: There aren’t really a lot of differences between what you’re now pushing  and what Kevin Rudd was pushing for.  He was negotiating a deal with the  miners on the mining tax.  There are suggestions he was also pushing for a  regional processing centre.  He said to you that he wanted to take new policies  on climate change to the election.  Is it a case that you’re just a new face on the  same old Labor policies that Kevin Rudd had?

PM: I’ve brought my own perspective to the policies and announced my own  vision for this country.  A vision about a sustainable Australia, that’s what I’ve  been talking in Queensland about and will continue to discuss in Queensland  today.  Making sure we don’t hurtle down the track to a big Australia, but we put  at the forefront of our thinking sustainability, including getting our regional cities  and towns that want growth to grow, and take some pressure off our bigger  cities.  Of course, I’ve put my own stamp on the breakthrough agreement that

we had with the mining companies, giving mining communities, the mining  industry certainty, and also enabling us to give some great benefits, like  increased superannuation for working people and a cut in the company tax rate,  and tax breaks for small businesses.  And of course I’ve also brought my own  perspectives to the asylum seeker question and moved to strengthen border  protection with a real plan.

HOST: You talk about not wanting a bigger Australia.  You can’t stop people  from having kids and, at the moment, Australia does have a skills shortage and  that’s only going to get worse.  You need to keep up the levels of skilled  migration.  What are you going to do?

PM: Well, I think in this country we actually have communities in very different  circumstances. In some parts of the country we’ve got literally more people than  jobs and congestion.  In other parts of the country, we’ve got cities and regions  that are crying out for more skilled workers they want more people.  I believe  we can work our way through to a set of policies that help us deal sustainably  with these questions.  That’s what I’ve asked Tony Burke to do as our Minister  for Sustainable Population.  But the measure I announced yesterday is a modest  measure to take us forward, to help those regional centres and towns that want  to grow, and to develop some affordable housing in those centres.

HOST: You can’t make people live in regional centres though.

PM: You can implement policies that will make a difference, and the policy I  announced yesterday is one that will make a difference, will enable up to fifteen  communities around the country to have access to funds that will help them  develop affordable housing to get more people to places that want growth and  have the jobs available.

HOST: On some major policies that you’ve been involved in, the Building the  Education Revolution and the Home Insulation Program, there are investigations  into both, you’ve set up a taskforce into Building the Education Revolution.  An  Auditor-General is looking at the Home Insulation Program.  The findings of  these investigations won’t be out before the election.  Voters have deep  concerns about both these programs.  There’s a perception here that you’ve  called an early poll to potentially avoid some embarrassing findings.

PM: Frankly, I think that’s complete nonsense.  We’ve had an Auditor-General  report into the Building the Revolution program.  It was called for by my then  Opposition counterpart, Christopher Pyne.  Obviously I’ve moved from direct  control of the Education portfolio since.

HOST: Cost blowouts that people have been hearing about are nonsense?

PM: No, no, I am specifically not saying that, but I’m just correcting the  impression you’re giving that somehow a report is not going to be available  before election day.  The Auditor-General’s report into Building the Education  Revolution, asked for by the Opposition, actually found that, broadly, the  program was meeting the aims we’d set for it.  I believed we did need to focus  on value for money, I wanted to do more and I set up the Building the Education  Revolution taskforce, led by a leading Australian businessperson to do just that.

The first report of that taskforce will come down in August, and I have  guaranteed it will be available before the election.  On the Home Insulation  Program, obviously that was run by our Minister, Peter Garrett.  That program is  the subject of an Auditor-General’s report.  The Auditor-General is an  independent watchdog.  He makes the decisions about timing - nothing to do  with me, nothing to do with the Government.  But I’ve acknowledged publicly as  Prime Minister that the home insulation program became a mess, absolutely  became a mess.  I very much pass on my condolences, and are very sorry for  the loss that four families sustained, where we saw dreadful incidents and  accidents involving four young Australians who died installing insulation.  This  program was a mess.  I will keenly await the Auditor-General’s report to see  what lessons can be learnt, but that report and its timing is a matter for the  Auditor-General and cannot be influenced by me.

HOST: When you took over as Prime Minister three weeks ago, you said you had  to get on with the business of governing. Yet on Saturday, two days after some  serious allegations were raised too about you allegedly welching on a deal with  Kevin Rudd, again there’s a perception here that you were pretty hasty to see  the Governor-General about triggering an election to try and end that discussion.

PM: I just don’t accept the premise of any of these questions.  When I became  Prime Minister on the twenty-fourth of the June, I said frankly to the Australian  people, I know I haven’t been elected and I want to make sure that Australians  get the opportunity to exercise their vote, their birthright, pick their Prime  Minister, pick their government.  I gave them a pledge that we would be moving  towards the polls.  We are holding the polls - ordinary general election in the  timeframe in which its due.  An ordinary election could be held any time after  the first of July; we’re obviously having an ordinary election on the twenty first  of August.

HOST: There was widespread belief that the decision to delay the emissions  trading scheme started the rot for Labor and for Kevin Rudd.  You have said that  the scheme will still be delayed.  Why should Australians think you’re going to do  anything differently?  I mean, you’re the Prime Minister for still not yet.

PM: I will be having something more to say about climate change during the  course of the campaign, and when I say it, of course, it will be a statement  coming from someone who believes climate change is real, who believes it is  caused by human activity, who accepts the science.  My opponent, Tony Abbott,  dismisses the science, out of hand; has called it absolute crap.

HOST: Do you believe, if you are re-elected, will you put a price on carbon  during the next term?

PM: What I’ve said is that the decisions that the Government has already  announced about the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme stand, so there’s no  change there.  But I will be having something more to say on climate change  during the course of the campaign.

HOST: Green preferences look like they’re going to be pretty important in this  election.  Do you concede that?

PM: Well, look I think every vote’s important and obviously people will choose to  exercise their vote and choose where they want to put their preferences.

HOST: You’ll need to announce something substantial if you’re going to win  those votes.

PM: I’ll be announcing policies on climate change that I think are in the nation’s  interest, and then it will be a question for Australians to judge whether or not  they believe that they are good policies.  Anything I announce will be because I  believe it’s the right way forward for this country.

HOST: Julia Gillard, thanks for your time.

PM: Thank you very much.



