Scott Morrison, MP

Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship    Media Release

Transcript - 2GB Ray Hadley Program

Monday 19th April 2010

Subjects: reopening of Curtin Detention Centre, Motekiai Taufahema, SIEV 36



EandOE



RAY HADLEY: We have this fiasco of the Federal Government being portrayed in some light

as being too tough on asylum seekers or illegal boat people because they happen to be

reopening a detention centre in Western Australia in a bid to ease overcrowding on

Christmas Island. It hasn’t stopped the people flowing, this decision they took to assess

people as opposed to process people from Sri Lanka and Afghanistan. Now boat people

whose visa applications have been suspended by the government will now be housed

apparently at this Curtin Air Base in Western Australia. The base in Western Australia’s

north-west is being prepared to hold up to 300 Sri Lankan and Afghan boat people. They will

stay there until the decision to suspend applications from both nations for three and six

months respectively is reviewed. You know what is going to happen don’t you? It is the same

as this health fiasco. As soon as they are returned to government, which they probably will

be, the visas will flow and they will keep flowing until they perhaps suspend it again just out

from the next election in three years time. The centre is expected to open within weeks and

the cost of the upgrades to prepare the centre have been called ‘considerable’ by the

government. More illegal boat people are being moved off Christmas Island which is jammed

packed to capacity, to other detention centres in either South Australia where the local

mayor is blowing up because of money being spent there and not on locals or to Darwin.

Sixty single male detainees are being moved to Darwin while 70 unaccompanied minors are

being relocated to Port Augusta and that’s what the mayor is saying. She has got

disadvantaged Aboriginal youth in the town who can’t get much done for them but we are

importing 70 unaccompanied minors and it is further proof of the influx of illegal boat people

drawn here by the promise of permanent residency. The fact they have announced now

some sort of a moratorium on processing, as opposed to assessing these people has made

not one bit of difference. The Shadow Immigration Minister, Scott Morrison is on the line.

Scott, G’day.



SCOTT MORRISON: Good morning Ray.



RAY HADLEY: It has made not one bit of difference, they continue to come here and are you

a bit like me, once if they are in fact returned to government at some stage this year, that

these people will just simply all be given visas?



SCOTT MORRISON: Yeah that’s right. It’s a plan for the election, not a plan to stop the

boats. They will still get permanent protection visas on the other side of the six months if

their claims are successful and that’s why we have said all along that temporary protection

visas, which would be provided to people whose claims check out, is the way to go. That

would deny people the opportunity to pursue the family reunion program and offer a real

difference in what you would get if you were waiting up in a refugee camp or another

UNHCR processing centre. If you want to go there well you will get a permanent protection

visa, if you want to come this other way, illegally by boat, well the best you will get is a

temporary visa.



RAY HADLEY: It seems bizarre that while they are hitting this with a feather duster they are

being portrayed by some in their own party as being too heavy handed.



SCOTT MORRISON: Oh, that’s all just bluff Ray. It’s all just trying to talk up the tough talk

but we all know that the tough talk is not being matched by the actual permanent actions

which we know from when we were in government actual makes a difference. This is all just

bluster from Kevin Rudd from the election trying to make it look like he is doing something

about the issue like on so many other issues. When you look closely it has no impact at all.



RAY HADLEY: Nielsen poll results show the primary support for the Rudd Government has

fallen 3% to 39%. Do you think it may be on the back of their boat people action? Either

people not supporting it or people thinking they are being too tough one way or the other?



SCOTT MORRISON: Well look I think others will read the tea leaves on this but clearly what

I find wherever I go whether it is Kevin Rudd’s plan for 36 million people or it is his total lack

of control over our borders or whether it is the BER program or whether it is pink batts, the

list goes on and on and on. These are the issues which are showing that this Prime Minister

is all talk and no action and I think people are waking up to that fact and I think that is what is

reflected in today’s poll.



RAY HADLEY: A problem that has been brought about by courts, not necessarily by the

Minister but I am looking for some guidance here, I have spoken in the past about Motekiai

Taufahema, one of the men convicted over the death of the NSW Senior Constable Glenn

McEnally. He was murdered although they were, of course, pleading guilty to manslaughter.

At the weekend you criticised Chris Evans, the Minister for deferring decisions about

Taufahema’s visa to his department rather than taking action himself. Given that this bloke

has been to the Administrative Appeals Tribunal, then to the Federal Court and then I think

the full bench of the Federal Court, what should the Minister do. How can he actually get this

person out of this country and back to his native land?



SCOTT MORRISON: Well under the Migration Act, the Minister has the power to make a

unilateral decision which cannot be appealed to the courts, under Section 501 of the Act.

That’s what he can do. What he has done instead is he has delegated this decision out to

department officials and you can appeal against their decisions. Now he can write today,

actually cancel this fellow’s visa just like he can cancel those visas of the three people who

were involved in the plan to blow up that boat, the SIEV 36 but again, missing in action,

won’t take decisions.



RAY HADLEY: So he is wrong in saying that he can’t usurp the decision of the Federal

Court? You are saying by the stroke of the pen and Section 501, a decision by the Minister is

not referrable to any court?



SCOTT MORRISON: That’s right. The problem here is that the decision has been taken by a

department official. The Minister can make a decision and this is what Philip Ruddock used

to do. Rather then let these things go through the administrative processes of officials, he

used the powers that were there for him and any Minister for Immigration, particularly in

cases like this where there are clear community views about this, that this fellow, the second

he steps out of jail he should go back to Tonga. I wrote to Senator Evans last week. I did

make an issue of this, I know Ray you have been pursing this issue for a very long time…



RAY HADLEY: Well I have been a bit light on him because I thought, mistakenly obviously,

that once the decision was taken by Administrative Appeals and then the Federal Court, that

to a certain extent he was hamstrung and I have been lighter on him because of that but now

you tell me Section 501 would allow him to make a unilateral decision on the government’s

behalf and get this bloke back to Tonga.



SCOTT MORRISON: That’s right and George Brandis, the Shadow Attorney General who is

a sharp lawyer, and I have discussed this matter and looked at the Act and it is within his

power to make a decision that is not appealable. It is the same way for those on the SIEV 36

[inaudible] but this Minister doesn’t make decisions and you need Immigration Ministers who

will make decisions.



RAY HADLEY: Apart form the people who blew up the boat, all of the other people who

didn’t co-operate with the Coroner in the Northern Territory have all been rewarded with

permanent visas as I understand it.



SCOTT MORRISON: They have all got permanent protection visas and we are still trying to

chase up today whether those who were mentioned in the Coroner’s report have actually

been charged. I would like to know if they have been charged because they should be

charged.



RAY HADLEY: Well the Coroner said, and he named those three men I think from memory

who were responsible for the deaths of those five people and of course no co-operation from

the others and they are somewhere in the community those people now.



SCOTT MORRISON: Yeah they are around the country, with permanent protection visas

which takes us back to where we started.



RAY HADLEY: So effectively, not only are we not deporting a murderer back to his native

Tonga, we are importing murderers.



SCOTT MORRISON: Well that is one way to put it Ray.



RAY HADLEY: Well it is the only way to put it. If these people are responsible for the murder

of five people, via their actions as determined by the Coroner…



SCOTT MORRISON: There are grounds under the Migration Act for their visas to be

cancelled today. It is not prejudicial for any court action because no charges have been laid.



RAY HADLEY: Ok well we will go to him with Section 501 because…



SCOTT MORRISON: I will send you the details.



RAY HADLEY: He has been hand wringing and saying look if I could get rid of Taufahema I

would be sending him back with his brother. So now you tell me that he can, he has the

power but he is just not strong enough to do it.



SCOTT MORRISON: That’s right.



RAY HADLEY: Ok, thanks for your expertise.



SCOTT MORRISON: Thanks a lot.



