





ATTORNEY-GENERAL   HON ROBERT McCLELLAND MP

TRANSCRIPT

Parliament House, Canberra ACT 2600  Telephone (02) 6277 7300  Fax (02) 6273 4102  www.attorneygeneral.gov.au

INTERVIEW   ABC RADIO AM WITH TONY EASTLEY   WEDNESDAY,  24 FEBRUARY  20 10

Subject: Anti People Smuggling Legislation; Counter Terrorism White Paper

EASTLEY:   Australia's domestic spy agency, ASIO, has always played a significant role in  national security and counter -terrorism but is set t o undergo some changes. The Government will  introduce new bills into Parliament today to bee f up ASIO's powers, allowing it now to go after  people smuggling syndicates and criminals. But will this detract from the organisation 's traditional  role?

The Federal Attorney -General Robert McClelland is in our Canberra studio, he's with Sabra Lane.

LANE:  Mr McClelland, welcome to AM.

McCLELLAND:   Thank you.

LANE:  You're pushing for significant changes to ASIO, giving it powers t o go after people  smugglers but you launched the Counter -Terrorism White Paper yesterday saying that the terrorism  threat to Australia was permanent. Won't these new duties simply take the organisation's focus off  terrorism?

Mc CLELLAND:   No. ASIO is a sub stantial organisation. Its priori ties will remain counter -terrorism, there's no question about that but curre ntly its powers are restricted. It can utilise  information incidentally obtained as part of counter -terrorism operation s and provide it to law  enfo rcement agencies as part of the people smuggling effort.

We will now, as a result of thes e amendments if they're passed, enable ASIO to become directly  involved . We don't believe and it's not intende d to diminish from its primary role of counter -terroris m.

LANE:  We just heard from our reporter in Jaka rta claims of funding from the Middle East to  Jemaah Islamiyah organisations in Indonesia, is that still a major concern?

Mc CLELLAND:   It is , to the inter national community. T he United Nations has passed  unanimously resolutions requiring all countries to monitor and control the transfer of funds that  potentially could end up with terroris t organisations. Regrettably , it doesn't cost much to fund a  terrorist attack. It's estimated the Bali bombi ngs, the firs t major Bali bombings cost about $30,000  -   not a lot of money - so it's a constant job to monitor these transfers.

LANE:  The Opposition  has accused the Government of being a soft touch on border protection,  will these new changes for ASIO stop the boats  arriving off Australia's north coast?

Attorney General News Release  2

Mc CLELLAND:   We are respond ing  to a whole range of issues including international  pressures which the Opposition conveniently overlooks.

If you look at the numbers arriving in Australia  given the crisis in Afghanis tan, Sri Lanka, and  elsewhere but in particular those locations for our region, t here  is obviously a significant push that  is going to cause people to seek asylum, to seek safety.

But having said that, the law enforcement response of this Government is m ore substan tial than any  other peace -time G overnment in terms of border protection; more boats in the water, more planes in  the air, stronger law enforcement powers as well as working increasingly cooperatively with our  neighbours.

LANE:  Recently the Imm igration Minister Chris Evans voiced concerns that some Australians  seem to have a vast amount of knowledge of boats that were yet to arrive in Australia, are these  laws also focused at that?

Mc CLELLAND:   Yes, in short, the offence  of providing material s upport to a people  smuggling operation is specifically intended to aim at those persons within our jurisdiction who  may be providing funds or other material support to a people smuggling venture. We  are aware o f  that, obviously there are various elements o f intelligence and these things collectively were a  motivator of the amendment we're proposing.

LANE:  Are Australia's neighbours like Indonesia and Malaysia, where many of these boats  come from, are they happy to have ASIO officers based there or how's t hat going to work?

MCCLELLAND:  There is a close working relationship with the law enforcement agencies  generally. ASIO's role will essentially  be to pivot between and assist law enforcement agencies.  They are not an operational agency in this cont ext they  are an intelligence gathering agency and  they will be providing that information to la w enforcement agencies who in turn will liais e with  Indonesian authorities.

LANE:  The Prime Minister highlighted the issue of home -grown radicals yesterday, but  securi ty analysts say that there weren't any new policies or any new money set aside in that policy  lau nch yesterday to deal with this , why?

Mc CLELLAND:   Well , the C ounter Terrorism White Paper is necessarily a framework . In  terms of putting meat on the bones of these poli cies , obviously they're issues for the budge t process .

But in the area of counter -radicalisation it must be said there  is a lot of good work that's happening  in the States . What is needed is drawing together and promoting best practice at a nati onal level as  well as specific areas where the Federal Government can have , and should have , a responsibility  such as in respect to things such as the misuse of the interne t. These sorts  of things as well as , of

course , strate gies to counter the measures radicalisation.

LANE:  But there might be more money in the budget to come?

Mc CLELLAND:   There will be programs announced in the budget.

LANE:  The White Paper says Australia will introduce strict biometric tests for ci tizens of 10, as  yet unnamed, countries. The UK's had major issues with home -grown radicals and terrorist attacks,  will the UK be on that list and if not w hy not?

Attorney General News Release  3

Mc CLELLAND:   We  wil l be working with the UK. The UK are already rolling out the  biometrics. Wha t we'll be endeavouring to do is to supplement and value -add to that framework  that's already in place, those technologies, so tha t we're not replicating or duplicating.

LANE:  I understand that, but they've a lso had their problems with their own radicals , will we be  biometric testing people from the UK?

McCLELLAND:   This is a matter for the Minister for Immigration and Foreign Affairs but  we'll certainly be liaising with the UK in respect to people travelling to Australia who may be a  potential risk. There's a good relationship there  but there  are other locations around the world where  there aren't those safeguards and communications .



LANE:  Is there a risk now that we're goi ng to nominate these 10 nations and they will be  publicly named eventually; is the Government risking alienating people who are already living here  in Australia who have originally come from those countries?

Mc CLELLAND:    We have to explain  all these things and explain the basis upon which they   are selected. Obviously those locations, if there is instability, if there is a presence of terrorist  organisations, if there is a propensity  to support those terrorist organisations we've simply got t o be  upfront and honest and open about our criteria.



At the end of the day it's in every one's interest, certainly those in Australia, to ensure that we  prevent those who may carry out a terrorist a ttack from entering our country in the first place . So, I  think when these things are explained there  will be some appreciation.

LANE:  Mr McClelland , thank you.

Mc CLELLAND:  It's my pleasure.



[Ends]

