THE HON BRENDAN O’CONNOR MP

MINISTER FOR HOME AFFAIRS AND JUSTICE











ABC 774 Melbourne, Mornings with Waleed Aly  Tuesday, 21 September 2010  Topics: Villawood Detention Centre

WALEED ALY: What I want to do right now though, is talk to Brendan O'Connor. He's the  Home Affairs Minister. He's been good enough to join us this morning. Thank you very  much for being there, Brendan O'Connor.

BRENDAN OCONNOR: Good to be here, Waleed.

WALEED ALY: This is a pretty disastrous situation that's unfolding, isn't it?

BRENDAN OCONNOR: Look, it is a challenging situation rising out of the very tragic  individual circumstance, and can I say, because I've just been listening to some of your texts  that have come in, in defence of my ministerial colleague Chris Bowen, he's actually been  engaged with a lot of media on this matter. He takes it very seriously. It just so happened he  was unable, just for this particular interview and that's why I've stepped in the breach. I just  wanted to say that because sometimes people don't always understand the demands that  might be placed on people, but look as you say, it is a challenging circumstance and the  service providers are working with the clients to try and resolve the matter.

WALEED ALY: It's more than challenging though. It seems to me pretty unacceptable. I  mean, how do we have a situation where a person who has been give plenty of warning that  he is about to commit suicide can be left basically unattended? And we're told that the only  real way of stopping him committing suicide that came from the people running the detention  centre, was they put a mattress under the - at the bottom of the building and said jump on the  mattress.

BRENDAN OCONNOR: Well look, I'm not going to go to the details. At this point it would  be improper. The New South Wales police will be investigating the matter. There will be a  full report by the service provider Serco. There'll be a coronial enquiry. It is a tragic situation.  I do extend my sympathies to the family of the gentleman, and we want to make sure now we  resolve the outstanding matter with some of the clients who are on the roof and we need to  resolve that.

WALEED ALY: Irrespective of whether or not you want to go into the details or even what  the details are, surely we know enough to know that this was shambolic. There was no, there  was simply was not enough support on the ground, either prior to, or at the time that this  person was committing - was threatening to commit suicide, and ultimately did.

BRENDAN OCONNOR: I don't think we can say that at this point, but there will be a full  and proper investigation into the matter. Look, if indeed this is a suicide, and it would appear

that more likely than not, the fact is anyone who knows anything about a suicide usually  know that there's never one factor involved. These are complex issues and we do need to get  to the bottom of it and that's why the government will be ensuring that there's a full  examination of the circumstances that led to this individual tragedy.



WALEED ALY: Do you have concerns with the way that detention centres are run by the  private companies?

BRENDAN OCONNOR: No, I don't. I think the providers have a dedicated professional  staff. These are not always easy circumstances. There are, you know, from time to time,  issues that come up that do test the capacity of any staff, whether they were public servants  or staff of a provider. But I think before we start to rush to judgement we should allow, not  only the provider itself to provide a report, but also the law enforcement agencies and indeed,  the coronial enquiry - the coroner to make some determinations on this issue.

WALEED ALY: Brendan O'Connor, it's hardly a rush to judgement, I mean we've been  hearing stories like this emerge for probably ten years now.

BRENDAN OCONNOR: And I'm saying that in centres when you have from time to time,  people who are anxious or concerned, you will have challenging situations. There is no easy  answer to this. You're not going to always be able to manage things in a manner that would  be without problems, there are challenges. We do everything we can to anticipate them and  the providers certainly seek to do that. But with respect of this matter, we need to make sure  we get the full facts and then make sure that those facts are disclosed.

WALEED ALY: What confidence can we have that we're actually going to get to the facts  and follow through on this? It's been on long standing issue. The horror stories that emerge  from these immigration detention centres keeps coming, yet I've never really seen any follow

through on this at all. Not from the previous - not from the Howard government, not from the  Rudd Gillard governments.

BRENDAN OCONNOR: As I say there are statutory authorities that will determine their  findings on these issues that are removed from government. It's not for us to interfere or  intervene on what determinations are made by other law enforcement agencies or coroners,  and indeed determinations and indeed recommendations will be done without fear or favour,  and that's how it should be.

WALEED ALY: What sort of policy changes will you consider?

BRENDAN OCONNOR: Look, that's, you know, that's certainly up to the Minister for  Immigration, but I'm sure he will await for a proper consideration of this particular situation  to see whether in fact there needs to be any operational or policy change. But that's  something can only be determined once all of the information is provided to him as Minister.



WALEED ALY: What sort of time frame are we looking at for that though? I mean, it's a  pretty urgent situation we're dealing with now.

BRENDAN OCONNOR: Well we have to, at this point, attend to the current situation. Look,  as you've said yourself, the detention centres are not always, you know, without challenge  and in terms of the timeline, well that will be subject to the way in which the coroner

operates. Again, you must remember these are authorities that are independent from  government, as they should be, and they determine the duration of the process.

WALEED ALY: It just - there's a lot of distance in this language that I'm hearing, we'll wait  for a process. I mean, is there no capacity, is there no framework for an urgent response to  what is - it looks like a pretty urgent situation?

BRENDAN OCONNOR: Well you say that. I'm saying to you that this is a tragic death and  we of course want to examine the matter properly and expeditiously, but it's important to  understand that these matters are dealt with independent from government, but the

government takes the matter very seriously and we want to ensure that the matter is  considered as quickly as possible. But we should not be making, drawing conclusions  without the full facts before us.

WALEED ALY: How does the government deal with - as a matter of principal, more abstract  principal - how does the government deal with a situation where - like this one it seems -  where a person, in a sense, becomes an asylum seeker or refugee in Australia, rather than the  more typical situation of someone who's come from another country seeking asylum?

BRENDAN OCONNOR: Well, in this circumstance as I understand it, the person in question  was an overstayer. There was some misunderstanding by some that he was an irregular  arrival and of course, I think this country affords entitlements to people that are fair and

reasonable and indeed we have an appeal mechanism.  If you fail in the first instance, you have the capacity to appeal your case, and as I understand  it in this circumstance, the appeal process was exhausted and so I just make the point that,  you know, we do have a fair a robust process, and we ensure that people have rights and  those rights are respected.

WALEED ALY: I guess I'm asking the question though - can you become a refugee in  Australia?

BRENDAN OCONNOR: I'm not sure what you mean by that.

WALEED ALY: Well, the story that - the reporting in this case, is that you have a Fiji  national who wasn't a refugee when they came to Australia, but since they've been here,  they've been prodemocracy activists and as a result, are arguing that they now fear for their  lives in returning to Australia. Can you become a refugee in those circumstances?

BRENDAN OCONNOR: Well that's a good question. As I understand it as signatory to the  convention, we consider whether there's a well founded fear of persecution. That's the  primary test to apply to an individual applicant, and that's determined by the appropriate  officials. Each and every person has that test applied. If that test is fulfilled, then you're  determined to be a refugee and indeed you have that status.   But as to whether in fact that can occur subsequent, I'm not clear on that, I think it would  stand to reason that if there is a well founded fear of persecution, that you'd have some  capacity. But you might have to address that directly to the Minister of Immigration, I'm  sorry.

WALEED ALY: We're getting a lot of text messages just finally. A lot of text messages  objecting to your language here talking about detainees as ‘clients’ for instance.



BRENDAN OCONNOR: Sure.

WALEED ALY: Is this reflective of philosophy or an approach to the immigration policy  area...

BRENDAN OCONNOR: No.

WALEED ALY: ...that's distant in human, that's lacking in an understanding of the human  nuance of the immigration overload?

BRENDAN OCONNOR: Well I can assure you I'm not trying to euphemise the language to  somehow trick your listeners. I'm using the word ‘client’ because it's an appropriate term of  respect for people. Yes, they're in detention. I've used the word detention centre. I'm not

pretending to suggest otherwise. We have a detention policy. In certain circumstances people  are detained. But look, the word is used to afford the person respect and not to refer to their  state of accommodation, but to talk about them as a person who needs support and services  and that was the point I was making, I wasn't attempting to pretend otherwise.

WALEED ALY: Brendan O'Connor, thanks very much for joining us this morning,  appreciate it.

BRENDAN OCONNOR: Not at all Waleed.

WALEED ALY: That's Brendan O'Connor, the Home Affairs Minister.

