

BORDER PROTECTION COMMAND INTERCEPTS VESSEL

(21 April 2010) Border Protection Command today successfully intercepted a suspected  irregular entry vessel.



HMAS Wollongong, operating under the control of Border Protection Command, intercepted  the vessel during the night on Tuesday 20 April 2010 west of Cape Leveque, Western  Australia.



It was initially detected by a Customs and Border Protection Dash 8 aircraft, operating under  the control of Border Protection Command. The vessel had been under surveillance by  Border Protection Command for several days.



Initial indications suggest 46 passengers and two crew members are on board the vessel.



The group will be transferred to Christmas Island where they will undergo security, identity  and health checks. Their reasons for travel will also be established.



The Australian Government has changed the asylum seeker processing system, effective 9  April 2010. It has suspended the processing of claims for Sri Lankans and Afghans for three  and six months respectively, as situations in both countries are evolving.  If passengers on

this vessel are making claims in relation to Sri Lanka or Afghanistan, their claims will not be  considered until these suspensions are lifted.



People smuggling is not just an issue for Australia—it is a global and regional problem. The  commitment of our neighbours, through bilateral cooperation and the Bali Process on People  Smuggling, Trafficking in Persons and Related Transnational Crime, is critical to addressing  this most serious issue.



Recent meetings with government officials in Indonesia and Malaysia have led to positive  steps forward in bilateral and regional cooperation to deter people smuggling.



The AFP continues to provide support to foreign law enforcement agencies in their efforts to  combat people smuggling activities in the region. These close working relationships have  resulted in a number of arrests and disruptions to people smuggling ventures in countries such  as Indonesia, Malaysia, and Sri Lanka.



Since September 2008, the AFP has arrested 135 people in relation to offences under the  Migration Act 1958 (Cth). These offences attract a maximum penalty of 20 years  imprisonment.



The Australian Government remains vigilant and committed to protecting Australia’s  borders.



Contact: Brian Humphreys 0438 595 567 or Customs and Border Protection media (02) 6275  6793





