



BORDER PROTECTION COMMAND INTERCEPTS VESSELS

23 January 2009

Border Protection Command has successfully intercepted two suspected irregular entry  vessels.

HMAS Ararat, operating under the control of Border Protection Command, intercepted a  vessel late yesterday afternoon (22 January) near West Islet at Ashmore Reef.

It was initially detected by a Dash-8 surveillance aircraft and initial indications suggest 29  passengers and four crew are on board the vessel.

Early this morning HMAS Bathurst also intercepted a vessel, one nautical mile north of  Christmas Island. Initial indications suggest 38 passengers and two crew are on board this  vessel.

The two groups will be transferred to Christmas Island where they will undergo security,  identity and health checks. Their reasons for travel will also be established.

People smuggling is a world-wide problem and Australia is committed to working closely  with our neighbours to address the issue.

Situations around the world mean that large numbers of displaced persons are looking for  settlement in stable, democratic nations such as Australia, and can be targeted by, and fall  prey to, people smugglers.

People smuggling is not just an issue for Australia - it is a global and regional problem. The  commitment of our neighbours, through bilateral cooperation and the Bali Process on People  Smuggling, Trafficking in Persons and Related Transnational Crime, is critical to addressing  this most serious issue.

Recent meetings with government officials in Indonesia and Malaysia have led to positive  steps forward in bilateral and regional cooperation to deter people smuggling.

The AFP continues to provide support to foreign law enforcement agencies in their efforts to  combat people smuggling activities in the region. These close working relationships have  resulted in a number of arrests and disruptions to people smuggling ventures in countries such  as Indonesia, Malaysia, and Sri Lanka.

Since September 2008, the AFP has charged 88 people with offences under the Migration Act  1958 (Cth), These offences attract a maximum penalty of 20 years imprisonment.

The Australian Government remains vigilant and committed to protecting Australia’s  borders.

Media Contact:  Rob Ayling 0410 478 445 or   Customs and Border Protection media (02) 6275 6793



