1





THE HON BRENDAN O’CONNOR MP

MINISTER FOR HOME AFFAIRS



BORDER PROTECTION COMMAND INTERCEPTS VESSEL    (7 March  2010) Border Protection Command today successfully intercepted a suspected irregular entry  vessel.      Australian Customs Vessel Holdfast Bay, operating under the control of Border Protection Command, intercepted the  vessel during the early morning of the 7th of March , north west of Adele Island.     Initial indications suggest 28 passengers and two crew are on board the vessel.    Situations around the world mean that large numbers of displaced persons are looking for settlement and  can be targeted by, and fall prey to, people smugglers.    According to the UNHCR 2008 Global Trends report, there were 42 million displaced persons worldwide at  the end of 2008, including 15.2 million refugees.    People smuggling is not just an issue for Australia - it is a global and regional problem. The commitment of our  neighbours, through bilateral cooperation and the Bali Process on People Smuggling, Trafficking in Persons and  Related Transnational Crime, is critical to addressing this most serious issue.    The Australian Government has an orderly and planned migration program and places a high priority on protecting  Australia’s borders from irregular maritime arrivals by maintaining an effective and visible tactical response program  of aerial, land and sea-based patrols. Border Protection Command uses a combination of Customs and  Border Protection and Defence assets to deliver a coordinated national response to security threats in Australia’s  maritime domain.    The Government remains vigilant and committed to protecting Australia’s borders and today’s successful  interception demonstrates the effectiveness of the proactive response program in place.    The group will be transferred to Christmas Island where they will undergo security, identity and health checks and  their reasons for travel will be established.

Contact: Brian Humphreys 0438 595 567 or Customs and Border Protection media (02) 6275 6793

