The Hon Julie Bishop, MP  Shadow Minister for Foreign Affairs  Deputy Leader of the Opposition  Member for Curtin

ABC News 24 with Melissa Clark

Thursday, 11 November 2010

Subjects: High Court decision on asylum seeker claims; Basel III reforms; Gabe Watson; US  President Barrack Obama

MELISSA CLARK    …Now to go through some of these issues and some of the others in  the federal political sphere at the moment I am joined by the Deputy Opposition Leader Julie  Bishop who is in Perth. Julie Bishop, thanks for joining us this morning.

JULIE BISHOP    My pleasure.

MELISSA CLARK    Now, one immigration official this morning has described this ruling by  the High Court as a disaster. Do you agree?

JULIE BISHOP    Yes I do. We are still working through the implications of this decision but  it would appear to represent a total collapse of Labor’s offshore processing system.

This was a system that Labor put in place, they refused to accept the Nauru processing  centre that the Howard Government had put in place underpinned by a statutory framework  and this decision of the High Court now throws into doubt the whole offshore processing  system that Labor had introduced and essentially opens up a Pandora’s Box when it comes  to the potential legal claims that could be made.

Now it seems to me that the only option that the Labor Government has at present is to pick  up the phone, as we have been urging, talk to the President of Nauru and reinstate the  system that the Howard Government had in place.

Overall it just demonstrates that Labor has lost control of our border protection system.

MELISSA CLARK    But does some of the blame lie with the Coalition given, although there  were changes in 2008, the basis for this offshore processing system and the consequent  flow ons and restrictions on legal challenges to decisions began with the Howard  Government?

JULIE BISHOP    My understanding is that the decision focuses on the changes Labor made  in 2008. When the Howard Government set up the regional processing in Nauru we had it  underpinned by a statutory framework. What Labor did, was set up a processing system in  Christmas Island but it was not underpinned by a statutory framework, it was non-statutory.

So not only did they change the law in relation to temporary protection visas, close down  Nauru, they then opened up a system in Christmas Island that has been subject to High  Court challenge and now, because of the number of asylum seekers that are coming,  Christmas Island is full, they are opening up detention centres across Australia.

This represents a total failure on Labor’s part for protecting our borders.

MELISSA CLARK    The essential thrust of what the High Court decision aimed at was that  through the offshore processing system, by excising some areas from the Australian  mainland through the Migration Act, was that you were detaining people under the Migration  Act but then not giving them legal rights to appeal that through the Migration Act.

Is it that the High Court has essentially ruled that the Rudd Government, and previously the  Howard Government, were being unfair? The High Court has said they were denied  procedural fairness by not being allowed to have this review and part of that was the case in  the Howard Government laws before they were changed prior to 2008.

JULIE BISHOP    Well this decision has just been handed down. As I said, we are working  through the implications of it. My understanding is that it focuses on the 2008 framework put  in place by the Labor Government, and overall it does represent a failure on the part of  Labor to put in place appropriate border protection laws.

They changed what was working and have now created a situation where the people  smuggling trade is back in business, we have record numbers of asylum seekers coming,  the processing system is now in chaos as a result of this High Court ruling and detention  centres are being opened up across Australia to cope with the people coming.

MELISSA CLARK    And as you say, there will be lots of people looking for legal advice and  pouring over the detail. If I can move on…

JULIE BISHOP    I’m sure.

MELISSA CLARK    Yes, absolutely. If we can move on to the G20. Julia Gillard and Wayne  Swan are currently in Korea for talks with the G20 meeting. One of the main elements of the  talks will be able reform to the global financial system, in particular the Basel Reforms. Do  you think the Federal Government should be fighting to have Australian banks excluded from  tougher capital or prudential regulation given how well the Australian financial system has  held up during the global financial crisis?

JULIE BISHOP    The focus of the G20 meeting is the so-called Basel III financial sector  regulations, and these are designed to prevent banks from collapsing should there be  another global financial crisis. It is to ensure that banks globally are more resilient and they  don’t have to rely on taxpayer bailouts essentially….

MELISSA CLARK    Should Australian banks have to face tougher prudential regulation as  well?

JULIE BISHOP    Well Australia should meet its global responsibilities and the Basil III  requirements go to better and more capital holdings by the banks, stronger liquidity  requirements.

Now Australia should meet its responsibilities, but of course we can adapt these regulations  to our local needs and I am sure that is what our authorities including APRA will do.

The United Kingdom, the United States, Europe had these bank collapses. We did not in  Australia because our banking sector has been well regulated over the years. Our banks  were strong, they had good capital, but if there are things that we can do to make our banks

even more resilient then Australia should take that on board but adapting that to our local  circumstances.

MELISSA CLARK    Now on the case of Gabe Watson, the American honeymooner who  has served a sentence here in Australia, is the Federal Government right to insist on more  insurances from the US that he wouldn’t face a death penalty in America before deporting  home back to the US or should they be happy with the guarantees they have been given by  the Alabama State?

JULIE BISHOP    Well my understanding is that the Australian Government did seek  assurances from the Alabama authorities in relation to Gabe Watson that if he were returned  he would not face the death penalty and that is consistent with our international obligations  and also consistent with the bi-partisan position. Both the Liberal Party and the Labor Party  do not support a death penalty and would not extradite a person should they face that  possibility on return.

But if the Government is concerned that that assurance needs to be strengthened and wants  to seek an assurance from the US Federal Government then it should do so. The Australian  Government must be reassured that he will not face the death penalty. Once they have got  that assurance, and are happy with that assurance, then he can be returned.

MELISSA CLARK    And briefly, one final question, Barrack Obama has been travelling  around the Asia Pacific, he has managed to India, Indonesia, Korea but he hasn’t managed  to get to Australia. Is he snubbing the Australian Government?

JULIE BISHOP    Look I think it is more a reflection of the strength of the Australia-US  relationship going back many, many decades. Secretary Clinton and Secretary Gates over  the weekend made it clear that the relationship is strong, and are working to enhance the  relationship.

I think it is important that the US President spend time in India, in Indonesia, building bridges  with the Muslim community in Indonesia and we certainly welcome the deeper US  engagement in the Indian Ocean and the Asia Pacific area.

And while it is lovely to have a US President visit us I think it just reflects how strong our  relationship is. There are no contentious issues between us.

MELISSA CLARK    Julie Bishop, thanks very much for joining us.

JULIE BISHOP    My pleasure.



