Scott Morrison, MP

Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship



Transcript - 2UE Radio Afternoon Program

Tuesday 2nd February 2010

Subject: Another illegal boat arrival on Christmas Island



E&OE



TIM WEBSTER: The latest asylum seeker boat, as I understand it, has simply putted into

Christmas Island. It wasn’t intercepted, it just lobbed. 188 potential new Aussie residents and

four crew; Afghanis, we’re told and they’re still arriving at the rate of two a week. The

government insists its border protection policies are working. Really? Who for? Christmas

Island is bulging and more demountables will be built but not until April so you would think

that any new refugees would end up being housed on the mainland. Probably Darwin first or

the far North coast of WA or somewhere. The Opposition spokesman on Home Affairs, Scott

Morrison has just returned from Christmas Island a couple of days ago and he joins me now.

Hi Scott, am I right in saying that this boat just turned up.



SCOTT MORRISON: It cruised on in to Flying Fish Cove where I was last week and its not

the first time that’s happened actually. Not that long ago another boat did exactly the same

thing. While its amazing, its actually not that surprising as boats are arriving at will in our

North and Christmas Island has become a destination not a deterrent.



TIM WEBSTER: They’re good navigators! They’d do James Cook proud.



SCOTT MORRISON: Well they probably would! But the purpose here is not to evade

detection. The purpose here is to get to Christmas Island which has literally become a visa

factory. You get there, you pay $20,000 to a people smuggler and within 100 days or so

you‘ll be sitting in Australia with a permanent visa so the people smuggling business is

booming. That’s who these policies are working for.



TIM WEBSTER: Well, look, the Minister says, Brendan O’Connor says it is working, he’s

talking about people being arrested in Indonesia for people smuggling, etc, but that doesn’t

seem to stem the flow of the boats, Scott.



SCOTT MORRISON: Well that’s right. If he thinks its working then he must think that if

you’re down 100 points at half time in AFL then you’re in front. I mean he’s dreaming; Kevin

Rudd’s dreaming. They have literally put up the white flag on this Tim, they just accept the

fact that their policies are producing this outcome and are quite happy to live with that. Now

we had a very different view. When we were faced with a surge of arrivals, not of our

making, ten years or so ago, we took action; we did something about it and the boats came

to zero. In our last six years we had 18 boats Labor have had 18 boats in the last eight

weeks. It’s out of control.



TIM WEBSTER: You do face the spectre, and I’m sure you know, of people overboard etc,

and anything you do will be leapt on, probably, as being draconian. But look, you’ve seen

the living conditions first hand on Christmas Island, just describe it for us.



SCOTT MORRISON: The living conditions are fine and in fact, if we treated Indigenous

Australians in remote Australia where I visited last year with Tony Abbott, like we do those

on Christmas Island there’d be no gap to close. They have access, as they should, to good

conditions, clean facilities, and meals and recreation and counselling and support services,

and legal services. They Skype their families back in Colombo or Afghanistan and they talk

on the phone. This is all available and I felt totally comfortable with the level of service

provided in terms of meeting acceptable standards.



TIM WEBSTER: OK so we’ve now got 1850 beds 200 in tents where some people have

been living for months and demountables planned but not until April for another 500 or so.

Obviously, quite obviously, I’ve been saying this Scott since last year, Christmas Island will

reach capacity and they’ll have to be housed on the mainland somewhere.



SCOTT MORRISON: Well, that’s what the government wants to do, bring them to the

mainland, but when we were in government we had a different view and found alternative

offshore processing. If we were in government today, that’s what we would be doing. The

Government’s answer is to bring people to the mainland. Now that’ll just say to people

smugglers, you can now get your customers all the way to the mainland. It’s a very attractive

product to sell. We take a very different view to that and that’s why we say that the

Government has put up the white flag on this issue and is just happy for the borders to be

completely porous.



TIM WEBSTER: Look, I have to tell you that some of my listeners absolutely splutter about

this, they literally do not understand how it can just be floodgates, and while you might have

some compassion, and I do, you can’t just keep having boatload after boatload turn up here.



SCOTT MORRISON: Well there are 10.5 million refugees and people in similar situations

around the world and we have a program which has bi-partisan support of 13,500 people

that we take. Now we take those people out of refugee camps in Africa, and in Thailand and

places like that and that’s a good thing for us to do, we’re a generous country and we’re a

compassionate country. But we want to decide who we’re going to help and who we extend

our generosity to. We don’t think that should be based on someone’s ability to pay $20,000

to a people smuggler and come across and take a place.



TIM WEBSTER: I’m not a scare monger but are you satisfied with the processing

procedures, I mean are they weeding out the few dangerous ones among the asylum

seekers?



SCOTT MORRISON: Well, more than 9 out or ten, Tim, are getting the tick and when we

were in government , the Minister would regularly , as a matter of process, question the rate

of acceptance and look into these things. The current government is not doing that and I pay

tribute to the officials on the island because it’s a stressful situation working through these

issues and they’re doing a good job. But I see no level of oversight or review by this

government to give Australians an assurance that the high rate of acceptance is something

that is totally fine. In Europe at the moment, I was told just yesterday by the UNHCR that the

rejection rate for Afghan asylum seekers has been rising steadily in recent months, now

that’s not been reflected in the results that we’re seeing. They could be completely different

circumstances, Tim, but as a Minister you’ve got to ask the questions because people’s

general level of comfort about immigration levels broadly is in many ways determined by this

issue, because it looks like the Government is completely out of control, and they are. That’s

not want people want to feel in terms of the country.



TIM WEBSTER: There has to be a point where your compassion, doesn’t run out, but is

tempered. I have listeners who tell me that they went through this huge process to get here

and yet as you say these people can pay a people smuggler twenty grand and get here.

Twenty grand times a hundred and eighty - I mean these people are getting paid a fortune

and we’re just letting them do it. That’s my biggest concern.



SCOTT MORRISON: That’s true Tim, it is a big business and it’s getting bigger by the day

and as everyone in business knows if you’ve got a good product to sell it will sell. I think,

undoubtedly, the Government’s policies are making their product better. Under the Coalition,

it’s our job to make that product tough to sell.



TIM WEBSTER: It just seems that the policy is, well ok, we’ll just let as many people arrive

as we possibly can but in the meantime we’ll try and stop the people smugglers well there

are still two a week so there’s not a great success rate so far.



SCOTT MORRISON: No, it’s an absolute failure, an absolute failure.



TIM WEBSTER: Thanks for your time.

