Scott Morrison, MP

Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship

Transcript - Sky News PM Agenda

Wednesday 31st March 2010

Subjects: Rudd Government’s failed immigration and border protection policies, Coalition

immigration and border protection policies, transfers of detainees from Christmas Island



EandOE



DAVID SPEERS: Scott Morrison, this poster that we are just trying to bring up at the

moment…



SCOTT MORRISON: I’ve got one here David, here you go [holds up 100 boats poster]. I just

so happen to have one.



DAVID SPEERS: We do have it there in the system but look, that’s the one there, so 100

boats. What I was going to ask you is why don’t you make a poster with the thousands of

planes that arrive? They carry more asylum seekers than come here by boat.



SCOTT MORRISON: Well no one dies on planes trying to come to Australia to seek asylum

David, that’s why. Boat arrivals put people’s lives at risk and I think that’s a point that is often

lost in this debate. Equally those who come by air often have a valid visa and documentation

to prove who they are which enables the process to be completed and the vast majority of

those, particularly those who have come from China, are returned. What we have going on

in our northern waters is a very dangerous practice which is being peddled by people

smugglers. Last year we had 105 people we believe, die at sea. So the contrast between

those who arrive by sea and by air could not be more stark, people die on boats.



DAVID SPEERS: Now your plan to stop the boats is to reintroduce temporary protection

visas, to ensure that all claims are processed offshore, although you are still working out

exactly where that will take place on top of Christmas Island if necessarily but also Tony

Abbott said this morning that Australia should turn back the boats under the right

circumstances. What are the right circumstances to turn back a boat?



SCOTT MORRISON: Well Tony actually said that last December, that’s nothing new…



DAVID SPEERS: And what are those circumstances he is talking about?



SM: Well the circumstances have been set out in international law for some time. They relate

to the seaworthiness of the vessel, they relate to the agreement of the country to which you

are turning them back to that they won’t be refouled to the country from which they have

sought asylum. Now we were able to do that when we were in government with the

Indonesia government and with their cooperation and their understanding because we had

that sort of practical partnership where they understood we were doing everything we could

not to heighten the pull factors…



DAVID SPEERS: Because it’s easy to say you will turn back the boats…



SCOTT MORRISON: Well Kevin Rudd said it…



DAVID SPEERS: But when it comes to the practicality, you are saying you will turn back the

boats by getting an agreement with Indonesia to take them back?



SCOTT MORRISON: No what we are saying is we have said we will do it, we have done it in

the past, Kevin Rudd said he would do it before the last election and that policy was

abandoned fairly shortly afterwards and we saw that through the whole debacle over the

SIEV 36 explosion…



DAVID SPEERS: The point is getting agreement with Indonesia is not that easy on some of

these sensitive matters.



SCOTT MORRISON: Well the boats don’t just come from Indonesia, they can also be

returned to potentially other ports where there is an agreement that they won’t be refouled,

particularly other ports where they may actually be signatories to the convention itself, it all

depends where they come from. But it is part of a suite of policies David, as I have said

before, it is part of a question of resolve which the Coalition clearly has and we

demonstrated in government. So we have form unlike the government at the moment. They

say these things but they don’t do them, they don’t have the resolve, they pretend to be one

thing and then completely fail to be another.



DAVID SPEERS: You have been critical of the government for bringing to the mainland

asylum seekers whose claims have been processed and rejected. You have referred to legal

advice that suggests they could appeal those decisions through the Australian court system.

Can you tell us about this legal advice, who it has come from?



SCOTT MORRISON: Well I haven’t referred to any legal advice, I don’t know where you got

that from, we can all read the Migration Act and the Migration Act is pretty clear that it is

silent on the issue of people transferred from Christmas Island. The government said last

year that the transitory persons provisions that related to our transfer of people from Nauru

and Manus to the mainland did not apply to those who are transferred from Christmas

Island. Now we put those provisions in place in the Migration Act to quarantine people’s

ability to access the courts. Now the government has said those provisions do not apply to

those people transferring from Christmas Island, the Act is therefore silent and as advocates

have said for refugees just in the past few days, there is the opportunity, there is the option

for test cases to now be brought. Now bringing 89 people to the mainland which they said

themselves they wouldn’t do where claims have been rejected, and clearly Julia Gillard was

caught out on that the other day when she thought they were still operating under the policy

they were talking about only a few days before, by violating that, they have put the situation I

think in grave risk. They have taken no measures legally under the Act to quarantine this,

they were relying on their own assertions and I think that is quite reckless.



DAVID SPEERS: But do you think these asylum seekers who have been brought to

Villawood can actually appeal their decisions through the court system? Is that your

understanding?



SCOTT MORRISON: Well it is entirely arguable that they could. That’s the point. A court will

decide that, it only takes one judge in one court to decide to hear that case and off we go

again. Now the government cannot rule that out as a possibility. We couldn’t rule it out as a

possibility and that’s why we introduced the changes.



DAVID SPEERS: There were asylum seekers brought from Nauru and other places under

the Howard Government for medical reasons to Australia…



SCOTT MORRISON: That’s right, there was.



DAVID SPEERS: They couldn’t actually make a claim through the courts or they could?



SCOTT MORRISON: No they couldn’t because we specifically put a change into the

Migration Act which changed their status from offshore entry persons to transitory persons

for the purpose of that transfer and they could stay no longer than 6 months on the mainland

and they had to be returned. Now the government says those provisions don’t apply to

Christmas Island so the position and status of those transferred from Christmas Island once

they hit the mainland is unclear. Now the government may well be right, we may well be right

but only a court is going to be able to determine this and at the end of the day, we think the

Australian Parliament should decide these matters and it shouldn’t be a matter left open to

interpretation. This government has left the door open to this issue and they may well find

themselves on the wrong end of a test case.



DAVID SPEERS: And have any of the asylum seekers, because these weren’t the first over

the weekend, have any of the asylum seekers brought to the mainland tried this yet to the

best of your knowledge?



SCOTT MORRISON: No they haven’t because there hasn’t been a negative decision which

would lead them to make that sort of an application. But in the government bringing 89

people to the mainland whose claims have already been rejected…now they haven’t been

brought here to go home. That is a complete furphy from the government; Sri Lanka is a lot

closer to Christmas Island than Sydney is. They have been brought here to pursue their

opportunity for their panel appeals which they have the opportunity to do so under the

government’s process. I also think the government is being quite foolish with their comments

saying the process has been completed, because their process isn’t completed until that

merit appeal has had the opportunity to be pursued. That could well be the basis of an

appeal as well.



END



