



THE HON BRENDAN O’CONNOR MP

MINISTER FOR HOME AFFAIRS            BORDER PROTECTION COMMAND INTERCEPTS VESSELS

(23 March 2010) Border Protection Command today successfully intercepted two suspected  irregular entry vessels.    HMAS Bathurst, operating under the control of Border Protection Command,  intercepted a vessel at around 8.30am, west of Ashmore Islands.  Initial indications suggest  19 passengers and three crew are on board the vessel.     ACV Triton intercepted  a vessel  at around 10:00 am just inside the contiguous zone north of  Adele Island. Initial indications suggest 55 passengers and two crew are on board the vessel.    People smuggling is a world-wide problem and Australia is committed to working closely  with our neighbours to address the issue.    Situations around the world mean that large numbers of displaced persons are looking for  settlement in  stable, democratic nations such as Australia and can be targeted by, and fall  prey to, people smugglers.    People smuggling is not just an issue for Australia - it is a global and regional problem. The  commitment of our neighbours, through bilateral cooperation and the Bali Process on People  Smuggling, Trafficking in Persons and Related Transnational Crime, is critical to addressing  this most serious issue.      The AFP continues to provide support to foreign law enforcement agencies in their efforts to  combat people smuggling activities in the region. These close working relationships have  resulted in a number of arrests and disruptions to people smuggling ventures in countries such  as Indonesia, Malaysia, and Sri Lanka.

Since September 2008,  for example, the work of the INP has resulted in one hundred and  nine disruptions of planned people smuggling ventures involving the interception,  apprehension or detention of groups of foreign nationals who had an intention for further  onward travel to Australia.  Disruption activities in Indonesia have prevented approximately 2899 persons  from

potentially travelling to Australia by illegal means.   Fifty four Indonesian based facilitators/organisers have also been arrested by the INP during  this period.      The Australian Government remains vigilant and committed to protecting Australia’s  borders.

The groups will be transferred to Christmas Island where they will undergo security, identity  and health checks. Their reasons for travel will also be established.    Contact: Brian Humphreys 0438 595 567  or Customs and Border Protection Media on (02)

6275 6793

-----------------------------



