

BORDER PROTECTION COMMAND INTERCEPTS TWO  VESSELS



(10 May 2010) Border Protection Command today successfully intercepted two suspected  irregular entry vessels.



HMAS Childers, operating under the control of Border Protection Command, intercepted a  vessel during the afternoon north of Ashmore Islands.



Initial indications suggest 36 passengers and three crew are on board the vessel.



Later this evening, HMAS Glenelg, operating under the control of Border Protection  Command, intercepted another vessel near Christmas Island.



This vessel was initially detected by a RAAF P3 surveillance aircraft, operating under the  control of Border Protection Command.



Initial indications suggest 86 passengers are on board this vessel.



The groups will be transferred to Christmas Island where they will undergo security, identity  and health checks. Their reasons for travel will also be established.



The Australian Government has changed the asylum seeker processing system, effective 9  April 2010, and suspended the processing of claims for Sri Lankans and Afghans for at least  three and six months respectively as situations in both countries are evolving.  If passengers  on this vessel are Sri Lankan or Afghan there is no guarantee their claims will be processed.



People smuggling is not just an issue for Australia - it is a global and regional problem. The  commitment of our neighbours, through bilateral cooperation and the Bali Process on People  Smuggling, Trafficking in Persons and Related Transnational Crime, is critical to addressing  this most serious issue.  Recent meetings with government officials in Indonesia and  Malaysia have led to positive steps forward in bilateral and regional cooperation to deter  people smuggling.



The Australian Federal Police continues to provide support to foreign law enforcement  agencies in their efforts to combat people smuggling activities in the region. These close  working relationships have resulted in a number of arrests and disruptions to people  smuggling ventures in countries such as Indonesia, Malaysia, and Sri Lanka.



As a direct result of these strong working relationships, since September 2008, in Indonesia  there have been 147 identified disruptions; 3,813 foreign nationals detained by Indonesian  authorities; and 87 arrests of facilitators/organisers.



Media Contact: Belinda Cole 0438 595 567 or Customs and Border Protection media (02)  6275 6793

