The Hon Julie Bishop, MP  Shadow Minister for Foreign Affairs  Deputy Leader of the Opposition  Member for Curtin



MTR 1377 Breakfast with Andrew Bolt

Thursday, 16 December 2010

Subjects: Christmas Island tragedy

E&OE…

ANDREW BOLT    Good morning Julie. Look, Julie, this is a tragedy that is a direct consequence of  the Government policies that led to a resumption of the boat people trade. They were warned, the  Opposition warned them. I think today, now that the rescue operation is over, today is the time we  start to hold people accountable. Would you agree?

JULIE BISHOP    Well Andrew it is a terrible human tragedy. We still don’t know how many people  have drowned on this disastrous ship wreck. It seems there are 41 survivors but until we know how  many were on the boat we won’t know the full extent of the tragedy.

And after any tragedy it is natural and appropriate for people to ask how did it happen, could it have  been prevented? There will be many questions, no doubt there will be an official investigation, there  will be formal inquires, I expect there be a coroner’s inquest as there have been in the past. The  Western Australian…

ANDREW BOLT    Julie it seems to me you’re reluctant, you’ve been intimidated out of talking about  the contributing factors to this tragedy. Is it not true that these people were lured to their deaths?

JULIE BISHOP    Andrew the Prime Minister hasn’t spoken publicly about the matter yet. I assume  she’ll be speaking about it today. So then we’ll hear what the Government has to say on how it  happened, where they came from, whether…

ANDREW BOLT    Yeah but what have you got to say about it?

JULIE BISHOP    …whether people smugglers were involved. I don’t have those facts yet. We  haven’t yet sought a briefing but we will do so today.

ANDREW BOLT    Julie. Julie there were people not dying at sea for the six years before the  Government relaxed these laws. Your Opposition took up my call about a year ago and told the  Government - look there are at least 25 dead so far, more will come, you were told you were a  disgrace, shocking, horrible, the whole lot, now there are people dying in our full view.

You’ve got to be able to say this is a consequence of them being lured to their deaths by policies that  were too soft. Why are you backing off now?

JULIE BISHOP    Andrew we put in place a policy about 10 years ago. We had a policy when we  were in Government and our policy has not changed in Opposition.

But today all the focus should be on the rescue efforts, determining how many were on board, how  many are still to be accounted for. We don’t even know if people smugglers were involved…

ANDREW BOLT    It is not a question of people smugglers involved; there are people on the boats  that came here. Bugger the people smugglers they are just a taxi service, it is the people on the boats  that are determined to risk their lives at sea to come here because they thought they would get a  softer welcome than happened before. I don’t understand why you are so sensitive about saying this  is the consequence that we warned about.

JULIE BISHOP    Well let’s hear from the Prime Minister today. I am sure these are all the questions  that will be put to her and I would like to hear what the Government has to say.

ANDREW BOLT    Alright. That’s a shame.

JULIE BISHOP    Now she should be given an opportunity to speak publicly about what happened,  why it happened, could it have been prevented.

ANDREW BOLT    Okay, thank you.

JULIE BISHOP    There are many questions and the Coalition will continue to ask them.

STEVE PRICE    Appreciate your time. Julie Bishop there.



