

Transcript: Julia Gillard, Press Conference, Perth  Julia Gillard posted Wednesday, 18 August 2010

E & O E - PROOF ONLY

Subjects: Financial literacy policy; election campaign; infrastructure; costings; border  protection; health funding.

PM: Alright, it’s fantastic to be in WA, I’m joined by Sharryn Jackson, the Member for  Hasluck, by our candidate for Swan, Tim Hammond and it’s great to be here talking to the  people of Western Australia. And today I’m talking to the people of Western Australia about  the big choices in this election campaign.

Today, adding on those big choices, I do want to also say, that we have announced, today I  am announcing a policy, that if the Government is re-elected we will ensure that kids in  schools get the ability to learn about financial literacy. I want kids in schools to understand

the benefits of savings. I want them to understand what it’s like to have a mortgage and how  you pay down debt. I want them to understand how to calculate how a credit card works and  what it’s going to cost them; what a mobile phone plan costs them, how they can meet the  bills. So we will be working with our experts at the Australian Curriculum Assessment and  Reporting Authority to train six thousand teachers in Financial literacy to pass those skills on  to other teachers, to pass those skills on to the kids. I want to make sure that kids of today  have the skills they need to manage their money tomorrow.

Can I also say, as we count down the remaining days of this election campaign, as we draw to  a close in the election campaign, I will go from here to Brisbane. I will go from here to  Brisbane and I will be there at six o’clock tonight waiting to debate Mr Abbott on the  economy. This is the debate that Australians deserve to have. My message today to Mr  Abbott is: I will be there for a debate on the economy. He should join me to debate the issue  at the centre of this campaign.

But I'm concerned as this campaign goes on, that it becomes increasingly clear that when the  big economic decisions need to be made, Mr Abbott goes missing. Mr Abbott was missing  during the global financial crisis when we needed to step up to support Australian jobs. He  was missing on the day his party announced its shambolic policy the national broadband  network when they announced their shambolic policy to cost Australians the jobs of the  future. Mr Abbott is apparently going to go missing today when the Liberal Party releases its

costings for its promises in the election campaign. He’s going to go missing when the  consequences of his $1 billion a day expenditure are finally revealed to the Australian people.  And he’s apparently going to go missing tonight, denying Australians the debate that they  deserve on the economy.

So I’m going to say to Mr Abbott, you can’t be Prime Minister and go missing when the big  judgments on the economy need to be made. We have a $1.3 trillion economy. Saturday  about more than anything else is about who runs that economy for the future to give people  the benefit of jobs, to make sure as a nation we can afford great schools and decent health

care. You can’t go missing when the big calls need to be made.

To the people of Western Australia can I say this - every vote around the nation counts, every  vote here counts on Saturday. It counts in the support of the great candidates who are with me  today. It counts in this state about the future of its economy and support for jobs. It counts in  this state for the construction of the National Broadband Network. The $2 billion in  infrastructure. For better health care, for decent schools. It counts on Saturday here in  Western Australia. That’s my message to the people of WA on my last visit here before  voting starts on Saturday.

JOURNALIST: (inaudible) Some commentators are saying that you’ve pressed the panic  button by going to Brisbane with Tony Abbott?

PM: I’ve got no idea what that’s a reference to.

JOURNALIST: They’re saying that you must be panicking by going to Brisbane - last  desperate attempt to sort of sure up support in that state.

PM: I’ve got no idea what that’s a reference to. I’ve said consistently - let’s be absolutely  clear here - the Courier Mail said that it would host an event tonight in Brisbane, I said  fantastic, and I said, and I said, let’s make it a debate on the economy, because that’s the  debate Australians deserve to hear in this election campaign. Mr Abbott is going missing, he  won’t debate the economy. Of course I’m happy to speak to the Brisbane in a town hall style  event, but what the people of Brisbane deserve, what the nation deserves is Mr Abbott  fronting up at six o’clock, an hour long debate on the economy followed by an hour long  town hall style meeting. I’ll be there in Brisbane for that. Where is Mr Abbott going to be?  Will he front up to that debate?

JOURNALIST: (inaudible) Mining tax is hurting Labor’s campaign in WA?

PM: This trip is about me saying to the people of Western Australia their votes count on  Saturday. They count to determine whether or not they’ll have great representatives in the  Federal Parliament. People like Sharryn Jackson and Tim Hammond and our Labor team here  in Western Australia. They count for jobs. They count for health care. They count for  schools. They count for the National Broadband Network. They count for $2 billion of  expenditure on infrastructure here in WA. That’s why I’m here today.

JOURNALIST: Prime Minister why are your infrastructure commitments in WA contingent  on the passage of a mining tax? Whereas your commitment infrastructure commitments to  other states, like your $2 billion dollar rail line in Sydney are unconditional and they’re not

conditional on that same condition.

PM: We’ve made direct infrastructure investments in Western Australia. Direct infrastructure  investments that are in no way conditional on the Minerals Resource Rent Tax. But if we  look at what we have invested in this state in infrastructure, what we have invested in this  state in infrastructure in ports in roads right across the state in works in Perth that Colin  Barnett, you know, spruiked to the Federal Government as very important for the future  shape of the city. In health care, in schools right around this state, we have been delivering  infrastructure. In addition to that infrastructure, on top of that infrastructure, on top of us  continuing to invest in infrastructure in this state, I want to deliver two things. $2 billion extra  dollars to deal with the stresses and strains that growth in mining brings and the National

Broadband Network. Under Mr Abbott, neither of those things will ever happen and I want to  keep delivering for this state, Trades Training Centre in schools. GP Super Clinics,  investments in health care. That will not happen if Mr Abbott is elected.

JOURNALIST: (inaudible) Tony Abbott’s releasing his election costings today. Do you  know if he can achieve a bigger surplus than Labor?

PM: Tony Abbott’s not releasing his election costings today, Tony Abbott’s going to be  missing. He’s going to delegate releasing his election costings to a member of his team. Now  once again, this is telling you everything you need to know about Mr Abbott and the  economy. When the big decisions for the nation’s future need to be made, Mr Abbott goes  missing. Today he is going to go missing in the costings of his $1 billion a day expenditure  are finally revealed to the Australian public. He’s going to go missing tonight when it comes  to debating me in Brisbane on the economy. What this shows is Mr Abbott is a risk to our  $1.3 trillion economy. It seems remarkable to me, and Australians should be thinking about  what risk this means to them, that Mr Abbott, a man who wants to be Prime Minister, won’t  go and front his party’s costings of his policies in this campaign. The risk to the budget  bottom line, to the budget surplus, the risk to debt and deficit in this election is Mr Abbott.

JOURNALIST: (inaudible) Isn’t this already (inaudible) to do this anyway and then also  another (inaudible) there’s a report today that there’s a pipeline coming out of India now of  asylum seekers coming to Australia (inaudible) what are your comments on that?

PM: On asylum seekers first, my aim is to stop the boats before they leave foreign shores. I  want to make sure we’ve got a regional framework with a regional processing centre, so  there’s no incentive to get on a boat, because if you do, you still end up in the regional  processing centre. I want to take away from people smugglers the very product that they sell.  I want to make sure we don’t see boats leaving foreign shores to get here because there’s no  reason to get on a boat. That will be my approach as Prime Minister. On financial -

JOURNALIST: - Are you alarmed about reports that there could be now be a pipeline  coming from India, not just from the traditional ports in Indonesia.

PM: Look, obviously on any reports about asylum seekers, my mind goes to the solution and  the solution is, how do we stop boats leaving foreign shores. Well we’ve got to take away any  incentive to get on a boat. That’s what the regional processing centre is about. On financial  literacy, (inaudible) but we are going to turbo-charge it with new investment. Six thousand  teachers trained, training other teachers, providing financial literacy to kids. I want them to  understand what it is to save, to save for a goal like a home deposit. I want them to  understand how to calculate a mortgage and what it means you’re going to pay. I want them  to understand what credit cards are, what overdrafts are, what the limits are, what the burden  on the repayment is, to understand their exposure when they enter a mobile phone plan. I  want them to have those skills so personally they can manage their finances and not get into  trouble.

JOURNALIST: (inaudible)

PM: I think giving people the skills they need to run their lives is enabling.

JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you must be worried about you know taking a hit here over  the mining tax, surely, I mean that’s why you’re here isn’t it?



PM: Look, obviously, I’ve travelled to Perth a number of times this year and I understand that  people were concerned about the resources super profits tax, I listen to those concerns from  Western Australia and having listened to those concerns from Western Australia, the first  thing I did as Prime Minister, the very first thing, was enter a breakthrough agreement with

our biggest mining companies with the Minerals Resource Rent Tax. The biggest miners in  our nation have entered an agreement with the Government about this tax. What that will  enable us to do - two billion dollars for infrastructure here, cutting company tax, Mr Abbott  wants to put it up so you pay more in the shop. It enables us to back in superannuation  changes so the workers around me retire with a better retirement income. It enables me to  provide tax breaks for small businesses. These are important things.

JOURNALIST: (inaudible) concerned about ALP polling that you’re getting (inaudible) on a  knife edge?

PM: I’m concerned about the future of the nation. I’m concerned for the risk that Mr Abbott  poses to the budget. I’m concerned that on Sunday the 22nd of August, Mr Abbott will be  prime minister. No plans for the economy, polices that haven’t been properly costed and he  hasn’t even bothered to front for costings, posing a risk for the budget coming back to surplus  in 2013. No National Broadband Network so we export jobs to Singapore, Korea and Japan.  No investments in schools like Trades Training Centres, no GP Super Clinics, no GP  Afterhours Hotline. These are the things that I’m concerned about and of course the risk of a  return to WorkChoices.

JOURNALIST: Back to WA, how confident are you that you can keep those seats?

PM: Look this is a decision for Western Australians and I’m here today talking about that  decision that people will make on Saturday. My message to the people of Western Australia,  my message to Australians generally is every vote counts. Every vote will decide the future  of our $1.3 trillion national economy. Every vote will decide whether we’ve got new  investments in schools and health care, whether we build the National Broadband Network,  whether we cut company tax or put it up and pay higher prices for it, whether people get  decent superannuation, whether we continue Fair Work or go to WorkChoices. That’s what  Saturday’s about.

JOURNALIST: (inaudible) latest polling shows a net loss for Labor of about 10 seats?

PM: Well every vote on Saturday is important. The issues that I’ve described are the issues  people will be voting on and they will also be voting considering Mr Abbott and his track  record on the economy. Mr Abbott’s went missing during the global financial crisis that  could have cost more than 200,000 Australians their jobs. He went missing with the National  Broadband Network announcement in his campaign so pivotal to the jobs of the future. He’s  going missing today when their costings are released; he’s going missing tonight, doesn’t  want to give Australians the debate on the economy that they deserve.

JOURNALIST: (inaudible) what do you say to Colin Barnett (inaudible) prefer a fairer share  of the GST rather than (inaudible)?

PM: I understand that Premier Barnett believes that, he will pursue that on behalf of the  people of Western Australia. What I can say, if I’m elected prime minister I will be investing  in Western Australia an extra $2 billion of infrastructure, the National Broadband Network.

People will never see these things if Mr Abbott is elected.

JOURNALIST: putting that aside Prime Minister -

PM: (inaudible) direct to my heart -

JOURNALIST: (inaudible) what is the real Julia Gillard’s message to those undecided voters  in those key marginal seats -

PM: Well the premise of your question is absolutely wrong. All of my life, all of my life I’ve  believed that having a job, having the benefits of work, having the dignity of work is what  makes your life. I’m fighting for that in this campaign, I’m fighting for who will run our $1.3  trillion economy, who stood up for jobs in the global financial crisis, who will stand up for  jobs again. All of my life, I’ve believed in the transformative power of education; it made me.  And at the centre of this campaign is whether we invest in schools or cut schools. All of my  life I’ve believed we should show care and concern for each other. Do we want to go back to  the days of Mr Abbott ripping $1 billion out of health care or go forward with new

investments in health? All of my life I’ve believed we shouldn’t be afraid of the future.  That’s what the National Broadband Network is all about.

JOURNALIST: Is that one of the reasons you’ve made this mad dash to Perth, because there  are seats here on a knife edge?

PM: I’m here in Perth, speaking to the people of Western Australia as they make a final  decision for voting on Saturday about the biggest issues in this campaign. Nothing more  important than this for this campaign than the strength of our economy - we’ve got a strong  economy, people have work, we can make investments in education and health. That’s what’s  at the centre of this campaign. Where is Mr Abbott? He’s missing whenever the going gets  tough and big judgments need to be made on the economy.

JOURNALIST: On health, you are still withholding hundreds of millions of dollars  (inaudible) sign up to the health deal -

PM: Well that’s actually not completely factually correct, either. We’re investing hundreds of  millions of dollars in Western Australia -

JOURNALIST: (inaudible)

PM: But let’s talk about our total health investment. What you’ve just said now is not true.  We are investing hundreds of millions of dollars in Western Australia in new money in  health, and I want to invest even more. I want to invest even more by entering into an  agreement with Premier Barnett. We are investing now and I want to invest even more in the  future. What’s the choice on Saturday on health care? My additional investment plus even  more when we reach an agreement with the Premier, versus Mr Abbott’s track record of cuts.  You look at any Perth hospital now and you ask yourself why is it struggling, go back to the  billion dollars that Tony Abbott ripped out of health care. He was one of the longest serving  Health ministers the nation has ever seen. What did he achieve as Health Minister? He cut $1  billion out of public hospitals and he cut back GP training places. You can’t get an  appointment with a GP today - thank Tony Abbott. It takes a long time to make a General  Practitioner. The reason we’re short now is because of Mr Abbott’s cutbacks. Ok, thank you  very much.

