The Hon Julie Bishop, MP  Shadow Minister for Foreign Affairs  Deputy Leader of the Opposition  Member for Curtin

Meet the Press

Sunday, 07 November 2010

Subjects: Proposed regional processing centre, US Secretary of State, BANKS, Qantas,  Interest rates.

PAUL BONGIORNO, PRESENTER    Hello and welcome to Meet the Press. In the new  paradigm, it seems the political temperature doesn't fall even when parliament isn't sitting and  the Prime Minister is out of the country. Julia Gillard began the week at the East Asia summit  in Hanoi, then went on to Malaysia and Indonesia. The people smuggling and refugee issues  followed her everywhere.

JULIA GILLARD, PRIME MINISTER (MONDAY)    We agreed, following our  discussion, to share information and continue to work through on our proposal for a regional  protection framework and a regional processing centre.

MUHYIDDIN YASSIN, MALAYSIAN DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER (MONDAY)     There are a few outstanding matters that need to be addressed before Malaysia takes its  official position on this.

SUSILO BAMBANG YUDHOYONO, INDONESIAN PRESIDENT (TUESDAY)     Indonesia is open to that, but we have to discuss in depth to ensure once again there is a  regional solution.

SCOTT MORRISON, SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION (MONDAY)     The Prime Minister should not mistake polite conversations at regional forums for any sort  of concrete support.

PAUL BONGIORNO    While at home, the Commonwealth became the bank that stopped a  nation, with a Melbourne Cup Day rate hike almost twice the Reserve Bank's move.

WAYNE SWAN, TREASURER (TUESDAY)    This is a cynical cash grab by the  Commonwealth Bank - there is no other way to look at it.

JOE HOCKEY, SHADOW TREASURER (TUESDAY)    The banks are treating the  Australian people with contempt because the Government is completely insipid and weak in  standing up to the banks.

PAUL BONGIORNO    Deputy Opposition Leader and Shadow Foreign Affairs Minister,  Julie Bishop, is a guest. And later, beyond bank bashing, housing finance specialist,  Christopher Joye from Rismark joins us. But first, what the nation's papers are reporting this  Sunday, November 7: Secretary of State Hillary Clinton is quickly down to business on her  arrival in Melbourne. The ‘Sun Herald’ says: "US Forces get our nod, military to expand

presence in Australia”. At a joint news conference with Foreign Minister, Rudd, co-operation  was the buzzword for the AUSMIN talks.

HILLARY CLINTON, US SECRETARY OF STATE (LAST NIGHT)    There we will  discuss a full range of issues including our joint efforts in Afghanistan, cyber security,  counter-terrorism, the peaceful use of outer space.

PAUL BONGIORNO    The ‘Sunday Age’ reports on the travails of the national flag carrier,  “Qantas party crashed", the headline. Three mid-air emergencies in as many days have left  more than 1,200 passengers stranded. The pilot's union has accused all airlines of lowering  safety standards. A charge rejected by Qantas. Another major bank is tipped to raise its home  loan rates above the Reserve Bank's 0.25%. The ‘Sunday Telegraph’ says Westpac is  preparing to announce a rate hike of 0.3% tomorrow. The ‘Sunday Herald Sun’ has:  "Powerbrokers call for gay marriage debate". The paper says two key right-wing Labor  powerbrokers, Mark Arbib and Paul Howes have put themselves directly at odds with PM  Gillard on gay marriage. Welcome back to the program Julie Bishop. Good morning, Ms  Bishop. Later today you're meeting Hillary Clinton. Do you share the Americans’ concerns  over the military build up of China?

JULIE BISHOP, DEPUTY OPPOSITION LEADER    I don’t think we need to be  concerned. What I am interested in hearing from Secretary of State Hillary Clinton, is about  the United States’ greater engagement in the Asia-Pacific and the Indian Ocean region. I hope  we will have the opportunity to discuss that. Naturally, it is not a government to government  meeting, but I hope we can discuss a range of policy directions from the United States  particularly post the mid-term election result. We will obviously raise China as one of the  issues.

PAUL BONGIORNO    In her news conference last night, Hillary Clinton lent credibility to  the reports on ‘The Australian’ yesterday that we would have even closer military  cooperation - more US troops in Australia, the use of our, well, I guess you would call them  ‘spy facilities’, especially looking at things like security in space. Does the opposition  support this direction?

JULIE BISHOP    There have been joint operations between the United States and Australia  for decades now. There has been a US presence on Australian soil for many, many years and  I am sure that will continue. I welcome the thought of military exercises, increased visits  from the US naval carriers to our shores. I think that every port city in Australia subject to  appropriate consultation, would be delighted to have more American engagement in our port  cities. Also our joint efforts in intelligence analysis and the sharing of intelligence, that  obviously goes on now at Pine Gap and other areas within Australia. So I think this deeper  engagement is inevitable and we would certainly welcome it.

PAUL BONGIORNO    From the midterms is there anything that particularly interests the  opposition?

JULIE BISHOP    I think the most significant outcome was President Obama’s statement  that he would not proceed with his emissions trading scheme, a cap and trade scheme. That  does have a significant impact here in Australia. It will put enormous pressure on Julia  Gillard given her approach to climate change. There will be pressure on the Labor  government to drop its price on carbon policy if there is no global agreement, and there won’t

be without the United States. And President Obama has made it clear that he will not be  proceeding with the cap and trade system, then the question is, why would Australia put a  price on carbon here which would make our industries uncompetitive and increase electricity  prices?

PAUL BONGIORNO     Going to the issue of detention centres, the protest over using  military bases, especially the one at Northam in WA saw two women turn up with "Bomb the  boats and sink the boats" T-shirts. Some are saying that the opposition’s campaign is  whipping up this sort of sentiment.

JULIE BISHOP    I attended that meeting in Northam. It is about an hour out from Perth.  The vast majority of people there were local residents and they raised legitimate concerns at  the Government’s decision to place a detention centre in the army barracks with 1,500 single  Afghani men.

PAUL BONGIORNO    But “sink the boats” - what do you think of that concept?

JULIE BISHOP    I did not see anybody wearing such a T-shirt. The vast majority of people  were local residents. In fact, all of the….

PAUL BONGIORNO     You cannot endorse those sentiments?

JULIE BISHOP    Well, I don’t. But I didn’t see anybody wearing that. The vast majority of  people there were local residents. Everybody who asked a question at the meeting was a local  resident, identified themselves as such. They were very angry that there was nobody from the  government there to discuss their concerns. They had a number of legitimate issues they  wanted addressed, yet there was only somebody from the Immigration Department, not  actually a Government representative to say why Northam had been chosen, why there had  been no consultation and what policy the Government actually had in place to ensure  detention centres would not continue to be placed in country towns.

PAUL BONGIORNO    On Wednesday, Tony Abbott visited the vacant defence housing  estate in South Australia where the Government is planning to locate asylum seeker families.  He was appalled by how nice it was.

TONY ABBOTT, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (WEDNESDAY)    You do not send  idyllic picture postcards from Australia to the people smugglers and their customers and you  know this is effectively a postcard from Australia saying, "Come on over!" That's what it is  and I just think that that's the last thing that we should be doing.

PAUL BONGIORNO    Well, you see, the implication is that the direct correlation is maybe  we should be punishing asylum seekers, their families, their children for coming rather than  putting them up in acceptable housing.

JULIE BISHOP    No. What we should be doing is stopping the people smuggling trade so  that Christmas Island would not be overflowing. We did have in place a system where Nauru  and Christmas Island were off shore processing centres. Nauru has been closed and Christmas  Island is full. The Government's policy in terms of border protection has failed. The people  smuggling trade is flourishing, that is why we have seen record numbers of people arriving  on that very perilous journey from overseas. So the failure of policy is causing the….

PAUL BONGIORNO    But the direct implication is we must make it less attractive for  asylum seekers to come to Australia by punishing them.

JULIE BISHOP    No. We should be changing the laws back to the system that was in place  with the Howard Government. What I would suggest the Prime Minister does is read the 12-page policy document that the Coalition took to the last election…

PAUL BONGIORNO     Can I suggest this to you that from what Tony Abbott said it would  seem that he would prefer to send a postcard from behind the razor wire in Woomera or the  fortified jail at Baxter or the hell hole of Nauru?

JULIE BISHOP    We would not need to have detention centres onshore if the  Government’s border protection policy was working. That’s why I say Ms Gillard should  read the 12-page policy, 4,000-word document that we put together that would show how a  policy could be effective. It would show how to stop the people smuggling trade. The  Government should not have changed the Howard government strategy that was in place that  saw boat arrivals reduced to zero. Then you wouldn’t need these detention centres onshore  and the people of Northam, for example, wouldn’t be so concerned about what’s going to  happen to their security, their services and as I say, they are furious at the lack of  consultation.

PAUL BONGIORNO    Time for a break. When we return with the panel: Is a regional  processing centre a charade or the answer? Straight talking is for serious politicians - just ask  Barnaby Joyce.

BARNABY JOYCE    This is just another one of their class one cluster stuffs.

PAUL BONGIORNO    That was cluster stuff - Tony Abbott's straight talking got stuck in  the groove.

TONY ABBOTT (THURSDAY)    I'm as much against bullshit as the next man. I'd like to  think that in everything that I say and do, at least people understand what I'm talking about.

PAUL BONGIORNO     You're on Meet the Press with Deputy Liberal leader Julie Bishop.  And welcome to the panel Michelle Grattan from ‘The Age’ and from News Limited Steve  Lewis. Good morning Michelle and Steve. Julia Gillard pursued her regional processing  centre with Asian leaders and had a message for her critics at home.

JULIA GILLARD (MONDAY)    No one country through its domestic laws can address  this problem, and individual countries acting may displace the problem to another country but  not solve it - so it requires regional cooperation to be solved.

MICHELLE GRATTAN, THE AGE    Ms Bishop, although Julia Gillard's proposal did  not encounter any great enthusiasm, no country has absolutely slammed the door in her face.  Are you saying that the East Timor centre will never get going?

JULIE BISHOP    Yes, I am saying that. I think it was a mistake for Julia Gillard to raise  what was essentially a three-word slogan - regional processing centre - with Asian leaders on  her recent trip without there being any detail. The Asian leaders raised, understandably, the  same kind of questions that we in the coalition have been raising. What are the details of this

regional processing centre? How will it work? Who will be involved? How will people be  transferred to it? Without that kind of detail, no wonder there was little enthusiasm for the  idea. Without fleshing it out, I think it was a poor judgement on the part of the Prime Minister  to raise it in this way.

MICHELLE GRATTAN    The detail of your alternative is to go to Nauru but that’s a  relatively small facility, or set of facilities and there is no evidence that if that route was  taken, the boats would stop coming. What would be the next fallback position if that was  full?

JULIE BISHOP    Michelle, our policy is in fact many layered. It is not only the fact that  Nauru could be up and running and would have been up and running immediately after the  election had we been elected, but also a range of policies including temporary protection  visas. As I was saying to Paul earlier, we have a substantial document on border protection.  You mentioned that the Nauru facility would only be small. We don’t have any idea of the  size of the proposed facility that Julia Gillard is talking about. She has indicated that  countries as far away as Mongolia, Turkey, Iran could be involved in this regional processing  centre because she said the countries of the Bali process - there are 44 countries involved in  the Bali process. She also talked about the region being the Asia-Pacific. That includes South  America, North Asia, it involves a lot of countries. Until we have some detail from the Prime  Minister beyond just the three words, ‘regional processing centre’, no-one will take the  proposal seriously. And also, East Timor, four months after the proposal was first raised, are  still waiting for the barest of details about it. I don’t believe that it has any chance of  progressing and that leaves Labor without a border protection policy and it means the boats  will be coming and more detention centres will be needed onshore.

STEVE LEWIS, NEWS LIMITED    Julie Bishop, you are the Shadow Foreign Minister,  you do a lot of overseas travel, how concerned are you about the damage to Australia's  reputation with three incidents involving Qantas jets in the last few days?

JULIE BISHOP    Qantas is an iconic brand. It is synonymous with Australia and obviously  we want to ensure that Qantas passengers are safe, that the Qantas crew are safe. These  incidents are worrying, but I have no doubt that Qantas will address them and they will  investigate them thoroughly. If there is a design fault in the planes, they will ground them  until it is fixed.

STEVE LEWIS    But it is damaging to Australia’s reputation isn’t it? Surely in New York  and London people will be looking at, as you say, this iconic brand and they will be saying  ‘what is going on’? Won’t it affect more broadly on Australia?

JULIE BISHOP    Steve, I wouldn’t overstate it. Qantas flies many planes on many routes  around the world and the A380 is in fact a new plane. I was on one of the inaugural flights. It  is a magnificent aeroplane. Obviously there is some kind of problem. I’m sure Qantas will fix  it. It knows that its brand is iconic and safety is absolutely paramount.

MICHELLE GRATTAN    Can I switch the discussion to the banks. Now, bashing banks  has suddenly become a very fashionable thing to do. In practical terms, how far can a  government go, how far should a government go in a basically deregulated system?

JULIE BISHOP    Michelle, our concern has been the collapse of competition in the banking  sector post the global financial crisis. Wayne Swan talks a lot about it, but so far has failed to  do anything, and what has become a hallmark of this government is he seems incapable of  actually achieving anything. Joe Hockey has been leading the debate, calling for greater  competition and he will be introducing a Private Member's Bill to address one of those  aspects of it.

MICHELLE GRATTAN    But when he started making his comments, you, I think in the  shadow cabinet, warned the opposition had to be careful of not going against its own  philosophy in this area.

JULIE BISHOP    We want to see strong and profitable banks in a well-regulated system,  but we are also concerned that it must be a competitive environment that we can achieve  which provides consumers with choice and competition and a better outcome for consumers.  We do want strong, profitable banks, a well-regulated sector, but we also have to have an eye  for the consumer's concerns.

STEVE LEWIS    Is there a concern, Julie Bishop, that the Coalition's message on this issue  and other issues, has been a bit too shrill? That economic handsomism tag, which Julie  Gillard has portrayed the coalition pursuing that it actually does have some resonance?

JULIE BISHOP    Steve, there is a policy vacuum within the government at present. It  doesn’t seem to achieve anything. It is paralysed in terms of policy reforms. So that means  that the coalition has had the opportunity…

STEVE LEWIS    What about on your side? When Joe Hockey talks about using levers etc  with the banks, you must have some concerns that the Liberal Party, the Party of Free  Enterprise, is pursuing this sort of rhetoric. Is that not a bit too shrill?

JULIE BISHOP    Steve, what we are talking about is greater competition in the banking  sector. I think most sensible people are thinking that is needed. More competition in the  banking sector and that gives consumers more choice.

MICHELLE GRATTAN    But how do you get it? Could you be more precise about how  you could actually get it?

JULIE BISHOP    Well, Joe has raised a number of issues. His 9-point plan includes giving  the ACCC power over price signalling. He has looked at a much broader inquiry into the  financial services sector, amendments to the Financial Services Act - a range of issues that  could make the banking sector more competitive and that is what we are looking for. Choice  for consumers as well as a strong and profitable banking sector.

PAUL BONGIORNO    Thanks for being with us today Deputy Opposition Leader Julie  Bishop.



