Scott Morrison, MP  Shadow Minister for Productivity and Population  Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship  Member for Cook



Bowen's East Timor guarantee a re-run  of Oceanic Viking debacle   14/10/10

Minister Bowen’s naive commitment to guarantee no asylum seeker or refugee will stay more  than 3 years at Labor's proposed regional processing centre in East Timor will repeat the  mistakes of Kevin Rudd's botched handling of the Oceanic Viking, Shadow Minister for  Productivity and Population & Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Scott  Morrison said today.

“Minister Bowen's commitment to a maximum 3 year stay for the regional processing centre  is a re-run of Kevin Rudd's botched decision to guarantee outcomes for the 78 asylum seekers  on the Oceanic Viking, sight unseen,” Mr Morrison said.

“Labor just never learns from their border protection failures, compounding their lack of  judgement and understanding on these issues,” he said.

“Not only does the Gillard Government want to put what the Indonesian Government is now  calling an asylum magnet in our region, they now want to underwrite the proposal to say that  anyone who doesn't find a place to resettle can come to Australia, just as Kevin Rudd did  with those on board the Oceanic Viking.

“This is a dangerous and naive commitment from a new Minister who clearly does not  understand the implications of his own policy. No wonder Kevin Rudd did not want to have  anything to do with it.

“Now the Government is suggesting that more than one centre may be opened, when they  cannot even get a proposal up for one.

“The present discussions in Indonesia have revealed that Julia Gillard has put no more detail  to her proposal since it was first discussed by former Foreign Minister Stephen Smith with  the Indonesians three months ago.

“Since the federal election, 20 boats have arrived carrying almost 1,000 people and Julia

Gillard's proposal for a regional processing centre is still just a thought bubble. By contrast, if  the Coalition were now in Government, Nauru would be open.

“If Julia Gillard was serious about third country processing of people arriving illegally by  boat in Australia, she would end the East Timor charade and pick up the phone to the  President of Nauru.

“In addition Julia Gillard should immediately withdraw the naive commitment made by  Minister Bowen on people being held in a regional processing centre.

“The Oceanic Viking debacle was bad enough. Minister Bowen's naive commitment would  institutionalise the failings of Labor’s Oceanic Viking folly into an international agreement  for our region that would compromise the integrity of Australia's immigration programme for  years to come.

“We can only be thankful that at least the Indonesian Government is aware of the serious  failings of Labor's flawed East Timor proposal because Julia Gillard and Minister Bowen  clearly are not,” Mr Morrison said.

