The Hon Julie Bishop, MP  Shadow Minister for Foreign Affairs  Deputy Leader of the Opposition  Member for Curtin



ABC2 News Breakfast with Michael Rowland

Thursday, 16 December 2010

Subjects: Christmas Island tragedy; WikiLeaks

E&OE…

MICHAEL ROWLAND    For more now on the Christmas Island tragedy we’re joined from Sydney by  the Acting Opposition Leader Julie Bishop. Julie Bishop, good morning and thanks for your time.

JULIE BISHOP    Good morning Michael.

MICHAEL ROWLAND    You would have seen the Government’s updated death toll figure. Sadly it  spears the death toll is expected to rise potentially quite dramatically over the course of the day.

JULIE BISHOP    Yes this is a terrible human tragedy. We don’t know the full extent of it until we  know how many people were on board this boat. And the numbers of survivors stand around 40 or  more but we don’t know how many people have drowned in this disastrous ship wreck until they are  able to determine how many were on board.

It is a terrible human tragedy and there are survivors who would be very traumatised, the rescue  crews are still out there working on recovery, and of course the people of Christmas Island who not  only witnessed this tragedy but also tried to help, they must also be feeling very traumatised today.

MICHAEL ROWLAND    The survivors, as you mentioned, the 44 survivors to date would be  extremely traumatised. Should they be taken to the main land where there are much greater services,  counselling services and the like, on offer?

JULIE BISHOP    Well I am sure the Government will do all it can to support those who need  assistance. I understand that a couple of the survivors have been flown to Royal Perth Hospital. That  is quite a trip, it is about 2,500 kilometres from Christmas Island to Perth. The Western Australian  Premier has offered all the assistance of the Western Australian Government in terms of hospitals  and other medical support.

If people need to be brought to the mainland then I am sure arrangements will be put in place as soon  as possible.

MICHAEL ROWLAND    Are you asking the question, as many people are this morning, as to why  this boat was able to get so close to shore without being monitored and intercepted?

JULIE BISHOP    After a tragedy like this there are many questions that will have to be answered.  Clearly people will want to know how did it happen, could it have been prevented?

I expect the Prime Minister will make a statement about some of these issues today. She’s not yet  spoken publicly so we’ll wait to hear what the Government has to say on those matters.

I would expect there to be some form of official investigation, formal inquiry. The Western Australian  Government has offered a coroner’s inquest which will no doubt take place as it has in the past when  these tragedies have occurred at sea. But I am sure there will be many questions to be answered by  the Government.

MICHAEL ROWLAND    Is that a legitimate question though? Don’t you find it so strange that on an  island and the waters relatively so small and so many naval vessel’s patrolling the seas that this boat  was able to slip through and get so close to shore?

JULIE BISHOP    The Coalition has not yet had a briefing on this matter, which is understandable.  The Government is obviously focussed on this search and rescue effort. But we will be seeking a  briefing and these are the sort of questions that we will raise. And I am sure when the Prime Minister  makes a statement, as I expect she will today, they are the sort of questions that will be put her and  we’ll hear what the Government has to say about that. No doubt there will be …

MICHAEL ROWLAND    Refugee advocates…

JULIE BISHOP    … No doubt there will be a discussion about this for some time to come but today  we really should be focussing on those whose bodies are yet to be recovered.

If we understand there is something like 70 or even 100 people aboard this boat then there are a  number of lives still to be accounted for.

MICHAEL ROWLAND    Refugee advocates this morning are pointing the finger at the Government  saying this tragedy is the direct result of the Government’s asylum seeker policies. Would you echo  that view?

JULIE BISHOP    Look I think today is a time to focus on those who have risked their lives to help  people in this traumatic situation, focus on the survivors and their needs and focus on the people on  Christmas Island who witnessed this tragedy.

And there will be a debate about this for days, weeks ahead but today I think we should be focusing  on ensuring that everybody that could be saved has been saved.

MICHAEL ROWLAND    Given the scale and now the potential scale of this tragedy, is it fair for there  to be no political points made, not today, not tomorrow, but for some time?

JULIE BISHOP    Well it is not a question of political point scoring today. The people of Christmas  Island have just been through an extremely traumatic experience. The people on board the boat have  been through a most terrible and terrifying ordeal. Naval and Customs officers are still engaged in a  rescue effort. It is a very sensitive and difficult time.

Of course there are questions, it’s natural and appropriate that there be questions of the Government,  and I am sure the Government will have to respond to them, but at this stage I think we should be  focusing on the full extent of the tragedy. We don’t know how many lives have been lost and that is  where our efforts should be today.

MICHAEL ROWLAND    In a related issue, the WikiLeaks, latest WikiLeaks cables splashed onto the  front pages of the Fairfax newspapers this morning, Julie Bishop, have a what is described as a key  Liberal Party strategist telling US diplomats back in November 2009 that the issue of asylum seekers  was quote, unquote, “fantastic for the Coalition” and again quote, unquote, “the more boats that come  the better”. Is that a fair summation of what a key Liberal strategist would have been telling US  diplomats at that time?

JULIE BISHOP    Nobody is named in the cable, not the person alleged to have said these words nor  the people who are alleged to have received these words. It is certainly nothing I have ever heard  said within Coalition ranks or at a Coalition meeting at any time.

MICHAEL ROWLAND    It obviously concerned the US diplomat so much that he has put it in the  official cables sent back to Washington.

JULIE BISHOP    I’ve never heard it said, I’ve never heard that sentiment said, and nobody is named.  I can’t comment.

MICHAEL ROWLAND    And so it is not ‘fantastic ‘ for the Coalition that more asylum seeker boats  come to Australia?

JULIE BISHOP    Today is a very tragic and sad day. Many people have lost their lives, many lives  are still at risk, many people are traumatised. I think our focus should be on the tragedy and what we  can do to ensure that all lives that can be saved have been saved and that all our rescue crews get  home safely and also that the people of Christmas Island receive all the support they need after going  through such a traumatic experience. It must have been a horrible ordeal for everybody involved.

MICHAEL ROWLAND    Julie Bishop in Sydney. Thank you very much for your time this morning.

JULIE BISHOP    Thank you.



