



Billion Dollar budget blow-out for costs on Christmas Island

18-May-2010  Source: Kay Hull, MP -



The illegal arrival of boat K126 will take Christmas Island back to the brink, forcing  more detainees to be transferred to the mainland, The Nationals Member for  Riverina, Kay Hull, has said.  “The 126th boat to arrive since Kevin Rudd rolled back the Coalition's strong border  protection regime, was carrying 92 people. It was the 20th boat to arrive since the  Government announced their asylum freeze, just five weeks ago.  “The fact that yet again a vessel was intercepted in distress highlights the risks that  are being taken.  “The capacity at Christmas Island was recently increased by another 400 beds to  cater for 2,500 detainees. When this latest boat arrives, there will be more than  2,450 people on Christmas Island, unless more detainees are transferred to other  centres or hotels on the mainland.  “It is worth remembering that when the Rudd Government was elected, Christmas  Island had a standard capacity of 400 people and there were just two detainees on  the Island.  “With the arrival of this latest boat there will be in excess of 3,500 people who have  been allowed to be exploited by people smugglers, in some form of immigration  detention around Australia, including Christmas Island. This is an increase of more  than 1,500 since January, including those whose claims have been rejected yet are  still here, going through their appeals.  “The rapid escalation in the detention population has created a billion dollar budget  blow-out for costs on Christmas Island and to increase the capacity of on shore  detention facilities, including the reopening of Curtin. Yet the Rudd Government has  still not budgeted for either the increase in costs to run their expanded onshore  detention centres, nor the increase in the onshore detention population.   “This latest arrival will remove two navy patrol vessels and one customs vessel from  their regular duties, leaving a gaping hole in our border protection system.  "As long as Rudd Labor remains in Government, Australia will continue to be a  magnet for people smugglers,”



