Scott Morrison, MP

Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship    Media Release



Transcript - 2GB Alan Jones Program

Friday 9th April 2010

Subjects: illegal boat arrivals, asylum seekers



EandOE



ALAN JONES: Scott Morrison is the Shadow Immigration Minister and he’s on the line. What

would you do if you were in government tomorrow in relation to asylum seekers?



SCOTT MORRISON: The first thing we would do is reintroduce Temporary Protection Visas,

we would reestablish universal offshore processing for all asylum seekers, there would be no

transfers to the mainland. We would begin working on that from day one. We would have a

policy of turning boats back where you would be able to do that, secure the vessel and be

able to send them back and we would be taking a very close look at how these applications

are being vetted and reviewed and one thing I highlighted just the other day was the large

number of people who are discarding their identity documentation en route. They are getting

half way to Australia by plane into other countries with identity documentation and somehow

this just disappears when they turn up at Christmas Island.



ALAN JONES: Why couldn’t you say to these people, you talk about turning the boats

around, why couldn’t you say well we are here, you asked us to arrive, now, I’ll tell you

where we are going, we are going to the nearest spot, Colombo where you came from is a

lot closer than Sydney so we are off to Colombo.



SCOTT MORRISON: Well I think this is a real point Alan. Go to Afghanistan, I mean Senator

Evans likes to claim Afghanistan is in our region, well it’s nowhere near our region. We have

soldiers fighting in Afghanistan to make Afghanistan safe. I have people from the defence

force who live in my electorate who raise these issues with me and they find all this very

discouraging and I have to identify with that sentiment. We need to get control of our

borders, we need policies to do that, we had those policies when we were last in

government, we would go back to those policies and that would send a strong message from

day one. That’s why we have been so strong on this from Opposition, because if elected

later this year I want and Tony Abbott want the people smugglers to know that the business

will change, the government’s view will change…



ALAN JONES: Hotel Australia will be closed for business.



SCOTT MORRISON: Yeah, that’s right.



ALAN JONES: And there’s talk that another 70 boats will arrive before the Federal election.



SCOTT MORRISON: I have no doubt about that. We have had four over the last six days or

thereabouts and we have had 105 on Kevin Rudd’s watch.



ALAN JONES: Because these people know what they are doing don’t they? They know

there has been a change of policy, they are not being intercepted they are actually ringing

up and saying we are here, come and get us, then off to Christmas Island to wait a couple of

weeks at a maximum level and then permanent residency in Australia.



SCOTT MORRISON: That’s it. It’s a good product to sell and people are buying it and the

price is coming down under Kevin Rudd. It used to cost around $20,000 and now it’s priced

at $4000 US. No wonder people are buying passage on these boats. They will be on there

for about two days, they ring up, a meet and greet service to Christmas Island and even into

Australia before your claims are assessed, you can pursue your appeals on the mainland. I

mean this has taken us back years and years. It took a lot of hard work for John Howard and

Philip Ruddock and others to get this issue under control. That’s what Kevin Rudd inherited.

What has created it has been this mess which we now have which has been confirmed by

the UN. It’s not just the Opposition saying it. The government likes to bag the Opposition for

raising this issue and holding them to account, well they now have to respond to the UN as

well. They say it is out of control, Kevin Rudd needs to end his denial.



ALAN JONES: Kevin Rudd said in November 2007 when asked what he would do with

asylum seeker boats he said -‘you’d turn them back. You can’t have anything that is orderly

if you allow people who do not have a lawful visa in this country to roam free. That’s why you

need a detention system. I know that’s politically contentious but one follows from the other.

Deterrence is effective through the detention system but also your preparedness to take

appropriate action as the vessels approach Australian waters on the high seas.’



SCOTT MORRISON: Yeah and he led people to believe it would all be business as usual

but it certainly hasn’t been business as usual as we knew it under the Howard Government

and our program now is being completely compromised. I know of three individuals who are

in Pakistan at the moment, they have been approved by the UNHCR, three women who

would be eligible and be the sort of people we would normally say yes to under our

humanitarian program, they have been told and they are in danger, that they can’t come to

Australia because the places are full and they are full because of unauthorized arrivals. I’ve

been told they’ve been told that by the Australian Government and that is an outrage. That

means people smugglers are deciding who comes to this country, not the Australian

Government and not Australians and that is not on.



ALAN JONES: And how much is this costing us? The 89 who were brought here two weeks

ago were offered $1000 in cash plus airfares, it is costing us what, $30 million a week at

Christmas Island and then the notion that the government charters Boeing jets to bring these

people to Australia, Boeing 737s, how much is this costing the taxpayer?



SCOTT MORRISON: Well as the least I can tell you it is costing taxpayers $81,900 every

time one person turns up and that is based on the figures we have been able to pull out of

the government, it is like extracting teeth. I do want to know what the cost of those charters

are, I do want to know what all these additional costs are. My colleague Michael Keenan has

estimated that the simple border protection costs on top of that is around $25,000 per head

as they arrive. So $100,000 for starters every time and now the average boat has around 40,

45 people on board, that’s $4 million every time one of these arrive.



ALAN JONES: And the department used three charter jets in one week to fly 163 people

without visas to Australia and by my last count I think there were about 198 boat passengers

and crew on mainland Australia and their visas haven’t been processed.



SCOTT MORRISON: They are not on their way home Alan, this is another part of Kevin

Rudd’s spin. Sri Lanka and Afghanistan are the other direction. Sydney is in the other

direction and they are coming here to pursue the appeals that this government created when

they came to office. They created a new system of appeals which is more than what is

provided for by the UN and now that they are on the mainland we will have to sit wait and

see whether that actually produces a situation where they can take their appeals further in

the courts. They have completely unwound what they inherited. As Tony Abbott has said,

they found a solution and created a problem and now they want to deny there is a problem

and talk about something else.



ALAN JONES: Good to talk to you, most articulate, thank you for your time.



SCOTT MORRISON: Thanks Alan



