UNCLASSIFIED



THE HON BRENDAN O’CONNOR MP

MINISTER FOR HOME AFFAIRS



BORDER PROTECTION COMMAND INTERCEPTS  VESSEL



(10 March 2010) Border Protection Command today successfully intercepted a suspected  irregular entry vessel.

HMAS Armidale, operating under the control of Border Protection Command, intercepted the  vessel just after 8am this morning, north of Ashmore Islands.

Initial indications suggest 46 passengers and 3 crew are on board the vessel.

People smuggling is a world-wide problem and Australia is committed to working closely  with our neighbours to address the issue.

Situations around the world mean that large numbers of displaced persons are looking for  settlement in stable, democratic nations such as Australia, and can be targeted by, and fall  prey to, people smugglers.

People smuggling is not just an issue for Australia—it is a global and regional problem. The  commitment of our neighbours, through bilateral cooperation and the Bali Process on People  Smuggling, Trafficking in Persons and Related Transnational Crime, is critical to addressing  this most serious issue.

Today, the Australian and Indonesian governments adopted an Implementation Framework  for Cooperation to Combat People Smuggling and Trafficking in Persons.

The Framework, developed under the Lombok Treaty Plan of Action, reflects the cooperation  between the two governments as co-Chairs of the Bali Process, as well as the 2006 bilateral  MoU on Migration and Border Control management.

The two governments recognise that people smuggling and trafficking in persons are regional  problems that require collaborative engagement among countries of origin, transit and  destination, and with relevant international organisations.

This cooperation necessarily involves law enforcement and other agencies working together  to prevent, disrupt and bring to justice people smugglers and people traffickers.

The group will be transferred to Christmas Island where they will undergo security, identity  and health checks. Their reasons for travel will also be established.



Contact: Brian Humphreys 0438 595 567 or Customs and Border Protection media (02) 6275 6793



