

BORDER PROTECTION COMMAND INTERCEPTS VESSEL

(10 April 2010) Border Protection Command today successfully intercepted a suspected  irregular entry vessel.

HMAS Maitland, operating under the control of Border Protection Command, intercepted the  vessel during the afternoon on 10 April north east of Ashmore Island.

It was initially detected by a Dash - 8 aircraft, operating under the control of Border  Protection Command.

Initial indications suggest 36 passengers and four crew are on board the vessel.

The group will be transferred to Christmas Island where they will undergo security, identity  and health checks. Their reasons for travel will also be established.

On 9 April 2010, Australia changed its asylum seeker processing system and suspended the  processing of claims by Sri Lankans and Afghans for at least three and six months  respectively as situations in both countries are evolving.  If passengers on this vessel are Sri  Lankan or Afghan nationals, their claims will not be considered until these suspensions are  lifted.

People smuggling is not just an issue for Australia - it is a global and regional problem. The  commitment of our neighbours, through bilateral cooperation and the Bali Process on People  Smuggling, Trafficking in Persons and Related Transnational Crime, is critical to addressing  this most serious issue.

Recent meetings with government officials in Indonesia and Malaysia have led to positive  steps forward in bilateral and regional cooperation to deter people smuggling.

The AFP continues to provide support to foreign law enforcement agencies in their efforts to  combat people smuggling activities in the region. These close working relationships have  resulted in a number of arrests and disruptions to people smuggling ventures in countries such  as Indonesia, Malaysia, and Sri Lanka.

Since September 2008, the AFP has charged 132 people with offences under the Migration  Act 1958 (Cth). These offences attract a maximum penalty of 20 years imprisonment.

The Australian Government remains vigilant and committed to protecting Australia’s borders

Contact: Brian Humphreys 0438 595 567 or Customs and Border Protection media (02)

6275 6793

