Scott Morrison, MP

Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship

Transcript - 2GB Ray Hadley Program

Monday 29th March 2010

Subjects: asylum seekers transferred to mainland, Villawood Detention Centre escapees,

Rudd Government’s failed border protection policies



EandOE



RAY HADLEY: Scott Morrison, the Shadow Immigration Minister is on the line. G’day Scott.



SCOTT MORRISON: Good morning Ray.



RAY HADLEY: Just for your edification, Christmas Island to Colombo is 3,450 KM.

Christmas Island to Sydney 5,304 KM. They’ve gone the long way haven’t they?



SCOTT MORRISON: They’ve gone the long way home Ray.



RAY HADLEY: And they’ve apparently chartered a jet. So why if they have expired their

request to remain here as refugees, why would you take them 5,304 KM to Sydney instead

of 3,450 KM to Colombo?



SCOTT MORRISON: Well there’s only one reason Ray and it’s because Christmas Island is

full. The Minister has to stop his denial and spin on this. We need to know how much that

charter flight cost, that mystery flight on Saturday night. 89 people who have a pretty high

motivation to break out of Villawood because their claims have been rejected, the reason

they were brought to the mainland is this - this government introduced a higher level of

appeal when they were elected for people who had their claims rejected. Now those people

would have waited on Christmas Island to go through that process. There was no room for

them so they moved them to the mainland in Sydney. That’s the reason they’ve been

brought here. They’re not on their way home. Some of these people will appeal and we will

now find out down the track they may choose to appeal that decision in our own courts. So

they have opened a can of worms here. The Northern IDC (Immigration Detention Centre) at

North West point on Christmas Island is a secure facility. It’s probably the most secure

facility in the Commonwealth and they’ve taken them to Villawood for security reasons they

say. This is all just spin and nonsense.



RAY HADLEY: Well I think that Piers Akerman writing today in the Daily Telegraph also

points out that no one, including the government, knows exactly what avenues are open.

And even those who support asylum seekers or illegal boat people know exactly what’s

going to happen in relation to bleeding heart lawyers knocking on the door at Villawood and

saying we want to represent you.



SCOTT MORRISON: Well now they’re on the mainland they can come and do that and we

will see that tested. The government, honestly, are in crisis over this. The breakouts from

Villawood is just another example of that. And you make the point about the distance to

Colombo and to that matter to Kabul or to Afghanistan or Karachi. Christmas Island is about

an hour’s flight from Kuala Lumpur, it’s about 45 minutes from Jakarta but apparently we

have to transit through Sydney. You can get to any country in the world, pretty much from

Jakarta. When these transfers take place and the government just comes out with these

untruths, the Australian people are awake to them on this and they should just be up front.



RAY HADLEY: Do we know, and we’ve been down this path before yourself and myself, on

the handful who have gone back because they’ve either agreed to go back or they’ve been

sent back and we’re only talking about less than 25 to 30 people at the very most over the

past couple of years, do you know whether they were simply brought to Perth and then put

on a plane, a domestic flight to Colombo? How were they transported, do we know?



SCOTT MORRISON: What we know is the 89 the other night, there was about another 19

who’d been rejected earlier this year. Now they would be waiting on their merit appeals Ray,

that’s that thing.



RAY HADLEY: The government did tell me that when we had an interview, they told me

some had been sent back voluntarily. What I’m trying to establish is I’m sure they weren’t

flown to Sydney and put on a flight to Colombo. I’m sure that when they said ‘okay we’ll go’

they were put on a flight to Perth and sent directly back to Perth.



SCOTT MORRISON: I suspect they were put on a flight to KL or Jakarta…



RAY HADLEY: From Christmas Island?



SCOTT MORRISON: From Christmas Island.



RAY HADLEY: Well Maxine McKew has been on Sky News this morning pooncing on about

this in only the ABC type fashion she could and no one explained to Mitch Fifield who joined

her from your side of politics or anyone else, if it is 4,350 KM from Christmas Island to

Colombo and it is 5,304 KM from Christmas Island to Sydney and I’ll now find out how far to

Kabul, and how far to Lahore, why these people are being brought home via the long route

so to speak?



SCOTT MORRISON: Well the answer is simple and that’s because they are not on their way

home. They are awaiting their appeals. They should be awaiting them on Christmas Island.

The government said they would not undertake these appeals on the mainland, they’ve

broken that promise, they’ve brought them there because Christmas Island is full. These

people could be here for some time. They’re not sitting in a transit lounge in Sydney airport,

they’re sitting in another immigration detention centre where they could be for some time,

particularly if they pursue these appeals. The government is just not being honest about

what’s going on. If it’s their view that they should shut down Christmas Island and bring

everyone to the mainland, well they should have the guts to say it rather than engaging in all

these subterfuge midnight flights and all of this nonsense. It is insulting the intelligence of

Australians.



RAY HADLEY: It certainly is. Now to the four that escaped and there has been apparently

ten people sacked over four escapes, we need some guarantees I’d expect from the people

your government previously employed to look after this to make sure it doesn’t happen again

I guess.



SCOTT MORRISON: Well we started the process when we were in government of the most

recent round of contracts. I’m not going to pretend Ray that on our watch people didn’t go

missing either. This happens from time to time and you need to tighten up all the time and I

can only support that. I’m not going to claim that never happened under the Coalition. But I

suppose that when it comes at a time when they’ve just transferred 89 people to a facility

who have a pretty good reason to try and get out it just ads to the crisis that this

governments in.



RAY HADLEY: Ok thanks as always for your time.



SCOTT MORRISON: Thanks Ray.



END





