

INTERVIEW WITH GERALDINE DOOGUE

ABC RADIO NATIONAL BREAKFAST

WEDNESDAY, 7 JULY 2010

SUBJECTS: Asylum seekers, debate over population policy.

GERALDINE DOOGUE:

Joining me now from Sydney Airport, Financial Services Minister, Chris Bowen,  and from Sydney today, Shadow Education Minister, Christopher Pyne.  Gentlemen, good morning.

CHRIS BOWEN: Good morning.

CHRISTOPHER PYNE: Good morning, Geraldine. Good to be with you.

DOOGUE: Yes, indeed. Minister, to you first. Can you explain the fears and  concerns you hear in your electorate? If we can possibly get to your electorates,  that'd be good, rather than even the broader responses, but in your electorate  about the asylum seekers coming to Australia by boat.

BOWEN: Well, Geraldine, I represent a seat in western Sydney, and it's well  known that this is a big issue in western Sydney. I also represent a seat with a  very high multicultural population, and a high number of refugees and people  with relatives in refugee camps around the world. In fact, I spend a lot of time in  my electorate office talking to people with relatives in camps in Africa and the  Middle East, trying to help them get them out of there, and I see the pictures of  their state and talk to them about their conditions, and it's appalling.

So people in my electorate, I think, do understand the value of refugees. They  understand the value that they can bring to the community. They understand  our obligations and the trauma that people who've been classified as refugees go  through. But they also very acutely understand the need for an orderly process  for dealing with people who are at camps around the world, and they understand  that if you don't have that process then that's a bad thing for those people who  are in very bad situations around the world. So it's a nuanced and complex  issue, and my electorate, I think, understands that.

DOOGUE: And they actually say to you, do they, that when the boats arrive this  prompts all of these thoughts, or you know, sparks it up? Is it like a scab that  gets picked or is there just an underlying anxiety around people coming here?

BOWEN: Well, look, I don't think it's an underlying anxiety around people  coming here. It's an underlying anxiety around the way people arrive here, and  to make sure we have that orderly process. But of course when you have a boat  arrival or a high number of boats arrive, that heightens that concern, no  question about that. But what you do need to do is have a methodical and  balanced approach to it, which is what I think Julia Gillard did yesterday and  what is so important. And you need to have the full story told, the number of  refugees that come to Australia as a proportion of the total migrant intake, for  example, is an important point to make.

DOOGUE: Alright.

BOWEN: They're the sorts of points we need to be making, those points that I  think my electorate broadly understands.

DOOGUE: And Christopher Pyne, in your Adelaide electorate what do people say  to you?

PYNE: Well, people are very concerned, Geraldine, that there is an uncontrolled  arrival of boat people across our north-western coastline, and they know that  the Howard Government stopped the boats in 2001, and then the boats resumed  when the Rudd-Gillard Government changed the laws and softened border  protection. And they know that, not just because the Opposition tells them, but  because the spike in the graphs is so transparently obvious. Since the Rudd-Gillard Government changed the laws, there have been 143 boat arrivals.

DOOGUE: But do they say this to you? Do they know there have been 143  boats? Do they say this to you?

PYNE: Yes, they certainly do. They say that they know there's been a spike in  the boat arrivals, in the number of people. They know the difference between  before the spike and after the spike was the change to the laws by the Rudd-Gillard Government, and they say, 'Well, whether you like the hardline policies  or not, there's nothing compassionate about putting the sugar back on the table  as Labor did and encouraging the people smugglers to ply their evil trade.'  That's what happened under Labor; the sugar was put back on the table and  people started coming here again, and that put them at risk and in danger of  being drowned on the high seas, which happened, and there's nothing  compassionate about that.

DOOGUE: And refugees themselves, what do they say to you about them as a  general group?

PYNE: Well, obviously they have a different view because they have often in  their own circumstances come here as unauthorised arrivals and then been  allowed to stay, and refugees would have a different view. The general  Australian public, on the other hand, and in my electorate, their view is, 'We  don't necessarily want tough border protection that keeps asylum seekers out,  but we understand the necessity of protecting our borders. We understand the  need to have an orderly refugee process. We take more refugees in Australia per  capita than any other current country, and as a consequence, we certainly have

credentials as a compassionate nation. We have to protect our borders.' They  know that therefore we need a tough, strong border protection policy. The  Howard Government achieved it and they know that the Coalition, if re-elected,  will return to that. Labor has come at some kind of midnight conversion and  quite frankly, they haven't got a policy anyway. Jose Ramos-Horta and the East  Timorese Opposition and Government are already casting doubt over the policy  today in the newspapers.

DOOGUE: Julia Gillard says she wants a frank and fearless discussion on asylum  seekers. Now, I'm going to ask you both, as an Australian first and as a  politician second, if that's possible, do you personally, Chris Bowen, fear asylum  seekers coming to Australia by boat?

BOWEN: Well, I don't think most Australians would put it that way, Geraldine. I  think they would say that we need an orderly process. And I think, frankly, Julia  Gillard yesterday, in a very erudite and eloquent fashion, laid out the  complexities of this argument and appealed to the better [inaudible] of our  nature, but also made it clear that we need an orderly process. Now, oppose  that to the sort of glib one liners and cheap and nasty politics that we get from  Tony Abbott, with cheap and nasty policies like 'we'll turn the boats back'.

DOOGUE: But you don't sit there fearing this. There's two separate things about  an orderly process and fears. It's the fears that can sort of change votes, isn't it?

BOWEN: Look, I don't think people necessarily fear refugees, certainly not in  my area. But they do think there's a need for proper processes and for Australia  to be taking its refugees primarily from those camps around the world.

DOOGUE: And it's not a broader thing that, you know, Paul Kelly's written this  morning in The Australian that it's actually urban congestion, particularly in a  place like Sydney, that is fostering a sense that Australia's too full anyway.

BOWEN: I think there's some of that. In fairness, I think there's some of that. I  think some people say, 'Well, you know, I'm sitting on a freeway' and they  conflate the two arguments. I think, frankly, the Liberal Party has tried to  capitalise on that, has tried to conflate the two arguments themselves, which of  course is silly. As Julia Gillard said yesterday, it would take 20 years for the  number of refugees arriving in Australia to fill the MCG. I mean, the two  arguments are separate arguments. But I can understand in the community  where those concerns do get conflated, I can understand that. But I don't think  it's necessarily always fear. Different people will have different motivating  factors for their policy on this.

DOOGUE: Okay. Christopher Pyne, as an Australian, you know, do you fear  personally asylum seekers coming here by boat?

PYNE: No, Geraldine, I don't fear them. Every time a boat arrival comes here in  an unauthorised way carrying a few dozen or 100 or so unauthorised boat  arrivals, I feel that that means that there are people in refugee camps in Kenya  or the Sudan or Thailand or elsewhere who will have to wait longer to come into  Australia, and they are going through the correct process. So I always think

that's more people who are waiting in Africa or Asia who are going to have to  wait longer.

DOOGUE: This used to be Philip Ruddock's line too.

PYNE: And that's what I feel. In terms of population, there is a deep concern in  the community that Labor is allowing the migration intake to run out of control.  We now have over 300,000 new migrants a year net in Australia and that is the  highest it's ever been, even since the post-war boom, and people are very  concerned that there isn't a policy in place to put in place the infrastructure for  most people. In my state, in Adelaide, of course, that particularly revolves  around water.

DOOGUE: Yes.

BOWEN: Christopher, if you want to have a mature and balanced debate, you  can stop dissembling like you just did. You know that the figure you just quoted  includes temporary migrants. You know that Tony Abbott's policy of turning the  boats back won't work, unless you are going to say if a boat is in distress and  people are drowning, 'We'll continue to turn it back.' So either you have a policy  which won't work or you have a policy which is indescribably inhumane. And if  you continue to dissemble in the way you just did about Australia's migration  level, then you will not be contributing to a mature and balanced debate on  these issues.

PYNE: Well, the only policy that actually works, of course, is the policy of  bringing together temporary protection visas with offshore processing, and Labor  has not supported temporary protection visas. While people are able to access  permanent residence in Australia by coming here in an unauthorised way, they  will do so because from where they're coming is much worse than where they  are going. If they get to Australia and get permanent residence, that is the sugar  on the table which Labor is leaving there. All the fine words yesterday and all the  rhetoric and talk, and the late night phone calls to Jose Ramos-Horta and John  Key, won't count for diddly-squat unless temporary protection visas are  returned.

BOWEN: We don't support temporary protection visas and we won't. A) because  they don't work -

PYNE: Then you can continue to encourage people to come here illegally.

BOWEN: I let you have a go. After you introduced temporary protection visas,  8,000 unauthorised arrivals came to this country and you also put people on the  never-never. You left people in a situation where they had no certainty about  their future. You left them on a merry-go-round of temporary visas and it was  inhumane, and we won't be going back to that policy. If you wish to, as a small  'l' liberal, that's your right. We won't be doing it.

DOOGUE: I'll give a last word to Shadow Education Minister, Christopher Pyne.  How are you going to make sure this doesn't descend into an unedifying debate?  It always just teeters on the edge of that, you know, going back to those

dreadful discussions around SIEV X and so on and so forth. Surely we don't want  to go back to that.

PYNE: Well, we certainly don't, and the problem with the Labor Party's policy for  the last three years has been that it has encouraged people smugglers to sell a  product. The product is permanent residence in Australia. The product is our  fantastic standard of living, and people will take the risk of coming across the  sea and they are dying. We know that 170 people have drowned in the high sea  because they've been trying to get to Australia since Labor was elected. They're  the ones we know of. The Sri Lankan Government says there are a great deal  many boats that have left Sri Lanka that are unaccounted for, that can't be  proven either way. So we know the Labor Party's policy is a long way short of  compassionate. The only way to stop the boats is to change the Government and  to reintroduce temporary protection visas and offshore processing.

DOOGUE: Okay.

PYNE: The combination of those things will mean that the boats will stop just as  they did in 2001 under the previous Government.

DOOGUE: Alright. Thank you very much indeed, Mr Pyne.

PYNE: Pleasure. Thanks, Geraldine.

DOOGUE: Shadow Education Minister Christopher Pyne and Financial Services  Minister, Chris Bowen.



