Tue, 12th January 2010

ABBOTT INTERVIEW WITH GREG CARY (RADIO 4BC) - PRIVATE MEMBER'S  BILL TO OVERTURN THE WILD RIVERS ACT, WHALING

The Hon Tony Abbott MP

Leader of the Opposition

E&OE

GREG CARY:

Happy New Year, Tony. How are you doing?

TONY ABBOTT:

G’day Greg and Happy New Year to you as well.

GREG CARY:

Noel Pearson, as you’d anticipate, was very happy with what you’ve got in mind. What do you have in mind?

TONY ABBOTT:

Well, a private member’s bill that, at least in respect of Cape York, strikes down the Wild Rivers Act, because this

Act effectively locks up the land. It effectively takes away indigenous people’s rights to use their land as an

economic asset. It was brought in without any serious consultation and if Anna Bligh and Kevin Rudd are fair

dinkum about looking after Aboriginal rights to a future - an economic future not just a welfare future - they will

do something and the best way that I can provide a voice to the Aboriginal people of Cape York is to bring in this

prive member’s legislation.

GREG CARY:

You know the area well. You’ve worked in the area. What annoys you most about the legislation?

TONY ABBOTT:

Well, it assumes that Aboriginal people and other stakeholders in Cape York want to rape the environment. Well,

I think that’s the last thing anyone up there wants. I mean, the cattle people up there in Cape York, they know

that they’ve got to live in harmony with nature. The Aboriginal people have been stewards of the lands for

millennia and the last thing they’re going to do is want to do something that’s not in harmony with the

environment. It’s basically just a gesture to the urban-based green movement. I think that’s the problem with the

thing, and it sacrifices the real interests of Aboriginal people to score political points with a few inner-city greenies

and, look, I regard myself as as big an environmentalist as anyone but frankly we can have economic

development that is ecologically sustainable on Cape York, but this unfortunately make sit impossible.

GREG CARY:

Yeah, our Government down here today is saying what you’re proposing is a stunt. Your response?

TONY ABBOTT:

My response is that they would say that, wouldn’t they? I think that if it was just me saying it, fair enough, but

you’ve had Noel Pearson on our program. I met with a number of traditional owners in Cairns this morning who

were very welcoming of what I’m proposing. I’ve been exchanging messages with Joseph Elu who’s another very

significant indigenous leader on Cape York who has been in close contact with Warren Entsch on this issue and,

look, I think that the Aboriginal people of Cape York are very, very concerned about this serious erosion of their

right to an economic future.

GREG CARY:

Tony, it’s profoundly patronising, isn’t it? On the one hand, as we all know - and you’ve been pushing this line for

a long time, as has the Prime Minister in fairness - education is key to all of us, not least our indigenous folks

who have had trouble getting access to a lot of that education. In the north Noel Pearson’s having amazing

success. Others are having equal success in other places. Okay, so now we’ve got the education, you’ve got

some hope - where are the jobs?

TONY ABBOTT:

Exactly right, and the problem with this legislation, this Wild Rivers Act, is that it basically means that Aboriginal

people have got to leave Cape York or stay on welfare for the rest of their lives and, as Noel and others have

been saying for some time now, that’s poison. There’s a couple of lost generations of Aboriginal people now who

have been living on welfare and in many instances their life has been very badly affected by alcohol and

substance abuse.

Now, if we’re going to give people hope for the future they’ve got to have reasonable expectation of some kind of

economic independence and that means if they’re going to stay in Cape York they’ve got to have the opportunity

to make economic use of their land to try to create viable businesses. Now it might be in the cattle industry, it

might be in ecotourism. These are not environmentally damaging industries, in fact ecotourism in particular

absolutely depends on the environment, but you’ve got to be able to put in the proposal to build the eco-lodges

and that’s what is almost impossible thanks to this Wild Rivers legislation.

GREG CARY:

Well, our show’s heard all around the state so they’ll be welcoming those words as they listen to them at the

moment. Just before you go, Tony, final thought: on the whales, a lot of people have been discussing and

debating the whole whaling issue related to Japan. What do you think we should be doing?

TONY ABBOTT:

I think that if we are serious about stopping the whaling, the best thing we could do is send the Oceanic Viking to

the Southern Ocean immediately. Now that the boat people are no longer holding it up in Indonesia it should go

immediately to the Southern Ocean to the scene of this confrontation. If it is able to keep the whalers and

protestors apart, as it should be able to, then it will in fact make it much harder for the whaling fleet to destroy

whales this year and I think it’ll be helping to keep the peace and it would be protecting the whales at the same

time. That is the most important thing the Rudd Government could do but Kevin Rudd unfortunately has

gutlessed-out on sending the Oceanic Viking to the Southern Ocean to this trouble spot, instead they’re talking of

sending the Oceanic Viking down south to chase Patagonian toothfish people.

GREG CARY:

Just on that point, though, and as fundamental to the whole debate - and I’m not sure, with respect, what you’re

saying overcomes the fundamental problem - that Japan sees nothing wrong in what they’re doing. You

obviously see something wrong in doing it so doesn’t what you’re suggesting risk exacerbating the problem. Don’t

we need to get to the core of: is what they’re doing right, is it wrong, and if it’s wrong, how do we convince them

they’re wrong?

TONY ABBOTT:

Well, I think the practical problem is how do we try to stop the whaling. Now, yes, I think that a lot of Japanese

people don’t see anything unattractive about whaling and it’ll take time to change that culture, but in the

meantime we have an immediate law and order problem, if you like, in the Southern Ocean and given that these

are Australian waters we should have a cop on the beat and that’s what the Oceanic Viking would be if it was

down there.

GREG CARY:

Opposition Leader Tony Abbott, appreciate your time.

TONY ABBOTT:

Thanks so much.

