Stephen Smith transcript of interview with Kerrie Ritchie

AM program, ABC Radio

Thursday, 15 July

TONY EASTLEY:   When it comes to the Government's plans for setting up a regional  processing centre for asylum seekers in East Timor, there is one large, critical player that needs to  be convinced that it's a good idea.

And so today Australia's Foreign Minister Stephen Smith finds himself in Jakarta spruiking the new  asylum seeker proposals.

It's from Indonesian ports that most of the asylum boats set off, and it's Indonesia which is  concerned about security issues with the regional processing centre in East Timor.

Correspondent Kerri Ritchie reports from Jakarta.

KERRIE RITCHIE:  This is Stephen Smith's sixth visit to Indonesia as Foreign Minister.

He says he's in Jakarta to talk about a number of matters not just people smuggling.

But he will be highlighting the positives of a refugee processing centre in East Timor, when he  catches up with Indonesia's foreign minister Marty Natalegawa later today.

STEPHEN SMITH:   We need to have regional support, either through the Bali Process  formally or generally throughout the region. Having Indonesia's support, of course, is absolutely  essential.

KERRIE RITCHIE:  Indonesian ports are a very popular departure point for people  smugglers.

The Federal Government believes a refugee processing centre in East Timor would stop many  asylum seekers trying to move from one country to another.

But East Timor's Deputy Prime Minister has rejected the proposal, reportedly saying Dili is no-one's  puppet.

STEPHEN SMITH:   East Timor is certainly not a puppet and that's why as one sovereign  nation through its Government we are having a conversation with East Timor as a sovereign nation  through its Government. Our officials have been in Dili for the first couple of days of this week, had  very productive talks with East Timorese officials.

As the Prime Minister made clear from the first moment the proposal is at its commencement  stages. We are not at the end stage.

KERRIE RITCHIE:  Australia and Indonesia co-chair the Bali Process, which was set up to  combat people smuggling and human trafficking.

Stephen Smith says Australia also needs support from settlement and re-settlement countries such  as New Zealand, Canada and America.



STEPHEN SMITH:   Co-operation of the settlement and re-settlement countries is also  required to re-settle people who have already been accorded refugee status by the UNHCR in our  region.

KERRIE RITCHIE:  Kemal Azis Stamboel is the Chairman of the Indonesian House of  Representatives Commission, which oversees defence and foreign affairs.

He says Australia was within its rights to approach East Timor but he's worried about spill over into  Indonesia's West Timor.

KEMAL AZIS STAMBOEL (translated): If people see that Indonesia is open for them, hundreds,  thousands of people will come and feel that it is okay, it is safe to be in Indonesia, we don't want to  have that image.

So our immigration law has to firmly reflect that our country is not an easy place for these illegal  migrants to come.

KERRIE RITCHIE:  Stephen Smith gave his support to Immigration Minister Chris Evans,  who's in hot water after reportedly saying that the Government's failure to control the immigration  debate is "killing the Government"

STEPHEN SMITH:   He's made the point that this is a difficult area. I think he is right.  There is no magic solution here.

TONY EASTLEY:   The Foreign Minister Stephen Smith speaking there with  correspondent Kerri Ritchie.



