



THE HON BRENDAN O’CONNOR MP            MINISTER FOR HOME AFFAIRS

BORDER PROTECTION COMMAND INTERCEPTS VESSEL

(2 April 2010) Border Protection Command today successfully intercepted a suspected  irregular entry vessel.    HMAS Larakia, operating under the control of Border Protection Command, intercepted the

vessel during the afternoon on Friday 2 April north north east of West Island at Ashmore  Reef.    Initial indications suggest 79 passengers and four crew are on board the vessel.     People smuggling is a world-wide problem and Australia is committed to working closely  with our neighbours to address the issue.    Situations around the world mean that large numbers of displaced persons are looking for  settlement in stable, democratic nations such as Australia, and can be targeted by, and fall  prey to, people smugglers.    People smuggling is not just an issue for Australia - it is a global and regional problem. The  commitment of our neighbours, through bilateral cooperation and the Bali Process on People  Smuggling, Trafficking in Persons and Related Transnational Crime, is critical to addressing  this most serious issue.    Recent meetings with government officials in Indonesia and Malaysia have led to positive  steps forward in bilateral and regional cooperation to deter people smuggling.    The AFP continues to provide support to foreign law enforcement agencies in their efforts to  combat people smuggling activities in the region. These close working relationships have  resulted in a number of arrests and disruptions to people smuggling ventures in countries such  as Indonesia, Malaysia, and Sri Lanka.    The Australian Government remains vigilant and committed to protecting Australia’s  borders.    The group will be transferred to Christmas Island where they will undergo security, identity  and health checks. Their reasons for travel will also be established.

Contact: Brian Humphreys 0438 595 567 or Customs and Border Protection media (02) 6275 6793

