Scott Morrison, MP

Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship    Media Release



Transcript - ABC Newsradio breakfast

Tuesday 16th March 2010

Subjects: illegal boat arrivals, asylum seeker transfers to Darwin

EandOE

GLEN BARTHOLOMEW: The Federal Government is reportedly preparing to  transfer hundreds of asylum seekers from Christmas Island to the mainland to make  way for new arrivals expected in the next few days. The transfer is being forced by  the anticipated arrival of several hundred asylum seekers now on board two illegal  ships, that’s according to reports in News Limited papers today. For more Marius  Benson is speaking to the Opposition Immigration spokesman, that’s Scott Morrison.

MARIUS BENSON: Scott Morrison have you from your own sources heard these  reports that hundreds of people are heading towards Christmas Island now in new  boat arrivals?

SCOTT MORRISON: Well the Coalition has heard that the government has been  preparing to accept a large number of people at the Northern Immigration Detention  Centre in Darwin. Just last Saturday week they were advertising for additional staff,  they put the local fire crews and emergency services on a stand-by, if you like, to  familiarize themselves with the facility. So the government by stealth has been  making these arrangements now for some time. Two additional boats arriving this  week would not be surprising because boats are arriving at a rate of more than two  per week and have been since the start of the year. It’s only a matter of time when  Christmas Island fills up and certainly the arrival of two boats of that size would  completely swamp the island.

MARIUS BENSON: If, for whatever reason, people are transferred from Christmas  Island to Darwin, what’s the problem?

SCOTT MORRISON: Well there are two, I think, very big problems. The first is it  sends a message to people smugglers that they can now get their clients all the way  to the mainland before their asylum claims have been tested and that has always

been the key thing that offshore processing was designed to avoid, both as part of a  process of not providing those [asylum seekers] with an endless access to our court  system to pursue appeals but also as part of a deterrent. Now that was the  centrepiece, offshore processing, of the Howard Government/Coalition  Government’s border protection regime and the government’s decision, if they follow  through with this in the next few days, would totally break the back of that offshore  processing system which would be an even further roll back of the system they  inherited from the Coalition.

MARIUS BENSON: But according to the reports these people have been processed  to the point of being established as low-risk individuals and then only being  transferred to Australia on that basis. Is there still a problem?

SCOTT MORRISON: Well their asylum claims have not been tested, if they had then  they would have visas and that’s not what the situation is. Their asylum claims have  not been proven and only just last week we had the UNHCR stating that things over  the last while in Afghanistan and Sri Lanka have been improving, so a rejection of  any of these claims potentially opens up to the courts opportunities for appeals and  we go back to the bad old days of people literally spending years and years and  years in our court system trying to delay their deportation.

MARIUS BENSON: But there’s legal dispute over that isn’t there? Whether their  status actually does change if they are in Christmas Island or Darwin, that testing  their claims can still be done while they are on the mainland without involving the full  panoply of Australian law?

SM: Well I think this is very, very murky legal territory. The government has taken no  steps to try and introduce legislation which would clarify this situation. When we were  in government we introduced legislation that provided for people to be transferred  from an offshore processing place, particularly Nauru and Manus, for a temporary  purpose. If someone was ill or required something immediately on the mainland we  provided, in any of those locations, we created a provision under the act with  enabled us to transfer people without affecting their status but it was for only a  temporary purpose. Now the government has introduced no such provision to  safeguard against this. I think they are being extraordinarily complacent and they are  opening up further incentives for people smugglers by putting more sugar in the pot.

END



