Leader of the Opposition Address to the  Liberal Party Federal Council   26/06/10

E&OE

Julie, thank you very much indeed for that marvellous introduction. To Joe, Joe  Hockey, my friend and colleague, to Warren Truss, the great leader of a great party,  the National Party, to all of you, parliamentary colleagues, captains and generals in a  people’s army that wants to restore good government to this country, thank you very  much for that tremendous welcome and thank you very much for the support you’ve  given me over the last seven months.

On Wednesday night I had a phone call from John Howard, who offered his  congratulations and he said ‘you have achieved the greatest prize that any opposition  leader can, you have secured the scalp of a prime minister’. My fellow Liberals, we  were going to defeat Kevin Rudd and his Government. We know we were going to  defeat them because the Labor powerbrokers have executed their leader without pity

and without mercy. But, as John Howard said to me on Wednesday night, ‘you now  have another task and that is to do it all again’. But we can do it again. We can do it  again because the Australian people are wondering why the prime minister of this  country should be chosen by the union and the factional warlords rather than by the  people themselves, and the Australian people have the same basic choice this week as  last week between a do little Government addicted to spending tax payers’ money  badly and a stable, responsible, mature and adult alternative. The only thing that has  changed is that the Australian public now know only too well that the leader of the  Liberal Party is chosen by members of parliament, but the leader of the Labor Party is  chosen by the faceless men of the unions and the factions. In fact, one of them even  broke cover to go on Lateline on Wednesday night and declare, ‘we determine who  leads this country and the circumstances under which you will lead’.

Yes, my fellow Liberals, we have defeated one Labor leader and we defeat another  Labor leader. They have dumped their salesman but they have not changed their  product and the problem was not the prime minister, the problem is the Government.  You see, this is a Government which has broken promises; that’s bad. This is a  Government which has wasted money. That is unconscionable. But this is a  Government which as threatened to kill the mining boom stone dead and that is a  crime against the future of our country.

But it’s all different, it’s all different now, the factions chiefs will tell us. Prime  Minister Gillard had no association and is not to blame for the policies which Deputy  Prime Minister Gillard decided and defended. We have the strange case of the absent  Deputy Prime Minister. The Deputy Prime Minister who was not, like her other  colleagues, in denial when peoples roofs were catching fire and when workers were  dying. The Deputy Prime Minister who wasn’t there when the boats started arriving  again on our western islands. The Deputy Prime Minister who had nothing to do with

$38 million worth of taxpayer funded political propaganda against the mining  industry.

The faction bosses would have us believe that it wasn’t really the new Deputy Prime  Minister who devised the great big new tax on mining. That was all someone called  Ken Henry’s fault and that person who called the mining leaders ignorant liars, that  wasn’t really Wayne Swan, Deputy Prime Minister. That was his evil twin, that’s who  it was. And then of course, ladies and gentlemen, there’s the absent Deputy Prime  Minister who was just an innocent bystander when an elected Prime Minister was  assassinated by the Sussex Street death squads.

My fellow Liberals, the Deputy Prime Minister, now the Prime Minister, was part of  this Government. She was on a unity ticket with Kevin Rudd from the very beginning  and for better or for worse, for all its history, this will be the Rudd/Gillard  Government and she must tale equal responsibility for the dud policies, the mistakes,  the betrayals, the broken promises, the waste and the mismanagement, and right now,  right around this county, there are school halls costing three times what they should  have and there are school canteens costing ten times what they should have and that is  the direct responsibility of the new Prime Minister, the former Deputy Prime Minister,  because she preferred to give billions of dollars to the state education bureaucracies to  waste rather than to school P&Cs to spend wisely. What we can say with absolute  certainty about Julia Gillard is that she can execute a Prime Minister but she can’t  execute a government program. She can manipulate the factions but she cannot  deliver computers to schools on time and on budget.

Now, ladies and gentlemen, as the father of three daughters I am pleased that there is  no job in our country that’s denied to women, but, you know, I come from Sydney  and in Sydney we have a female Lord Mayor, a female Premier, a female Governor, a  female Governor-General and a female monarch. I’m very pleased we have a female  monarch and it’s good, it’s good that we’ve now had a female Prime Minster too. As  the father of three daughters I have always believed that it should be judgment that  counts, not gender. As the father of three daughters I have always believed that people  should be chosen on the basis of their competence not their sex, and here are three  tests by which the competence of the new Prime Minister will be judged. Can she  stops the boats, in particular will she re-introduce temporary protection visas? Will  she end the school halls rip-off, in particular will she suspend the final $5.5 billion  worth of so-called building the education revolution payments, at least until after  she’s read the value for money report and, in particular, will she dump the tax which  is threatening to destroy the basis of our prosperity?

Now, she’s pulled the ads, but she hasn’t pulled the revenue from the Budget that the  tax provides, nor the spending from the Budget that the tax sustains. She can’t do that  and still balance the books because in the year when the surplus is supposed to be $1  billion the tax raises $3 billion and in the next year when the surplus is supposed to be  $5 billion the tax raises $9 billion. This Government needs the tax to sustain the  spending spree and they can’t remove the tax if they’re not prepared to stop the waste,  the extravagance, the reckless spending.

Now the new Prime Minister says that she wants to talk to the miners. You bet she  wants to talk. She wants to keep them talking and talking and talking and not

advertising until right past polling day and this week’s protestations of good faith  towards the miners are as believable as last week’s protestations of loyalty to Kevin  Rudd.

Let’s be clear what the faction chiefs want from the new Prime Minister. The faction  chiefs want the wow factor associated with a new Prime Minister to carry the  Government to polling day, but once that’s happened Julia Gillard will be just as  dispensable as was Morris Iemma, as was Nathan Rees and as will be Kristina  Keneally once she is of no further use to them. The faction chiefs, as we know, have  turned the leadership of the Labor Party into a transit lounge controlled by poll and  media driven apparatchiks and that is not good for our country and we have to  demonstrate to the Australian people that that is no way to run a country. I am sure  that the Australian public are not mugs. They know that despite the makeover it’s the  same Government, with the same policies and the same Ministers and the same  disdain for proper process, the same recycled rhetoric from the last election, the same  fibs about their political opponents. We all know that they are trying to airbrush Julia  Gillard from the inconvenient past just as they are trying to airbrush Kevin Rudd from  the future, but the public will not be fooled. The public are not mugs and I was  delighted, absolutely delighted, Barry O’Farrell, that in last weekend’s Penrith by-election the booths as the Samuel Terry Public School were manned entirely by union  officials in “Your Rights at Work” t-shirts and the swing at that polling place to the  Coalition was 30.3 per cent.

I want to make two final points about the current Government. The Australian people  do not want in our national capital the political style of the state Labor Governments.  They do not want Mafioso politics to contaminate Canberra. They do not want our  national government to resemble the patronage machines of New South Wales and  Queensland. That’s the first point I want to make. The second point I want to make is  that, sure, right now the new Prime Minister is enjoying a predictable bounce in the  polls. That was to be expected. The Government has tried to fix the headlines but they  can’t fix the problems and the headlines won’t stay fixed unless the fix the problems.

When the history of the Rudd/Gillard Government is finally written, it will be said of  them ‘what was that all about?’ ‘What was that all about?’ There was the apology to  Aboriginal people at the start where noble words have not been backed up by  effective action and then there was climate change, the greatest moral challenge of our  time, coupled with the dumping of the policy that was supposed to deal with it and,  yes, Government ministers will boast until polling day that they have saved Australia  from the global financial crisis. Well let me assure the public that it was the reforms  of previous governments, not the spending spree of the current Government, which as  kept Australia out of recession. When all is said and done, the history of the  Rudd/Gillard Government will be written in red ink because what this Government  has done, its only notable achievement has been to turn a $20 billion surplus into a  $57 billion deficit and to turn a $60 billion net asset position into a $100 billion of net  debt. You see, ladies and gentlemen, it takes principle to make history and this  Government has left no mark, will leave no mark because it can’t take the hard  decisions because it hasn’t got deep and real values on which to base them.

Well, ladies and gentlemen, there is a better way. People are not disillusioned with  this Government because of Kevin Rudd, they are disillusioned with this Government

because it hasn’t delivered. Just a few weeks ago the former Prime Minister said we  made 600 promises to the Australian people and we’ve kept all of them. Well, the  trouble with making 600 promises to the Australian people is that no one can keep  tabs on any of them. If you try to do too much you will end up doing very little.  Indeed, almost nothing. Now, I can’t promise that the next Coalition government will  be perfect, but I can promise that it will be different and I can give the Australian  people this commitment, that our promises will be achievable, they will be  comprehensible and they will be affordable. Our promises, they will be prudent, they  will be possible, they will be desirable measures and they will be doable and so,  toady, I offer the Australian public my strong plan for our country. I offer the people  the Coalition’s Action Plan for a better future and this is a road map to good  government because it is based on mainstream community values and I want to tell  you that the first commitment we give - the foundation of good government - will be  to restore the Budget surplus within three years and start re-paying Labor’s debt.

I want to pay tribute to my colleague, Joe Hockey, and to my colleague, Andrew  Robb. Fiscal rectitude has to be the foundation of good government and the are two  strong guardians of fiscal rectitude. Whenever I was tempted to channel B.A.  Santamaria, Joe and Andrew said ‘don’t do it, remember you are a Liberal’ and I am  proud to be a Liberal and every time I am reminded of my history as an early acolyte  of B.A. Santamaria I will remind Julia Gillard of her history as the convenor of the  Socialist Forum.

We will restore the Budget to surplus and we will do it via the high road of cutting  government spending, not the low road of higher taxes. We have already identified  $47 billion worth of cuts to capital and recurrent funding. We will get the deficit  down to reduce pressure on interest rates and to preserve and secure the prosperity of  all Australians.

Our second commitment is to end Labor’s waste and restore cabinet government.  Now, I regret to tell you, ladies and gentlemen, that the new Prime Minister is as  addicted to tax as her predecessor. She has never seen a tax that she didn’t support  and so far her only recorded contribution to smaller government is to take the Gang of  Four and to turn it into a Gang of Two, and she’s done that by driving out of the  Government the Minister for Finance, Lindsay Tanner, who was its only  economically literate member.

Our third commitment is to reject Labor’s massive new mining tax and all other taxes  that hurt productivity, and here I want to pat tribute to Ian Macfarlane, who  understands the mining and the resources industry better than any other elected

official in our country and also to Julie Bishop, who understands the importance of  mining and resources to regional Australia as much as any other leader in our country.

Yes, we all know that there aren’t mines in every suburb and town, but there is a  mining industry in every suburb and town. We all know that the mining sector is but  seven per cent of GDP but it almost half of Australia’s exports and the rest of our

economy cannot be sustained without the export sector to make it all work. Let’s be  very clear about this, we already have a profits based tax, it’s called company tax. The  mining industry is already paying its fair share of tax because it pays company tax on  its profits and because its pays royalties on the non-renewable minerals that it gets out

of the ground and it should not be treated as a milch cow by spending addicts who  think that profit is a dirty word. So, that is why, ladies and gentlemen, while there is  breath in our political bodies we will oppose this tax. We will oppose this tax and let  there be no doubt at all, Labor wants this tax, Labor will introduce this tax and  whatever compromises they pretend to make, whatever promises and pledges they  pretend to make, all that is standing between our country and this jobs destroying and  investment destroying new tax is the Liberal Party and the National Party - our strong  federal Coalition.

Ladies and gentlemen, we will finally end discrimination against small business. You  know, the Labor Party promised prior to the last election that government would pay  small business bills on time, but when you actually looked at the fine print of that  promise, small business had to actually have a formal contract before the Government  would do this. Well, I say that when we are in government we will allow small  business to charge government interest on overdue accounts. Let’s face it, ladies and  gentlemen, if we are late paying the tax office they charge us interest and it is only  fair that we are able to reciprocate.

Ladies and gentlemen, we will enforce strict border security and control and, again,  let me pay tribute to our Shadow Minister in this area. Scott Morrison has been the  most vigilant guardian of our borders. Not a boat has arrived without Scott alerting  the world to that fact.

When the new Prime Minister was the Shadow Minister for immigration she used to  issue press releases headed, ‘another boat, another policy failure’. She didn’t get to  issue them very often. She only got to issue them three times a year because that is  how often boats arrived under the Howard Government. Now boats arrive three times  a week. Well, ladies and gentlemen, I give you this commitment. We will control our  borders. We did it before, we can do it again but only a Coalition government can.

Now, ladies and gentlemen, we will link population growth to the provision of better  infrastructure. I want, we all want a stronger and more prosperous country where  migrants have a warm welcome. That’s the Australian way. It always has been, it

always will be. But, there is little point deliberately bringing people into cities that are  already choking on their own traffic. We are determined to ensure that infrastructure  keeps up with population growth and that immigration does not out-strip  environmental and economic sustainability.

We will take direct action on water and the environment. I pay tribute to our shadows,  to Greg Hunt, to Barnaby Joyce. I pay particular tribute to my predecessor, the former  Minister for the Environment, Malcolm Turnbull, who was responsible for the  Howard Government’s Murray-Darling plan. We will improve water infrastructure  and we will co-ordinate the buy backs to make sure more water is available for the  health of the Murray-Darling Basin and we will do it in ways which ensure our food  security and preserve our agricultural industry.

There will not be an emissions trading scheme under a Coalition government because  we will not damage our economy to achieve a futile gesture. But we will take prudent  precautions against foreseeable threats and that means that we will purchase  emissions abatements from the market in ways which also improve our environment

and I point out to you, my fellow Liberals, that we are actually the only major  political party with a credible emissions reduction policy.

We will protect private health and we will improve the public health and hospitals  system. We want to empower patients and to empower the doctors and nurses who  treat them and we will fund hospitals rather than continue to fund the state health  bureaucracies. We will provide more resources to health but we will do it in ways that  actually deliver better services to patients rather than simply add to bureaucratic  process and the achievement of targets, bureaucratic targets, which are never fully met  and which patients hardly ever notice.

Ladies and gentlemen, we will help growing families to get ahead with six months  paid parental leave. Now, I know this has been a difficult and controversial policy for  many of us in this room. A political party’s values should never change but policy  must evolve to meet the changing needs of our society. 62 per cent of all mothers are  in the paid workforce just prior to giving birth. They need to be catered for. Paid  parental leave should be a workplace entitlement, not a welfare one. That’s why we  will provide, as a Coalition, six months leave at full pay. This will be good for women  because it will finally give them a real choice to combine family and career. It will be  good for families because it will give them financial support at a time when they are  most vulnerable and it will be good for our economy because it will increase  population, it will increase productivity and it will increase participation - the three  P’s of the intergenerational reports which Peter Costello established.

Now, I want to say that this is not funded by a great big new tax. It is funded by a  relatively modest levy that I hope will be but a temporary addition to the cost burden  of larger business and the fact that the Labor Party refers to a great big new tax just  demonstrates how sensitive they are about the really great big new taxes - the two of  them - that they are still committed to.

Ladies and gentlemen, I, in the marrow of my bones, believe in our families. I believe  in all the families of Australia, in all the different shapes and sizes in which they  come. The next Coalition government will be totally committed to the welfare of all  the families of this great country.

We will provide safer neighbourhoods by ensuring that communities that want closed  circuit TV to boost their security can have access to them. We will raise standards in  eduction because we will work with the states to give more autonomy to school  communities. In particular we will work the states to ensure that school principals  have the power to pay their best teachers more and on this issue, as on so many issues,  I want to thank and congratulate the Shadow Minister for Eduction. In fact I wish to  let you know, my fellow Liberals, that scarcely a meeting of the shadow cabinet takes  place without a resolution of gratitude being passed to the Shadow Minister for  Education.

Ladies and gentlemen, last but by no means least, the next Coalition government will  restore work for the dole and mutual obligation. This was one of the signature policies  of the Howard Government. This was one of the achievements of the Howard  Government of which I was most proud and yet it’s something which deep down the

Labor Party hates. Martin Ferguson, the man who has been so brilliant at negotiating

with miners once described work for the dole as almost evil and that is the Labor  Party’s real attitude towards this particular policy. I want people, including  unemployed people, to be able to show the world what they can do, not just what they  can’t do. I want, we want all working aged people to work, preferably in paid  employment but if not then work for the community. It’s a great policy and it’s a

policy that will be a very important part of the next Coalition government.

Let me tell you, ladies and gentlemen, just one policy that will not be part of the next  Coalition government. We will not bring back WorkChoices. WorkChoices is dead.  WorkChoices is dead and any suggestion to the contrary is a lie and I want to let you  that there were two members of the Howard Cabinet that spoke against WorkChoices.  One of them is sitting in the audience right now, it’s Kevin Andrews, and modesty  prevents me from naming the other member of the Cabinet that spoke against it.

Let me also say that I am conservationist. Always have been, always will be and there  is, or should be, a natural fit between a conservative political movement and practical  conservationism. But, let me tell you what many of you know already, that we are  losing the fight against feral animals, against noxious weeds and against the  degradation of our land because there just aren’t enough volunteers, council workers  and National Park rangers. So, the Coalition will establish a standing green army,  15,000 strong, to ensure that our children inherit an environment that is in better shape  than the one we have right now.

Ladies and gentlemen, it is an extraordinary honour and privilege to lead the Liberal  Party and to lead the Coalition. Apart from my wife agreeing to marry me, this is the  greatest honour and privilege that has been bestowed upon me in my life. As a  Liberal, I support lower taxes, smaller government and greater freedom. As a  conservative, I support a fair go for families and respect the values that have stood the  test of time. As an Australian, I want policies that work and which do not trifle with  the future of our country and from this day until polling day my colleagues and I will  have a simple message - if you want to stop the boats, it’s not enough to change the  Labor leader you’ve got to change the government. If you want to stop the tax, it’s  enough to change the Labor leader you’ve got to change the government. If you want  to restore clean government in this country, it’s certainly not enough to let the factions  change the leader, you’ve got to change the Government. The only risk, the only risk  - and we’ll hear a lot of talk about risk from our opponents over the next few months  - but the real risk is the risk that the Australian people might give a bad government a

second chance that it doesn’t deserve and we are here to minimise that risk, and I  believe that we will do this.

I am proud to lead a team that has learnt the lessons of 2007 and has also learnt from  the mistakes of the Rudd/Gillard Government. We are ready to govern. Seven  members of the Shadow Cabinet were Cabinet Ministers in an effective government.  Fifteen members of the Shadow Cabinet were Ministers in an effective government.  We know how to be professionals in government because that is what we have been,  ladies and gentlemen. There will be no amateur hour bungles from us because we  know what a good government looks like, we have been in one and, if elected, we will  be the most experienced and the most accomplished incoming ministerial team in a  generation.

Ladies and gentlemen, I pay tribute to my predecessors. I pay tribute to Brendan  Nelson, who helped to heal the wounds of defeat. I pay tribute to Malcolm Turnbull,  who had the courage to oppose Labor’s $42 billion second stimulus package because  he knew that it was too much too soon and he could see the damage that it would do. I

salute John Howard and Peter Costello, the best political teachers that anyone could  have and I acknowledge the spirit of Sir Robert Menzies, which should hover over  every gathering of Liberals.

I thank my Mum and Dad, who are here today with us, who gave me the best possible  start in life, and as I look at my friend, Joe Hockey, I’m conscious of the fact that Dad  gave him the best possible teeth in life.

I am so lucky to be here with my wife, Margie, and one of my beautiful daughters,  Frances. Without their generosity and self sacrifice my public life would not be  possible.

And, so, ladies and gentlemen, we go forward into the next election. We go forward  into the next election full of confidence, full of hope, secure in our values, strong in  our principles and united as a team. It will be a tough fight because we are opposed by  one of the world’s most ruthless political machines fighting for its political survival. It

will be a filthy campaign funded to the full resources of the union movement and it  will be obviously the supreme challenge of my life so far, but I will not let you down  and I will not let our country down. With all the energy at my disposal, with the  experience I have of life and of government, I will strive to be the leader that  Australia needs now.

Ladies and gentlemen, thank you so much for your support. I can feel the energy from  this room. I can feel the commitment to win, not just for us, not just for our party but  for the Australian people who deserve better than they’ve got now.





