Scott Morrison, MP

Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship    Media Release

Transcript - Sky News PM Agenda

Thursday 29th April 2010

Subjects: Coalition population policy, Rudd Government’s failed border protection policies



EandOE



DAVID SPEERS: What does this new policy mean?



SCOTT MORRISON: Well what this is about is setting a new way about how you make

decisions about population growth. What the government has done is ask Tony Burke to tell

everyone why 36 million by 2050 is a good idea. What we have done is say we will change

the role of the Productivity Commission to provide independent credible advice about what a

sustainable growth path is so they will say over a period of five years, say, this is the growth

path we can sustain ably operate on, a low band and a high band and you set your migration

targets to match that growth path.



DAVID SPEERS: So each year or every five years?



SCOTT MORRISON: Each year you have to set what your migration intake would be but the

growth bands, a bit like I suppose what the Reserve Bank does with its inflation band they

need to neep things in a particular window. Equally the Productivity Commission, or the

Productivity and Sustainability Commission as it would become known, would advise on

what that population growth band would be which it deems sustainable. That would be

based on whether they thought infrastructure programs were being delivered in accordance

with the timetable, to do exactly the types of things that Tony was just talking about.



DAVID SPEERS: Well this is the point isn’t it because what Tony Abbott was saying back in

January was that as long as you have got the infrastructure we can handle a population of

36 million so does the Productivity Commission have a role then to investigate what

infrastructure we do have in where the growth is happening, whether it is adequate? That’s a

pretty big job isn’t it?



SCOTT MORRISON: It is a big job but it is an important job and you can’t go and sign up

blindly to 36 million people without having done that work.



DAVID SPEERS: So they will have to go around each city, each regional centre, look at

things like hospitals, schools, other services, roads, public transport? The mind boggles at

how big this job could be.



SCOTT MORRISON: Well the Productivity Commission already does an enormous amount

of work on these areas. If I go back to when I was in the housing portfolio, they produced a

voluminous report on the delivery of public housing stock around the country, they have a

pretty good handle on what is being delivered around the country but what is important is

whether programs are being delivered, that infrastructure is being put in place as it is said it

would be. So as Tony said you can have a level of confidence that if your population is to

grow there will be the support and energy and schools and infrastructure and that is really

what this debate is about.



DAVID SPEERS: And if the Productivity Commission says, look we can’t handle, we don’t

have the infrastructure to cope with migration to continue at the rate, or the population

growth to continue at the rate it is, then what? The Coalition Government would say, ok we

are going to have to cut immigration?



SCOTT MORRISON: Well you would have to match your migration to match the Productivity

Commission’s recommendation and what that does is take the politics out of it and make it a

very independent, transparent, credible process where you could have confidence that

whatever your migration intake is going to be that it will be part of a sustainable growth path.



DAVID SPEERS: But then you get to the question that you have had trouble answering in

the past, what sort of migration do you cut? Is it the skilled migrants? Is it the family

reunions? Is it the refugees?



SCOTT MORRISON: Well it all depends on where you are at any given time. Currently, as I

have said before, we have a net overseas migration of 300,000 running per year. That would

give us a population of 42 million, that is well in excess of the 36 million…



DAVID SPEERS: Sure but if the Productivity Commission says look, you need to cut

migration by 100,000, what do you do as the government? That’s your decision where you

are going to cut it.



SCOTT MORRISON: Well you have to know where the baseline is where you are operating

from at that given point and it will be different at any point in time in the future. For example,

457 visas have been falling for the last 18 months. They have been falling all on their own

and partly, we believe in the way the government has changed the rules around 457 visas.

In the eight months to February we have actually had a 40% decline in the number of 457

visas approved in this country so there have been big declines in that area. That is what is

happening now, what is happening in the future you would have to assess at the time.



DAVID SPEERS: But the implication of this policy is that as a government, the Coalition

would take the advice from the Productivity Commission and then make a hard headed

decision on we are going to cut immigration but you can’t tell us where you are going cut it.



SCOTT MORRISON: Well no one has a crystal ball as to what the levels of migration in any

of the different programs is going to be over the next 20 years David. That’s why having a

process which says these are the guardrails of growth that you can operate in. That’s what

this policy is about, it’s about setting those guardrails that give the community confidence

about what an upper limit is and also I think gives business confidence about the fact that we

would be looking at growth. In this document we have said that skilled migration will be top

of the list, top of the list when it comes to what your migration program is for.



DAVID SPEERS: And what is bottom of the list?



SCOTT MORRISON: Well, we would work through that at the time but obviously if you have

an economically focused migration program then economically driven categories are those

that go to the top of the list David.



DAVID SPEERS: It’s being all things to all people, saying we are going to look after

population, we are going to keep skilled migration, we are going to keep business happy but

you don’t want to deliver the bad news about who is going to be cut out of the program.



SCOTT MORRISON: Well you won’t know until you know what the baselines are and I will

give you an example. At the moment the government has announced changes in terms of

how they are going to deal with the skilled occupation list and how they are breaking the

nexus between student visas looking for permanent visas. Now we need to know from the

government, as we say in this document, what their projection is on the new baseline for net

overseas migration as a result of their changes to the education visa program. Until we know

what that is then basically you are pulling numbers out of the air and I don’t think that is good

policy.



DAVID SPEERS: You are putting a lot of reliance on the Productivity Commission as part of

this policy. Is there an irony that just weeks ago your colleague Barnaby Joyce was talking

about using Productivity Commission reports as toilet paper?



SCOTT MORRISON: Look I think Barnaby dealt with that comment I don’t think we need to

go over that ground. The commission is respected, it is an independent agency which I think

is critical and the other thing we have asked them to do is undertake an inquiry which lets

Australians have their say on this issue. This is what Kevin Rudd has failed to do. They want

to have their say and that will give us a new baseline for what community expectations are

about population growth.



DAVID SPEERS: There was also a lot of criticism from the Coalition of Kevin Rudd when he

was Opposition Leader for calling too many inquiries, whether it be on groceries or petrol or

whatever but here we have the Coalition backing more inquiries.



SCOTT MORRISON: Well I don’t think you could say we have announced a lot of inquiries

David. I think what we have done here is where there is a need to go out and really listen to

people on issues, and I think one of the biggest amounts of feedback I have had in this

portfolio on the population issue is that people just don’t believe their voice is being heard

and I think as the commission takes on this new role under a Coalition Government they

need to start from the premise of what do Australians see as the future for our population

and I think that needs to very much influence and provide a baseline, as I say, for their

investigations.



DAVID SPEERS: On the boat arrivals, 4 in 4 days, 4 this week, as I said earlier another

monthly record of 16 boat arrivals for April. Do you think the government’s announcement

earlier in the month that it is suspending the Afghan and Sri Lankan claims has failed?



SCOTT MORRISON: Well the evidence speaks for itself. Even they said on the day that it

was not going to stop the boats and they have been proved right on that. Four in four days,

16 this month, more people have arrived this month than last month and the litany of failures

continues. This policy is not only ineffective but as others have said it is quite inhumane. The

Coalition Government never suspended assessments based on people’s nationality. That’s

not something we ever did. As we have seen there will probably be legal cases that will

probably come forward. These legal cases will be made easier by the fact these individuals

will be transferred to the mainland.



DAVID SPEERS: Well as you know refugee groups have been pointing out that things in Sri

Lanka and Afghanistan aren’t pretty, even the UNHCR has released a report out of Sri

Lanka talking about how bad it is there. So are you now saying the Coalition would overturn

this suspension and start processing those claims again?



SCOTT MORRISON: Well our policy is to have Temporary Protection Visas. That

recognises the fact that someone’s refugee status is not a permanent condition and under

our policy it wouldn’t be if circumstances had changed and that was established, then it

wouldn’t just be people on boat K107 that were affected but people who were on every boat.

So I don’t think it is fair to say you turned up one side of an arbitrary line therefore you are

going home and everyone who turned up before can keep their Permanent Protection Visas.

Our policy recognises the fact that this is not a permanent status and if circumstances

change then all those for whom those circumstances apply would be going home.



DAVID SPEERS: And if you do come to office, when you do, the people who are still in

detention on Christmas Island, maybe at the Curtin Detention Centre that is being reopened

or perhaps elsewhere, would that policy immediately apply to them? They would only get a

temporary refugee visa?



SCOTT MORRISON: Our policy is to introduce Temporary Protection Visas. If people have

already been given visas well that is the decision of a previous government but for us it will

be Temporary Protection Visas that would not give people access to the family reunion

program, as it was the case when we were last in government and that policy would apply.



