







Lateline with Leigh Sales  17 September 2010

Subjects: sustainable population - leadership

E&OE only

LEIGH SALES:  For more on federal politics we're joined tonight in our  Sydney studio by the Minister for Sustainability,  Environment, Water, Population and Community, Tony  Burke, and by the Shadow Immigration, Productivity and  Population Minister, Scott Morrison.

Gentlemen your titles are so long we're almost out of  time.

Let's start with the announcement of the expansion of  the immigration detention centres.

Scott Morrison isn't this a necessary short term decision  for Labor to take while it figures out the longer term  strategy?

SCOTT MORRISON: Well as long as the boats keep coming then we're going  to be in this situation of needing more beds, it's that  simple. I think that's what Tony just said.

But this won't be just a short term solution, this will be a  far longer term solution because the Minister flagged  himself today that he would be looking at more beds

down the track when he has the opportunity to consider  what other further options are available.

But what didn't happen today was the opening of third-country off-shore processing. Had the Coalition been in



government today then that's what we would have been  announcing with the reopening of beds in Nauru.

Timor is not open today, East Timor won't be open  tomorrow, it won't be open this term.

Kevin Rudd needs to convince himself of the proposition,  let alone the East Timorese.

So, I think that's what it showed today, that the  Government's position is that more people are coming,  more beds are needed and nothings that changed.

LEIGH SALES:  Tony Burke?

TONY BURKE:  The announcement today is because the numbers have  been going up for a few reasons. One is that a whole lot  of people have had failed claims.

Now, when people have successful claims they're straight  into the community. When they have failed claims, then  they remain in detention until their appeals have  concluded or until they are put on a plane and  repatriated home.

Now, there is a court case at the moment before the High  Court where a lot of these issues are being tested. We  have an unusual situation where we have a high number  of people, who have been unsuccessful in their claims,  waiting for legal processes to conclude.

I'm sure if Scott were in the job that Chris Bowen's in  today, if it had turned out that way, Scott would have  been faced with a very similar situation.

Surely in advance of the High Court, you're not going to  actually start putting people on planes when you've got  court orders to not do so.

LEIGH SALES:  But what about what Scott Morrison says about you not  addressing the root issue which is the increasing number  of boat arrivals?

TONY BURKE:  Well, Scott says that in terms of comparing Nauru with  East Timor. Let's not forget what Nauru was last time,  and that was a holding bay. Once the electoral cycle was  at the right point people were put on planes and brought  to Australia.





After the '04 election all but two of the people who were  on Nauru were brought to Australia anyway.

The difference with what the Government's talking about  with East Timor is to have a regional solution with more  countries involved.

As long as Australia is the only country involved Nauru is  nothing but a holding bay as a political solution.

LEIGH SALES:  Scott Morrison that is what happened with Nauru.

SCOTT MORRISON: But what Labor always does is overlook the fact that  when we implemented the solution we had last time,  together with temporary protection visas, and the other  measures that we he had, including turning boats back -  the boats stopped coming.

The boats stopped coming and that was the goal of these  policies and that's what needs to be done again, we need  to stop those boats coming so we don't have this one-way asylum traffic into this, what has become a dead end  of detention.

The other thing that Tony didn't mention is the reason  there are so many people are caught up in detention at  the moment is the discriminatory asylum freeze that was  introduced on the 9th of April.

They've been there now for five months. That could have  been lifted today. The Coalition said if we were elected  we would have lifted that.

I think it should be lifted. I don't think it's right that  people from one particular nationality should be denied  an assessment.

That's what's been taking place and that's why the  system is clogging up as much as it is. The approval rate  from the figures for the 2009/10 for those who have  come was still sitting in the 70 per cent range, in fact, I  think it was a little bit higher than that and the appeals  process the Government introduced was far more lengthy  than the one that we had under our arrangement.

So it is clogged up it'll stay that way, and that's why we



will be spending more on more beds.

LEIGH SALES:  Tony Burke, is it possible that expanding facilities on the  mainland sends a message overseas that Australia  accepts the increasing number of arrivals?

TONY BURKE:  I don't think anyone can argue that. The expansion of  facilities is something that's required to make sure that  people are being treated decently while we're waiting for  these processes to be worked through. I don't really think  there's an option there.

If I can just pick up quickly though on what Scott said  about temporary protection visas.

When temporary protection visas were introduced the  number of boats went up...

SCOTT MORRISON: That's not true, the number of people went up but the  number of boats didn't go up Tony...

LEIGH SALES: Let's allow him....

SCOTT MORRISON: I've heard you say it before.

LEIGH SALES:  ... to make his point.

TONY BURKE:  The other thing is when did the boats slow down?  Following the fall of the Taliban in Afghanistan. That was  the critical timing issue, not the introduction of temporary  protection visas.

LEIGH SALES:  The West Australian Premier, Colin Barnett, says that his  state is taking a disproportionate amount of asylum  seekers and that it is a "powder-keg-type circumstance".

What's the Federal Government's response to that?

TONY BURKE:  Detention environments always need to be carefully  managed and there were some terrible situations before  we came to office where some of the detention centre  environments had some very significant cultural  problems.

These need to be carefully managed, making sure that  you've got the extra capacity is part of being able to do  that.



LEIGH SALES:  Scott Morrison, Tony Abbott said today that Labor's lost  control of our borders and of course we've heard  members of the Coalition say that before.

Isn't that just nonsense? We're talking about a few  thousand people and doesn't the use of that phrase  'we're losing control of our borders' unnecessarily create  fear in the community?

SCOTT MORRISON: No, what it means is that the Labor have been unable to  stem the unprecedented flow of boats.

There have been 95 boats this year. We've never had 95  boats in a calendar year before and it's not even the end  of September.

We've got 5,000 people in detention. We've never had  that many people in detention before.

That's led to a cost blowout in costs of $1.1 billion. These  are significant costs and today we've had the  announcement of further 1,000 beds and no  announcement of costs and we do know that 600 beds at  Curtin cost just under $100 million a year to run.

So these decisions have consequences and the Western  Australian Premier has highlighted some of those  consequences, consequences for our courts,  consequences for how people are managed in prisons  and various other things when they face people  smuggling charges.

It's dominoing now all around the country. And when you  get the policy wrong at the start, then this is what flows.

LEIGH SALES:  Why haven't we heard the costings on this  announcement today?

TONY BURKE:  I'm not privy on those parts as to the staging of when  different parts of the announcement are going to be  brought forward.

LEIGH SALES:  In April last year you started work on a population  strategy that was due to report back in a year’s time, say  next April.

Firstly given all that's happened with the election is that  still on track and then what sort of process are you



engaged with and what should we be expecting to see  come out of that report?

TONY BURKE:  At the moment, we have lost some time. Election Day  went for 17 days and Treasury took a decision during the  caretaker period that because the method of devising a  population strategy was politically contested that the  population panels would not meet during the course of  the caretaker period.

So we've lost quite a few weeks.

It's still our intention for those panels to get up and going  again quickly now. They then put together the issues  paper.

That gets released over summer for full public  consultation and we're still intending to work towards the  April deadline for the release of the strategy.

We have lost some time so we'll see with the new  administrative arrangements whether we can keep to  that, but it is our intention to do so.

LEIGH SALES:  And Scott Morrison does the Coalition have any issues  with that? That this now comes under your ballpark,  obviously?

SCOTT MORRISON: Sure, well we'll see how Tony's process continues.  Obviously we had a different view about how it should go  with a productivity and sustainability commission process  and we didn't form government, so Tony will implement  his process and I'll look forward to being kept informed of  that as we go forward.

I mean there are so many issues involved in this, as  we've both said on many occasions.

From my end with the link with productivity, I mean one  of the things I often said when it came to keeping our  population growth under control, to ensure your economy  continued to perform meant looking at productivity  improvements.

Productivity improvements are the things that  significantly impact on our prosperity going forward and  have frankly for the last 50 years, so I'll be spending a lot



of time focusing on that area as well.

LEIGH SALES:  If we can turn to climate change which was another big  issue around this week.

Scott Morrison, has Marius Kloppers' interjection into the  debate, saying that Australia should impose a price on  carbon ahead of the rest of the world, left the Coalition  out on a limb?

SCOTT MORRISON: No, not at all, not at all. We're not in favour of a carbon  tax. I know that the Prime Minister said she wasn't in  favour of one before the election, but now is apparently  open to the idea.

By the way, they also said they wouldn't expand Curtin  before the last election, now they are.

But no, we are, I think, totally in sync with where the  Australian community is on this issue and that is really  that we don't want to see 25 per cent increases in  electricity prices for families and households.

We don't want to ensure that we're imposing a cost on  business that the rest of the world is not without trading  partners and our position is crystal clear.

LEIGH SALES:  But when you've got a very significant business figure like  Marius Kloppers coming out and making the statements  he did this week, does that not give you even pause to  think about your policy and where it's headed and  whether it is in step with what business is looking for?

SCOTT MORRISON: Well, even the National Farmers Federation or the  Australian Chambers of Commerce and Industry, they've  both distanced themselves from those comments.

I think Marius has made his contribution but I don't think  he speaks for all business and particularly small business  who would bear the brunt of a carbon tax and we're not  about to put burdens on business and we're not about to  put burdens on people's household budgets.

LEIGH SALES: Tony Bourke, Julia Gillard's commissioned this Climate  Change Committee to have a look at the issue. We've  had the Shergold Report, we've had the Garnaut Report,  how much more talk and investigation do we require?



TONY BURKE:  The missing part of being able to take action on climate  change was to get the political consensus.

There was a period of about three days where we  thought we had a political consensus at the end of last  year and then, because of the change of leadership in the  Opposition at the time, that fell apart.

We want to be able to get the political consensus on this.  And that's one of the reasons why Julia Gillard is not  playing a rule-in, rule-out game every time somebody  comes forward with a suggestion.

LEIGH SALES:  But how do you build political consensus around a non-existent policy? Don't you have to announce policy first  and then bring people on board?

TONY BURKE:  Well, the principle is to be able to reduce your  greenhouse emissions. That's the principle.

The science, the consensus is elsewhere, that that's what  needs to be done. The mechanism and how you do it is  something where we had a political consensus, then we  lost it and the result has been that we've ended up with  inaction.

There are areas of action, that's true, there's areas where  there is various pushes towards renewables and things  that are being done, but in terms of an overall strategy  on emissions we don't have it.

A political consensus will give us a way of getting there.

LEIGH SALES:  What were you going to say?

SCOTT MORRISON: Well I was going to say is that the Government's problem  here is that they want to be all things to all people on this  issue.

They want to say that they're sort of in favour of price of  carbon but then be opposed to a carbon tax before an  election. I mean the Government has to make up its mind  what direction it wants to go here.

I mean if the you stick your head out the car window  every five minutes and ask people for directions, people  are going to think you don't know where you're going  and I think that's where the Government is on this



issued.

I mean if, Tony Abbott is not asking people for directions  on this. He knows exactly where he is heading on this  and the Coalition's very united on it. I think the....

LEIGH SALES:  Well really?

SCOTT MORRISON: ... Government needs to show some leadership.

LEIGH SALES:  You've got Malcolm Turnbull in your ranks. We've had  Tony Abbott previously say climate change is crap and  now embraced direction action?

SCOTT MORRISON: Just as on the issue, other issue I'm responsible for in the  area of asylum seekers, there will be individuals within  our ranks that may have a different view and Malcolm  does have a different view on that issue.

But our policy is very clear and the Australian people  know it. On the Government side, we're not getting that  clarity and I think that's one of the reasons why so many  people walked way from the Labor Party at the last  election, because they just don't know what they stand  for anymore.

LEIGH SALES:  And is the Coalition committed to not being involved in  this committee and having a voice in that?

SCOTT MORRISON: Well, I will leave that to Greg Hunt and for Tony to  comment upon, but our view on this matter I think is  very clear and obviously if those sorts of options are on  the table, then we're clearly opposed to them.

LEIGH SALES:  Because I'm just wondering if your voters would feel that  if there is some sort of policy that goes through the  Parliament with the support of the independents and the  Greens, that they may want your side to have a voice in  that process.

SCOTT MORRISON: Well, we have a voice in the Parliament. Let's not set  aside the Parliament here.

I mean the phone book focus group that the Government  proposed and all of these other processes there, that at  the end of the day the Parliament is the body that will  make decisions on that matter and we'll engage in that  debate strongly and ferociously and make our case very



clearly.

TONY BURKE:  Can I just cut in there? In a hung parliament, to be able  to get legislation through in the national interest, we're  going to have to be able to be willing to act in a  consensus way, and you know a week ago we had group  hug moments, we had all the talk about consensus.

If the Coalition takes the view that we just want  everything to run as it has in previous parliaments and  ignore the fact that we have a hung parliament, we're  not going to end up with a situation in the national  interest.

There will be the odd political gain here and there, but I  think at the end the public will be pretty much  unimpressed.

LEIGH SALES: But that's easy for you to say when you're sitting in the  Government seat because you have everything to gain if  there's consensus and presumably Scott Morrison's side  doesn't.

SCOTT MORRISON: And we're not interesting in a carbon tax. We're not  supporting an ETS and if this process clearly wants to  pursue those as their favoured options then obviously our  view is clear.

I mean the Coalition is not going to be bullied into these  processes by the Government or others.

We had a strong vote at the last election. In fact, we had  members elected than the Coalition, than the  Government, and we are going to represent those who  voted so strongly for us.

It was the Government that lost 16 seats, it was the  Government that lost their majority in the Parliament and  so we feel very buoyed and encouraged by the strong  support we've had for these very views that we took to  the electorate and we'll be faithful to them.

We're not going to sell those people out.

LEIGH SALES:  I wanted to touch on a couple of other issues quickly  before we run out of time. Tony Abbott made it clear this  week that he sees broadband as a key battle area.



I mentioned the ‘ferocious assault’ line earlier and he said  that he hoped the coalitions might change their minds on  that.

Scott Morrison is the Coalition's hope that sometime  within the next couple of years the independents going to  realise, 'oh, we made the wrong decision', and then  switch over to your side? Is that what you're hoping will

happen?

SCOTT MORRISON: Well I can't begin to imagine or forecast what the  independents will do. What we will do is continue to  outline our position on the issue, whether it's broadband  or the myriad of other policies and we will be consistent  about that.

Malcolm, in particular, I think will be well placed to  highlight the very real weaknesses and impracticalities of  what the Government has put forward on broadband, as  Tony Abbott has said, 'the School Halls on steroids'.

Now it's for the Government now to deliver, and this is  the challenge for the Government in this term. They  made commitments to the electorate and the electorate  will expect them to deliver them and the idea of hung  parliaments and couldn't convince the independents and  all these sorts of things, they will not be excuses in the  electorate's eyes.

They will be held to account for what they went to the  people on.

LEIGH SALES:  On the independents, Tony Burke, what if Labor doesn't  back Rob Oakeshott in his bid to be Speaker? Does it  worry your side that he has to be kept happy all the  time?

TONY BURKE:  There's issues to be worked through on the Speaker  issue. Rob Oakeshott as a candidate has merit. There's  an agreement that was made with the Coalition that,  depending on the time of day they're either agreeing to  or they've walked away from now, but this is only going  to work with a level of goodwill.

LEIGH SALES:  We're out of time. Tony Burke and Scott Morrison, thank  you very much.



SCOTT MORRISON: Thanks.

TONY BURKE:  Thanks Leigh.

ENDS



