1

THE HON GREG HUNT MP  Shadow Minister for Climate Action, Environment and Heritage

TRANSCRIPT

INTERVIEW WITH ALAN JONES, 2GB873  WEDNESDAY 17TH NOVEMBER 2010

Topics: Judicial Inquiry into the Home Insulation Program, Insulation motion calling on the  Government to release insulation defect numbers

E & OE…

ALAN JONES  Yesterday I spoke at this time to Kevin Herbert, the Secretary of the Australian Cellulose  Insulation Manufacturers Association and Chris Meyers, a businessman in the insulation  business about yet another Gillard Government catastrophe.

There are a million of them where the Government has gone completely off the rails. But  this is this $2.5 billion Pink Batts fiasco, putting insulation in a million-and-a-bit ceilings.

The Auditor-General found that for the $2.45 billion of your money, there were 4,000  potential cases of fraud, 207 home fires, only 13,808 safety inspections conducted until  March, a minimum of half a billion to fix the mess, 29% of roofs so far inspected had  deficiencies, as I said 207 fires.

Greg Hunt, the opposition environment spokesman is calling for a Judicial Inquiry. An ill-advised, half baked catastrophe. Thousands and thousands of homes unsafe and still unsafe,  because of a Pink Batts program. And people don’t know where these homes are or what  the level of risk is.

Greg Hunt’s done a super job as the environment spokesman, as I said, calling for a  Judicial Inquiry. It’s the least we could have. This was a hair-brained stimulus package. It  was the Rudd Government - Rudd, Gillard, Swan and Tanner - who wanted to rush it out.

But my understanding is this was Julia Gillard’s baby. She argued for this. And it was the  Government, Rudd, Gillard, Swan, Tanner, who wanted to ignore Departmental advice -  and this Government believe it or not, is still in government.

Rudd was the architect. Julia Gillard was the initiator. No one’s taken any responsibility.  Rudd took it upon himself - he and his Department - drove the Pink Batts scheme. As I  said, the initiative originally Julia Gillard’s - she’s still Prime Minister.

2.2 million homes were going to get free ceiling insulation, allegedly saving families $200  per year on energy bills. It was all climate change superstition. And we were going to get a  lasting environmental benefit. We were told it was the equivalent of removing more than  one million cars off the road each year.

2

It failed on every front. The number of jobs created was fewer than promised. The jobs  when they were created didn’t last as long as they were promised. The first audit showed a  third of the 14,000 homes surveyed had quality or safety problems. The environmental  benefits weren’t there because much of the insulation was faulty.

The Government had already failed at Fuel Watch, Grocery Watch, the 20-20 Summit, and  they were at it again. And no one in the kitchen cabinet - Gillard, Swan, Tanner, no one  standing up to Rudd and saying ‘wake up, it can’t happen’.

Indeed to the contrary, Julia Gillard was the architect of the scheme. Rudd told Garrett to  push his Department to get the Program out. So the Auditor-General is saying 1.1 million  homes were insulated, at a cost of $2.45 billion. But more than a third of the work was  found to be deficient.

The final clean up bill will exceed half a billion dollars. The full extent of the rorting can’t  be detailed. Yet all of the risks concerning fraud, the quality of installation, the risk of fire,  the risk of safety, were identified before the Program began, but no steps were taken to  ensure compliance.

And the Auditor-General said the Department of Environment was under-resourced and ill-equipped to run the Program. The Auditor-General said the emphasis on speed of delivery  ensured it would be a disaster.

Who emphasised speed of delivery? Kevin Rudd and the kitchen cabinet - Rudd, Gillard,  Swan, Tanner. Garrett, kept in the dark by his Department, thrown to the wolves by Kevin  Rudd.

If you do the maths, each home insulation job that the package supported, cost taxpayers,  each job - in excess of $330,000.

This is the Pink Batts scheme. On top of the Solar Rebate scheme, it failed. On top of the  $43 billion National Broadband Network with no economic modelling. On top of the  Murray-Darling Basin Report. On top of asylum seekers…

What about the businesses driven to the wall because the scheme failed? And they’re stuck  with Pink Batts they can’t use and Pink Batts they can’t sell. No income, debt to banks,  houses mortgaged, and Australian families on their knees as a result of this Government.

And Julia Gillard is in an alliance with the Greens, so that no one can get any information  about what this is all about.

Greg Hunt has done an impossible job about all of this - he’s on the line.

Has there been, seriously I mean, Federation - 1901 - I can’t identify a greater scandal in  relation to public money since Federation, than this.

GREG HUNT  Well, my view has been that this has been probably the worst program since at least the  Second World War. There may be examples from before then that I’m not willing to  speculate on.

3

But it’s been a disaster firstly because of the consequences - 207 house fires, 1500  electrified roofs, and then a failure rate of 29% so far, but the Government won’t release  the figures of how bad the program is.

It’s extraordinary that for all of the tragedy associated with this Program, they won’t release  the figures. They must release the figures. And then above all else, you’ve had the human  tragedies, the four young lives associated with the Program.

ALAN JONES  But we’ve got Wilkie, the Independent from Tasmania, supported the Gillard Government  to government, arguing it was an ethical government.

Where are the independents when you’re arguing that the voter, the taxpayer, the public -  need this information?

GREG HUNT  Well next week, on Monday night we have a motion before the House of Representatives,  calling on the Government to do a very simple thing. And that is, to release the rate of  failure of all of the inspections they’ve now had.

They’ve now had 100,000 inspections. They released the figures for the first 13,000. We  believe they’ve got worse since then. That will be a test for the Independents.

All we’re asking for is for the Government to let homeowners know how bad the problem  has been. And I hope that the Independents will not find a reason to refuse to support the  release of public information about a disastrous program. And in particular, the risk of  asbestos to both installers, inspectors, and homeowners.

ALAN JONES  But look, Greg Hunt, you’ve done a manful job in all of this. However, you use that figure  100,000 - there were 1.1 million homes involved in this fiasco. There were to be over 2  million. They got to 1.1 million before they called it off.

There are people out there listening to you who don’t know whether their home is at risk.  100,000 inspected out of 1.1 million.

Now this CSR Bradford and UGL were appointed to manage the clean up. CSR are not  subcontracting any safety inspection work to insulation businesses. So, one, the progress is  slow - if it’s progress at all. And two, these insulation businesses are going out of business.

GREG HUNT  Two things have to happen immediately. The first is there has to be a package to ensure  that the legitimate, long-standing small insulation businesses, such as those which Kevin  Herbert runs, are given access to participate in the scheme. They have had their long-standing businesses effectively destroyed in many cases.

And secondly, the standards for inspection have to be part of a statement to the Parliament  in the next week by preferably the Prime Minister and if not her, then Greg Combet.

ALAN JONES  Well, two points about that. I mean, I’m told that there are 280 insulation companies  waiting to hear back. And they’ve been waiting months to hear back from UGL.

4

Secondly, I spoke to Chris Meyers yesterday and he told me he’d inspected jobs that had  already been rectified by government inspectors and he was alarmed at the poor quality of  the work. And the insulation industry aren’t being employed to carry out the inspections.

GREG HUNT  The sleeping story now is that the rectifications - some are well done. But we are getting  reports, and we are giving every one of these to the Government, that many of them are  dodgy jobs.

So we had dodgy insulation jobs and now we are getting reports of dodgy inspection jobs.  And the mess continues. The only difference now is they’re hiding the mess.

ALAN JONES  How many insulation companies have gone broke or are going broke? I mean, you’d name  any person, any family out there that would say ‘Oh, let’s get our house insulated today’.  [Laughs] I mean they don’t know. They’re frightened.

GREG HUNT  Well the sector has been almost frozen. And these are people who have run legitimate,  effective small businesses of 15, 20 years.

I met with Kevin Herbert and a group of his insulators, and they had longstanding  businesses. They basically said, our sector is broken, it’s been frozen by this, not because of  any problems we’ve had, but because the whole sector’s been given a bad name.

There needs to be a package for the small businesses. And we need to make sure that  there’s an inspection of all of the homes. And also, that the standards of inspection…

ALAN JONES  …Just to interrupt you there Greg Hunt - inspection of all of the homes? I mean, for God’s  sake, you’ll be dead and I’ll be dead before they get to 1.1 million homes. I mean, they’re  not even talking about that. The Government are talking about only inspecting 200,000.

GREG HUNT  You’ve got hundreds of thousands of listeners out there, many of whom will have had their  homes done under this Program. And particularly the seniors will be legitimately nervous  about ‘is my roof safe’?

There was a story we dealt with just over a week ago of a mother who has had a  smouldering roof for months. And the Department wouldn’t do anything about it, the  Minister wouldn’t do anything about it. It was only when we brought it to the attention of  the media that they finally acted.

ALAN JONES  Shouldn’t people know where these homes are? The Auditor-General says thousands have  been rendered unsafe and remain unsafe. Shouldn’t people immediately know where those  homes are and where the risk is?

GREG HUNT

5

The PM is hiding public safety information. And what that says is firstly, it is a complete  failure of ethical responsibility. Secondly, they have learnt nothing from the debacle of the  last year.

ALAN JONES  Ok, well we can only rely on you to keep going. I find this beyond alarming. But I do thank  you for your time, Greg Hunt.

GREG HUNT  It’s a pleasure.

ALAN JONES  Greg Hunt is the opposition environment spokesman. He’s calling for a Judicial Inquiry,  and it ought to be addressed with urgency.

(Ends.)

