





ATTORNEY-GENERAL   HON ROBERT McCLELLAND MP

TRANSCRIPT

Parliament House, Canberra ACT 2600  Telephone (02) 6277 7300  Fax (02) 6273 4102  www.attorneygeneral.gov.au

INTERVIEW   SKY NEWS PLAYING POLITICS WITH PETER VAN ONSELEN   THURSDAY,  18 MARCH 20 10



Subject: Asylum  Seekers; National Security Amendment Bill

VAN ONSELEN : But now in Canberra we've got our political guest, the Attorney -General  Robert Mc Cl elland. Mr Mc Cl elland, thank you very much for being with us.

McC LELLAND:   My pleasure.

VAN ONSELEN : There's some legislation that I know you've introduced today that I will get  to that I know you want to talk about. But just be fore then, the SIEV 36, the Coroner's re port came  down yesterday. The Opposition was very quick to push the argument that the Government sho uld  be revoking the permanent protection v isas of three in particular of the asylum seekers. Why won't  it do that ? W hy isn't the Government prepared to heed  those requests?

McCLELLAND:   Well again the Minister has indicated that the criminal justice process  will  now take its course. T he brief has been referred to the Northern Territory Police. Obviously these  are potentially very serious charges involving t he death of five individuals, and serious injury to  others, and the Minister has indicated that  he doesn't want to take any steps that could prejudice that  criminal justice process, but he will certai nly give consideration to the matter after the criminal  justice process is concluded.



VAN ONSELEN : Is that really fast enough for people? I mean, it's almost a year since the  incident happened. There's video footage of what happened. We've now got from yesterday a  Coronial inquest which has found - and I thin k at paragraph 78 of the report the Coroner in the  Northern Territory said that he believed t hat those three were not telling the truth and that they were  colluding to lie - which is in a sense perjury. I mean, how much more evidence do we really need  for the government to be prepared to act and revoke their permanent applications?

McCLELLAND:   Well , we believe that if three people, or others for t hat matter are  responsible for the death of five individu als, that they should face the full force of the law  in respect  to very serious criminal matters.

We don't want to see anything happen that could prejudice those trials. If you look at for instance  the very serious counter -terrorism trials re cently, a number of applications were made to discharge  juries. And if there are inappropriate public statements made with politicians purporting to find guilt  without the criminal justice takin g its course, then those  unwise statements , unquestionably in my  view , would be used as an application at least to set aside a  jury.  Then you are getting into the  contest, of course, during the cours e of a potential criminal trial as to whether that should occur or  not  and I don't think any Australian wants to see that happen.

Attorney General News Release  2

VAN ONSELEN : But Attorney -General, most examples o f where you run into those sort of  difficulties, t hey tend to come when comments are made during a trial. Here we've got a situation  where there haven't even been any charges laid by the DPP. There has been a Coronial inquest with  some pretty adverse findi ngs on this notion of chara cter - whether character is enough. That's what  the Opposition are calling for, a lack of ch aracter, failing the character test. Surely the Coronial  result, of it self, is enough to show that at least those three, if not more of t he asylum seekers do fail  that character test.

McCLELLAND:   The appropriate practice and culture of the media in this country, and of  political leaders is that when a matter has clearly been referred to the police, and individuals face  serious criminal a llegations, that that crim inal justice process should be allowed to take its course.

To make inappropriate comments  or purported findings of guilt by the media or political leader s  unquestionably could prejudice a successful  prosecution. And that is why it has been the custom  and practice of the political leadership of thi s country to adopt that course of action.

VAN ONSELEN : Last question on this issue - and moving to the idea that they were given  Permanent Protection Visas rather than Temporary Protec tion Visas, which were an option to award  to the asylum seekers back then. What was the reason? Was it ideological dogma I guess is what  I'm asking, that there was always the intention to abolish TPVs by your Government, was that the  reason that they were awarded permanent rather than temporary, which would have perhaps  avoided us being in this situation?

McCLELLAND:   Temporary Protection Visas were abolished by the Government prior to this  incident.

VAN ONSELEN : But the Opposition has argued that they could have still been awarded in  this case. Is that not right?

McCLELLAND:   They are alleging another class of visa was potentially usable. I think it's f air  to say a reading of that class of v isa  anticipates it is going to be used in circumstances where  there  will not be another visa following it.

But the essential facts are that these ind ividuals applied for protection. They were found under the  United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees guidelines to be justified in that claim.

I think everyone needs to be a little cautious he re. The Haneef matter, and indeed the litigation  arising from the Haneef matter, in particula r involving the then Minister for Immigration, indicated  that Ministers should be very cautious in not using immigration powers for  ulterior purposes. I  am   specifically suggesting in that context using the m , for instance , for criminal justice purposes as  opposed to migration purposes. So again , everyone needs to be a little cautious on where they are  taking this argument, and their su ggestions.

VAN ONSELEN : Are you at all surpri sed that the Opposition have gone so hard on this given  the hot water that they got themselves in by hasty action on the Haneef case? I mean, does it  surprise you that they seem to be going for the political j ugular on this given the way that they  approached Parliament yesterday?

McCLELLAND:   All I would say is that I would really suggest to them before they go too far  to look at precedent in respect to prejud icing criminal trials, and also to l ook at that ma tter in terms  of the appropriate use of migration purposes for mi gration related matters, not for an adjunct to  criminal justice processes.

Attorney General News Release  3

VAN ONSELEN : Okay. Attorney -General, you've introduced some legislation today that  makes some amendments to counte r terrorism and national security laws. Can you just take us  through what some of the key elements of that are?

McCLELLAND:   In some areas there is a strengt hening , for instance, empowering police  officers to enter premis es without a warrant if they beli eve there is a dangerous device or substance  on the premises.

There  is also some additional powers to re -enter if the evacuation was necessary as a result of a  potential terrorist event. The s edition laws have been renamed as urging violence; and there i s an  additional offence there of urging violence against an individual on the basis of their race,  nationality, ethnicity or political belief. That i s a new offence and is significant.

But at the same time, there are additional  safeguards. For instance, in response to the Clarke Report  in the Haneef matter, we've introduced a ca p on the period of suspension of detention where  someone is being questioned over a terrorist  offence to seven days.

And again, returning to the urging violence offences, we have  expanded those so that the good faith  defences will specifically exclude an artistic , journalistic, or academic work written in good faith.

There is also some additional oversight , for instance, a new parliamentary committee looking at the  actions of th e Australian Federal Police, and additi onal powers being given to the Inspector General  for Intelligence and S ecurity.

So while there has been some enhancement of powers, there has also been additional safeguards -  and additional oversight that have been  introduced.

VAN ONSELEN : What processes do you go through to try to ensure that you do get that  balance between having the appropriate powers that  the police and security think that they ne ed,  and to therefore I guess protect the community and make it f eel safe, at the same time as satisfying  at least elements of civil liberties  and protections of freedoms that we have in a country like  Australia?

McCLELLAND:   I think this has been a copy book example, and I'm not saying that to my  credit, or the Gover nment's credit. But the process started in reality under the previous Government  with recommendations from two important bipartisan committees.  That work continued. The Clarke  Inquiry that I've mentioned, the Australian Law Reform Commission inquiry made  recommendations to Government. We prepared a Discussion Paper , indeed, with draft legislation,  circulated that for public consultation. We receive d significant input  and have res ponded in a  number of areas to t he input from the community.

I think we've achieved as a result effective laws that can be used to prevent a terrorist act in  Australia, and at the same time not unreasonably infring e the  civil rights that all Governments want  to protect.

VAN ONSELEN : One final question if I could. I know that you've only introduced this today,  but do you have any idea what the Opposition's response is to i t? Are you expecting this to go  through with bip artisan support? Or are you expecting any elements of it to be contested?

McCLELLAND:   I would expect and hope that this package of legislation will go through  with bipartisan support. The Opposition have , of course , had the opportunity of makin g submissions  during the public consultation process  and I think they should be satisfied that we have acted in  good faith  in being receptive to all the pu blic submissions we have received.

Attorney General News Release  4

VAN ONSELEN : Okay.  Attorney -General, thank you very much f or joining us in Canberra ,  we appreciate your time.

McCLELLAND:  That's my pleasure.



[Ends]

