



THE HON BRENDAN O’CONNOR MP

MINISTER FOR HOME AFFAIRS          UNCLASSIFIED

Transcript

SKYNEWS PM AGENDA

30 March 2010

Interviewee: Brendan O’Connor MP

Subjects: People Smuggling/Boat Arrivals

DAVID SPEERS:     Ironically, if agreement can be reached with Tony Abbott and with the  States, well health may not turn out to be quite the red hot election issue that Labor had  hoped for. This may well be a factor in Tony Abbott's thinking; neutralise health and put the  pressure back onto the Government over issues on which it is more vulnerable.

One of those areas where the Government certainly is vulnerable, is on border  protection. Yesterday saw the arrival of the one hundredth boatload of asylum  seekers since the Rudd Government came to office.

The Opposition used this milestone, along with the transfer of more asylum seekers  to the mainlands and recent escapes at the Villawood Detention Centre, to put more  pressure on the Government.

So just how strong are Australia's border protection measures?

Well, joining me now to discuss is the Home Affairs Minister Brendan O'Connor.

Minister, thank you for joining us.

Firstly, can I start with the one hundredth boat that arrived yesterday at Christmas  Island. You said that it was intercepted in the vicinity of Christmas Island, but is it  correct that it actually sailed all the way into Flying Fish Cove at Christmas Island,  dropped anchor and then phoned up authorities?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR:   There's been a number of irregular arrivals that have  arrived close to the Christmas Island shores in this manner. Of course, I've sought a  briefing on exactly what occurred in that situation.

We need to remember that Christmas Island is thousands of kilometres away from  the mainland. We have more resources than ever before to ensure we intercept  vessels and have them processed on Christmas Island. And, indeed, under the

Howard Government, there were 27 un-alerted arrivals, most of which arrived near  Cairns, Townsville and Darwin.

So, by comparison, we're doing a much better job.

DAVID SPEERS:     But the point is that this vessel, and others, apparently are  wanting to be well, intercepted is the word that you used, but wanting to be picked  up. They make the call while they're in Australian waters and, in this case, possibly

right in Flying Fish Cove at Christmas Island. They're well organised. They actually  want to be picked up don't they?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR:   Well, of course, what we know is there's a significant  number of vessels seeking to come into our shores. On those vessels there are  people that are seeking asylum. Firstly, we determine their health status, their  identify and security status and then, of course, if they are seeking asylum, we have  those matters determined. If they're not determined to be asylum seekers, then  they're sent home. Otherwise they're settled, as was the case under the previous  government.

So we are processing this in an orderly manner. It is a challenge—it's a regional  challenge. It's nothing like the surge that occurred under Howard, but it is a  significant challenge and we're dealing with it on a day to day basis.

DAVID SPEERS:     Well it's, in fact, exceeded the Howard Government's surge on a  monthly basis. This month 15 boats have arrived. The peak, under John Howard,  was 14 in November of 1999.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR:   Actually in August 2001, there was 1645 people arrive in  one month, compared with 639 this month. So I guess it depends on what you use  as a measurement. There were far greater numbers people seeking asylum arriving  in any one month under Howard. Indeed, they still have the gold, silver and bronze  medals for the highest arrivals in three separate years.

That's not to say we're not dealing with a challenge, and as I've said we've dedicated  more resources than ever before to intercept vessels and to process these people in  an orderly way. What we don't like to see—and I think the Opposition has to  reconsider its position—we don't like to see scaremongering or Opposition for  Opposition's sake. If people have got credible alternatives to the way in which we  arrange this process, then they should put them forward. But we all we get is  carping, scaremongering and negativity.

DAVID SPEERS:     Well I just want to stick to the facts here. While the Howard  Government had a number of offshore processing places, Christmas Island, Naroo,  [indistinct] Island, the Labor Government now has only Christmas Island and that  appears to be right at capacity, or very near to capacity. We've seen more asylum  seekers transferred to the mainland over the weekend. I understand more - 50 more  were due to be transferred today. Has that happened? Where are these particular  people claims at? And where are they being taken to?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR:   I'm advised that those who have arrived recently to the  mainland are, of course, either to be settled or, indeed, the large bulk of those that  have arrived are to be sent home because their applications for asylum have failed.  And so if there are…

DAVID SPEERS:     They were the 89 on the weekend?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR:   That's right.

DAVID SPEERS:     And what about the - were there more today?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR:   That's right and all I can advise you, as I'm advised, is  that any further arrivals, or detainees, onto the mainland will be for the purposes of  either sending them home because they're not genuine asylum seekers, as  determined by the proper process or, indeed, that they're settled because they are.

As we know, this government and, indeed, the Howard Government, on certain  occasions, brought people onto the mainland and we will continue to do that. And  that's consistent with, I guess…

DAVID SPEERS:     Okay, so…

BRENDAN O'CONNOR:   …both governments' approach.

DAVID SPEERS:     We're more transferred today, to the mainland?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR:   I'm not advised that's the case, but I just say to you that  there will be times when further detainees will be brought onto the mainland. That's  either because we need to send them home via the mainland, or we're looking to  settle genuine asylum seekers. This is a process that I think is orderly…

DAVID SPEERS:     Why do they have to be…

BRENDAN O'CONNOR:   …and consistent.

DAVID SPEERS:     Okay. Why do they have to be taken to Villawood Detention  Centre? The Opposition says they should just be transferred through Sydney Airport  and flown home directly. Why do they need to spend weeks or months even at  Villawood Detention Centre?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR:   Well, firstly, we've indicated that if—there are those that  seek an independent review of the decision. They have that capacity. But further to  that, this is a logistical challenge. We need to make sure we get this process right.  There are people from different countries, different places of origin that are going  home and we will need to make sure we do this properly.

You know, we're dealing with human beings here. Now they have—they have failed  in their applications. Some may still have an independent review. But we are dealing  with men and women and children, in some cases, and we will deal with them  humanely and fairly. But we are doing it consistent with the proper approach, that is,  if they are genuine asylum seekers, we will assist them in seeking settlement. If they  are not, we will send them home and we'll do it in a manner that - we will not treat  them like freight.

DAVID SPEERS:     Yeah, okay. But isn't - I'm just wondering, in the reason here for  transferring them to the mainland, you've explained it there that this is to transit them  home. Isn't it also because Christmas Island is full? Isn't that the main reason they're  being transferred?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR:   Well Christmas Island is not full, but you've indicated that  it's certainly had more detainees in recent times than was the case a little while ago.  And that's why the Minister for Immigration has set about increasing the expansion of  the Christmas Island facility. And I'm advised by mid-April there will be a further 400-bed purpose built facility for detainees.

So we're looking to make sure that we maintain the offshore processing in Christmas  Island and we're doing that. And, of course, we're just dealing with this challenge in a  practical way.

DAVID SPEERS:     Okay, but you're honestly saying that these transfers have  nothing to do with the capacity problems at Christmas Island at the moment?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR:   I'm advised that they have been brought here for  purposes of either settlement or for return and that's only proper. There may be other  reasons for people to be here including - and I'm not - I can't go to individuals - but,

indeed, as you know, earlier there's been people sent here for medical reasons and  the same was the case under the Howard Government. And we'll continue to apply a  practical approach to these issues as we go about ensuring that Christmas Island  remains the offshore processing centre for…

DAVID SPEERS:     Okay, but nothing to do with…

BRENDAN O'CONNOR:   …those people seeking asylum.

DAVID SPEERS:     Nothing to do with making more beds available at Christmas  Island for the boats that continue to arrive?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR:   Well I've heard that conjecture. I can only say to you  David that I'm advised that people are being brought here to be sent home or,  indeed, if they are coming here, they're here to be settled. And there may be other

reasons. But no, I've not been given advice to the contrary.

DAVID SPEERS:     All right. What about the security problems we've seen at  Villawood. Seven people have escaped from there this month. Is that concerning  you?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR:   Well obviously it's always a concern if a - the principal  contractor, in this case Serco, doesn't fulfil its own obligations in maintaining the  security of a particular centre. And so we need to make sure they do a better job

and, indeed, I know that the Minister for Immigration has sought an urgent report  about that particular incident.

I understand that there's been far worse occasions. About 10 years ago, when there  was a much larger break-out of detainees from three centres. But, we need to make  sure that those contractors - they're get taxpayer's money to maintain and oversight  the facilities - do their job and they need to account for their behaviour in this regard.

DAVID SPEERS:     I do want to ask you - I know this argument about what is  attracting asylum seekers here, whether it's pull factors, or push factors. You  mention the fact that this government is offering a more humane approach to dealing  with these asylum seekers. You make that very public. You, of course, have also  reinstated permanent visas, rather than the temporary visas.

Why isn't this encouraging asylum seekers? They are clearly sophisticated enough  to know the phone number to ring when they get into Australian waters. Why  wouldn't they be looking at these factors of a more humane approach under this  government, and being attracted to Australia in greater numbers?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR:   Well in the end we determine whether people are  genuinely seeking asylum and if they're not, they go home. Whilst we treat people  fairly and we treat people humanely, we also apply rigorously the assessments in  order to ensure that they are genuine asylum seekers.

And I guess the reason why the Government has continued to say that this is mainly  due to external factors, is because of the conflicts in Sri Lanka and, indeed, the war  in Afghanistan. And, indeed, the previous Minister for Immigration, Philip Ruddock  said as much, 10 years ago, when he made clear that external factors were primarily  the response - the reason for the significant numbers…

DAVID SPEERS:     Primarily - primarily, but the pull factors are a part of it aren't  they?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR:   Well I think the major pull factor is that people seek to  come to industrialised countries and - one of which is Australia.

But I think we have to remember where we sit in all of this. So this is a global  problem. We're sixteenth on the list of industrialised countries that are a  target for  people seeking asylum. We have less than two per cent of those that are applying  for asylum. So in the context of the global problem, whilst it's a challenge and it's  something we need to deal with, we have to remember that in the scheme of things,  our challenge is not as great as many other countries.

DAVID SPEERS:     All right. Home Affairs Minister Brendan O'Connor, we'll have to  leave it there, but thank you for joining us today.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR:   Yeah, thanks David.





