

BORDER PROTECTION COMMAND INTERCEPTS VESSEL

(7 April 2010) Border Protection Command today successfully intercepted a suspected  irregular entry vessel.

HMAS Larrakia, operating under the control of Border Protection Command, intercepted the vessel  this evening south west of Cape Leveque.

The vessel was initially detected by HMAS Larrakia while on patrol.

Initial indications suggest 99 passengers and four crew are on board the vessel.

People smuggling is a world-wide problem and Australia is committed to working closely with our  neighbours to address the issue.

Situations around the world mean that large numbers of displaced persons are looking for settlement  in stable, democratic nations such as Australia, and can be targeted by, and fall prey to, people  smugglers.

People smuggling is not just an issue for Australia - it is a global and regional problem. The  commitment of our neighbours, through bilateral cooperation and the Bali Process on People  Smuggling, Trafficking in Persons and Related Transnational Crime, is critical to addressing this most  serious issue.

Recent meetings with government officials in Indonesia and Malaysia have led to positive steps  forward in bilateral and regional cooperation to deter people smuggling.

The AFP continues to provide support to foreign law enforcement agencies in their efforts to combat  people smuggling activities in the region. These close working relationships have resulted in a number  of arrests and disruptions to people smuggling ventures in countries such as Indonesia, Malaysia, and  Sri Lanka.

Since September 2008, the AFP has charged 132 people with offences under the Migration  Act 1958 (Cth). These offences attract a maximum penalty of 20 years imprisonment.

The Australian Government remains vigilant and committed to protecting Australia’s borders.



The group will be transferred to Christmas Island where they will undergo security, identity and  health checks. Their reasons for travel will also be established.



Media Contact: Brian Humphreys 0438 595 567 or Customs and Border Protection media (02) 6275 6793



