Scott Morrison, MP

Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship



Transcript - 2GB Ray Hadley Program

Wednesday 24th March 2010

JOURNALIST: The Shadow Immigration Minister Scott Morrison was there, Scott g’day.



SCOTT MORRISON: G’day Ray, how are you?



JOURNALIST: Not bad. Look I’ve got a few emails about what is covered on the front page

of The Australian newspaper. You’ve been saying this for quite some time now and you said

it to me about a month ago…



SCOTT MORRISON: That’s right…



JOURNALIST: ….new figures just confirm figures from earlier. Now the Government’s been

relying upon the news that every time you talk to them about the influx of boatpeople, oh,

this is a reflection of what’s happening globally…we can’t control it. Well that’s been laid to

rest now by the United Nations surely.



SCOTT MORRISON: That’s right, we had a 29% increase in Australia and the global

average was zero. We had higher growth than Germany, France, the United States,

Canada, Italy, Spain, the Netherlands and Norway, but particularly the United Kingdom. I

highlight the United Kingdom because they had seven of the same ten source countries of

asylum seekers so their profile of people who seek asylum in the UK is very similar to ours

and they had a 5% decline and we had a 29% increase. So Labor’s spin on this has been

laid bare and they’ve got to try and stop spinning boats away and actually take some direct

action.



JOURNALIST: I find it strange that the Indonesians should be critical of us for incarcerating

their fishermen when in fact they have no policy in place to stop, at this stage, people

smugglers in their own country.



SCOTT MORRISON: Well we’ve got the notorious Captain Bram who’s about to walk in

Indonesia and he was responsible for those 240 still sitting in the Port of Merak and he’s

trafficked over 1,000 people to Australia, so again, it lays these things bare. The bottom line

is that these figures show that not only have we had a significant increase compared to the

rest of the world but a lot of the asylum applications in these figures are actually coming

through boat arrivals.



JOURNALIST: …and keep coming and now Christmas Island has reached its capacity of

2040 people by a significant number, so what does the Prime Minister do now? Does he

start offloading people to Darwin as opposed to expediting their applications?



SCOTT MORRISON: Well, I think he’ll probably do both. As we’ve discussed before, I’m

very concerned about the rate at which people are getting a tick on Christmas Island this

year, and I suspect that it will continue. But it was just before coming on air to talk to you

today I saw something coming out of Darwin which said that the Government has said that

“for other reasons” they’ll be transferring some people to the mainland. Now they need to

say what those reasons are, how many people are being transferred because every time a

boat arrives they get into this practice of musical beds and they start moving things around.



JOURNALIST: Well, its simple, the “no vacancy” sign’s gone up.



SCOTT MORRISON: Yeah, its house full…it’s a full house and they can deny it all they want

but you can’t deny these things forever, you’ve got to face the reality and the consequences

of their own policy they don’t do it and as a result (the boats) keep coming.



JOURNALIST: One of my forward thinking listeners Thomas said in order to halt the asylum

seekers going to Christmas Island the overseas passenger terminal at Circular Quay will be

converted to accommodate increasing numbers of boat arrivals “this will cease the Indian

Ocean problems and Christmas Island overcrowding as the boats will come down the East

Coast of Australia; they will come into the harbour then they can disembark and go to the

suburbs of their choice without an application being made”…its open door, according to the

Rudd Government.



SCOTT MORRISON: Well the facts are that if people come through to Christmas Island

they’re getting a less than 3% rejection rate and they’re on the Australian mainland within

100 days, so its not too dissimilar…..



JOURNALIST: ….and that’s way short of the United Nations average in terms of people who

have their refugee claims rejected is it not?



SCOTT MORRISON: Well it is but also it’s the waiting time. I met a woman in Darwin

recently who waited fifteen years in a camp in Kenya and she spent two years dealing with

the processes of the Australian government before she got here. She would like to bring her

son from a camp in Kenya but as we discussed the other day, with all of those that are

coming this other way and taking up the family reunion places in the program, she’s going to

wait a long time.



JOURNALIST: She certainly is. Ok we’ll keep on the case. I do think Scott, as I’ve

mentioned to the Leader a number of times: I know we’ve got health, I know we’ve got the

BER, I know we’ve got the failures of insulation, but I think this is one of the biggest issues

that the Australian electorate are going to confront in 2010 - a really big issue.



SCOTT MORRISON: Well, I agree and you’ve been highlighting it strongly and we’ll

continue to do the same.



JOURNALIST: Thanks for your time. Shadow Immigration Minister Scott Morrison.



