The Hon Julie Bishop, MP  Shadow Minister for Foreign Affairs  Deputy Leader of the Opposition  Member for Curtin

Doorstop interview, Perth

Saturday, 11 September 2010

Subjects: Kevin Rudd’s appointment as Foreign Affairs Minister

E&OE…

JULIE BISHOP    With the announcement today of the appointment of Kevin Rudd as Foreign  Minister of Australia Ms Gillard has missed an opportunity to clear away the wreckage of the Rudd  Gillard Government.

The leader that was sacked by his own party because he led the Government off course and  caused the Government to lose its way is now expected to navigate Australia through our foreign  policies.

The leader who was sacked by his own party because he couldn’t get along with people is now  Australia’s number one diplomat, and the leader who caused damage to some of our most  important relationships is now being sent back to repair that damage.

It is true that the relationship between the Prime Minister and the Foreign Minister should be one  of absolute trust and confidence, and Stephen Smith made that very point today, that it must be a  relationship of absolute trust and confidence.

Yet Julia Gillard has appointed as Foreign Minister the man who she tore down so brutally from  the position of Prime Minister and we know that Kevin Rudd then spent most of the election  campaign in retribution.

The Australian people know that it was the Kevin Rudd camp that breached Cabinet confidence  against Julia Gillard and revealed her opposition to pension increases and to a paid parental leave  scheme.

The Australian people know that it was the Kevin Rudd camp that released information to the  effect that Julia Gillard did not attend all of the National Security Committee meetings of Cabinet  and instead sent a staffer.

And it was the Julia Gillard camp that retaliated with the news that Kevin Rudd didn’t attend all of  the meetings of the National Security Committee of Cabinet and sent a staffer.

And that also raises the very deep concern that neither Julia Gillard nor Kevin Rudd have ever  given any explanation as to why they failed to attend the most important Cabinet committee  meetings, those of the National Security Committee of Cabinet.

So I think it is a lost opportunity and it also presents a risk for Australia because of the fractured  relationship between Ms Gillard and Mr Rudd.

JOURNALIST    Who should have got that role then? Stephen Smith, should he have kept it?

JULIE BISHOP    Stephen Smith has shown that he is a steady hand, he has been an effective  politician.

It seems that Stephen Smith will now be taking on the role of peacemaker. He will also have to  ensure that both Mr Rudd and Ms Gillard live up to the expectations of attending National  Security Committee meetings of the Cabinet.

Now it is unthinkable that a Prime Minister and a now Foreign Minister could be so cavalier in  their approach to National Security Committee meetings of Cabinet. So I think there will be a  heavy burden on Stephen Smith not only as Defence Minister but also ensuring that there can be  some kind of truce between the Kevin Rudd camp and the Julia Gillard camp and that they both  fulfil their duties in relation to national security.

JOURNALIST    They are damned if they do and damned if they don’t in the eyes of the Opposition.  I mean when Julia Gillard took over from Kevin Rudd it was “poor Kevin Rudd” from the  Opposition and now you are saying he shouldn’t be Foreign Affairs Minster.

JULIE BISHOP    We didn’t ever say that he should be Foreign Affairs Minister. In fact relations with  our most important partners have deteriorated under Kevin Rudd’s leadership, and you only have  to look at the writings of distinguished former Labor adviser in foreign policy, Hugh White, who  said Mr Rudd had damaged relations with our most important partners and that it was a risk for  him to be appointed to the position of Foreign Minister.

Now I have said previously that Stephen Smith is a steady hand at the wheel and there is no  reason why he should not have remained in that position.

But Ms Gillard has made her choice and she has brought back into the most trusted position that  can exist between a Prime Minister and a Foreign Minister the man who she tore down only  weeks ago.

JOURNALIST    So this is a sad or a necessary demotion then is it for Stephen Smith?

JULIE BISHOP    Stephen Smith is taking on the extremely challenging role of defence and that is  not a role to be undertaken lightly and I am sure that Mr Smith will use his considerable skill to  fulfil his duties in defence.

JOURNALIST    Is it a step down though? From your perspective do you think it is a demotion in  some way?

JULIE BISHOP    I think foreign affairs and defence are two extremely important portfolios, after all  defence is about the security of our nation.

The Defence Minister has the responsibility for looking after our troops. We have a number of  troops overseas in war zones, a number of troops in peacekeeping roles and I hope that Mr Smith  is able to fulfil his duties with competence and confidence, and I wish him well.

JOURNALIST    And you confident in your position as Foreign Affairs spokesman for the  Opposition?

JULIE BISHOP    What do you mean confident?

JOURNALIST    Do you think in any shake up you may be challenged?

JULIE BISHOP    The Deputy Leader in the Coalition has the opportunity to choose their own  portfolio and Tony Abbott and I will be discussing the make up of the shadow portfolios over the  weekend.

JOURNALIST    Will you stay as Foreign Affairs spokesman?

JULIE BISHOP    They are matters I will obviously discuss with Tony Abbott.

JOURNALIST    If you do stay on, who do you see as a more formidable opponent? Stephen Smith  or Kevin Rudd?

JULIE BISHOP    Well I am deeply concerned that foreign policy in Australia will now be somewhat  confused. After all Kevin Rudd made a number of grandiose announcements in foreign policy  including his pet project the Asia Pacific community. Yet upon assuming the role of Prime Minister  the first thing Julia Gillard did in foreign affairs was to denounce the Kevin Rudd Asia Pacific  community as a failure.

Kevin Rudd will have his work cut out, there is no doubt about that.

He will have to repair relations with a number of our important partners including China, India,  Indonesia, Japan.

He will obviously have to apologise to East Timor for the bungle that Julia Gillard made over  announcing that East Timor would have a processing centre for asylum seekers when indeed East  Timor does not want such a centre and that she didn’t contact the Prime Minster of East Timor  before announcing it.

He will also have to apologise to Nauru for the Labor Government’s denunciation of Nauru’s ability  to enter into agreements with foreign countries, a statement that was patently untrue.

So there is a huge challenge ahead for Mr Rudd.

JOURNALIST    What sort of message do you think this sends to the international community?  Labor knifed Kevin Rudd in the back now he has been promoted to Foreign Affairs Minister. What  message is that sending?

JULIE BISHOP    It will be a very difficult challenge for some of our relationships because Mr Rudd  has damaged them in so many ways. I could go through the list.

It would help if he apologised to the Chinese Government for the highly undiplomatic language he  used in relation to the Chinese negotiators at the Copenhagen Climate Change Conference.

It would help if he apologised to the Japanese for snubbing them on his first overseas trip as Prime  Minister and then trying to point score against the Japanese by announcing on the eve of the visit  of the Foreign Minister that he was going to take Japan to court over whaling.

I mean there are a whole range of relationships where a very steady hand will be required to  improve and enhance those relationships.



