The Hon Simon Crean MP

Minister for Education

Minister for Employment and Workplace Relations  Minister for Social Inclusion

4 July, 2010

Transcript

Interview with Laurie Oakes, Nine Network

LAURIE OAKES: Mr Crean, welcome to the program.

SIMON CREAN: Thanks Laurie.

LAURIE OAKES: Well, are we off to the polls quickly?

SIMON CREAN: That's in the Prime Minister's domain. She'll call it when she thinks it's  appropriate.

LAURIE OAKES: What would you advise?

SIMON CREAN: My advice is to call it when she thinks …it's appropriate.

LAURIE OAKES: Okay. What did you think of the way Kevin Rudd was brought down?  Do you agree with Maxine McKew's comments about faction bosses playing brutish politics?

SIMON CREAN: Look, politics is a brutal game. It's a - it is a blood sport Laurie and I more  than anyone -

LAURIE OAKES: I know. You, you've been the one who got bloodied, yeah.

SIMON CREAN: Yeah. I've been through it. So look I think it's the fact of life. I think  Kevin was a great Prime Minister. He delivered Labor the victory that enabled us to lay the  foundations. The circumstances of his demise are now past. I think we have to move on but  also recognise that the Prime Minister has indicated that, were we to win the next election,  there would be a senior opportunity for Kevin within the Government. Our task of course is  to win, not to get ahead of ourselves and not to dwell on the past.

LAURIE OAKES: Well it's hard not to dwell on the past. As leader, you set out to break the  power of the faction bosses and what happened to Kevin Rudd would suggest that you failed.

SIMON CREAN: Well I don't think it was the factions that brought him down. I think that  the truth of it is until the late in the evening there wasn't a challenger. Whatever the  murmurings by some might have been, you can't have a challenge without a challenger. And  it was only in the circumstances of their one on one conversation that the challenger emerged.  And once that call was made, it was over for Kevin quite frankly, regardless of the factional  manoeuvrings.

[Prime Minister; mining tax; border policy]

LAURIE OAKES: Why was it over for Kevin, at that point?

SIMON CREAN: Because I think that once someone was being challenged and he called the  challenge on essentially. He said he was going to call the Caucus together. Even if he had the  numbers quite frankly he couldn't win and this is the same decision I had to make about my  position some years ago. And that's…

LAURIE OAKES: 2002.

SIMON CREAN: … that's more an understanding of how the Caucus, and the dynamics,  and that perception argument that was used at the introduction to your program, works. So all  I'm saying is let's not try and keep interpreting what happened. What happened happened.  And what we've got to do is to get on with building upon a legacy that Kevin established and  let's try and create the environment in which Kevin can continue to make a contribution.

LAURIE OAKES: Until a week ago you were Minister for Trade, so you're in a position to  answer this question. How did the row over the Resource Super Profits Tax affect Australia  internationally and did it affect our reputation as a place to invest?

SIMON CREAN: No, I don't believe it did. I had very extensive conversations in both China  and Japan in the weeks in which this was happening, Laurie. They'd be our biggest trading  partners. There wasn't concern about the investment. There was a desire for more  information. But when it was explained that the purpose of this tax was to try and address  some of the barriers to further investment, further expansion in mining in the country, they  were more than happy and wanted further details. They of course were invited to participate  in the negotiating process that the Government had set up to express their views. But for both  China and Japan, they want reliability of supply. Australia can deliver that. But they're more  concerned about what was happening to price. Why was price going up? Because supply, the  development of the resource, wasn't keeping pace with what was being demanded. If in fact  we'd developed a more modern taxing regime that encouraged greater investment, greater  expansion, we would be getting a better matching of supply and demand. So there wasn't  concern about the investment but the fact is this is now resolved. It's a great credit to Julia  that she has resolved it and I think we can get back to a position in which, not only have we  got a much better return for the nation, a fairer share for the nation, we've also got a regime  that hopefully will encourage greater expansion in the industry.

LAURIE OAKES: Well one simple question though, is the Opposition and the mining  industry right when they claim that the tax in its original would have prevented investment in  mining projects and put at risk an industry so important to Australia?

SIMON CREAN: No, they weren't wrong - they weren't correct…

LAURIE OAKES: Well you see if they weren't correct, if they weren't correct on that why  has the Government backed off? Why is it bowed down to the miners? Why has it done a  back flip? Is it a weak government?

SIMON CREAN: It hasn't back flipped Laurie. I mean what we've got is an outcome in  which there is over the budget cycle an extra ten and a half billion dollars, coming back to the  nation, a better return for the nation, for assets that the nation owns and have been valued  significantly upwards by the rest of the world. That ten and a half billion dollars…

LAURIE OAKES: You said there was nothing wrong with the original tax. So why did Julia  Gillard give in to big mining companies and their money?

SIMON CREAN: No I'm sorry. The concept of the original tax there was nothing wrong  with. But if in fact it turned out that in the design that which the Government was asserting  was a benefit to the miners, they were telling us wasn't a benefit to them, then let's not  pretend it is. Let's change the design of the tax in a way that still gets the return for the nation,  still encourages expansion in the industry but importantly is an outcome that the mining  industry agrees with.  After all it was projected to yield $12 billion. It's still going to yield ten  and a half billion dollars. It's 90 per cent of the original revenue yield and that 90 per cent is  going to reduce corporate taxes going forward and importantly to increase superannuation  benefits for the nation and to invest in the infrastructure of the nation, vital if we're to expand  the mining projects so that we don't run into capacity constraints.

LAURIE OAKES: Okay. Well, following what you say was not a back down on the mining  tax, Julia Gillard says her next job is to deal with the asylum seeker issue, issue of boats  coming to Australia and she says she's not going to worry about political correctness in doing  that. Now what do you think she means by that and what do you think should be done about  the asylum seeker boats?

SIMON CREAN: Well just before I come to asylum seekers, let's just talk about the back  down. The only back down that will happen, in terms of the mining tax, is if Tony Abbott  wins, because Tony Abbott has committed to repeal this tax. In other words he doesn't  believe that the nation should get a better return for its own assets. He doesn't believe that  people should get an increase in superannuation. He doesn't believe that companies should  get a reduction in their tax. He doesn't believe we should be investing in the infrastructure of  the nation. The only back down in terms of this tax will come if Tony Abbott wins. And that  would be a very bad outcome for the nation in many ways, including this loss of revenue.  Now on the asylum seeker issue Laurie, this is something that Julia Gillard has enormous  knowledge about. When I appointed her to the front bench I gave her the specific task of re-writing or developing Labor's response to this very difficult question. So I've got no doubt,  not only does she understand the issues but she will come up with an appropriate response.  She knows it's important to get the balance right between being tough at the borders but fair  and compassionate in terms of our commitment to refugees. And she also understands it's  terribly important that we develop a regional response. We talk more effectively to our  neighbours about how we address it. So I'm convinced, knowing in the discussions I had  when I was leader with her, I'm convinced that not only does she understand the issues, she  will be able to address this in a sensible and balanced way as well.

LAURIE OAKES: Of course the policy she developed for you was basically the policy of  the Rudd Government which got Kevin Rudd into trouble. But let me ask you this. When you  were leader you also made Julia Gillard Minister in charge of - Shadow Minister for  Population with the responsibility to develop a population policy. Did she do that and what  was it?

SIMON CREAN: Well she did but this was the commitment that she's now made and the  change she's made to the ministers responsible's title, Sustainable Population Development. It  isn't a question of plucking a figure out of the air and she didn't and by the way neither did  Kevin Rudd, this figure that emerged really came out of the inter-generational report that  Treasury submitted. But Julia is committed to the task of ensuring that we have a sustainable

development of our population base in this country and a recognition that what you've got to  do is to provide services for people. You can't just put people in places in which the services  don't exist.

LAURIE OAKES: When you appointed Julia Gillard to that job, you said we must set  population targets as part of a comprehensive population policy. Must Julia Gillard now set a  population target?

SIMON CREAN: No I don't think she must. It was a view that I held…

LAURIE OAKES: What's changed?

SIMON CREAN: …well I'm not the leader and she is. But I'm saying to you Laurie that I  think we have to understand…

LAURIE OAKES: But you see the Opposition is now saying what you said then, there  should be a population target.

SIMON CREAN: The Opposition is saying? Well let them say that…

LAURIE OAKES: There should be a population target.

SIMON CREAN: We say that we have to develop a population policy which is appropriate  and sustainable. There are many factors that come into account. We have to take account of  what the natural birth rate is because that's going to determine a certain number of people.

LAURIE OAKES: Sure. We understand all that…

SIMON CREAN: We also have to take into account what annual migration…

LAURIE OAKES: But there is a debate. There is a debate though about whether you should  set targets. You said the Government should set targets, the Opposition now says it. Julia  Gillard doesn't seem to be doing that.

SIMON CREAN: What Julia Gillard is committed to do is to developing a population policy  which is sustainable for the nation. And I'm sure that in the same way as she applied herself  in those other areas of - in the other areas of policy development, she'll do so well in this as  well.

LAURIE OAKES: Mr Crean you've put your education hat on, the old Julia Gillard  Education Minister hat. You said the other day…

SIMON CREAN: My old hat too Laurie.

LAURIE OAKES: That's true. You've been there, done that. You said the other day there's  been some problems with the so-called building the education revolution schools program.  What are those problems? Can you name them for us?

SIMON CREAN: Well I think we have to acknowledge in some circumstances Laurie there  wasn't value for money and there was a concern that parent groups and schools didn't think  their real concerns had been taken account of. I must say…

LAURIE OAKES: And how serious are those problems?

SIMON CREAN: Well I think in the instances in which they've occurred I don't  underestimate their seriousness and they do have to be addressed. And I think it is interesting  in the last few days in New South Wales they have made money available to address those  concerns where parents had identified or been upset that certain things they thought they were  getting weren't happening. But overwhelmingly this has been a beneficial program for the  nation. It's been beneficial because what we've seen is schools, for the first time in decades,  getting much needed facilities, libraries, science centres, those sorts of things. You can't  encourage…

LAURIE OAKES: But was - was there widespread rorting and wastage?

SIMON CREAN: No, there was not and this, I am convinced from the initial discussions I've  had with Brad Orgill, is not the case. There are some instances of it, we have to address those  and we are. We have to learn from it in terms of applications for the future but they are not as  widespread as people are making out. They exist…

LAURIE OAKES: You see on Friday the Queensland Government slashed fees paid to BER  project managers. Now that looked like an admission of rorting or waste.

SIMON CREAN: I think - no, what they did was to - the PriceWaterhouse report that came  out in New South - in Queensland did say that they were getting value for money. It did say  that the management fees that were established were - did not exceed the Commonwealth's  target and it did say, based on what they had learnt from the second round that going into the  third round, or the next stage, management fees could be cut. So that again is an example of  where learning from the exercise we can find improvements. We can increase the value for  money. We can ensure better value for money going forward.

LAURIE OAKES: We're out of time unfortunately but thank you.

SIMON CREAN: My pleasure Laurie.

Media Contact: media@deewr.gov.au

Non-media queries: 1300 363 079



