

THE HON DR CRAIG EMERSON MP  MINISTER FOR TRADE





Transcript

Ten Morning News political debate with Ron Wilson  22 October 2010



E&OE

Subjects: Asylum seekers; banks.



WILSON: The war on Afghanistan, asylum seekers and Government  control of the big banks hit the headlines during the return of  Parliament this week. Joining us to discuss these and as many  other issues as we can get through in our Friday morning  political debate, Trade Minister Craig Emerson in Canberra and  Shadow Immigration Minister Scott Morrison in Sydney.  Gentlemen, thank you very much for having a chat to us this  morning.



MORRISON: Good morning

EMERSON: Thanks for having me on the program.

WILSON: Dr Emerson, last night there was some very heated scenes in  the Adelaide Hills as locals reacted angrily to news that your  Government is about to dump an asylum seeker detention  centre right on top of them. They’re saying it’s policy on the run.  They’ve had no discussion with you about it, and it’s all due to  happen before Christmas. Is this policy out of control at the  moment?



EMERSON: We do have the view, which we hope is shared by the Coalition,  that accommodation for families, and most particularly children,  needs to be suitable. That they are able to get a decent  education and we do know, I think the experts have said that  harsh detention facilities are a breeding ground for mental  illness, particularly in young people. So this is the Gillard  Government ensuring that these families, especially children,  are housed in suitable accommodation rather than tents on  Christmas Island or in motel accommodation. I do know, too,  that the Australian public doesn’t regard accommodating asylum

seekers in motels as being the right way to go. This will help  relieve that sort of pressure.

WILSON: But it’s not just about accommodation. This is a small  community and the asylum seekers who will move there are  going to be families. Those families are going to have to  integrate in a great degree. Under your new policy, they’re going  to have to integrate into that community and that community  simply doesn’t want them at this stage.



EMERSON: Well, it’s a Defence facility that we’re talking about...

WILSON: Yes, I know. But the community that they will have to integrate  into isn’t a Defence facility.

EMERSON: All right, let’s not start this sort of hysteria that they’re somehow  horrible, dangerous people. These are people who will be  assessed using the normal checks that were put in place many,  many years ago. The sorts of checks that have been applied by  the previous Coalition Government are being applied by this  Government. And I have seen in other places, not in this  particular debate, in this particular location, some pretty wild and  unfortunate allegations about the health of these people and  their motives and so on. They are human beings. They are  children. They deserve to have a reasonable education. And I  think that most people around Australia would agree with that  proposition.



WILSON: Mr Morrison, both sides of politics have shown support for the  war in Afghanistan this week. Clearly the war though is  contributing to the refugee numbers. So shouldn’t we be  prepared to accept more of these people coming to Australia?



MORRISON: Well, what we have is a rolling detention crisis of this  Government. I mean, the reason people are being moved to  Inverbrackie in South Australia is because the detention network  is full. We’ve had over 8,300 people arrive over the last two  years. There were facilities on Christmas Island. They are now  full. The Government needs to be accountable for the fact that  they’ve had this situation develop under their watch. There are  just so many people now that they’re trying to accommodate,  that the community of Inverbrackie, without any consultation,  without any forewarning, has had this forced upon them. And I’m  just amazed that the Government is surprised that there would  be some reaction from the community when they haven’t even  been talked to. And so the Coalition will be moving...



EMERSON: I didn’t say that, Scott, so don’t put words into my mouth.

MORRISON: I’ll finish Craig, I let you speak. What the Coalition will be doing  is moving a motion seeking for a Parliamentary Committee to  consult with the local community on their views and report back  to Parliament. And the Government should have the good grace  - with Jamie Briggs, I should stress, it’ll be Jamie’s motion - to  listen to that report so the Parliament can understand what the  issues are. Because you make a good point, Ron, and that’s  this: these are not refugees who have been settled into the  community, who have had their asylum claims proved. They are  people who are maybe there for six months, three months. They  will engage with this community, many of them will fail in their  asylum claims. They’ll then have to be removed. It’ll create all  sorts of confusion with young people they engage with. I mean,  this is happening on a scale which has never happened before  in terms of children and families being in this situation. And it is  all because of one thing and that’s 8,300 people have turned up,  107 boats, the 21st yesterday. And that’s the crisis this  Government has, which they will not address.



WILSON: Another thing.

EMERSON: Well let’s put a little perspective into this. It’s in the interests of  the Liberal Party, or it seems to feel so, to create the impression,  I think the word used yesterday in one of the debates was a  tsunami. I’d ask your viewers to take a guess at this question:  how many asylum seekers have arrived by boat, in Australia, in  the last 35 years?



WILSON: Well, 88 have arrived yesterday.

MORRISON: Well how many have arrived in the last two years, Craig? When  you...



EMERSON: You see you don’t want the answer to that. And the answer is  around 25,000, which would be a disappointing crowd at a  football semi-final. But what we hear from the Coalition, what we  hear...



MORRISON: So you’re happy with the rate of arrivals, Craig? You think it’s all  fine? No changes necessary, let them all come in.

EMERSON: I thought we were going to not speak over each other. So we  are going to speak over? Let’s go. Right. The number of asylum  seekers in the last, arriving by boat over the last 35 years is in  the order of 25,000. I’m simply saying...



MORRISON: So you’re comfortable? You’re comfortable with the policy?

EMERSON: I’m simply saying it’s not an armada, it’s not a tsunami, it’s not  an invasion.  It’s Tony Abbott...

MORRISON: Oh, you’re not going to change anything? You’re totally relaxed  and comfortable about it. Okay.

EMERSON: ...with arrows coming from the north-west of Australia, this huge  threat.

MORRISON: Oh, I think the Australian public understand, Craig. You don’t  want to change anything. You’re happy with it.

WILSON: Gentlemen.

EMERSON: And they absolutely understand, they understand, Scott, that  your predecessor, Bruce Baird, would be absolutely ashamed.

MORRISON: Don’t verbal Bruce.

EMERSON: Your disgraceful behaviour over this, because Bruce Baird at  least had some humanity in him and you’re behaving  appallingly, absolutely appallingly.



MORRISON: Oh, so you’re now accusing me of not having humanity? I have  no humanity, Craig?

EMERSON: The way that you’ve tried...

MORRISON: Oh, we’re back, we’re back to the pre-election. I thought the  Government understood community concerns about the issue.  Now we lack humanity. We’re back to the old rhetoric. I knew it  wouldn’t be long.



WILSON:  Gentlemen I’m going to have to step into another issue that has  community interest at the moment. Of course, interest rates. Joe  Hockey believes the government should be putting more  pressure on the big banks not to raise interest rates above what  the RBA determines. Minister, that doesn’t seem like a bad  idea?



EMERSON:  Oh well, it is a bad idea; it would be a re-regulation of interest  rates. I’ll be fascinated to hear Scott Morrison back that in. We  actually had a backbencher Don Randall from Western Australia,  when asked about this thought it was Greens’ policy and said  ‘This is a policy from the lunatic fringe’. Now that’s what he’s  described Joe Hockey as embracing, a policy from the lunatic  fringe.



WILSON:  But you’ve allowed the Greens to become manipulators of the  Government at this stage and they say they have legislation that  they say they can get up with the support of the Opposition.



EMERSON:  Well we won’t support the re-regulation. That will be fascinating  to see Malcolm Turnbull supporting the re-regulation of interest  rates, to see Tony Abbott and Joe Hockey and, obviously, Scott  Morrison supporting that. I’ll be absolutely fascinated to see that  because you know who will miss out in all of this? And it’s a  point made yesterday by Treasury Secretary Ken Henry. And  that is that loans would be rationed and it would be low income  people who would just not get a loan. But, absolutely, if the  Coalition wants to embrace this policy, if Scott wants to embrace  the policy right now, I’m all ears.



WILSON:  Mr Morrison, are you going to jump into bed with the Greens on  this?

MORRISON: Labor in Government but the Greens are in power. I think we all  know that. The point I’d make about this issue.

EMERSON:  Just answer the question.

MORRISON: The point I’d make about this issue is that the Treasury  Secretary yesterday confirmed what Joe said and that is that the  spread that the banks are putting above the official cash rate has  actually grown larger today than it was before the GFC started.



EMERSON:  Are you going to re-regulate? Answer the question.

MORRISON: Joe Hockey has not suggested the regulation of interest rates.  What Joe Hockey has flagged is everything from backing claims  from the ACCC chair on price signalling and controlling over  that. I mean, there are discussions about whether APRA should  be looking at what banks are doing beyond their core activities.  These are specific things.



WILSON:   But will you get into bed with the Greens on this?

EMERSON:  He won’t answer the question.

MORRISON: The Greens’ Bill is something very different. What we’re talking  about here is the tension in the relationship between the banks  and the Government.



EMERSON:  You said you’d legislate.

MORRISON: The banks, at the moment, are a protected species and should  be, should be, but it can’t be heads that the banks win and tails  the taxpayer loses.



EMERSON:  So, you will legislate?

MORRISON: They are in a very special arrangement, which is important. And  that needs to be understood when they make decisions which  shows that today, around 2.8 per cent is the gap between the  cash rate and what the banks are now charging. It was about 1.9  per cent before the GFC. That’s what has happened under this  government and they’re doing nothing about it.



WILSON:   Gentlemen, gentlemen.

EMERSON:  Will you legislate? Will you answer the question?

WILSON:  Well I don’t think we’re going to get an answer from him. I think  the answer is probably no.

EMERSON:  Yeah, exactly.

MORRISON: I said very clearly we’re not going to legislate; we’re not going to  legislate interest rates. That’s what you’re saying we’re going to  do, Craig. And you can’t verbal us. You should act.



EMERSON:  You’ve just contradicted Joe Hockey.

MORRISON: No I didn’t, at all.

WILSON:  Gentlemen thank you very much for your time this morning.  Craig Emerson, thank you very much. Scott Morrison, also in  Sydney, thank you very much.



EMERSON:  Lots of fun. Thanks a lot.

MORRISON: Good to be with you Craig. Good on you Ron.

WILSON:  I think we’ll all go take a Bex and have a good lie down.



END











