

1



MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS  STEPHEN SMITH, MP



TRANSCRIPTION: PROOF COPY E & OE

DATE:   19 January 2010

TITLE:  SKY NEWS INTERVIEW WITH THE MINISTER FOR FOREIGN  MINISTER, STEPHEN SMITH.

SUBJECTS: ANNOUNCEMENT OF A DOUBLING OF EMERGENCY  ASSISTANCE FOR HAITI; COMMENTS ON THE WAR IN  AFGHANISTAN; THE RESCHEDULING OF THE AUSMIN TALKS; THE  RESETTLEMENT OF OCEANIC VIKING ASYLUM-SEEKERS AND; THE  VISIT OF PRINCE WILLIAM.

KIERAN GILBERT:  Stephen Smith, thanks for your time.

STEPHEN SMITH:  Pleasure.

KIERAN GILBERT:  There's been an announcement, additional aid, you've made this  morning. Can you talk us through exactly what the Government's going to provide?

STEPHEN SMITH:  Last week I announced five million dollars for emergency assistance  and five million dollars for longer term reconstruction. Today I've announced a doubling of  the emergency assistance, for food, for water, for shelter, for medicines, doing that through

the World Food Programme, through Australian and international non-government  organisations and also through the UN coordinating body and through the Caribbean Disaster  Emergency Management Authority.

The key priority now, other than search and rescue, is the lifesaving materials: water, food,  and shelter. So we've doubled our contribution today.

KIERAN GILBERT:  Okay, is it frustrating to look at from a distance obviously but we're  seeing the images that there are bottlenecks in terms of the aid getting through, given there  have been large announcements - not just Australia but many other world leaders making  commitments - but it doesn't seem to be getting to where it's needed?

STEPHEN SMITH:  In the initial phases coordination is always a problem. Despite our best  efforts to have better disaster and emergency management and relief coordination, in the  initial stages they're always difficulty.



2

The reports overnight from the United Nations, the Haiti Government itself, the United States  and other important countries like Brazil, which is responsible for leading the UN  peacekeeping mission, are that the coordination is now better and we seem to be making  much more substantial progress.  We're confident that our contribution will be delivered on  the ground and it targets the things that are needed most at this stage.

KIERAN GILBERT:  There are suggestions the UN wants a bigger peacekeeping force,  more boots on the ground. What is Australia looking at on that front?

STEPHEN SMITH:  There's been for half a dozen years a large United Nations  peacekeeping contingent, nearly 9000 military and a couple of thousand police, some 20  countries contributing militarily and some 40 countries contributing police. We're not  proposing to make a contribution to that effort.

The Security Council, in the next 12 to 24 hours everyone expects, will approve an increased  contribution.  But there are plenty of countries from the region who'll make that contribution.

One thing we are looking at is whether, and we're in discussions with the United Nations  about this, we have particular individuals with relevant technical and specialist expertise that  may be required at the moment: logistics, communications, and engineering. If we can  provide some technical experts then we'll do that but we're not proposing to contribute to any  peacekeeping force either through military personnel or through police personnel.

KIERAN GILBERT:  On another matter now, the Taliban has made an attack right in the  heart of Kabul, near the presidential palace, a brazen attack by anyone's estimation. This has  got to be a big concern.

STEPHEN SMITH:  Well, Afghanistan continues to be very difficult and very dangerous  and the strategic intent of the attack is clear, to go right to the heart of the new Karzai  Government in Kabul.

Obviously security remains a very essential aspect of Kabul and Afghanistan. Fortunately no  Australians were caught up in it. There were a small number of casualties in this terrible  terrorist attack.  But this issue and the wider security issues will no doubt be the subject of  discussion at the Afghanistan conference in London next week which I'll be attending, as will  very many of my foreign ministerial colleagues, where we look at the security situation.  But  also what more we need to do on the non-military side to put the Afghan nation and people in  a position to be able to manage their own affairs, both on a security front but also in terms of  providing economic and social benefits to their people.

KIERAN GILBERT:  This obviously would have been one of the issues on the table for the  AUSMIN talks which had been scheduled for this week. Have you got any better sense of  when they might be rescheduled?

STEPHEN SMITH:  I've obviously been leaving Secretary of State Clinton alone while she's  dealing with the coordination of the humanitarian assistance to Haiti. There's a prospect I may  be able to speak to her in London at the Afghanistan conference if in the event she is able to



3

attend.  But we agreed when I spoke to her early Thursday morning of last week that once the  dust had settled on her return to Washington for the Haiti effort that our officials would look  at reconvening AUSMIN in Australia at the soonest mutually convenient time.

So we would want to and hope to do it sooner rather than later but certainly both Australia  and the United States are committed to doing AUSMIN in Australia this year and we want to  do it as soon as we can.



KIERAN GILBERT:  It seems, on another matter now, that the asylum-seekers on board the  Oceanic Viking have been resettled in large part. Questions by the Opposition and others as to  whether there were inducements by the Government to other countries to take these people on  board. Initially they seemed reticent but then they agreed to take them. Were there  inducements offered?

STEPHEN SMITH:  There were obviously discussions between Australia and other  countries who form part of the regular resettlement program out of Indonesia, and other  countries who have longstanding records so far as resettlement is concerned.

So I spoke to a number of my counterparts, the Minister of Immigration spoke to a number of  his but this was all done in conjunction with the United States High Commissioner for  Refugees as part of a resettlement program out of Indonesia.



There are some, I think - and I'm very happy for Senator Evans to deal with the precise detail  - there are some 16 asylum-seekers remaining in Indonesia. My understanding is that in the  next couple of days it's expected they will leave Indonesia for resettlement in other countries  but this was done in accordance with UNHCR procedures and in accordance with the normal  sort of operating arrangements that go into resettlement out of Indonesia and generally.

KIERAN GILBERT:  Does that include offers to do something in return?

STEPHEN SMITH:  Well, no inducements that I'm aware of were made other than saying to  individual countries this is resettlement out of Indonesia, you play a role in that, as we do.   And also approaches to other countries, particularly some European countries with  longstanding records of humanitarian assistance and resettlement.

We've all got problems so far as asylum-seekers, human-traffickers and people-smugglers and  people movements are concerned.  Not just Australia but throughout our region generally but  also European countries also have these difficulties.

So everyone now understands that these are issues you can only deal with regionally and  internationally and that's what occurred in this case.

KIERAN GILBERT:  Okay, just one final issue, on a brighter note. Prince William has  arrived in Australia. Do you think that this is going to rekindle an affection for the Monarchy?

STEPHEN SMITH:  I think there's an affection for the Queen herself and there's clearly an  affection for Prince William.  It's quite clearly the case that he's going to be welcomed very



4

enthusiastically in Australia, as he was in New Zealand, and as he should be. So we welcome  his visit. I'm sure he'll have a most enjoyable time and I'm sure Australians will welcome him  warmly, as they have other members of the Royal Family in the past.

KIERAN GILBERT:  Stephen Smith, as always, appreciate your time.

STEPHEN SMITH:  Thanks very much.



[END]

