

LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  THE HON. TONY ABBOTT MHR  FEDERAL MEMBER FOR WARRINGAH



Tony Abbott Press Conference -  Restoring integrity and fairness to  refugee decision making; Julia Gillard’s  great big new tax on mining   06/07/10

Subjects: Restoring integrity and fairness to refugee decision making; Julia Gillard’s  great big new tax on mining.

TONY ABBOTT: Thanks very much for coming along this morning.

Julia Gillard used to say another boat, another policy failure. She didn’t get a chance  to put those press releases out very often under the Howard Government because  under the Howard Government there were three boats a year on average. Since the

current Government has weakened our border protection policies we’ve had on  average more than three boats a week. This is a comprehensive failure by the  Rudd/Gillard Government and I note that the Prime Minister has recently reiterated  that she herself has been the principal author of Labor’s border protection policies, the  border protection policies that have comprehensively failed.

As you know the Coalition has already announced policy in this area. Our policy  includes rigorous offshore processing, including third country processing. Our policy  involves turning around boats where this can safely and practically be done, and  crucially our policy involves a return to a temporary protection visa because if illegal  boat people get permanent residency the people smugglers have a product to sell.

I am here this morning with my colleagues, Scott Morrison, the Shadow Minister for  Immigration, and Michael Keenan, the Shadow Minister for Customs, to talk about  further improvements to our policy to ensure that a Coalition government will do  what it takes, whatever it takes to keep our borders secure and our country safe.

There are four elements that we announce this morning. The first is that there will be  a presumption where boat people destroy their identity documents that they will be

denied refugee status. The second is that we will increase ministerial oversight of the  process of approving refugee applications. The third is that we will increase the  number of places that will be available to people who are playing by the rules and

applying off shore. Finally, we will trial a system which has been working quite well  in Canada where community groups will have the opportunity to sponsor refugees to  this country provided they bear the full cost. These are important additional measures  and they demonstrate that you can trust the Coalition to keep our borders safe. The  Coalition found a problem back in the early 2000s and we fixed it. The current  Government found a solution and created a problem. You cannot trust Labor to deal  with this problem because Labor created this problem and my message to voters from  now until polling day will be that if you to stop the boats you’ve got to change the  government. You just cannot trust the people who created this problem to fix it. They  just don’t have it in them to fix the problem that they created.

I want to say how proud I am of the work that Scott Morrison and Michael Keenan  have been doing in this area. Scott and Michael have been extremely vigorous  advocates for a stronger border protection policy and I’m now going to ask Scott and  then Michael to say a few words.

SCOTT MORRISON: On the measures. Australians are a generous people and we  like to help those who are in need, but we aren’t mugs, we like to ensure that those  who are in need are in genuine need and that’s why we want to restore community  confidence in the process by which we make decisions about whether a person is a  refugee or not.

We know and the assessors up on Christmas Island and other centres know that there  are many people who arrive on our door illegally by boat who discard their  documentation. Figures that we received during the course of this year for 2009  showed of those that arrived from Sri Lanka around two thirds of those had come to

this country for a large part of that journey by plane where they would have needed  documentation, but only about one in five of them actually still had that  documentation when they presented themselves.

We need to have strong borders where we know who’s coming and having identity  documentation assists that process and so if you want to throw your documentation  away what we’ll be doing under the powers that were actually established by the  Coalition when we were last in government is to create a presumption against a  refugee status determination, a positive one, where it can be reasonably assessed that  a person has actually discarded their documentation.

So, basically, no card no entry and that’s an important change, and that’s an important  improvement to give Australians confidence that the refugees that we are assisting are  legitimate refugees. I think all Australians want to ensure that we assist legitimate  refugees and that change will ensure that we do just that.

In terms of the ministerial oversight, it is really about ensuring that there is a lot more  tension in the cord if you like in the way the processes run. Currently there is an  ability for ‘no’ decisions to be reviewed but equally under this arrangement what we  would be seeing is that those who make the assessments whether it is on Christmas  Island or elsewhere will make a recommendation in terms of a person’s status. That

final determination as to a person’s status will be made in most cases by the  department under the authority of the department’s Secretary, but the Minister will  have the opportunity to call in any recommendation along the way if the minister feels  that there is a need to do so and to ensure that there is a proper level of oversight and  scrutiny on the process.

The other two areas which are very important in relation to the refugee intake, we take  13,750 refugees each year. That has been a longstanding commitment from both sides  of politics. What we will be doing is, out of that 13,750, we will increasing the  proportion that we take through the stream are made available by the UNHCR - so

people coming out of camps, out of settlements all around the world, how that will be  done is that the Australian Government will make the ultimate decision about who  comes as is the case now but we’ll be creating further places for those who are

coming through the front door. And, finally, the issue of the pilot programme. This is  an exciting programme which will give Australians the opportunity, where they want  to, as community groups - that might church groups, it might be community

organisations - who want to or are aware of people who are in distress in another part  of the world and where they meet all the relevant tests and a health and security and  identity check, they would be given the opportunity under a pilot programme to fully  sponsor over and above what we take under our overall programme. So, there is the

opportunity to do that and we’ll trial that. The scheme has been very successful in  Canada, around 5,000 people or thereabouts are taken in under that programme now,  it’s been running for a number of years and we’ll be working with various community  groups to work through the details as to how that pilot will be established. Thank you.

TONY ABBOTT: Ok, Michael.

MICHAEL KEENAN: Thank you, Tony. People smugglers are very organised and  sophisticated criminal gangs and there’s a lot of money involved. You can charge up  to $US15,000 a head to smuggle somebody into Australia and they understand the

implications of policy changes in Australia. So, that’s why at around the turn of the  year 2000 when we made changes under the Howard Government the business of  people smugglers was almost cut off instantaneously. Again, in August of 2008 when  changes were made in Australia that weakened that border protection process that tap  was almost instantaneously turned on. We need to send an unambiguous message that  we are closed for business for people smugglers. Currently, over half of the people on  the humanitarian programme, the most generous humanitarian programme per capita  in the world, over half of those places are going to be taken by people who are  smuggled into Australia. No Australian Government should accept that they’ve lost  control of our immigration system in this way. These policy measures that we’ve  announced today and the policy measures that we’ve announced previously will send  that unambiguous message that Australia is closed for people smugglers to ply their  evil trade.

TONY ABBOTT: Ok, do we have any questions?

QUESTION: Under your policy, Mr Abbott, how many of the boats that have arrived  since the last election would have been turned around?

TONY ABBOTT: Well, under the former Government up to a half a dozen boats  were turned around. The fact that we were able to turn boats around sent a very clear  message to people that the people smugglers could not necessarily deliver a product  and that’s why it’s important to have that possibility.

QUESTION: But, can you say that any of the boats, one of them or more, would have  been turned around?

TONY ABBOTT: Well, what I can say is that the former Prime Minister Kevin Rudd  promised that in government he would be tough enough to turn boats around. He  wasn’t. The former Deputy Prime Minister, now the Prime Minister, wasn’t tough  enough to turn boats around. You’ve got to be tough to protect our borders and this  Government is not tough enough to do it.

QUESTION: Have you checked with the UNHCR about whether these measures, in  particular the one about people having no documents, have you checked whether this  is in breach of the conventions?

TONY ABBOTT: We have no reason to think that it is. What we are looking at is a  presumption against refugee status for people who we believe have destroyed their  documents.

QUESTION: And how are you going to make that call?

TONY ABBOTT: Well, that’s obviously a matter for the people who are dealing with  the illegal arrivals.

QUESTION: But, doesn’t the nature of a refugee doesn’t necessarily mean that you  could go pick up your passport?

TONY ABBOTT: Ok, but many of them have come part of the journey by air and you  can’t get on a plane without documents, so many of them obviously did have  documents at some stage and if having had documents they no longer have them I  think it’s a very fair response on the part of the Australian Government to say that

there’s a presumption against granting refugee status.

QUESTION: How many people do you expect would come into the country under  this sponsorship pilot?

TONY ABBOTT: Well, we’re suggesting that it could be up to 1,250. But, the  important thing is that it’s got to be done by reputable community groups and it’s got  to be done at absolutely no cost to the taxpayer and there would be an expectation that  the community groups would vouch for the people concerned and ensure that they are  well looked after while they’re here.

QUESTION: What was to happen if one of those community groups was no longer  able to carry that financial burden?

TONY ABBOTT: Well, what normally happens in these situations, and I’ll throw to  Scott to talk further about this, but what normally happens in these situations is that a

bond is deposited in advance and the bond is calculated to be sufficient to cover all  reasonable costs.

SCOTT MORRISON: That covers it, Tony.

QUESTION: So, by talking people out of the, taking asylum seekers out of the  humanitarian stream effectively and increasing the number of people coming in  through this, what’s the total number of people coming in under humanitarian refugee  [inaudible]?

TONY ABBOTT: Well, we are not proposing as a government to change the number.  The number is 13,750. If community groups wanted to sponsor refugees from the  camps overseas and if they were prepared to take full responsibility for them at no  cost the tax payer, we are anticipating under this pilot that there could be an additional  1,250. But, as I said, as far as the government is concerned the number will be 13,750  as it has long been, but if community groups wish to get involved we are anticipating  up to 1,250 under this pilot scheme.

QUESTION: If the Howard government policies were so effective, why do you need  to toughen them up, add extra measures?

TONY ABBOTT: Well, what we are attempting to do here is effectively to restore the  policies that worked in the past. As you know, Mr Rudd and Ms Gillard dramatically  changed the policy here in August of 2008 and, funnily enough, from August 2008 the  boats started coming again because the people smugglers had a product to sell. What  we’ve got to do is to deny the people smugglers a product, that is the essential task of  the Australian government and that’s what these policies are intended to do, to deny  the people smugglers…

QUESTION: But if the policies worked then why go further?

TONY ABBOTT: Well, obviously as time passes situations change and intelligent  political parties respond to the changing circumstances of the time. One point I really  want to stress is that the only way to stop the people smugglers, the only way to stop  the boats, is to change the situation here in Australia. Now, what we’re going to get  from Ms Gillard is a lot of talk about international arrangements, a lot of talk about  new deals with Sri Lankans, new deals with the Afghan government. Now, that’s all  very well, all very well in its own way, but as long as the people smugglers can say to  people, ‘you pay your $15,000 and I can get you a very good chance of permanent  residency in Australia’, the boats will keep coming, and, I regret to say, people will  continue to drown at sea and we will have children in detention, and that’s why the  new policy which the Rudd-Gillard government put in place in 2008 is not a  compassionate policy. It has led to more deaths at sea. It has led to more children in  detention. It is not a compassionate policy. Our policy is the truly compassionate  policy, if you like, because it stops people from doing very dangerous things.

QUESTION: Mr Abbott, out of this sponsorship pilot, will these people coming out of  the pool… of people currently waiting? What’s to say that they won’t be queue  jumpers that get here because someone in Australia wants to pay for them?

TONY ABBOTT: Well, again, the intention is that this sponsorship programme will  only be available to people who have played by the rules who are in the overseas  camps, not people who have broken the rules and tried to jump the queue by coming  to Australia through the people smuggling rings.

QUESTION: In terms of increasing the role for the Minister, is this, I mean, are you  saying that ASIO clearances that people are getting now aren’t rigorous enough?

TONY ABBOTT: No, no. We’re saying that regardless of whether the decision has  been yes or no, the Minister should be able at all stages to seek a review. At the  moment, as I understand the situation, there can be ministerial review of ‘no’  decisions but there can’t be Ministerial review of ‘yes’ decisions. Now, I think that  the Minister is the one person in all of this who is an elected, democratically  accountable official, and I want to see a greater role for elected democratically  accountable officials in this than is currently the case.

QUESTION: [inaudible]

TONY ABBOTT: What is wrong with decisions being made by elected,  democratically accountable officials? I mean, I believe in democracy. I think that  people who have been elected and are accountable should have more power, not less  power, in our governmental structures.

QUESTION: So, when will the Minister intervene?

TONY ABBOTT: Well, it would be up to the Minister to decide, based on his or her  judgement, whether he or she should seek to have a review of decisions that have  been made further down the track.

QUESTION: Mr Abbott, advocates in this area are calling on you and Ms Gillard not  to blow this out of proportion, to keep the issue in perspective. Is this really… the  number of people coming to Australian on boats, is this really a crisis or is it just a  crisis of political convenience?

TONY ABBOTT: Look, no country can feel comfortable about three illegal boats a  week coming to its shores and no country can feel comfortable about any situation  which is happening on its borders which involves very significant risk to life, and  that’s what’s happening here.

Now, I know a lot of people will say, ‘but far more people who have come by air are  illegals’, but there is a world of difference between someone who comes safely by air  with documents and someone who comes unsafely by boat without documents.  There’s just a world of qualitative difference. Now, obviously I’m concerned about all  illegals regardless of how they come but I am much more concerned about people  who are coming into our country very unsafely without any Australian control, and  that’s quite different from the situation with air arrivals.

QUESTION: This will be the number one election issue?

TONY ABBOTT: It’ll be an important election issue. It won’t be the only election  issue.  I mean, in the end the election will be about trust, it will be about risk. It will  be about who do you trust to keep our country safe and there are many factors to  keeping our country safe. Managing the economy well is very important. It will be  about risk and the big risk is that a bad government will be given the second chance  that it doesn’t deserve and that Australia can’t afford.

QUESTION: Mr Abbott, the policy is to turn back boats where circumstances permit.  Can you elaborate on that?

TONY ABBOTT: Well, as I said, on up to six occasions under the former  government, boats were successfully turned around. Now, I’m not going to try to pre-judge here the operational circumstances, the relationships with other countries that  might be necessary for that to happen. But it has been done and it can be done. It has  been done safely; it can again therefore be done safely.

QUESTION: Mr Abbott, how much of this was guessing what Julia Gillard was going  to come up with and making sure you were just a little bit tougher?

TONY ABBOTT: Well, look, our job is to come up with credible alternative policies  and that’s what we’ve been doing all along.

QUESTION: When you turn boats back, where do they go?

TONY ABBOTT: Well, in the cases of the former government, they returned to  Indonesia, that’s my understanding.

QUESTION: Can you put a timeframe on this, what would your aim be to determine  if a person was not a genuine refugee and send them home?

TONY ABBOTT: Well, obviously it needs to be done as quickly as possible but I’m  not going to give hostages to fortune. One of the reasons why it has in the past taken a  long time to determine these cases is because first of all we’ve had people who have  been destroying their documents, not co-operating with investigators and then  appealing the process which has produced the outcome that they don’t like. Now, one  of the very clear messages that we are sending to boat people is that if you do not co-operate by, for argument’s sake, destroying your documents that will be judged  against you, that will be quite properly held against you.

QUESTION: [inaudible] think the Prime Minister needs a makeover?

TONY ABBOTT: I’m just not going to comment on that.

QUESTION: What about yourself, how do you rate your own [inaudible]?

TONY ABBOTT: Oh, look, I’m always being given good advice as to how I can  improve my appearance, change my style, be a better person, and I listen carefully to  all that advice and who knows what difference in the end it makes?

QUESTION: Any plans to set a date for your surfing lesson with [inaudible]?

TONY ABBOTT: Look, I’m very much looking forward to it because I haven’t been  out in the waves for a couple of weeks and I think any opportunity to get wet at the  moment will be gratefully taken. No I think we’re trying to co-ordinate a date?

QUESTION: Well, he says that you’re being noncommittal.

TONY ABBOTT: No, look, I’m keen to get back into the surf.

QUESTION: Mr Abbott, how does the so-called Pacific Solution fit into this policy?

TONY ABBOTT: Well, it’s a significant part of it and, as you know, when the  Coalition announced that we would be looking at third country processing as part of  our rigorous offshore processing, at least one country put its hand up and said we’d be  happy to do it.

Now, if there are no more questions on boatpeople and border protection I’d just like  to say a bit about the mining tax, if I may. Look, a couple of fundamental point first.  If a $12 billion tax was rightly considered to be a disaster for our economy, a $10.5  billion tax is an almost equally great disaster. Now, plainly the Government has been  tricky here. Plainly, the Government has been saying different things to different  people. It’s been telling the miners that they will pay almost no more under this new  system than under the current taxing arrangements and it’s been telling the public that  $10.5 billion is going to be raised and it’s going to pay for all these various benefits  and we don’t have to go back and redo our Budget. So, they are conning someone.  Either they are conning the miners or they are conning the public and my message to  the Australian people is don’t let these guys con you. They’ve done it before and  they’re trying to do it again.

Now, the interesting overnight development has been the admission by the Resources  Minister that the Government intends to play with the figures, play with the figures to  change things. Now, this is completely unacceptable, completely unacceptable that  the Government does not know exactly what its new mining tax is going to do,  exactly what its impact will be on the public, on the mining companies. Now, this is  not a game, this is a very serious business, and for the Resources Minister to say that  we are playing with the figures to try to get the right outcome should fill the  Australian people with dismay about what is effectively an amateur government, a  government which is making it up as it goes along.

Thank you.



