

BORDER PROTECTION COMMAND BOARDS

VESSEL



(16 May 2010) Border Protection Command provided assistance to a vessel yesterday  afternoon approximately 45 nautical miles east-north-east of Scott Reef. Initial indications  suggest 92 passengers were on board the vessel.



Royal Australian Navy patrol boat HMAS Ararat, operating under the control of Border  Protection Command, approached the vessel in accordance with our Safety of Life at Sea  obligations under international law. The passengers on the vessel indicated that they were in  need of assistance.



The vessel was initially sighted by a Customs and Border Protection Dash 8, operating under  the control of Border Protection Command. After boarding the vessel, it became apparent that  the vessel was unseaworthy and appeared to be taking on significant amounts of water. ACV  Hervey Bay and HMAS Launceston were also operating in the vicinity and provided support to  HMAS Ararat.

Passengers were safely transferred to HMAS Ararat, HMAS Launceston and ACV Hervey Bay  and they will be conveyed to Christmas Island where they will undergo identity, security and health  checks and their reasons for travel will be established.



While their nationality is yet to be confirmed, if these asylum seekers are Sri Lankans or Afghans, the  processing suspension introduced by the Government on 9 April 2010 will apply.



The suspension was introduced because of the evolving circumstances in these two countries. The  Australian Government believes that asylum seekers should only granted the right to live in Australia  if they are genuinely in need of protection.



According to the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees 2009 report on  Asylum Levels and Trends in Industrialised Countries, the number of arrivals to Australia remains

very low by world standards.   In 2009, some 377,200 asylum claims were recorded in 44 countries  with Australia receiving 6,170 - less than 2 per cent of the total asylum applications.



Australia was not alone in experiencing an increase in asylum seeker applications in 2009.  While  Australia had a 29 per cent increase, Denmark experienced a 59 per cent increase, Hungary a 50 per  cent increase, Finland a 47 per cent increase, Poland a 47 per cent increase, Belgium a 40 per cent  increase, and New Zealand a 36 per cent increase.



The Australian Government has implemented a comprehensive people smuggling strategy to  combat this issue. The Government has expanded its presence in the region with the  Australian Federal Police, Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade, Department of  Immigration and Citizenship and the Australian Customs and Border Protection Service  recently setting up or expanding liaison posts devoted to deterring irregular migration.



Media Contact: Belinda Cole 0438 595 567 or Customs and Border Protection media 02 6275 6793





