Scott Morrison, MP

Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship

Transcript - ABC Newsradio breakfast

Tuesday 6th April 2010

Subjects: Population, Oceanic Viking special deal



EandOE



MARIUS BENSON: Scott Morrison it’s reported that it’s your view that the immigration level,

the intake right now is too high.



SCOTT MORRISON: The net overseas migration to Australia is currently running at more

than 75,000 people per quarter. That’s over 300,000 per year. Our population is growing at a

rate of one additional person every 70 seconds. Now these rates of growth are not only in

excess of most of the developed countries around the world, but they are running at an

unsustainable level which has obvious impacts on the quality of life that Australians will

enjoy. Kevin Rudd has signed Australia up to a 36 million person future in 2050, the

Coalition believes that we must adopt a sustainable population growth path and must set

about doing the work to understand what that looks like and adjust our migration rates to

reflect that growth.



MARIUS BENSON: Now is the view those rates have to be cut, is that your personal view or

is that Opposition policy?



SCOTT MORRISON: Well the rate of unsustainable growth at 300,000 people on average

per year I think is fairly obvious. I think the only people who don‘t really acknowledge this is

the government that continues to go on the big Australia path. The Coalition has long been

expressing concerns about this. Just the other week we joined together with Bob Brown and

said we wanted to see a national independent inquiry into sustainable population growth.

Now that has been rejected. For some months now I have been saying these sorts of issues

should be on the COAG agenda, they are not in the COAG agenda, they are not on the

government’s agenda. What we have is a new Minister for Overpopulation who has been

given the rather Orwellian task of trying to convince all Australians that Kevin is right about

population and they are wrong.



MARIUS BENSON: Well you are quite definite about this issue but Tony Abbott was asked

about it on TV last night and was non committal. Can I just clarify that point, is there an

official policy of the Opposition to cut the immigration intake?



SCOTT MORRISON: Well what we are saying is net overseas migration is running at

300,000 people per year on average. The intergenerational report assumes 180,000 over

the next 40 years to get to 36 million so I think it is a fairly obvious observation that these

rates are too high. Now Tony himself spoke last night about the concerns of Australians

about this figure of 36 million and that is obviously echoed right throughout the Coalition. Our

detailed policies on these issues will be released closer to the election but what we are

flagging very clearly is that Kevin Rudd’s idea of a big Australia is not one that is clearly

shared by Australians and they are basically saying if we can’t trust Kevin Rudd to keep the

population on Christmas Island under control then how can we trust him, as he is asking

Australians to, on the bigger issue of the population of Australia.



MARIUS BENSON: Could I go back to that number you are quoting there, the net intake of

300,000, that’s not the number the government uses. They talk about an intake of 180,000.



SCOTT MORRISON: I’m not surprised that’s not the figure the government use. Net

immigration counts everyone who has come in here on a net basis for 12 months or more

and that’s what our population is based on, that’s how many people are here. That’s what

the 36 million figure includes so I think if we are going to be talking about figures of 36 million

then we need to be talking apples with apples. It is true the permanent migration program is

around 180,000 per year and we have a gross intake each year of around 500,000 or more

so the permanent migration program does not account for the lions share.



MARIUS BENSON: I will just ask you about a specific issue on immigration. The government

has announced that 3 refugees form Guantanamo Bay will be allowed to come to Australia.

It is being reported by the ABC that that is in return for the United States taking 30 Sri

Lankans from the Oceanic Viking. The Immigration Minister Senator Evans says no such

deal happened. Do you accept the Minister’s word?



SCOTT MORRISON: No I don’t. The government has been claiming there was no special

deal for those on the Oceanic Viking and that special deal was obvious to everyone including

those 200 or so still people waiting in the port of Merak who want that special deal. They

have done the deal, they should be honest about that deal, the problem here is the fact this

deal was done in the first place and that Kevin Rudd blinked and signaled basically to those

seeking to come that we were a soft touch.



