Scott Morrison, MP

Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship



Transcript - Sky News Playing Politics

Thursday 4th February 2010

Subjects: Coalition's plan for Direct Action on Environment and Climate Change,  Rudd Government’s border policy failures, Intergenerational report

E&amp;OE



ASHLEIGH GILLON: We’ll get to matters relating to your portfolio soon but first on this

advice given by the Climate Change Department, it suggests that your scheme would see

emissions rise in this country is that correct?



SCOTT MORRISON: Well I’m not surprised that the government will come out and say the

sky will fall and the seas will rise and Armageddon will be upon us if the Coalition puts out

any policy. I think this is a pretty predictable response from the government, in fact their

response to our policy is actually longer than the policy that they announced before the last

election. So, look I just dismiss the government’s bluster as that, it’s just simple bluster.

What the Prime Minister needs to answer is what will be the impact on electricity prices.

Yesterday he said it would be 7% now it has been revealed that that was only for one year

so I will be interested to know today whether he is prepared to come clean on what the

impact on households’ budgets will be, particularly for electricity prices on his plan.



ASHLEIGH GILLON: This advice though was prepared by public servants in the Department

of Climate Change, are you saying you can guarantee that emissions won’t rise under your

plan?



SCOTT MORRISON: Our plan is designed to buy reductions in emissions, that’s what it

does. It’s just like the government’s water buy-back scheme…



ASHLEIGH GILLON: So emissions will drop under the Coalition’s plan?



SCOTT MORRISON: This is the plan that the Coalition’s announced and that’s its intention

and that’s its purpose and I am very confident about it. I’m not surprised the government

would be enlisting the support of its army of public servants to come out and pick holes in

our policy.



ASHLEIGH GILLON: So the advice is wrong?



SCOTT MORRISON: Look it’s predictable, this is a very predictable response from the

government.



ASHLEIGH GILLON: But it’s not wrong? You are saying it’s predictable but is it wrong? It’s

very different.



SCOTT MORRISON: I will allow Greg Hunt to dissect it for you but I am not surprised that

the politics of this is the government will come out and say the Coalition’s plan will lead to an

end of civilization as we know it. I simply dismiss it as the usual blustering tactics of an

arrogant government.



ASHLEIGH GILLON: So you re dismissing it but you are not saying it is wrong Scott

Morrison. You are obviously a senior member in the Coalition now, do you think this advice

is wrong?



SCOTT MORRISON: Well unlike you Ashley I have not had the government’s army of media

advisers coming around and putting this in front of me and convincing me of its merit. All I

have heard of it is it exits. As I said it sounds like their attack on our policy is actually bigger

than the policy they introduced before the last election. Three lines, three lines. emissions

trading scheme, $40 million a year. They didn’t even say that much. So look I think the

government has been quite hypocritical about this. I think it’s time for them to answer

questions about their plan, their bill is in the parliament today. Again, that is going to have an

impact on electricity prices. What will be the impact? That’s the question for the Prime

Minister.



ASHLEIGH GILLON: Well another question about your scheme is how exactly is it going to

be funded? This morning Tony Abbott has said that foreign aid and the public service won’t

be cut under the Coalition but Barnaby Joyce today wouldn’t rule anything out. Are Barnaby

Joyce and Tony Abbott working off different pages here?



SCOTT MORRISON: No I don’t think so. We are talking about $3.2 billion out of forward

estimates of $3.2 trillion. Now that is an undertaking which I am sure is entirely able to be

accommodated within the forward estimates under the Coalition. Under the Coalition

remember we were the ones who reduced Labor’s debt to zero. We were the ones who were

able to pay off Labor’s debt, get the budget in shape and return surplus after surplus and

manage our economy and our finances well. So for us finding $3.2 billion in a budget over

four years is frankly an ordinary day at the office.



ASHLEIGH GILLON: But your Shadow Finance Minister has been asked pointedly will

foreign aid be cut, will the public service face cut backs as well and he hasn’t been able to

answer. Tony Abbott was asked today and he said, sure he would rule it out. Why are they

not communicating on this?



SCOTT MORRISON: Well at the end of the day these matters will be determined by the

Shadow Cabinet in terms of how policies are set and what our costings will be and where

savings will be achieved. Tony has made it very clear that all of that will be made very clear

to the Australian public before the next election. Now individual members will have their

views about how that can be achieved, we will discuss it, that’s how a Shadow Cabinet

works, that’s how a Cabinet should work and accommodating those savings I’m sure will be

a very realistic challenge.



ASHLEIGH GILLON: Did you see Barnaby Joyce’s address at the Press Club yesterday?

What did you make of it?



SCOTT MORRISON: Well I didn’t see it yesterday to be honesty because I was talking to a

lot of people yesterday about the latest arrival of another boat of 181 asylum seekers on

Christmas Island. So I was talking to a lot of Australians about that yesterday and so I didn’t

get the chance to see Barnaby’s presentation.



ASHLEIGH GILLON: Well that gives me a nice segue. We are going to talk about your

portfolio of course since last August 77 boats have arrived in Australian waters, nine have

arrived this year alone. Would turning the boats back as Tony Abbott suggested really work?

The refugee council says that that would be a breach of international law.



SCOTT MORRISON: Well it requires a suite of measures and when we were in government

we had a suite of measures.



ASHLEIGH GILLON: Is turning the boats back a measure the Coalition would adopt?



SCOTT MORRISON: Well its part of the suite of measures you have and that’s why I

supported Tony in saying that. But it’s not the only measure. In fact that was a measure the

Prime Minister, when he was in opposition just before the election, said he would do. Now I

don’t know what became of that promise, probably the same as many of the other promises

he has made, it’s gone by the way side. It requires a suite of measures and the things that

we have said is that we would reintroduce a form of temporary visa, we’ve called it a Safe

Haven Visa which meant the people who came down that path, illegally arriving in our

northern waters and taken to Christmas Island and processed offshore would have access to

a temporary form of visa which didn’t give them immediate access to family reunion and

things of that nature. The ultimate purpose of refugee policy is that people might voluntarily

return to their home and that’s what the vast majority of them want and so within that period

of time you’d hope that things may have changed and they may be able to return and if not

then they will be eligible to apply for a permanent visa. So we’ve announced that policy. The

other thing we’ve made very clear in the last few days, and in fact the last few months to be

honest, is the fact that we wouldn’t compromise on offshore processing. The government

said very clearly this week, when Christmas Island is full, which it is now, they will start

bringing people to the mainland whose claims have not been finalized. We won’t do that. A

Coalition government won’t do that.



ASHLEIGH GILLON: Back to my initial question though, is it a breach of international law to

turn the boats back? I’m sure you’ve looked into that.



SCOTT MORRISON: Yeah I have. It depends where the boat is intercepted and that’s why

Tony said very clearly, that if the circumstances allow for it, then that policy would be

pursued. Now the circumstances allowing for it would obviously have to address issues of

international law. Now the Prime Minister said the same thing when he was in opposition.



ASHLEIGH GILLON: So you can only turn the boats back if they aren’t in Australian waters?

How does that work?



SCOTT MORRISON: Well that’s basically how it works, yes. So it all depends of where the

boat is intercepted. But as I said it’s not the only measure, you have to have many measures

and that’s what I don’t think this government understands. They’ve changed a whole range

of things and they want to single things out and say well that won’t solve the problem or that

won’t solve the problem. What I do know is that when we had all these measures working in

concert the boat arrivals went to zero. We had 18 boats in the last six years. They’ve had 18

boats in the last eight weeks.



ASHLEIGH GILLON: Also in your portfolio, the intergenerational report was released earlier

this week. Can Australia support a population of 36 million? Are you happy with that

number?



SCOTT MORRISON: Well I don’t think anyone knows and that’s the policy point. There is no

population policy from this government, which is able to tell us what a sustainable population

is for this country and that’s why the Coalition is calling for a debate.



ASHLEIGH GILLON: Do you think it’s too high?



SCOTT MORRISON: Well I don’t think we’re in a position to know. We don’t know what is

going to be the investment in infrastructure for the next 40 years.



ASHLEIGH GILLON: Well you don’t need to wait for the government to tell you that do you?



SCOTT MORRISON: No, no we need to know that as a country, what those investments are

going to be. What are state governments going to do? What’s the planning process of that

period of time? That’s the nature of this policy debate. What’s the carrying capacity of our

environment? What will be the impact of these things on our environment? That’s the debate

I think Australians want to have. Whether 36 million or 32 million or 25 million or whatever

the number happens to be, it has to be a sustainable number. And this government won’t

engage that debate.



ASHLEIGH GILLON: So the Coalition doesn’t have a position on whether that is too many

people in Australia or not?



SCOTT MORRISON: Well I think it’s pre-emptive to suggest that that would be the case.

Because what we have to have is a population policy which addresses how you are going to

cope with an increasing population. Now if you take…



ASHLEIGH GILLON: And the Coalition doesn’t have a similar population policy?



SCOTT MORRISON: We will have a population policy and a process for determining what a

sustainable population is and how that would impact on immigration levels as part of our

policy releases.



ASHLEIGH GILLON: So we’ll see that before the next election?



SCOTT MORRISON: That’s our plan, to have a sustainable population policy. That’s why

we’re calling on the government to have one because in terms of population policy they

basically say ‘well treasury said it’s going to be 36 million so just get used to it’. Well we don’t

think Australians should just get used to it. I think they expect their governments to plan for

the future and to make decisions on 2010 that will have an impact on that future. All Kevin

Rudd wants to do is talk about the future, not the decisions he wants to take now that will

have an impact on that future.



ASHLEIGH GILLON: Scott Morrison we’re out of time. Thanks for joining us today.



SCOTT MORRISON: Thanks Ashleigh.



