

Senator Chris Evans  Minister for Immigration and Citizenship

Abbott must admit he won't turn boats back  Joint Media Release with Senator Chris Evans - Minister for Immigration and  Citizenship and Brendan O'Connor MP - Minister for Home Affairs.

Thursday, 8 July 2010

Tony Abbott has conceded his empty and false promise to turn back the boats can't  be delivered, Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Senator Chris Evans said  today.

‘Mr Abbott has today said he would rely on the discretion of Navy commanders to  turn back boats if they deemed it safe and if there were appropriate arrangements in  place with other countries,’ Senator Evans said.

‘His simplistic and shallow slogan is becoming more qualified by the day and this is  an admission that he can not deliver on his empty promise.

‘Mr Abbott can't explain how he'll stop people smugglers attempting to disable their  boats on the open ocean or how he can guarantee the safety of Australian customs  and defence officers.

‘His policy is completely discredited. He can't explain it because it's a nonsense and  it's time he told the truth.’

Senator Evans said that all Australians should be aware of the dangers faced by  Australian defence and customs officers in doing their jobs on the high seas.

‘We know that in the past asylum seekers have sabotaged their boat, in fear of being  returned. In the past this has led to the deaths of asylum seekers and injuries to  defence officers,’ Senator Evans said.

The Minister for Home Affairs Brendan O'Connor said he has been advised by the  Attorney-General's Department that Tony Abbott's plan is unworkable, would put  lives at risk and could force Australian personnel to breach the UN Safety of Life at  Sea Convention.

‘Labor will not risk the lives of our hardworking defence and customs personnel.

‘It's time for Mr Abbott to admit this is not a practical solution,’ Mr O'Connor said.

‘The truth is Mr Abbott's talk will never translate into action and it's time he stopped  conning the Australian people and pretending that he has a simple solution to this  complex problem.

‘Mr Abbott keeps suggesting he should be trusted on border protection when time  and time again he fails to tell the Australian people the truth.’



See:  Index of Media Releases

URL: http://www.minister.immi.gov.au /media/media-releases/2010/ce10059.htm   Last update: 08 July 2010 at 17:40 AEST



