Scott Morrison, MP

Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship    Media Release



Transcript - 2GB Jason Morrison program  Wednesday 12th May 2010

Subject: Kevin Rudd’s $1 billion border budget blow out



EandOE



JASON MORRISON: [INTRODUCTION] … How much is this costing? We ask the question

in the context of a country that last night confirmed borrowings projected to peak at $93

billion dollars. How much is it costing us to operate this failed policy on Christmas

Island?Well for the first time last night, as honest as you can ever take budget papers to be,

the government gave us a figure and the figure is quite astronomical. Scott Morrison, the

Shadow Immigration Minister is on the phone, he has been analysing the papers, good

afternoon.



SCOTT MORRISON: Good afternoon Jason.



JASON MORRISON: So $93 billion is what the country will owe in about a year’s time.



SCOTT MORRISON: That’s right.



JASON MORRISON: What billions are we spending on this program intercepting, again in

inverted commas, these vessels?



SCOTT MORRISON: Well just the costs of immigration alone and taking these people

through the immigration system has blown out by a billion dollars over 4 years. Now that’s

made up of $777 million in their ongoing costs and they are going to spend another $240

million or thereabouts having to expand all the various facilities they have around the

country. The reason all of these costs have to be incurred is because of the number of

people that are arriving. We have had 99 boats arrive this financial year, we have had over

4,500 people turn up and this time last year the government thought there would only be 200

people show up. So their budget has been blown to smithereens and we are all paying for it.



JASON MORRISON: Let’s do, if we can, a hypothetical comparison. The policy that is

running now, the far more humane policy that’s running now, the terrible one that was the

last government’s policy, and you can pick my tone on this, what do you think the cost

difference would be?



SCOTT MORRISON: It is at least a billion dollars, in fact it would be more than that over a

four year period. Just this year alone, in 2009/10 and it’s a year that’s not even finished yet,

the cost is anticipated to be about $304 million just for running the offshore processing of

people up there on Christmas Island. When we were in government the last time around it

was about $100 million. So this has blown out significantly under this government. It will go

to $470 million next year and then amazingly Jason, because they are not telling us the full

story, they think it is all just going to halve in 2011/12. Now there is nothing to justify that, I

don’t know if Kevin Rudd is budgeting for a Coalition victory at the next election which would

see boat arrivals drop because the policies we would introduce, but within these figures I

suggest that they have hidden hundreds of millions extra in expenditure that will happen

unless there is a change in policy and in our view a change in government.



JASON MORRISON: The figures themselves, to think that we have blown out in a year, this

figure of a billion dollars, $777 million for Christmas Island and that’s spent. Yes, ok we

probably need to have a Christmas Island Detention Centre and we needed to have a Nauru

detention centre but we are going to have one in Brisbane, we have a hotel and I am

investigating a report there could be another one that could be opening in country NSW, not

a detention centre but a temporary holding place in domestic accommodation, hotel rooms

and whatever else. These are all extra costs. We are opening an airbase in Western

Australia to house people being held here, all because we won’t send a message that says

stop coming.



SCOTT MORRISON: Yeah that’s right. The government is chasing its tail with these costs.

They are doing nothing to stop why the costs are increasing which is boats arriving and

having policies that will stop boats. Their answer is just to keep shoveling money, or I should

say debt, to pay for these blowouts in the borders which have now blown out in the budget.

Another area I would highlight Jason is, as you just mentioned, they are reopening the Curtin

Detention Centre, a centre we closed because it wasn’t needed anymore and all these

people are now being moved onto the mainland. Despite that fact, despite the number of

people in detention onshore has now increased by more than 100% since January, they

have not forecast any increase in expenditure to run those centres onshore so there will be

big blowouts there as this year progresses, they are not owning up to those and we will see.

$1 billion in blowouts is just the beginning for all this. It will go higher and higher as long as

this government is running our borders.



JASON MORRISON: I think, you just mentioned a billion, and we have become so numb to

these numbers, they are unbelievable, the number of zeroes, it is just unbelievable the

amount of money and I just remind people we are not talking about the cost, we are talking

about the blowout. There is already a cost that’s underneath that which would have to be in

the order of what we have talked about already.



SCOTT MORRISON: Yeah that’s right. To put it in perspective a billion dollars or

thereabouts is the cost of building a brand new hospital and running it I understand from

what I’ve been told from advice from others. So when we are talking about that scale of cost,

of course that’s over four years, and these numbers do get thrown about. The Treasurer is

crowing about celebrating that we will return to surplus in a few years time, well the surplus

he is talking about is a billion dollars. Now that surplus will evaporate as these costs

continue to escalate. Joe Hockey is right, this government will never return to surplus, they

will never stop the boats and the costs will continue to escalate.



JASON MORRISON: Ok. Look can I ask you a question before you go because yesterday

wasn’t the time for it. We had an extensive discussion about this Brisbane hotel and the plan

to hold people there for six months in a 4 star hotel. Now you can imagine the natural

reaction from a lot of people in the community is that we don’t treat our own as well as this

but we are treating desperate people from desperate places, some of them perhaps with

concocted stories but many of them not, who have had a terrible path, they have paid people

smugglers to get here so they have coughed up money already. Here we are in Australia

and the message now and the image that will travel to these parts is ‘here is where you may

end up’.



SCOTT MORRISON: That’s right Jason.



JASON MORRISON: In this Brisbane hotel, four star, conference facilities with 3 meals a

day in a reasonably nice looking place. I am not suggesting we feed them squalor and gruel

and put them in tents but fair dinkum I mean are we about controlling the message we are

sending the world?



SCOTT MORRISON: Well what has occurred here, and I don’t want to mislead, the Howard

Government when we were faced with various challenges and so on also used this type of

commercial accommodation so I don’t want to suggest we never did it, but the reason we are

doing it now is the key point. The reason we are doing it now is because of the rate of

arrivals that is higher than at any time on record. The Prime Minister yesterday in question

time tried to make out that things were worse back when the Howard Government was in

place but we have had 55 boats arrive this year, we had 13 at the same point in time last

year and back in the period of 1999, 2000 and 2001 when there was that surge we were

only in the mid 20s so this is the worst we have seen .That’s why we are seeing people spill

onto the mainland, into motels all around the country with the cost counter just clicking over

at a rate that defies imagination.



JASON MORRISON: Well that’s the word, imagination, because most of us could only

dream of what this money could do and here it is and it is paying for a policy that if we want

to talk about cuts to costs here, it’s not letting people starve on remote islands, it is about

changing the policy. Right, thanks for your time.



SCOTT MORRISON: Thanks Jason.



