Scott Morrison, MP

Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship    Media Release



Transcript - 3AW Neil Mitchell program

Tuesday 16th March 2010

Subjects: illegal boat arrivals, asylum seeker transfers to Darwin, Christmas Island cost blow

out



EandOE



NEIL MITCHELL: I mentioned earlier there are reports that there are several hundred boat

people headed to Australia, should be here within days, these are asylum seekers. I also

made the point I think that this will be damaging to Kevin Rudd because there is a perception

that he’s changed the policy and since then there has been an influx of boat people. Now

you can argue about that but that is the perception and without any doubt there has been an

increase in the number of boat people. On the line is the Opposition Spokesman for

Immigration and Citizenship, Scott Morrison. Good morning.



SCOTT MORRISON: Good morning Neil.



NEIL MITCHELL: What do you know about this, how many are coming?



SCOTT MORRISON: Well on average this year, 2010, we have more than 2 boats arrive

every week. More than 110 people turning up on average every week which the highest rate

of arrivals we have actually had on record. That is a far higher rate than we had back in

1999, 2000 and 2001.



NEIL MITCHELL: What is this new lot coming?



SCOTT MORRISON: Well the reports are today that there is intelligence suggesting will be

two very large boats coming this week. So we will have to wait and see whether that turns

up. Either way it’s more than likely two boats will show up this week because at least two

have shown up each week for the last ten weeks if not longer.



NEIL MITCHELL: Ok now why is one question, why the influx. Is it perhaps at least in part

the circumstances in places like Afghanistan, Sri Lanka and the Middle East?



SCOTT MORRISON: Well there have always been push factors and what our observation is

the demand for people smugglers is ubiquitous, whether it is at a higher level of demand or

what is considered a lower level, there are always plenty of people. There is ten and a half

million refugees in the world today and as a result there will always be people looking to take

this opportunity. The issue is whether there is the opportunity and that what has changed,

and since August 2008 when the Government started unravelling the border protection

regime they inherited and when they took decisions like they did over the Oceanic Viking

which sent a very strong message that this government was prepared to roll over, we have

had more than 40 boats arrive since then and I think that was a very decisive moment in how

this government is handling things.



NEIL MITCHELL: What about costs? You’ve estimated what you reckon is the cost. What is

it?



SCOTT MORRISON: Well it is around about $80,000 per person who arrives and that is just

the immigration costs. The Customs and Border Protection costs are estimated to be

another $25,000 on top of that, so $100,000 all up. The government amazingly when they

put the budget together this year thought only 200 people would arrive illegally this year by

boat. Now they confessed this at Estimates when 2,600 people had already arrived so we

are going to see a blow out this year of some $350 million in these costs. The have already

copped to $132 million of that but they need to cop to the balance which we estimate to be

another $250 million this year and if things remain the way they are, with no change in some

policies, then over this year and the forward estimates we will see a $1 billion blow-out.



NEIL MITCHELL: $1 billion over how long?



SCOTT MORRISON: Over four years, including this year.



NEIL MITCHELL: Ok, so what would you do? Bang, you’re in government what do you do?



SCOTT MORRISON: Well first thing we would do is we would be reintroducing a form of

temporary protection visa. We would also be ensuring we had an absolute no compromise

policy on off-shore processing, which this Government is rolling over on now with their

decision that they will transfer people to Darwin. The question of timing is still an open one

but it will happen - it is inevitable - Christmas Island is full, I have been there when there

were only 1,600 people on the island and most of it was full then and it looked full, people

were in tents so it is not a sustainable solution. Those two things are very important, they

were at the heart of what we did previously and ensuring that people had no certain

outcomes through this process, there was no guarantee they would get to the mainland I

think is very critical.



NEIL MITCHELL: Thank you very much Scott Morrison, Shadow Minister - Immigration and

Citizenship. His figures do seem to be logical - depends on the number of people who

arrive, but potentially $1 billion over four years. $1 billion on asylum seekers and people say

we don’t have a compassionate conscience.



END



