

The Hon Richard Marles MP   Parliamentary Secretary for Pacific Island Affairs

Interview on Radio Australia Today

Subjects: Ministry for Foreign Affairs, East Timor, Fiji, Independents votes

Transcript, E&OE

16 September 2010

NICOLE CHVASTEK: The Australian Opposition is claiming that the toxic relationship between  Kevin Rudd and the Prime Minister will damage international relationships.

Richard Marles is the Parliamentary Secretary for Pacific Island Affairs.

Richard Marles, good morning.

RICHARD MARLES: Good morning. How are you?

NICOLE CHVASTEK: I'm well. The Australian Opposition is claiming that the toxic relationship  between Kevin Rudd and Prime Minister Gillard will damage international relationships.  What's your reaction to that?

RICHARD MARLES: Oh well - I mean, this is hyperbole from the Opposition. And the first  thing to say is there's not a toxic relationship. I know both Kevin Rudd and Julia Gillard well.  They have worked incredibly well as a team over many years now and they're going to  continue to do that. And I know that they're main driving force in terms of the way they  operate is the national interest, and they're going to work very closely together and I think  very well together.

They're both experts in their fields and I think it's going to be a very productive relationship.

NICOLE CHVASTEK: How can you put behind you though the antipathy and the bitterness  that occurred when the leadership was seized from Kevin Rudd?

RICHARD MARLES: Oh look, I think - I mean, of course politics is a rough and tumble  business. But we're talking about mature people who know what politics is about, and  what's occurred is in the past. And, going forward, Kevin Rudd has said that he's greatly  honoured to be the Foreign Minister of this country, which is right because it is an

enormous honour to hold that position. Julia Gillard is going to be a fantastic Prime Minister  of this country. And the two of them, I think, are going to work really well. I mean, they  already are. They're speaking closely together, you know, I've spoken to both of them in the  last few days, and I have no concerns at all about their working relationship. I think it will be  a productive relationship for our country.

NICOLE CHVASTEK: Kevin Rudd is on his way to America via Pakistan. What sort of message  do you think that sends to our region in the Asia Pacific.

RICHARD MARLES: Well, I don't think we ought to read anything into that. There is obviously  an enormous humanitarian disaster which is occurring in Pakistan...

NICOLE CHVASTEK: He's only stopping off for a day in Pakistan though, isn't he?

RICHARD MARLES: Well, he's doing that to examine what is going on there before going to  New York where the issue of Pakistan will be the centrepiece of the conference that he's  attending. But I think, in answer to your question, there's no - firstly, there is no doubt as to  Kevin Rudd's commitment to our region and to the Pacific. Kevin...

NICOLE CHVASTEK: So why didn't he travel to the Pacific first?

RICHARD MARLES: Well, because the issue of Pakistan and the humanitarian disaster which  is occurring there is occurring there right now. Bear in mind Kevin Rudd has only been in this  job as Foreign Minister for, I think, about 36 hours. But as - we oughtn't forget this, as the  Prime Minister of the country, I think the first, you know, really substantive bilateral visit  that he made as the Prime Minister of Australia was to our region, to Papua New Guinea. I  think that came after the first overseas trip to the climate change conference in Bali.

So there's no question as to Kevin's commitment to this region. And I...

NICOLE CHVASTEK: That was when he was Prime Minister.

RICHARD MARLES: Well, yeah - but in terms of Kevin's foreign policy interests, in terms of  his foreign policy priorities, I don't think they've changed. And I know - I mean, I know the  man, I've spoken to him a lot about this region over many years, as it happens, and there is  no doubt about his commitment to this region. And I'm sure that you'll see Kevin Rudd play  a really important role as Foreign Minister within the very important region for our national  interest which is the Pacific. And indeed, you know, he stated the importance of the Pacific  to our national interest in his press conference yesterday.

NICOLE CHVASTEK: One of the unresolved issues he leaves is the asylum seeker centre  earmarked for East Timor. And consistently the message we're getting out of East Timor is  that they don't want it. And the reality is that Kevin Rudd didn't want it either when he was  PM.

RICHARD MARLES: Well, firstly - there are a couple of things in that. I'm not sure that is the  consistent message which is coming out of East Timor at all...

NICOLE CHVASTEK: It's the only one we're getting at this end.

RICHARD MARLES: Well, the conversations that have happened to date between the  Government and East Timor - and of course it is at an early stage - but those conversations  to date have been positive. The regional processing centre is exactly that. And so the issue  will be progressed through a regional process, through the Bali process, and that's a natural  way in which to do this...

NICOLE CHVASTEK: But that was not the original intention, to refer it off to a regional forum.  And that, in fact, means that it will languish for some months before even a decision is  made.

RICHARD MARLES: No look I - well, I don't accept that either in the sense that I think that  this is a process which is, of its nature, a regional one. It's perfectly natural that the Bali  process should have a key role in it. But we see, and we've stated at the outset, that we see  a part of this is developing such a centre hand in glove with the UNHCR. So there's no  question of the kind of multilateral nature of establishing this centre. But can I just - the  second point you raised was in relation to Kevin's own attitude to this. And I should say at  the outset this is going to an issue principally for Kevin Rudd as the Foreign Minister and  Chris Bowen as the Minister for Immigration.

But Kevin made it completely clear in his press conference yesterday that he supports this,  and he supports the direction that the Government is taking as it has been led by Julia  Gillard and...

NICOLE CHVASTEK: Well, he's changed his position from when he was prime minister  because it was on the table before him then, and he discounted it.

RICHARD MARLES: Well, I'm not sure I accept that. He made it completely clear yesterday  that he supports the direction that the Government is taking; a multilateral process with our  countries in the region to establish a lasting solution to the issue of people smuggling within  our region by establishing a processing centre in a country which is a signatory to the  Refugee Convention...

NICOLE CHVASTEK: Is it ever going to happen though, Richard Marles?

RICHARD MARLES: Well, I absolutely think it will happen. And at this point in time we're  pursuing this with East Timor; that's where our efforts are focused in the sense of pursuing  the centre being based in East Timor, but pursuing this with both East Timor and the  countries in the region and with the UNHCR. And I think Kevin will, with Chris Bowen, lead  that process and I have every faith...

NICOLE CHVASTEK: But none of these...

RICHARD MARLES: ...that it will...

NICOLE CHVASTEK: Sure. None of these administrative diversions were mentioned though  when Julia Gillard said in June that a processing centre would be built in East Timor.

RICHARD MARLES: What Julia Gillard said when she first announced this was that this was  not going to be a quick fix, this wasn't going to happen overnight. No-one for a moment has  suggested that we're going to be able to click our fingers and up will pop a regional  processing centre. This is going to take some time...

NICOLE CHVASTEK: But getting somebody from East Timor at least to say we want it and we  will build it, would be good.

RICHARD MARLES: Well, there have been conversations with representatives in East Timor,  and at this early stage they have been positive. And that's the important point to make here.  And we need to work through the Bali process and the multilateral institutions in the area to  see that this can come to fruition.

It's not going to happen overnight but it is really important that we get this issue right  because...

NICOLE CHVASTEK: C...

RICHARD MARLES: Well, can I just say - because people smuggling in our region has been an  issue. It's been a source of lives lost at sea. It is a dangerous trade, it's an evil trade. But it's  also, I think, from a domestic Australian point of view, a debate which has been very divisive  for the better part of a decade. And this offers - the idea of having a regional processing  centre based in East Timor offers a solution to all of that, both in terms of a regional solution  but also in terms of, I think, an answer to the debate which has raged in Australia over that  period of time.

NICOLE CHVASTEK: Your portfolio responsibility is Pacific Island Affairs and the Pacific  remains tainted by the presence of Fiji's military regime and its crackdown on press  freedoms, more specifically. News Limited has been forced to sell the Fiji Times, its oldest  newspaper, to an owner who it's reported today will be forced to accept onerous regime  interference. Has Australia failed as the Pacific's great power to make any difference  whatsoever, despite its trade and travel restrictions?

RICHARD MARLES: Well look, I've seen obviously the report today in relation to the sale of  the Fiji Times. And I think probably the first thing to say, Nicole, is 36 hours into this job it's  going to be difficult for me to answer that question in a lot of depth. But suffice to say this:  Fiji is a very important country within this region. It's a very important country to Australia.

We are the largest bilateral donor to Fiji. We're the largest foreign investor in Fiji, and we're  one of the top trading partners. We're clearly a major source of tourism to the area.

At the end of the day, what we want to see achieved is the earliest return to democracy as  possible and earliest return to the rule of law in Fiji, and we are committed to pursuing  policies which achieve that end.

NICOLE CHVASTEK: There's been a heavy-handed approach to Commodore Frank  Bainimarama. Is it time to start negotiations and, you know, put aside the sledgehammer?

RICHARD MARLES: Look, as I say, I think - our focus is on returning... seeing Fiji return to the  rule of law and to democracy at the earliest possible time...

NICOLE CHVASTEK: Does that mean you'll start talking to him?

RICHARD MARLES: Well, I'm not going to go into this issue in depth right now. It is - you  know, it's clearly going to be a large issue on my agenda and on the agenda of the  Government over the coming months and potentially years. It remains one of the large  issues within the region, there's no question about that. And Fiji is, of course, a very  important country to Australia. We continue to be a strong supporter of the people of Fiji  but we do want to see a return to democracy and the rule of law at the earliest possible  time...

NICOLE CHVASTEK: The other big issue for the Pacific Islands is climate change. With so  many threatened by rising sea levels, do you see it as part of your role to push for a carbon  tax so that Australia at least shows leadership on this issue?

RICHARD MARLES: Well, I think there's no doubt that climate change represents one of the  key environmental challenges within our region and, you know, I have no doubt that in  travelling the Pacific it will be an issue which is constantly raised with me. And so of course  naturally it is going to be an issue of great concern to me and as it is to the Government.

We've been really committed as a government over the last three years to act on climate  change and...

NICOLE CHVASTEK: Your emissions trading scheme fell flat.

RICHARD MARLES: Not for want of trying, I can assure you of that. It was a key priority in the  last three years and we've made no secret of the fact that we would have liked to have seen  the emissions trading scheme passed through our parliament...

NICOLE CHVASTEK: But not for want of trying doesn't cut it when people in the Pacific are  facing rising sea levels as a direct cause of climate change.

RICHARD MARLES: Well, I think what - our obligation is to make sure that we pursue this  issue with vigour and that it remains a top priority of this Government, which of course it is.

And, in pursuing this as a priority, it's not just I think about taking the Australian economy  into a post carbon world but I think we also are pursuing this issue, really aware of the effect  of climate change on rising sea levels to our neighbours in the Pacific. There's no doubt...

NICOLE CHVASTEK: One...

RICHARD MARLES: Can I just say there's no doubt that the challenges faced by the countries  in the Pacific are very much in the forefront of our minds in terms of our actions on climate  change.

So, you know, we see our challenge over the next few years to make sure that this country  can move on climate change, at building a lasting consensus in relation to climate change  and a deeper consensus. And we're going to pursue that with vigour.

We'll also continue to play an active role in the international stage in relation to advancing  the cause of climate change.

NICOLE CHVASTEK: One last domestic issue. Opposition Leader Tony Abbott has indicated  that he will continue to try and get the Independents to switch sides, so he's not given up on  the Liberals forming government in what may or may not be the next term of the Gillard  Government. What's your reaction to that?

RICHARD MARLES: Well, I guess, at the end of the day Tony Abbott's behaviour is a matter -  Tony Abbott's strategy is a matter for Tony Abbott.

What we know and what we're very clear on is that we've got a good relationship with the  Independents. We've got agreements with the Independents which form the basis of the  establishment of the Gillard Government albeit of course a minority government. But we  are working very closely with the Independents. I think we're very positive about the way  that's going to work, as indeed we feel they are. And I'm very confident that we can  continue working with them in a way which sees this Government exist during the duration  of this parliament, that it goes the full distance.

So...

NICOLE CHVASTEK: R...

RICHARD MARLES: ...the way in which Tony Abbott conducts himself is a matter for him, but  we're very confident in our relationship with the Independents.

END

Media inquiries

 Parliamentary Secretary's Office: (02) 6277 4330

 Departmental Media Liaison: (02) 6261 1555



