



Transcript of interview with Barrie Cassidy on Insiders

03 October 2010  SCT007/2010

Main Topics: First 100 days of the Gillard Government, negotiations with the Independents,  regional Australia.

BARRIE CASSIDY: Simon Crean, good morning. Welcome.

SIMON CREAN: Morning, Barrie. Congratulations too for that team of yours. They were  awesome yesterday.

BARRIE CASSIDY: A little more on that I think in Offsiders, a little later on.

SIMON CREAN: But you're not on it, so I thought I'd give you.

BARRIE CASSIDY: I will be. I'll be making a cameo appearance.

SIMON CREAN: Oh, you will be! Ah, wonderful.

BARRIE CASSIDY: Julia Gillard has just marked 100 days in office. Now they've been a  very unusual 100 days. Yet - we're yet to get a real sense of what she stands for and what  sort of a Prime Minister she'll be.

SIMON CREAN: Well I disagree with that. I think that she is a conviction politician, she's  clearly a skilled negotiator, which is got to be pretty important over the course of the next  three years. She's also mapped out in the time that she's held the ministerial portfolios her  commitment to the importance of education - education both as an enabler of the individual,  but also of lifting the productivity of the nation.

She's clearly committed now to ensuring that we get an effective price on carbon. That's  important. I think that we need - and so does the Government of course - need a mechanism  that rewards good behaviour when it comes to environmental impact, punishes bad  behaviour - so you've got to have a price on it. And clearly the other area of importance in  terms of resolution going forward is the asylum seekers. So, all of those things she has put  in place mechanisms to address. Trying to achieve them in the context of an election  campaign was difficult. Now that she's negotiated a - the basis of the Government going  forward, I think that you will see progress in these areas.

BARRIE CASSIDY: Yes, but because in the first 100 days you had an election and then a  hung parliament and so she had to spend a lot of time on politics, what do you think will  characterise the next 100 days, or what should characterise the next 100 days?

SIMON CREAN: I think sustaining - securing and sustaining Australia's economic future and  ensuring that the benefits are distributed fairly. I mean, that's a whole - that is the DNA of  Labor. It's the reason we go into politics, to make the change, to do those sorts of things.  You need a robust economy.

Without strong economic growth, you can't resource the things that are needed. You also  need productivity in that economy because without lifting productivity, you can't lift real  wages. These things all hang together. We've got to develop more effectively the message  as well as build upon the foundations that were so strongly put in place in our first three  years.

BARRIE CASSIDY: But what sort of policies will lead to that sort of outcome, the  redistribution you talk about?

SIMON CREAN: Well I think you're seeing it in terms of the focus on the regions, Barrie.  Regions are at a disadvantage. They're at a disadvantage in health hence the fact that  there's going to be a focus on health spending in this next round focused on the regions. The  fact that you've got disadvantage in education, the fact that the economic diversity in these  regions has to be established.

What's going to connect this, properly done, is the implementation of the National  Broadband Network. That's going be fundamental, because that is the connectivity. But  there's no point having the highway, the road, if you like, unless you've got the effective  applications to make that happy, happen.

And that's why integrating it in terms of education, in terms of health, in terms of e-commerce, in terms of the nation's infrastructure, this is what we've got to do more  effectively over the course of the next term. And quite frankly, the agreement with the  Independents gives us an important opportunity to put the spotlight on how we tap that  diversity that is the nation.

BARRIE CASSIDY: Now, you mentioned the price on carbon, but the major criticism that  comes from the Opposition in that first 100 days is that Julia Gillard said within that period  that she ruled out a carbon tax and then ruled it in, now that was a major reversal.

SIMON CREAN: Well, look, simplistically put, I think you can make that point, but what she  has consistently said, Barrie, is that you have to put a price on carbon. Why do you need to  put a price on carbon if you're to address this problem? - And first of all you've got to start  with the view that there is a problem. We do, Tony Abbott doesn't seem to. But if there is a  problem and it requires a price on carbon, you're putting a price on carbon to change  people's behaviour.

BARRIE CASSIDY: Sure, so why did she rule out a carbon tax?

SIMON CREAN: Because at the time we, along with the rest of the world, had come to the  conclusion that the most efficient way forward was to do it through a market mechanism,  because a tax doesn't actually deliver you the reduction in the greenhouse emission. It puts  the price on, but it doesn't achieve necessarily the reduction.

BARRIE CASSIDY: So what changed, apart from the fact that you had to start talking with  the Greens?

SIMON CREAN: I think that is the significant change, isn't it? The argument that - and if you  recall, her point was we need to build a community consensus, we need to get people in the  room to identify this. That now will now effectively be this parliamentary committee, but you  can't get people into a parliamentary committee if you're starting to rule things out.

BARRIE CASSIDY: But they've got one seat, one seat in the House of Representatives, and  that changes everything.

SIMON CREAN: And they've got eight in the Senate. They hold the balance of power in the  Senate come July next year. They've got one seat in the House of Representatives, but they  have to now operate, the Greens, as an homogenous group. They can't just sit back, wait for  us to determine something in the House of Representatives and then say no to it in the  Senate.

I'm a believer in negotiations, Barrie, and if you start with the principle that negotiation is  what we're required to do, there's no harm in starting early. So let's start early in the House  of Representatives, let's start early with the committee that Greg Combet and Julia are  involved in and let's try to progress it.

BARRIE CASSIDY: It may be that she can't keep some of her promises because she  doesn't control all of the numbers, of course, but don't you at least have to give it a try, don't  you at least have to try and fail before you cave in, as they did on this topic.

SIMON CREAN: Well but she hasn't caved in. She hasn't said she's supporting a carbon  tax. What she has said is, "We will have a carbon tax on the agenda." If the committee  comes to the view that another mechanism is the appropriate way, let's wait and see. Don't  try and pre-empt it.

But I think it trivialises this very complex issue to say upfront: "Broken promise". She's got a  commitment - and always had the commitment in terms of going into this election - we've got  to put a price on carbon, we've got to change people's behaviour. We've now got a process  that can advance it; let's get on with it.

BARRIE CASSIDY: There was a report in the Sydney Morning Herald at the weekend that it  was Julia Gillard and Wayne Swan that is now the Prime Minister and Deputy Prime  Minister, and not Kevin Rudd, who pushed the hardest to abandon the ETS.

SIMON CREAN: Oh, Barrie, look, I keep reading all of these reports. This is the so-called  "Gang of Four". God knows what sort of discussions were had within it. I can tell you though  that the Cabinet processes and the Government were strongly progressing in the direction of  saying, "Let's try and find the way in which we can implement the market mechanism."

But that's past history. We're dealing with the future. We're dealing with a new government,  a minority government. We're dealing with circumstances in which there is very strong  conviction within the Parliament and within the community that something here needs to be  done. Let's use the new processes to try and address a constructive solution rather than  trawl over the past. That's not going to get us anywhere.

BARRIE CASSIDY: But why it's important, I think, is because part of why Kevin Rudd fell  from grace is - was due to the handling of that ETS issue, and if it turns out that Julia Gillard  was the minister most responsible, then he's been hard done by.

SIMON CREAN: Look, governments have to take collective decisions. In the end, it's the  Prime Minister - and Kevin would make this point time and time again: ultimately, the buck  stops with him. The call was made. The call resulted in a whole set of circumstances; we  now have a different set of circumstances. But, the challenge still remains to address this  problem, address it in a constructive way. That's what we're doing. That's what she's  committed to. She's going to chair this committee, she's going to take an active role in it,  along with Greg Combet, with the Greens. Let's get on with the task of finding a constructive  solution.

BARRIE CASSIDY: Now there's another committee that's been formed as well, the regions  committee. Have you chosen a chair for that committee?

SIMON CREAN: No, this will be set up in the new - in the fortnight that we go back. But we  have agreed that the chair of that committee will go to an independent. The standing orders  have been amended accordingly. I look forward, I expect, to working very closely with Tony  Windsor in the chair of that committee.

BARRIE CASSIDY: OK. Now on this whole question of regions, we're already hearing that  the city is being neglected for the bush, and especially in terms of the hospital funding. And  when you look at the way that that round of hospital funding is being allocated, there's  something in that, isn't there?

SIMON CREAN: No, look, there's been a lot of money invested in hospitals and health to  date. This round, one round in terms of the health funds, is predominantly for regions. That's  because there is disadvantage in the regions, Barrie. It is a known statistic that people who  live in the regions are three times more likely to die of cancer within five years of diagnosis  than those living in the city. So there's a gap. It has to be addressed. We're using the  opportunity to apply existing funds to help address that gap.

But that's not to take away from the vast commitment we've made all around the country.  And from now on, 60 per cent of all capital infrastructure fund, whether it's city or urban - city  or regions or the bush, 60 per cent will be addressed by the Commonwealth. This is a major  change in terms of the whole Health portfolio. But all this fund is doing is shining a particular  light on regional disadvantage, the need to address it, to move more quickly to achieve that.

BARRIE CASSIDY: How do you define a region? What is a region?

SIMON CREAN: Every part of this country is constituted within their own region, Barrie.  We've got a regional development Australia infrastructure that is comprised of 55 geographic  regions. What's defined in the agreement in the case of health funds is the proportionality for  the non-urban regions when it comes to the allocation of the health funds and those  education funds.

BARRIE CASSIDY: So when you talk about regions, you mean non-urban?

SIMON CREAN: When I talk about regionalism and local empowerment, it is saying all  regions in the country, the whole 55 of them, we want their input to us, a bottoms-up  approach so that Canberra's not imposing top-down approaches to solutions. We want you  to come up with creative, innovative solutions for the way in which the existing resources of  the nation are spent.

In the case of the specifics of the agreement with the Independents, there is a proportionality  aspect that applies to the non-urban regions. Those non-urban regions are defined in

accordance with stats that the Bureau of Statistics puts together that has five gradings based  on remoteness and concentration. They're the sorts of guides we'll be looking to.

BARRIE CASSIDY: Hobart, for example: a capital city, a state capital. Is Hobart a region?

SIMON CREAN: Hobart - well, the region around Hobart is a region. In the case of  Tasmania, if you're talking about it, the regional development body covers the whole of  Tasmania. Hobart is a component of it, and Hobart, whilst we call it a capital city, for the  purposes of the Australian Bureau of Statistics that talks about the remoteness factor,  Hobart is not a capital city in that sense, it fits into a definition that will be picked up in the  regional application of funds.

BARRIE CASSIDY: And they have an independent representing them as well and they're  looking for regional funding.

SIMON CREAN: But so too are the other four seats in Tasmania, Barrie. But the way in  which we want to encourage them to look at that funding is not just go through the local  member of Parliament, but to understand the structure that we have put in place that is  reflective of the 55 regional structures all around the country and encourage much stronger  local input. Why does local input work? Because people on the ground know better what  their challenges are, what their needs are, what their aspirations are, what the gaps are.  What we want to do is to create an environment in which we're encouraging all of the  regions to build a strategy to strengthen their own economic future.

And it has to be done in a sustainable way. We're not asking for wish-lists, and I made this  point at the Press Club the other day: no wish-lists. We want proposals that stack up, that  make you more efficient, make you more competitive, make you more productive. But we  want your input as to how you say that can be done in a more efficient way. And not only the  regions benefit from that; so too does the nation, because we get a better spend, a more  efficient spend for the nation's assets.

BARRIE CASSIDY: Alright, just finally, you mentioned the Press Club, and that address was  almost in doubt because of the arguments over a pairing arrangement. Are you getting  anywhere on that? Will there be something that will work for both sides?

SIMON CREAN: Well if you could get Tony Abbott to come in on this program, you might be  able to ask him. I mean, this is a ridiculous position. I could not say - in fact I'd almost - I'd  got to the point of cancelling the Press Club because I couldn't get a pair. It was only at 8.30  the night before that I was told that I had a pair. Now is this the way we're going to run the  country under Tony Abbott's co-operative assistance?

BARRIE CASSIDY: But that will frustrate both sides of politics eventually, surely?

SIMON CREAN: Yeah, but they don't need a pair. They can stay out of the place. If we're  going to govern sensibly, and what the country wants and what the people of Australia want  is stability and certainty. We can't give that if we don't know that we're going to - if we can't  be guaranteed we won't be blindsided every time we make a commitment to make an  important appearance only to have them pulling the plug. Government can't work like that.

But Tony Abbott was prepared to accept the pairing arrangement when he thought he had a  chance of winning over the Independents. He entered into a bipartisan agreement with us  and the Independents and now he's torn it up. Not only won't he supply pairs, he won't  supply people to the Speaker's panel. He said that he would accept the Solicitor-General's  advice in relation to pairs. He's ignored the Solicitor-General's advice who said the pairing

arrangement is OK, and who does he rely on? George Brandies. One of his own. This is a  joke, Barrie. And the sooner Tony Abbott is called to account on this, the more effective the  Parliament can be in carrying out its functions.

BARRIE CASSIDY: OK. We're out of time. Thanks for your time this morning.

SIMON CREAN: My pleasure, Barrie.





