The Hon Julia Gillard MP

Minister for Education. Minister for Employment and Workplace Relations  Minister for Social Inclusion  Deputy Prime Minister

29 March, 2010

Transcript

Radio Interview - ABC 720 Perth

E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW   ABC 720 PERTH  905AM MONDAY  29 MARCH 2010

ISSUES: Visit to WA; Industrial relations in WA; Libraries; Apprenticeships; Asylum  seekers; Building the Education Revolution; My School; $2.5 billion Smarter Schools  National Partnerships.

GEOFF HUTCHISON: Good morning to you.

JULIA GILLARD: Good morning.

GEOFF HUTCHISON: You’re here for a few days to have a look at Gorgon and Pluto and  other such developments?

JULIA GILLARD: Yes, I’m here basically for the week. I’m in Perth today and I will be in  the federal electorates of Swan and Canning. I’m looking forward to meeting with our  candidates there, with Alannah MacTiernan and Tim Hammond.

We’ll been visiting some local schools and looking at Building the Education Revolution  projects and how they are transforming schools. Tomorrow I’m going to be going to both  Gorgon and Pluto. Also meeting with members of the Karratha community and then going to  Broome, once again to a school, a Trade Training Centre opening and very keen to talk to  Broome community members about how   life is going up there and certainly how the school  is going.  So it’s going to be a big week and I’m looking forward to it.

GEOFF HUTCHISON: You were at a breakfast speaking this morning and talking about  industrial relations and I know recently you’ve been trying to make clear to the union  movement that they won’t have easy access to work sites. What did you say this morning?

JULIA GILLARD: Well this morning I made it very clear that the rules are the rules. We  put the Fair Work system into place because we think it gets the balance right. The Australian  community didn’t want Work Choices. It had gone too far. Mr Abbott is obviously out there,  very much enamoured with Work Choices and still arguing for it. I think the Australia  community will reject it again.

But having got the system right with the Fair Work Act, they are the rules. And there are  some individuals in this state, I believe, aren’t respecting the Fair Work Act and aren’t  respecting the rules. We believe in tough compliance. Everybody has to respect the rules.  Rights come with responsibilities and if you don’t acquit your responsibilities, then you  should expect to feel the full force of the law.

GEOFF HUTCHISON: Did you mention Kevin Reynolds and Joe McDonald by name this  morning?

JULIA GILLARD: Look I didn’t, but I think it’s very well known in the state of Western  Australia that there are some particular problems here. Mr Reynolds and Mr McDonald  obviously have a very particular reputation in construction and my message to them is a very  clear one - the rules are the rules and they should not underestimate my determination and  the Rudd Government’s determination to make sure that everyone including the two of them  abides by the law and the Fair Work Act to the letter.

GEOFF HUTCHISON: Are you concerned about their level of influence? Or is it their  ability to grab a headline?

JULIA GILLARD:  People can be in the media saying what they want to say. The important  thing here is that there is industrial harmony and lawful conduct. This is a state with an  amazing future. It’s obviously a state that like the rest of the country has felt the effects of the  global financial crisis and global recession. One of the things I talked about this morning is  youth unemployment is almost ten per cent in this state. So there is work to do to make sure  that those young kids get a future.  But this is state with huge growth potential and having  industrial harmony, as well as investing in infrastructure and skills is pivotal to seizing the  full opportunity of the future of this state. And we’re determined on all fronts. We’re  investing in infrastructure, we’re investing in skills and I made some announcements about  new investments in skills this morning.  And we’re determined to deliver industrial harmony  with people abiding by the law.

GEOFF HUTCHISON: Julia Gillard is the Deputy Prime Minister. Thank you for your  calls, we’ll pop them through in just a moment. You are also the federal Education Minister  and this morning we are having an ongoing discussion about a state government that is  cutting its spending for public library books. Do you have a word for the government on this?

JULIA GILLARD: Well it’s not my job to leap into the shoes of the Western Australian  state government but I would make the observation that across this country, libraries are  pivotal to communities coming together. Whenever I talk to local councillors, social workers,  community development workers, teachers - the sort of people who worry about the glue that  holds communities together - they say libraries are fantastic meeting places, creating a sense  of community. Having the resources there so people can read, write, develop themselves and  in the course of developing themselves, develop connections with each other, is vital to a  sense of community well being.

GEOFF HUTCHISON: Politically stupid idea to put a line through funding?

JULIA GILLARD: I’ll let the political commentators in Western Australia have a go at that  issue. But I’m obviously passionate about education from the education of our smallest kids  in kindergarten and preschool, through schools, vocational education, universities and adult

education. We’re a government that invested in new capital for the adult and community  education sector, a long neglected sector, but making sure adults get opportunities to improve  themselves including through a great local library is really important.

GEOFF HUTCHISON: A lot of people want to speak to you - issues such as industrial  relations, asylum seekers and of course, the My School website. So let’s hand that over. Jim,  good morning to you.

CALLER - JIM: Good morning and good morning, Deputy Prime Minister.

JULIA GILLARD: Good morning, Jim.

CALLER - JIM: I am concerned about apprenticeships. And I am sure the Government is  concerned about apprenticeships. However I realise that there is a divide between federal and  state. And I can tell you that in this state, recognition of prior learning is a joke, as is also  when I know I had two young men who are in their eighth year of a four year apprenticeship.  So my question here is this: who and how do we have advocates for young people against  both the employer and the apprenticeship system?

JULIA GILLARD: That’s a good question, Jim. What I would say to you is two things.  Number one, we want to make sure that there are apprenticeship opportunities for kids and  one thing we were really scared about during the global financial crisis and the global  recession is the same thing would happen as has happened in past economic downturns:  people stopped giving kids apprenticeships, then two or three years later they are all  screaming ‘skill shortage’. There’s a young kid who has missed out on the chance for the best  start they could have for a start in life and we’re denying the future economy, the skills the  economy needs.

We had over the summer an Apprentice Kickstart program to get 21 000 young kids into  apprenticeships and we got there. So that’s 21 000 kids on a pathway for life and they are  going to put skills into our economy in the future.  But there are some underlying questions  about the apprenticeship structure, about skills and training and support for apprentices.

GEOFF HUTCHISON: And complaints?

JULIA GILLARD: And complaints. We’re having a good look at them through a specially  created taskforce and we will be responding to that piece by piece. There’s a lot of work to do  to make sure our apprenticeship structure is meeting the needs of kids today, employers today  and getting them the right skills for the future and we’re working through that.

GEOFF HUTCHISON:  Jim, thank you. Arnold, good morning.

CALLER - ARNOLD: Good morning, Geoff.  Good morning, Deputy Prime Minister.

JULIA GILLARD: Good morning.

CALLER - ARNOLD: Because the Labor Party policy to let anyone who wants to arrive in  Australia by boat be accepted at Christmas Island at a massive cost to the taxpayer, probably  $1 billion extra to what it was under the last years of John Howard, can you tell the public  why the Labor Party shouldn’t be funding this extra burden that they have caused to the

taxpayers of Australia? I am pleased actually that you have come on to the talkback radio. Mr  Rudd has been in West Australia at least 20 times and hasn’t had the spine to get on the radio.

GEOFF HUTCHISON:  Arnold, thank you.

JULIA GILLARD: Well thanks for that question. The truth is, that the Howard Government  spent a lot of money on the so called Pacific Solution and how that ended up is the vast  majority of asylum seekers who had their claims processed on Nauru or Papua New Guinea  ended up here in Australia as permanent residents. So they were spending a lot of money.   Christmas Island is actually a more effective solution so I can’t agree with your premise that  we’re spending more. What we are spending more on is patrolling our waters. We’re  investing more in patrolling our waters, having assets up there patrolling our waters than the  Howard Government did, having asylum seekers come here, we process their claims. If they  do not have a legitimate claim to Australia’s protection, then they are returned to the  countries that they came from.

GEOFF HUTCHISON:  Julia Gillard, but there are some issues here, though. You said you  would not process these people on the mainland, that this wouldn’t happen. 350 asylum  seekers have already been transferred to the mainland.  Is that the new inevitability about  asylum policy? And if it’s not, can you explain why it’s not?

JULIA GILLARD: Well there is still capacity at Christmas Island….

GEOFF HUTCHISON: But we’re talking such marginal capacity and that is what we’re  hearing from the Government all the time; there’s still room. Well, we’re expecting I think  the 100th boat since the election of the Rudd Government heading this way. Can you really  continue to push that line?

JULIA GILLARD: Well the raw fact of it is there is still capacity at Christmas Island.  People have been transited through into Darwin and that is part of transiting people for return.  So people who are being transited through are people whose claims have been processed and  don’t have a legitimate claim to Australia’s protection. So that’s just a natural movement as  we move people to the next stage which is for them to be returned because they don’t have a  claim to protection from this nation.

On the question of the number of boats I think we’ve just got to be pretty, you know, realistic  about this. We’re confronting a problem that the world confronts when there are wars and  civil disturbances around the globe. That gets people moving - we’re seeing the aftermath of  a civil war in Sri Lanka for example, that’s got people moving. The UNHCR as recently as  the last few days has confirmed that the nature of the issue here is really no more or no less  than the nature of the issue around the world.

GEOFF HUTCHISON: But there are a couple of things. Now you’re putting a spin on those  UNHCR figures that others did not and UNHCR said that the numbers worldwide appeared  steady but said there was a 30 per cent spike in the numbers of people wanting to come here.

JULIA GILLARD: Well there was one unsourced comment from UNHCR which was to  that effect and then there has been some on the record comment from official UNHCR  spokespeople to the effect that basically the nature of the issue here is the same as the nature  of the issue around the world and so people do get on the move.

GEOFF HUTCHISON: But it is telling isn’t it, that whereas Kevin Rudd will want to have  a debate on the issue of health; Tony Abbott will come out of that debate and say ‘let’s have a  debate on asylum seekers’. Are you prepared to accept something of a voter backlash on  asylum seekers and your government policy?

JULIA GILLARD: I understand that people are concerned. I absolutely get that. Kevin  Rudd gets it, as a Government we get it. Of course people are concerned when they see  people arriving unauthorised. The question is why, why are they on the move and there’s a  range of international factors there. And so we work with source countries, we work with  transit countries, moves like getting Indonesia to make criminal the act of people smuggling  is an important development, patrolling our waters is important, we’ve increased our  expenditure and our assets patrolling our waters.  Then…

GEOFF HUTCHISON: But you will take a hit on this and you accept that do you?

JULIA GILLARD: Then if people get here, then you deal with it through the processing. If  they’ve got no legitimate claim to stay then they’re returned. I understand we’ve got to keep  having the conversation with the community about what it is that is occurring, why it’s  occurring and what we’re doing about it. And what we’re doing about it starts in the source  countries like Sri Lanka, is part of our international work with transit countries like Indonesia  and the agreement that Indonesia would criminalise people smuggling and then through  effective processing here and returning people who don’t have a legitimate reason to stay.

GEOFF HUTCHISON: Trevor, good morning.

TREVOR: G’day. Deputy Prime Minister I just wanted to ask you a question in regards to  working with the dole. I sent your office an email to you back in February and I’ve yet to  have a reply. In that email I stipulated exactly what was happening here where I am and I  even sent you my weekly reports and I’m still waiting on a reply from your office and I’ve  sent one email in February directly to you, I sent another up to your office and I’m still  waiting on a reply. This so-called write to your Minister and you’ll hear a reply, where is it?

JULIA GILLARD: I’m sorry about that and I will certainly follow the matter up. Obviously  the truth is we get thousands and thousands and thousands of pieces of correspondence so if  there’s been some problem in dealing with yours, I am apologetic and what we’ll do is we’ll  ask the producer here at the ABC to help us out and get your full details and I will follow that  up personally today.

GEOFF HUTCHISON: Trevor, I’ll just put you back to Damien and we’ll get your number  and pass that on. Minister, stay with me, we’ve got some breaking new we have to look at.

NEWS BREAK

GEOFF HUTCHISON: Deputy Prime Minister, via the SMS - “please ask Deputy Prime  Minister how much value we’re going to get for our $16 billion Building the Education  Revolution program. The Australian newspaper claims that we will only get $7 billion of  value. Is that true?”

They’ve been running hard at you over this, haven’t they?

JULIA GILLARD: They have and the truth of this program is it’s a big program. It’s  building 24 000 projects in 9500 schools. Now when you engage in construction all around  the country quickly to support jobs and apprenticeships and tradespeople today during the  economic downturn, of course there’s going to be the occasional project that has a problem. I  mean, anybody who’s built a home, renovated at home knows about the stresses and strains  of building, multiply that by 9500 schools.

GEOFF HUTCHISON: OK, but isn’t there an argument that says you’re rather soft soaping  that? You talk occasional problems and teething problems. We have the Federal  Government’s home insulation scheme and similar lines have been rolled out. Obviously  there’ve been much more dangerous consequences - house fires and some deaths there - but  can your Government get away with saying when you roll out something this big there will  be an occasional consequence?

What we’ve also heard have been stories of people rorting the system and of schools getting  things that they didn’t even ask or even want. So the question is about the sensible spend of  taxpayer money.

JULIA GILLARD: And the question is legitimately about that. All I’m asking is for people  to have a sense of perspective. If a problem is identified and we investigate it there’s a  genuine issue there then I’m very happy to crack down on that genuine issue and this is a  program that comes with multiple levels of auditing so that we can find problems. But when  we’re talking about problems - 9500 schools, 24 000 projects - in terms of direct complaints  to us through our special coordinator and complaints mechanism, we’ve had less than 100. In  terms of the number of cases raised in the Federal Parliament by the Federal Opposition,  Tony Abbott and his mob who never supported this expenditure on school, they’ve raised less  than 30 of them.

When you look at the number of schools actually raised in The Australian newspaper it is a  limited number and when we have investigated some of the claims made in the newspaper,  sometimes they’re right, sometimes they’re wrong.

GEOFF HUTCHISON: Let’s return to the question then, that $16 billion in Building the  Education Revolution program, The Australian says we will only get $7 billion of value out  of it.

JULIA GILLARD: Well they’ve made that figure up. Clearly The Australian newspaper has  made that figure up. In order for you to come to a conclusion like that you would have to  conclude every project is running more than double over cost, well there is no evidence and  no information that would enable anybody to conclude that that is the case.

And when we look at this program one of the things that doesn’t get in the news, and I  understand why, but one of the things that doesn’t get in the news is the fantastic news stories  - the principals who talk about how this money is enabling them to transform the way they  teach in their school; the community groups who are now going to get access to brand new  facilities because a condition of this program is that community groups can use the new halls  and the new libraries - we were talking about libraries just a moment ago.

I will go to some schools today where I am sure I will meet with people who are absolutely  delighted at the possibilities that this program is bringing to their school. I met with a

principal in Perth last time I was here who in an emotional way, almost with tears in his eyes,  said to me he’d been in teaching for forty years and he will always remember this as the best  years that he spent in teaching. Now that’s a powerful statement from someone who knows.

GEOFF HUTCHISON: It is, it is.

JULIA GILLARD: Well I’d like to see some of those stories on the front of the newspaper.

GEOFF HUTCHISON: I’m not being super cynical here, but will you give us his name so  we know because there is nothing and I’m not doubting your entitlement to say that but in  political life we hear a lot of people say this old lady walked up to me yesterday and she said  Geoff I’ve never, I’ve never been such a beneficiary of what you’ve just rolled out.

JULIA GILLARD: I’m happy to make available to you the names of the principals that  came to the principal’s forum that I attended, absolutely. And you know what I’d really like  the Australian media to do and I don’t think you can do this all by yourself, I’d really like  them to ring every one of the 9500 principals and then type up and publish every word they  say because I think if they actually put that work in and maybe that six or ten weeks work for  twenty or thirty journalists but I think if they actually put that work in at the end of the  publication of that, people would have a true view about what Building the Education  Revolution is doing.

GEOFF HUTCHISON: Let’s stay at school. A plethora of Marks want to speak about the  My School website.

JULIA GILLARD: Many Marks.

GEOFF HUTCHISON: Morning, Mark.

CALLER - MARK: Hello.

GEOFF HUTCHISON: Yes, good morning.

MARK: Yes, good morning, Geoff.  Good morning, Deputy Prime Minister.

JULIA GILLARD: Hi.

MARK: First of all, I mean, my child has Down Syndrome and he’s not quite yet school age  and first of all, I mean, I think the Government’s doing a terrific job with respect to disability  but I have a question, I suppose a concern about the My School website which may well  indeed be ill founded.  And that is that amongst the circles of parents of Down Syndrome,  there are boundless stories about parents who, parents of children without Down Syndrome,  who get grumpy with teachers because the child with Down Syndrome or the child with the  intellectual disability is dragging down the class as a result of the integration process, etc.

My concern is that if parents have got concerns about league tables, rightly or wrongly, if  they have those concerns how is that concern going to be transmitted onto my child in class  in terms of stigmatisation and rejection by parents of my son? I’m wondering if there are any  safeguards against that sort of thing in terms of the way intellectual disability in  mainstreamed or integrated classrooms gets considered?

GEOFF HUTCHISON: Mate, thank you, it’s a really good question.

JULIA GILLARD: It is a really good question. In terms of the protocols of national testing,  it is possible depending on the nature of a child’s special needs and abilities and disabilities,  depending on that, it is possible that the child may not participate in national testing. So that  is one thing to just factually know, there is a protocol there.

In terms of the vast majority of kids who do participate in national testing -   because overwhelmingly kids do - obviously there are kids with special needs in all schools  and all school groups and My School as a website will become increasingly transparent about  that, about the numbers of kids with special needs in our school system and school by school.

I think that’s really important not only to fully understanding school performance, but it’s  really important to the public debate about how we fund and resource and work with schools  to make sure we are meeting the needs of those children too.

So I don’t think that there’s anything to fear here, Mark. I actually think that there is an  opportunity for people like yourself who would be a big advocate of better assistance for kids  with special needs, for you to say well the more transparent this becomes the more the  requirement for resourcing becomes clear to politicians and the community and we’ll have a  better informed debate about how we help kids the best.

GEOFF HUTCHISON: Mark, thank you. A survey of school principals suggests that 9 out  of 10 of them reckoned that the My School system doesn’t accurately represent their schools.  Is that difficulty bedding the system down or do 9 out of 10 of these principals polled have  comprehension difficulties?

JULIA GILLARD: Well that was a poll of the Australian Education Union which of course  is threatening to ban the administration of the national tests in May because they’re  completely opposed to My School and were opposed to it even before they saw it. But I  understand that transparency can put pressure on people.   But we’re the adults in the system - principals, teachers, politicians, community members -  we’re the grown-ups. We’re the ones who are supposed to bear that pressure in order to make  things better for the kids.

GEOFF HUTCHISON: But you did also say that you don’t want to see a form of league  tables but you know there’s almost an inevitability that the media starts telling schools about  the schools that are doing badly and will report stories about, supposedly about the students  being bullied because their school is not going well. Do you just accept that that is a  consequence of something like this?

JULIA GILLARD: What I accept is that newspapers can publish what they like about  schools. They have in the past and they’ve named and shamed schools in the past well before  My School. What’s different now is if you see a claim about a school in the newspaper, get  on My School and have a look yourself and see whether or not you’re being told the truth,  make up your own mind. You’ve never been in a position to do that before.

GEOFF HUTCHISON: What about those principals, if 9 out of 10, if it’s not 9 one of 10, if  it’s 7 out of 10, are they purely being driven by the politics there or are they looking at this  view of their school and say that just isn’t right?

JULIA GILLARD: Look, I think that there’s two levels of this debate. There are people  who are opposed to this transparency.  With those people I have an argument and I’m not  going to give in. I think transparency is important, it’s empowering parents, it’s enabling us  to make better decisions where, you know, $2.5 billion of new resources goes. It goes to the  schools that need it the most. So transparency is about improvement, it’s about accountability  and I believe in it. So for those who say ‘no transparency, let’s just hide the truth,’ I will  never agree with them.

Then there are some people who say look, I accept transparency but can we build on what is  there with My School with further measures? That is a legitimate discussion and yes, we will  keep building on My School as we get more information. This is the first year for example  that we are retesting kids who have earlier sat national tests because we’re only in the third  year of national testing. This is the first cohort of kids that’s going to be retested. That means  you can do things like value added measures; what’s happened to those kids in that two  years? Well of course we want to keep improving My School with that additional information  but we will build on what is there. What is there now will stay and be updated.

GEOFF HUTCHISON: Let’s have one more from another Mark. Good morning on the  same subject.

CALLER - MARK 2: Good morning, Deputy Prime Minister and Geoff. I could talk for a  week on this but I’ve been asked to be concise.

JULIA GILLARD: Me too.

CALLER - MARK 2: School principal at my son’s school in response to some issues with  boys in the senior school invited some parents and dragged some other parents into some  workshops and the crux of it was, was a little timeline he drew which said when your son is  alive for eight hours of the day they’re asleep, for eight hours they’re at my school under my  care and for eight hours they’re with you.

Can you provide some evidence of frameworks or programs that you’re putting in place  which can use My School to look not at the school or the principals or the teachers, but the  parents who might be needing help or those who don’t want to engage. How can we actually  engage them in their child’s education?

GEOFF HUTCHISON: Mark, thank you, I’ll have to ask you to be brief, Minister.

JULIA GILLARD: Yes, that’s a fabulous question. You’re right onto something really  important about parental responsibility to support a kid’s education. I understand that and of  the $2.5 billion I spoke about which we are using the My School information to direct, some  of that money is going to disadvantaged schools for programs, whole school improvement  plans including plans about how you get the parental community to engage with their child’s  education and their child’s school. They’ve got a responsibility too and that’s part of the  reform work we’re doing.

GEOFF HUTCHISON: Finally, Julia Gillard, any chance of you involving yourself in an  Iron Woman triathlon event any time soon?

JULIA GILLARD: I’ve actually been asked that this morning to which I said ‘in these  shoes? I don’t think so!’

GEOFF HUTCHISON: Did you admire if nothing else Tony Abbott’s endurance?

JULIA GILLARD: Look, if I was putting on a personal fitness coach I’d give him the job  tomorrow.

GEOFF HUTCHISON: We’ll leave it there. Thank you for talking to us this morning.

JULIA GILLARD: Thank you.



ENDS

Media Contact:

media@deewr.gov.au

Non-media queries: 1300 363 079



