



Transcript: Julia Gillard, Doorstop Interview, Emerald  Julia Gillard posted Tuesday, 17 August 2010

E & O E - PROOF ONLY

Subjects: Flynn Labor candidate Chris Trevor; Labor’s economic plan; Election launch;  Gulgong hospital; Minerals Resources Rent Tax; Border protection; smoking; Coalition’s  infrastructure announcement; Emissions Trading Scheme.

PM: Well, it’s great to be here in Flynn with our local member, Chris Trevor - better known  as CT. And, of course, I’m joined by the Deputy Prime Minister and Treasurer, Wayne Swan.  And here in Flynn in the community of Emerald and right across the communities within the  federal electorate of Flynn, the election on Saturday comes down to a choice. It comes down  to a choice about having Chris Trevor, CT, who has represented this community so well,  continue to have his voice heard in the federal parliament on behalf of this community.

And it comes down to a choice about keeping the economy strong. This is a growing region,  a prosperous region. People come here to work, they come to places like Emerald to work. I  want people to have the benefits of those jobs, to have the benefits of work. That’s why, on  Saturday, I’m asking people to consider my strong economic plan to give people the  continuing benefits of work. We made the right judgment to support jobs during the global  financial crisis. We’ve got the right economic plan for the future to continue growing our  economy and growing jobs. And that plan comes down to investing in skills, investing in  infrastructure, including the National Broadband Network, cutting tax for all businesses,  growing our national pool of savings through superannuation. This is the better economic  plan.

Here in Flynn it means a series of very important things for the local community. Here there  are kids in school that I want to benefit from a Trades Training Centre. If Mr Abbott is  elected, around 6,500 kids in this electorate will miss out on the benefit of a Trades Training  Centre. I want kids in school to also be able to learn with computers because they’re so much  part of our workforce today. If Mr Abbott is elected, around 2,500 kids in this electorate will  miss out on computers. And, of course, we want to provide GP super clinics to Gladstone and  here in Emerald. That’s part of our plan for the future. It’s not Mr Abbott’s plan. We want to  build the National Broadband Network. I will build it. Mr Abbott will not. And through the  National Broadband Network I want to provide people with access to new ways of getting  health care, new ways of being able to contact a specialist for getting help in the middle of  the night. We’ll train more doctors, we’ll train more nurses, we will deliver increased  superannuation. This is all part of my better economic plan for the future. And, of course, as  part of that plan, we won’t return to WorkChoices. We were proud to get rid of it, whereas  under Mr Abbott we know WorkChoices will be back. When we consider this election on  Saturday, central to the election will be the question of who’s got the better economic plan.  And there is some important developments recently in the campaign on this question. I note

today that Senator Brandis on radio was unable to explain when the Budget would come back  to surplus under MR Abbott. He said he didn’t know, that they didn’t know. That Mr Abbott  couldn’t tell you when the Budget would come back to surplus. Well I can: the Budget will  be back in surplus in 20113 if I’m re-elected, if my Government is re-elected on Saturday.

Secondly, Mr Abbott last night on national television, suggested that his tax on groceries may  last for up to 10 years. Up to 10 years of paying additional prices in supermarkets as a result  of Mr Abbott’s plans to put company tax up which would flow through to groceries. And  then thirdly of course Mr Abbott’s been spending $1 billion a day during this campaign. He

hasn’t submitted his policies to proper costing and he can’t name the accountancy firm he  says is checking the costings of his policies. Now these are three new factors in the campaign,  but once again looking at Mr Abbott it’s telling us he doesn’t have an economic plan for the  future and he doesn’t have properly costed policies.

JOURNALIST: Prime Minister if you don’t get the Budget back to surplus -

PM: Hang on, hang on, hang on, just let me finish Matthew and then I’ll come to your  question. Can I conclude by saying this: clearly there is the question of economic debates  being discussed today. What I would say to Mr Abbott is if you can’t debate your economic  plan for more than 15 minutes, that probably means you don’t have one. And I would say to  Mr Abbott: come on let’s have a fair dinkum debate, let’s do the right thing. Let’s do the right  thing by the economy, by the country, indeed by the Courier Mail, let’s do the right thing,  and to the event that they are histing tomorrow night, first hour on the economy, second hour  taking questions from the people of Brisbane.

JOURNALIST: If you don’t make a, get the Budget back in to surplus in 2012-2013, this is a  question to both of you, the cameras are on - will you resign?

PM: (laughs) The Budget is coming back to surplus, no ifs no buts it will happen.

JOURNALIST: So that’s a ‘yes’?

PM: Matthew, I know and you know like these questions during campaigns but the Budget’s  coming back to surplus. There’s no credible analysis on our economic plan that it won’t come  back to surplus. I haven’t added a cent to it during this election campaign. The figures are  plain, they’re transparent, they’re from the Budget. They’re there from the Mid-year Fiscal  and Economic Outlook, they’re there from the Pre-Election Fiscal and Economic Outlook.  The figures are there for all to see. We haven’t added a cent to them. We’ve had our policies  properly costed this is a stark contrast to Mr Abbott. $1 billion a day, not submitted for  costing. Can’t even tell you which accountancy firm is going to look at these costings. This is  the comparison here: better economic plan, Budget coming back to surplus in 2013. Senator  Brandis has let the cat out of the bag. They don’t know when the Budget will come back to  surplus under them, because their costings are full of holes.

JOURNALIST: What did you make (inaudible)

PM: Sorry?

JOURNALIST: Was your speech yesterday genuinely off the cuff?

PM: Look I understand that there’s been some discussion about this too and I’m very happy

to answer the question. The speech I gave yesterday was from my heart. That’s what I wanted  to do and I’ll allow others to judge whether or not they liked what they heard.

JOURNALIST: Did you have notes or -

PM: I’m just going to - Yeah Latika, Latika, in order to answer questions I’ve got to be  allowed to talk. I don’t know whether that’s struck you as part of the phenomenon but ok, and  on that question, and on that question, yesterday morning I sat down with a laptop and I typed  for myself some notes, some key words and I typed for myself how I wanted to end the  speech.

JOURNALIST: Prime Minister can I ask you a question about Gulgong hospital which is set  to close. The State Government said today that they’ll look into rebuilding it, but they need  federal money. Can you commit to any funding for that?

PM: Well, under our plan for health care, of course, we’re stepping up to being the dominant  funder of hospitals in Australia, providing 60 per cent of the funds, that includes you know  the funds necessary to enable capital works. That’s the benefit that we’re providing at this  Federal Election if we’re re-elected on Saturday.

JOURNALIST: Specifically anything for Gulgong?

PM: Well what I can say of course is through our funding of health care you will see  additional funds flow through. As those additional funds flow through they will benefit  hospitals around the country. Once again, a very stark contrast to Mr Abbott. Took a billion  dollars out last time he was Healthcare Minister and his planning cuts for health care that he’s  announced during this campaign.

JOURNALIST: One thing you didn’t speak to the workers out here today about is your  Minerals Resources Rent Tax. Are you embarrassed to talk to them about that?

PM: I’ve had the opportunity to actually be in this mine before and to talk to workers here. I  came and visited here when the debate about the then Resources Super Profits Tax was pretty  hot and I had the opportunity to talk through with them some of the issues in that debate. Of  course, my plan, my economic plan includes the Minerals Resource Rent Tax. It’ll enable us  to spend two billion dollars on infrastructure in Queensland, to back in what the Government  needs to do to provide increased superannuation, to reduce company tax, to provide tax  breaks for small businesses, that’s the better economic plan and I’ve certainly had the  opportunity to canvass issues about taxing resources here in this very mine.

JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, will a new detention centre built on land adjacent to  Melbourne’s Broadmeadows Army Barracks, just for the Herald Sun, remain an option to  house boat arrivals?



PM: Oh look I’ll have to get back to you on the details of that, but we have obviously said,  that we will continue to use Christmas Island as the main facility on which asylum seekers  are held and asylum seeker claims are processed.

JOURNALIST: (inaudible) of you smoking as a student. Are you able to tell us if you were a  regular smoker then? And how you gave up, if it was difficult?



PM: Smoking’s bad for you, I’m not a smoker. And yes I was young once.

JOURNALIST: The Coalition came out today with a statement on how to fund infrastructure.  Doesn’t that highlight the fact that you’ve run out of money to fund some of your own  infrastructure, does it show that they’ve actually got an economic plan. Do you have a  response to what they’re saying today?

SWAN: Yes. We have.

PM: Well, I’ll say something, then I’ll turn to a very eager Wayne Swan. What I understand  Mr Abbott has announced today is he might investigate a possibility of infrastructure bonds  that is, he’s announced the infrastructure plan you have, when you’re not going to spend a  cent on infrastructure. I’ll turn to Wayne.

SWAN: This is uncosted, unfunded thought bubble and that’s all. I mean it’s just not a  policy. It just demonstrates the lack of any economic framework, any alternative economic  framework let alone fiscal policy in terms of the Coalition. There’s not a dollar for  infrastructure, only some, only a group of people so bereft of ideas could put this forward  seriously in an election campaign.

JOURNALIST: What about Toowoomba bypass?

SWAN: It is not a policy.

JOURNALIST: What if the private sector is willing to stump up and invest in infrastructure,  shouldn’t that be encouraged?

SWAN: Not a dollar, not a dollar. Not one dollar in this alternative program, so called put  forward today. Not a dollar, it’s not a policy, it’s a thought bubble.

JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, doesn’t your economic plan involve taxing middle income  Australians more through bracket creep. A million Australians will be pushed into higher tax  brackets over the next three years. You’re going to use those taxes to give us a budget  surplus, would you consider giving Australians a tax cut?

PM: Well we’re a Government that’s provided income tax cuts for three years in a row and  we’re going to continue to provide what we can to assist families with cost of living  pressures. That includes, obviously, providing the Education Tax Rebate to help with the  costs of getting kids to school and extending it school uniforms, continuing to have the Child  Care Tax Rebate at 50 per cent of out of pocket costs. That’s a big step up from where the  Child Care Tax Rebate was when Mr Abbott was last in Government, and we will be

changing our Family Benefits Scheme, modernising it, to assist with the costs that families  with teenagers have, and for families on the maximum rate. That’s a benefit of more than  $4,000 a year. They’re our plans to assist with cost of living.

JOURNALIST: (inaudible) yesterday Prime Minister briefed journalists that you’re speaking  off the cuff when in fact you had a thick wad of notes on your lectern.

PM: Well that’s completely untrue. I typed out some notes myself on a few sheets, you know,

less a handful, and had them on the lectern. Obviously, I think, I’m not sure if you were there  yesterday, but anybody who saw me speak yesterday would be able to tell that I was speaking  directly and I was not reading the speech. Now I know, and the point that I believe people  would have been making to you yesterday, is as follows. Normally at campaign launches  people read speeches. Mr Abbott read every word of a teleprompter. I decided to do it  differently yesterday. I decided to do it differently and to deliver it directly from me to the  Australian people. I created a few notes to guide me. I had them on the lectern. Anybody  watching me deliver that speech would know I was not reading a prepared speech. That’s  laughable.

JOURNALIST: Prime Minister you keep (inaudible). The ETS (inaudible) on the economy.  You saying how transparent Labor’s been on economic matters so why can’t you tell the  Australian people that it’s your intention, your plan to legislate for an ETS in the next term?

PM: We’ve told people, clearly -

JOURNALIST: Legislate?

PM: Well we’ve told people clearly what I believe should happen with the Carbon Pollution  Reduction Scheme and we’re in this situation, I understand many Australians are frustrated  and disappointed by it. We’re in this situation because Tony Abbott won the Liberal  leadership from Malcolm Turnbull by one vote and crashed the consensus in Parliament

House for a Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme. We had a deal. We had shaken hands with  the Liberal Party. Mr Abbott took his hand away and walked away. What that now means is  we need to work for a deep community consensus. I’ve said we will review this in 2012 as  we come to the end of the Kyoto commitment period and we will act when the Australian  community’s ready and the Australian economy is ready. And in the meantime of course, we  will be tackling climate change. We’ve made records investments in solar and renewable  technologies. Now we’ll bring that clean green energy of the future into the national  electricity grid. We’ll make sure there are no new dirty coal fired power stations. We’ll be  greening our carbon with mandatory standards, greening the buildings that we work in.

JOURNALIST: So there’ll be no legislation before the next election?

PM: Well what I’ve said is our position on the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme. Now I  understand Mr Abbott is going back to the fear campaign here. Let’s be very very clear what  the decision is on Saturday. The only person presenting as Prime Minister for election on  Saturday with a plan to put a tax on groceries is Mr Abbott.

JOURNALIST: How do you feel about borrowing Barack Obama’s slogan. Couldn’t the  Labor team have come up with a better line.

PM: Well I developed that myself. Didn’t like it? I’m sorry.

Tags: border, economy, Emerald, emission, emissions, Flynn, Gillard, Gulgong, Minerals,  mining, protection, resource





