The Hon Simon Crean MP

Minister for Education

Minister for Employment and Workplace Relations  Minister for Social Inclusion

8 July, 2010

Transcript of interview with Derryn Hinch, Radio 3AW

Main Topics: Monthly job figures, school building program.

DERRYN HINCH: Well as you've heard on the news, the national jobless rate has hit  5.1 per cent for June. That is the lowest figure since January 2009, which is good news for  the economy, good news also for the Government heading into an election which will be  announced in the next couple of weeks. And the guess is the election will be held on  21 August. On the line now the Minister for Education and Workplace Relations Simon  Crean, good afternoon.

SIMON CREAN: Hi Derryn. How are you?

DERRYN HINCH: I'm well thank you. You'd be very happy with those figures, because it's  half what's happening in the United States.

SIMON CREAN: Yeah, and very encouraging, and good news, Derryn. And today I was  down in Geelong where we held a jobs expo, and that was responsible for getting another  1000 people into work.

So this, interfacing with people looking for work, with employers looking for them, matching  them up at the regional level - this is an important dimension of how you can do it properly at  the local level, but the overall figures are pretty impressive.

And actually, if you just look at the last 12 months, Derryn, we've had 350,000 jobs created  in this economy - that's a three per cent growth rate, and that is the fastest job growth of any  advanced major economy. And as you say, we're at 5.1 per cent, the US is at 10.

DERRYN HINCH: All right. And that's the good news. The bad news is you personally  have got a problem, you know that?

SIMON CREAN: What's that Derryn.

DERRYN HINCH: That is that you're the new Minister for Education. Now Julia Gillard,  the new Prime Minister, she can blame any problems with the Government on Kevin Rudd. If  you have problems with BER - the Building the Education Revolution - you can't blame your  predecessor, because she's now your boss. She's the Prime Minister.

SIMON CREAN: Yeah, but I want to fix the problems where they exist, Derryn, and that's  why the taskforce that we've set up under Brad Orgill, who I met with last Friday in Sydney,  is making very good progress in identifying where the problems are, identifying the fact that  the problems by far are the minority of the case. I've just visited Jan Juc, you'd know it

Derryn from your old school, down there, a primary school at Brayside. Three hundred kids  going there next year. They've got this magnificent new structure going up.

The principal was ecstatic about what he's getting. It was a pleasure to inspect the site and see  what's happening.

DERRYN HINCH: Yeah. That is very good. Now listen, as I said to your predecessor only a  couple of weeks ago when she was still arguing the education case - but yeah, and listeners  said, yeah, you go to all the successful ones. And she has letters from people saying how  wonderful they are. But you don't go to the dud ones. You've got some parents even in your  former leader's, Kevin Rudd's, own electorate saying that, you know, they've been disasters,  with, you know, money spent overly on school gyms that they could have got other things  for.

And you're now saying that - I saw you today saying that Tony Abbott's idea that handed it  over to the parents and principals, you're saying it's a hollow promise that will risk harm to  students.

How does it hurt students?

SIMON CREAN: It hurts students because - and the reason it's a hollow promise is  98 per cent of the contracts have been let. If Tony Abbott goes ahead with what he says, he is  tearing up contracts and exposing the Commonwealth to litigation, the biggest litigation scam  - scheme against the Commonwealth ever in the history of the country. So...

DERRYN HINCH: Yeah, but if there's - of the $16 billion, so, I'll pluck a figure - say  $4 billion has been rorted and stolen and overpriced and suddenly you get a canteen where  you wanted a gym or a gym where you wanted a library, and it's about five times the cost it  should be - surely you're entitled to chase that money down and get it back through your task  force?

SIMON CREAN: Yeah, we are. We are.  And it's nowhere near that amount. And what  we've said to New South Wales, where most of the problems exist - we've withheld  $75 million from their next appropriation as leverage to ensure they fix the problems.

Also in New South Wales, the bigger problem state if you like, they have got a fund where  projects have come in under budget. A $50 million fund, which is now being used to plug the  gaps that previously had to be taken out of the initial contracts. So I can assure you Derryn,  that we are not ignoring the problems. We are addressing them. I want to ensure that we get  value for money. It's not just a department that we're using for this, we're using an  independent taskforce that has access to the information. We not only want it to identify the  problems and help us address them, we want it to give us directions going forward, as to how  we ensure that if there are other initiatives that the Commonwealth are involved in, we get the  value for money.

DERRYN HINCH: Okay. All right. Now there's one final question. As a former leader of  your party, let's talk about East Timor.

SIMON CREAN: Yep.

DERRYN HINCH: Why - acting on advice, we're told, why would the Prime Minister  contact President Ramos-Horta and not the Prime Minister Xanana Gusmão?

SIMON CREAN: The contact was made in accordance with the appropriate protocol.  And I  don't know whether you've caught up today Derryn...

DERRYN HINCH: Yes.

SIMON CREAN: ...with the fact that Mr - Prime Minister Gusmão has met with President  Jose Ramos-Horta.  Prime Minister Gusmão says East Timor will approach the issue with an  open mind.

DERRYN HINCH: Yep.

SIMON CREAN: And he has given Jose Ramos-Horta, the person we first contacted, the  lead role in negotiations with Australia.

DERRYN HINCH: Yes, now but is it true that Steve Bracks was your contact?

SIMON CREAN: No.  I - look, I don't know who the contacts were.  This is not my field of  activity Derryn.  But what we do know - Steve has had a lot to do, as you know, with Timor.   And he has all sorts of contacts with them up there.  But the truth of it is there is a  preparedness on the part of East Timor to look at this.  That's the important thing.  Why is  East Timor important?  Because it's a signatory to the Refugee Tribunal - Refugee Treaty.   What we've got to do is to get international consistency with the way in which people are  processed, and the way in which they're fairly dealt with.  If we can get...

DERRYN HINCH: Why - what happened...

SIMON CREAN: ...if we can get all countries signatory to the treaty, agreeing to such an  approach, I think we will make progress.

DERRYN HINCH: All right.  But then why was the Prime Minister rowing back this  morning, virtually saying that oh, she didn't really say it was going to be East Timor that  definitely would have the centre.  That was not what she meant.  She said - I mean it sounds  like she was rowing back big time, until Gusmão camto the party, or seemed to come to the  party this afternoon?

SIMON CREAN: Well, he's come to the party.  That's the important thing.  As for what's  happened today, I mean I've been down in Geelong...

DERRYN HINCH: All right.

SIMON CREAN: ...getting people into jobs.  I've been dealing with unemployment - the  good employment figures and I've been visiting schools that are significant beneficiaries of  the government program.



DERRYN HINCH: All right.  We started - we end where we started.  Thank you for your  time.

SIMON CREAN: Righty-o.  See you.

DERRYN HINCH: Thank you.  Minister for Education and Workplace Relations, Simon  Crean.

Media Contact:

media@deewr.gov.au

Non-media queries: 1300 363 079



