The Hon Simon Crean MP

Minister for Education

Minister for Employment and Workplace Relations  Minister for Social Inclusion

15 July, 2010

Transcript - Radio Interview ABC 891 Mornings

E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW  ABC 891 MORNINGS - MATTHEW ABRAHAM AND DAVID BEVAN  10.36 AM

MAIN TOPICS: Education and training projects; asylum seekers

DAVID BEVAN: Well Simon Crean joins us. Good morning Minister.

SIMON CREAN: Good morning David. How are you?

DAVID BEVAN: You’ve announced that the Federal Government will be putting nearly $40  million into two training projects, one for health and one for construction skills here in South  Australia. How many people will benefit?

SIMON CREAN: Well this will eventually benefit up to 20,000 South Australians, 15,000  of them who are already at the university but these are two more significant training  infrastructure projects. One in civil construction and you know how important that is for the  important infrastructure works that are being undertaken but Australia also has significant  presence overseas in infrastructure so these will not only be skills that Australians can use  here, they will be transportable skills. The other big area of shortage going forward is in the  health sector and so the new $30 million expenditure on the health infrastructure hub is going  to go a significant way to training more people in this vital sector.

So these are addressing skill shortages but they’re giving many more people in South  Australia real career opportunities going forward.

DAVID BEVAN: But the actual number of increased people, the actual increase in people  who will receive training is closer to 5000 not 20,000. Is that fair?

SIMON CREAN: Well that’s fair but I think it’s important to understand that those who are  at the university already will also benefit from this new infrastructure and obviously the fact  that there are facilities that expand opportunities that is an advantage in the overall sense.

DAVID BEVAN: Right. Now what level of qualification were these 15-20,000 people be  receiving as a result of this extra money? What are we going to get for our money?

SIMON CREAN: What you’re going to get is far more qualified people coming out with  graduate skills. That’s what it’ll mean. It’ll also mean that in terms of the vocational streams  of the construction industry there will be a renewed focus on the traditional trades as well as  the importance of growth in the trades for the civil construction sector, you know, the sorts of  activities are being undertaken with the growth of the mining sector in South Australia,  important to be able to build the physical infrastructure that services that, so we don’t end up  with bottlenecks. So training the skill base for that is terribly important moving forward.

DAVID BEVAN: Minister this program this has been told that a lot of public money that  goes into traineeships ends up subsidising kids who are flipping burgers instead of creating  tradespeople. Do you share that concern?

SIMON CREAN: No I don’t. I think that there are many aspects to unemployment David  and I think that unfortunately there are lot of people who have been disengaged from the  workforce or grown up in families that haven’t given them encouragement to understand  issues that get them into the workforce. We’ve got to have targeted programs for them.

DAVID BEVAN: Of course we do but the criticism that’s been presented to this program is  that effectively you’re subsidising large corporations who are employing cheap labour and  then when the kids have finished and often these kids are working in these places while  they’re getting other qualifications which is great, but let’s not fool ourselves that we’re  training up a new generation of tradespeople and that’s what many people would think about  when they think of traineeships.

SIMON CREAN: Yeah but this is more than traineeships David, with respect. I mean, there  is another program that I’m announcing today with Jack Snelling that is about 500 training  places but what we’re talking about in terms of the two infrastructure announcements leads to  university qualifications as well as trade qualifications that are tradeable, moveable in the  international sphere. These are internationally recognised qualifications.

But what you’ve got to do is to build the physical infrastructure that enables that quality of  training to be delivered. I mean, in the civil construction area for example what we’re  investing in and there is a commitment from the industry in terms of this infrastructure as  well so it’s a partnership, what we’re talking about here is training people on simulators so  that what you’re getting is a quality of training that is in the classroom without the heavy cost  of it being associated with on the job. And so is a very innovative approach to training. They  won it in a competitive bid, but it is a partnership and it leads to internationally recognised  qualification. This will enable people to do more than flip hamburgers David.

MATTHEW ABRAHAM: Simon Crean on 891 Mornings. Matthew Abraham here Simon  Crean. What are you announcing with Jack Snelling today, the 500 places?

SIMON CREAN: That’s the 500 places, training opportunities particularly for two  disadvantaged groups, one’s the Indigenous population and you know in South Australia  that’s a particular area of disadvantage. I remember from my time previously in this portfolio,  we were doing lots of programs targeted there. But also for under 19s; the people who have  left school. This is a pre-apprenticeship concept that seeks to get people prepared to move  that next step into the formal qualification that is about genuine trade, traditional trades,  plumber etc.

MATTHEW ABRAHAM: Is it going to be run through TAFE?

SIMON CREAN: I think TAFE can obviously bid for these places but as for training  providers, training programs I guess they’re available on a competitive bid. I’m not sure on  that actually but TAFE obviously can bid for them but there are other training providers as  well and we’ve tried always to try and get a competitive bid for the best quality outcome  that’s available.

MATTHEW ABRAHAM: I often wonder why the Government doesn’t trust its own  services. TAFE’s a fantastic organisation. You know, you got the Government that says we  put out the tender so we get the best. Well shouldn’t TAFE be the best?

SIMON CREAN: It should be, it should be and if it is the best then it’ll win the tender but I  think we both agree Matthew that we should be getting the best. I don’t have a problem with  competition. What I want is the quality outcome.

MATTHEW ABRAHAM: Okay.

DAVID BEVAN: And Minister before you leave us, do you agree with Immigration Minister  Chris Evans that Labor’s asylum seeker policy has failed?

SIMON CREAN: No I do not and he did not say that. I think that there’s been a lot of  verballing going on but I’m more interested in the skills and qualification and the future for  many of the people in South Australia than getting sidetracked on that issue.

DAVID BEVAN: Well he’s also quoted as saying that community anger over border security  is killing the Government. Do you agree on that front?

SIMON CREAN: Well he’s quoted as saying that but I think you should take that up with  him. As I understand it this was an outcome of a conversation that he was having in private.  Now I don’t, I haven’t spoken to him so I can’t really comment.

DAVID BEVAN: It wasn’t in private. It was at a conference but he tried to tell the journalist  not to report it but the journalist who reported it wasn’t there for that briefing, rolled up  innocently and did what any journalist would do.

SIMON CREAN: Well fair enough but I’m interested in getting this important message out  in South Australia and that’s what I’m coming over there for. I’ve got a meeting to go to now,  been very good to talk to you and I’ll be happy to talk further about this when I get over….

JOURNALIST: There is no doubt Minister that this is a very important issue, that is training  and I think we’ve given that some time. We just wanted to know as a senior member of the  Government your thoughts on asylum seekers. So you can’t spare a moment, just 60 seconds  for that?

SIMON CREAN: I’ve had a lot to say about that on previous occasions. I’ve had lots of  comments to say about it in the Cabinet and that’s where my comments will remain.

JOURNALIST: Simon Crean, thank you.

SIMON CREAN: Thank you very much.

JOURNALIST: Safe travels to Adelaide.

SIMON CREAN: Righteo.

JOURNALIST: Federal Minister for Education who will be in town today and as you heard  he’ll have an announcement with a counterpart, Jack Snelling, Minister Jack Snelling.

ENDS.

Media Contact:

media@deewr.gov.au

Non-media queries: 1300 363 079



