



















THE HON BRENDAN O’CONNOR MP  MINISTER FOR HOME AFFAIRS

TRANSCRIPT



E&OE PROOF ONLY

ABC Newsradio with Marius Benson   Friday, 9 July 2010  Topics: Regional immigration processing centre

MARIUS BENSON: Brendan O'Connor, the Government is universally being seen today as  back flipping on a statement that Prime Minister made on Tuesday that East Timor was the  chosen site for a processing centre for asylum seekers. Is back flip fair?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: I don't think that's the right characterisation because on Tuesday  the Prime Minister made it clear she would be discussing this matter and, indeed, had  discussed the matter with the President of East Timor, about the possibility of a regional  processing centre. There'd been no reference to where and, indeed, there was certainly no  point made about exactly how this was to be done.  This is no quick fix. We made clear we would want to engage. The good news is the Prime  Minister of East Timor and the President have said they want to sit down and talk about the  detail about such a centre because, in the end, we need a long term, sustainable answer to this  regional problem.

MARIUS BENSON: But the Prime Minister of East Timor, Xanana Gusmao, said he'd like to  sit down and talk about it after initially saying - what scheme? Was it premature for the Prime  Minister to announce discussions with East Timor before she spoke even to the Prime

Minister?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Look, not at all. The Prime Minister had no problem at all in her  engaging with the President. The President of East Timor is an international figure of high  standing, with a great understanding of international and regional issues and after his  conversation with the Prime Minister they were both agreeing that they would sit down and  speak with Australia about the detail of a proposal, back to the next logical step, and that's  what we will be doing.

MARIUS BENSON: But the point many people have been making is that if you want to  speak to the Government of East Timor about some practical issue like establishing a  processing centre, you don't speak to the President. He's a more ceremonial position. That's  like talking to the Australian Governor-General about government action here.  This, it's claimed, reveals an amateurism by Julia Gillard in the international sphere.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: I've heard that claim. The point is Jose Ramos-Horta is not such a  figure. He is a very active President. He engages on regional and international matters and,  indeed, he has sat down with the Prime Minister and they are both on the same page wanting  to discuss now the detail of the proposal and that's a good thing. It's the next step and that's  what we'll be doing.

MARIUS BENSON: But was the Prime Minister premature in announcing that these  negotiations were underway when, in fact, the extent of the negotiations was one phone call  on Monday night to the East Timorese President?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Look, it was, I think, an example of her willingness to get on with  this issue. In her first week of Prime Ministership she resolved the mining tax matter. That  was a challenge. That was resolved. She's moved on to this issue and has indicated that we  need a regional approach, we need partnership with our neighbours in the region to fix this  very complex issue and she was right to get onto the phone and speak to heads of state and  leaders of the region and that was a good thing.

MARIUS BENSON: But she was acting with the extreme urgency and excessive urgency  according to many assessments because of political considerations and just to show the,  mention some of the headlines this morning describing her latest position: Gillard eats her  words, Gillard retreats on Timor plan, Julia's boat policy sinks.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: I've seen that characterisation but I don't think that's a fair  description, quite frankly, of the approach. We've made clear we want to establish a regional  processing centre. We've engaged with East Timor and other countries including New  Zealand and, indeed, East Timor's President and Prime Minister want to sit down and talk

about the detail and that's a very good thing and that's the next logical step and that's what we  will be doing.

MARIUS BENSON: Do you think it is clear that the Prime Minister has done Labor's cause  some harm by the confusion over this issue, over the past three days?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: The Prime Minister understands the importance of this issue and  understands the concern of the Australian people to get this right. There is no quick fix and  people may want to throw stones but the fact is we have a Prime Minister who will  relentlessly pursue a regional answer to this regional problem and, indeed, that's what we're  doing and the next logical step now is to accept the offer by the President and Prime Minister  of East Timor and look through the detail of a proposal for a regional processing centre.

MARIUS BENSON: Brendan O'Connor, thank you very much.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Thank you very much, Marius.



