The Hon Julia Gillard MP  Deputy Prime Minister  Minister for Education  Minister for Employment and Workplace Relations

28 May, 2010

Transcript

Television Interview on the Today Show

E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  710 AM FRIDAY  28 MAY 2010  TODAY SHOW

ISSUES: Pacific Solution; Resources Super Profit Tax.

LISA WILKINSON: Joining us now is Deputy Prime Minister Julia Gillard and Opposition  Leader Tony Abbott. Good morning to both of you.

JULIA GILLARD: Good morning.

TONY ABBOTT: Morning.

LISA WILKINSON: Now it’s been a big week for everybody, but Tony I’ll start with you.   Your revival of the Pacific Solution - did you consult your own party about that before you  announced it?

TONY ABBOTT:  We went through internal process. We debate this issue and Mr Rudd’s  failure to stop the boats every week in the party room and that’s the problem. Under the  Howard Government there were three boats a year. Under the Rudd Government there’ve  been three boats a week. We have to stop the flow and what I announced yesterday is an  important part of stopping the boats.

KARL STEFANOVIC: When you say you discussed it internally what do you mean by that,  because there are a couple of people, namely one Victorian senator, who’s been very vocal  about the fact that you haven’t consulted them and this was the problem that led to Malcolm  Turnbull being axed as the leader.

TONY ABBOTT:  It’s very clear that there is absolutely overwhelming party room support  for the policies I announced yesterday, Karl.

LISA WILKINSON: But why aren’t you consulting with everybody because people are  feeling aggrieved.

TONY ABBOTT:  But I did, no, no, but I did, I did. Look, I really did and what I gave some  of those who I know aren’t happy with the policy yesterday was some serious face time to  talk about it. But the thing is there’s only one way to stop the boats and that’s to change the  government, because only a Coalition government has the will to do it. We did it before, we  can do it again.

KARL STEFANOVIC: There is an appetite out here, Julia, we get a lot of emails through  the course of the morning, all you have to do is listen to radio as well to know that there is an  appetite out there for a better solution than what you’re providing at the moment - 6000  people, 128 boats and counting. Your policy has been a failure, hasn’t it?

JULIA GILLARD: Obviously this is a difficult issue but what Tony announced yesterday is  a slogan, not a solution. I mean, he’s not able to answer any of the basic questions. Where  would people go? I mean, he said he’d take boats back to Indonesia and overnight Indonesia  has said ,no you won’t,, so where would people go? When would it start? What would it cost?  We haven’t got answers to any of that so it’s a slogan, not a solution.

This is a complex worldwide problem. Obviously our policy is we assess people’s claims, if  they’re not refugees then they get sent back and we’re tough on people smuggling. We’ve got  92 people before the courts right now charged with people smuggling offences.

TONY ABBOTT: You see, Karl, it wasn’t a problem under John Howard. John Howard  fixed it. Kevin Rudd and Julia couldn’t leave well enough alone. Now we’ve got, as you say,  128 boats and 6000 illegal arrivals.

They have mucked this situation up. It needs to be fixed, but if you want to fix it you’re going  to have to change the Government because this mob can’t do it.

JULIA GILLARD: Well you haven’t got a fix. I mean, give us some basic details. When  would it start? Where would they go? How much would it cost?

TONY ABBOTT: I made it clear yesterday that this is the kind of thing that would have to  be done in government.

JULIA GILLARD: So you don’t know when it would start.

TONY ABBOTT:  We would do in government what the Howard Government did which  worked, not what you did which hasn’t worked.

JULIA GILLARD: But you can’t answer any of those basic questions, can you?

TONY ABBOTT:  But the point is you’ve already had a…

JULIA GILLARD: Where would they go?

TONY ABBOTT:  You’ve already had a $1 billion blow-out.

JULIA GILLARD: Where would they go?

KARL STEFANOVIC: Indonesia have already said that they’re not going to buy it. That’s  going to be a problem for you if Indonesia aren’t going to buy it.

TONY ABBOTT: Indonesia is not the only country in our region.

KARL STEFANOVIC: But what do you do with them coming through Indonesia and what  do you do about smugglers?

TONY ABBOTT: But again, Karl, under the former government there were good relations  with Indonesia. John Howard and President Yudhoyono got on well. We didn’t have the kind  of megaphone diplomacy which Kevin Rudd has practised. We didn’t have the kind of  Oceanic Viking cave-in after boat people effectively held an Australian vessel hostage for a  month.

JULIA GILLARD: Tony, overnight Indonesia has said no and accused you of election  fever, so don’t somehow pretend that you’ve got better relations with Indonesia than the  Government. The Government is working with Indonesia in cooperation on people smuggling  issues. This is a complex problem. We all know that. But a simple slogan announced  yesterday with your party fracturing underneath you is not a solution.

LISA WILKINSON: But Julia, do you have an answer to changing the numbers because the  numbers have gone through the roof. Can people expect more of the same?

JULIA GILLARD: Worldwide circumstances have changed. I mean, Tony says there  weren’t boats under John Howard - there were a lot of boats under John Howard, depending  on international circumstances and how many people were on the move.

What’s changing? Sri Lanka stabilising after civil war, that’s going to make a difference to  the number of people moving. That’s why we’ve suspended asylum seeker processing claims.

LISA WILKINSON: So you’re counting on other countries to fix this? You don’t have a  solution yourself?

JULIA GILLARD: Well we’re working with them. We provide aid for example to assist  with that reconstruction. We’re working with Afghanistan obviously in the same way, not  only with our defence intervention there but also through our civil aid. We’ve got a very clear  policy here. If you’re a genuine refugee, you get to stay…

TONY ABBOTT: But it hasn’t worked, Julia.

JULIA GILLARD: …If you don’t you get sent back.

KARL STEFANOVIC: All right let’s leave that issue. It’s pretty clear to the voters out there  if they either agree with Julia or they’ll agree that it hasn’t worked and let’s move on with a  different policy.

Let’s move on though to the negotiations with the mining companies. Now, how are those  negotiations progressing at this point? Can you reveal anything?

JULIA GILLARD: You’ll see the product of some of those discussions. There’s been a high  level expert panel working. That’s all under the oversight of the Treasurer.

KARL STEFANOVIC: Because the Head of BHP, Marius Kloppers, says there is  absolutely no deal being worked on at the moment, that negotiations have reached a  stalemate.

JULIA GILLARD: There’s a clear process here. We said we’d start with the expert panel  and we’d work through. But, you know, let’s just take a little bit of a reality check here. If  you ask people to pay more tax they say no, they don’t like it. We’re seeing that from the  miners now. But we’ve had these kind of things before where business has kicked off and  we’ve come to solutions.

Let’s look at alcopops. We had a fast and furious campaign from the distillers. Tony  supported the distillers, shouldn’t be any changes in the taxes on alcopops, we changed those  taxes, there was an advertising campaign against the Government, a political campaign, we  changed those taxes and the results today are in - drinking by young people has gone down.

KARL STEFANOVIC: And spirits have gone up, harder spirits have gone up.

JULIA GILLARD: Yes and in total, add it all together.

KARL STEFANOVIC: The young kids are just buying spirits.

JULIA GILLARD: No, no that’s no true on the statistics, Karl. Even when you add it all  together, 200,000 litres of pure alcohol less being consumed and less alcohol being consumed  by young people. This has worked. We had to fight hard against a business campaign. We’re  going through the same process with the mining tax. It’s the right policy setting, fair share for  this country, we’ll get to the end of this fast and furious debate and we’ll get an outcome.

LISA WILKINSON: But if the head of BHP says that it’s at a stalemate, you’re talking  about coming up with solutions, will that include you having to back down on this?

JULIA GILLARD: We said when we announced it that the tax was going to be the subject  of discussion with the mining industry on implementation arrangements and details. That’s  exactly what’s happening now. Everything we announced is happening in a methodical way  working towards the solution.

KARL STEFANOVIC: Ken Henry said yesterday, Tony, that essentially your arguments  couldn’t wash, it didn’t wash with him and we’re wondering this morning if you were in a  position of government, would you be getting rid of Ken Henry?

TONY ABBOTT: Well Ken Henry has a contract, but just to go back to what Julia said...

KARL STEFANOVIC: Well you could just fire him under your workplace agreement.

LISA WILKINSON: Big pay out and he’s gone.

TONY ABBOTT: He has a contract but look, you know, Julia says taxing alcopops produces  less drinking. That’s what she’s just boasting about but she says taxing resources is somehow

going to produce more mining. See this is the complete illogicality at the heart of the  Government.

KARL STEFANOVIC: That was quite clever.

JULIA GILLARD: Well yeah, in a Simple Simon kind of way, doesn’t stand up to much  analysis - Tony all over.

TONY ABBOTT: Since this new tax has been announced the share market is down, the  dollar is crashing, investment is evaporating, jobs are disappearing.

JULIA GILLARD: Tony.

TONY ABBOTT: This is a dagger aimed at the heart of our prosperity. It’s an act of  economic insanity and frankly it proves that this Government are not fit to rule our country.

JULIA GILLARD: And so our tax announcement here has caused the problem in Greece,  the European currency to go down, instability in currency markets around the world and what  we’ve seen on the share market, has it? Is that what’s happened?

LISA WILKINSON: Julia, Julia.

JULIA GILLARD: Because Australia’s made an announcement, Greece has gone into  crisis. What a load of nonsense.

LISA WILKINSON: We’ve got one last question. Last week you criticised Tony for his  comments about the truthfulness of what politicians say. We need you to look down the  barrel of the camera and tell us a yes or no answer to this. Have you been approached by any  member of your party, powerbrokers included, to take over the party? Have you even been  sounded out about taking over the Labor Party? Look down the barrel of the camera, yes or  no?

JULIA GILLARD: Absolutely.

KARL STEFANOVIC: Is that an absolutely you have?

JULIA GILLARD: Absolutely not, no, no, not approached by anyone at any time.

LISA WILKINSON: Not even a little whisper in the corridor?

JULIA GILLARD: No one, no one, absolutely not.

KARL STEFANOVIC: I think I saw your eye flicker then.

JULIA GILLARD: I got confused looking down the barrel of the camera but absolutely not,  no.

KARL STEFANOVIC: Before we go it is, in New Zealand celebrating today, International  Day of the Ginga and we are celebrating it here today as well so as in that spirit of supporting

redheads, we’re wondering if we could get Tony to give Julia a hug on this international day.  It’s Hug a Ginga Day.

LISA WILKINSON: Go on, you know you want to.

TONY ABBOTT:  What about I’ll blow her a kiss.

KARL STEFANOVIC: Oh you’ve got to hug it up.

LISA WILKINSON: Come on, you can do a hug, can’t you.

KARL STEFANOVIC: You’ve got to hug it out, it’s not that hard, come on you two.

LISA WILKINSON: Come one, over here.

HUGS

KARL STEFANOVIC: That’s perfect.

LISA WILKINSON: There we go.

JULIA GILLARD: When Bob Baldwin and Nicola hugged in Parliament so there we go,  Tony.

LISA WILKINSON: Like you mean it, big pat, big pat.

JULIA GILLARD: There we are. What about you, Karl?

TONY ABBOTT:  Does Lisa need to hug you as well? Why stop here?

KARL STEFANOVIC: Thank you, you two.

LISA WILKINSON: I’m not a ranga but it’ll do.

KARL STEFANOVIC: Thanks for being great sports.



ENDS

Media Contact: media@deewr.gov.au

Non-media queries: 1300 363 079

