Julie Bishop  Federal Member for Curtin  Deputy Leader of the Federal Opposition  Shadow Minister for Foreign Affairs  Shadow Minister for Trade



2GB, Afternoons with Chris Smith

Thursday, 23 June 2011

Subjects: Kevin Rudd; Julia Gillard’s one year anniversary; National Broadband Network;  Senate change-over

E&OE…

CHRIS SMITH    Question Time was yesterday extraordinary. Not for what was said but for  what was implied. You should have seen it - there was Kevin Rudd looking poised and  somewhat Prime Ministerial while Julia Gillard was sitting looking stony faced behind him.  And it was noticed, the Opposition saw blood.

Julie Bishop took to the floor, the Deputy Leader of the Coalition, saying that Australia’s  diplomatic relations with East Timor, Papua New Guinea and Malaysia had been damaged by  Labor’s asylum seeker approach. And then she played the “Bougainville card”. You see there  is a good rumour around Canberra that Mr Rudd refers to Julia Gillard in The Lodge as  “Bogan Ville”.

Now knowing this, I am sure this is why the Deputy Opposition Leader Julie Bishop posed  this little pearler to the floor, of course looking directly at one Kevin Rudd.

JULIE BISHOP    Will the Foreign Minister advise the House when he intends to return to  Bougainville?

KEVIN RUDD     Can I say to the Deputy Leader of the Opposition as she embarks on one of  her first visits to Bougainville in the next week or two, something which the House may not be  apprised of, is that the Australian Government remains deeply seized of the Bougainville  peace process, the upcoming referendum on Bougainville's future and therefore what we  must do as a country to ensure that that peace process is brought to its proper conclusion.

CHRIS SMITH    Is that the new name for the Prime Minister? Julie Bishop joins me on the  line right now from Parliament House. Julie good afternoon.

JULIE BISHOP    Good afternoon Chris.

CHRIS SMITH    It sounds to me like he kind of left the door open there. A very interesting  reply from Kevin Rudd, and I am sure I saw several smirks.

JULIE BISHOP    The media have reported how Kevin Rudd describes Julia Gillard and  people may have thought I was being a bit cheeky. But there is a serious issue here and that is  the tension between the Prime Minister and the Foreign Minister causing dysfunction at the  top of the Government. They don’t trust each other. She betrayed him and took his job, he is  seeking revenge and instead of working together to solve serious problems facing the country  like the ban on live cattle exports, putting livelihoods at risk like the asylum seeker problems  they can hardly bring themselves to speak to each other.

CHRIS SMITH    So you were having a bet each way really?

JULIE BISHOP    Well it was up to Kevin Rudd as to how he answered the question and I  thought it was interesting that he kept emphasising the Bougainville peace process and the  concerns over the status of Bougainville. I thought that was rather interesting.

CHRIS SMITH    Well I can’t understand why Kevin Rudd would refer to the Prime  Minister as any kind of bogan, I think that is highly unfair, but anyway.

Now, 12 months on you’ve got this anniversary of Kevin Rudd’s axing and Julia Gillard  rising to the Prime Ministership is almost something that I think Labor would rather turn its  back on and avoid, don’t you think?

JULIE BISHOP    I think that every benchmark for bad Government was set by the Rudd  Government and now every bad benchmark for bad Government has been exceeded in the 12  months since Julia Gillard took over.

I must point out that every failing or failure of the Rudd Government is equally the  responsibility of Prime Minister Gillard, after all she was Deputy Prime Minister to Kevin  Rudd and one of the trusted gang of four in his administration.

I think the point is Chris, she took the job away from him saying that the Rudd Government  had lost its way. Her words, the Government had lost its way, now 12 months under Julia  Gillard as leader the Government is worst than ever.

The mining tax still hasn’t been resolved, the carbon tax that Julia Gillard promised would  not be introduced is being forced onto the Australian people no matter the consequences and  this Government has got it so wrong with asylum seeker issues. You know they first  announced the East Timor detention centre, that didn’t happen; then they announced the  reopening of Manus Island detention centre, that didn’t happen; nearly two months ago Julia  Gillard announced a deal with a Malaysia, there is still no deal; and more asylum seekers  have arrived in the last six weeks than in the last six years of the Howard Government.

CHRIS SMITH    Can I also add to that list a few hours ago Senator Stephen Conroy and the  Prime Minister held a press conference to talk about the National Broadband Network? They  have announced that the Government, the NBN Co, and Telstra have signed an agreement to  phase out the copper network beginning to role out a fibre optic.

Now the Government has promised free installation to the home but the breadth of the  promise is remarkable. I want to play you just a snippet from what Stephen Conroy had to  say.

STEPHEN CONROY    No Australian will be forced to take an NBN service. People will  have the option to say no, we’d rather not have a fixed line service, we’ll go mobile, we’ll go  wireless. People will have that option if they want to.

CHRIS SMITH    No Australian - it sounded very much like no child will live in poverty.  But I was listening to that press conference and started to follow the trail of questioning  afterwards and then you start to understand that Stephen Conroy didn’t even have a right to  make that statement in the first place. Have a listen.

STEPHEN CONROY    I think the only cost that has ever been speculated on by NBN is  around $300.

CHRIS SMITH    $300 if those who are with the NBN decide that they don’t want it any  more, down the track this is, and people’s circumstances change. They can’t make that  promise.

JULIE BISHOP    What the Government is seeking to do is lock all Australians into this one  technology owned by the Government - fibre - and taxpayers are hit with the cost of the  monopoly, over $50 billion. And the Government is worried about the take-up; it is so low  that they are worried that it won’t be viable. So taxpayers, having already forked out at least  $50 billion for the network, if they don’t take it up according to when the Government  dictates then they will be charged several hundreds of dollars.

Now we want better broadband services but under this Government’s $50 billion monopoly  taxpayers are not getting value for money, consumers won’t get cheaper broadband and of  course they won’t get the benefits that come with competition, competition between different  technologies as well as between different telecommunication companies.

CHRIS SMITH    One final thing, there are some major changes to occur with the Senate,  that is from July 1, and the Greens are about to hold the balance of power. And there are  some wonderful photographs today of the gang of Greens about to hold that balance of power  and walk into their chairs into the Senate. Should we be scared?

JULIE BISHOP    Yes we should be very concerned. The Government is in a formal  alliance with the Greens, the Greens have some very extreme policies, and as we’ve been  saying Labor may be in Government but the Greens are in power.

Now Chris, on that note, the bells are ringing. I am going to have to go into the House and  vote.

CHRIS SMITH    Okay, I will let you go, thank you very much for the time you have given  us this afternoon.

JULIE BISHOP    My pleasure.

CHRIS SMITH    Okay, the Deputy Leader of the Opposition, Julie Bishop.

