Page:  1





THE HON DR CRAIG EMERSON MP  MINISTER FOR TRADE





Transcript

Sky News AM Agenda with Kieran Gilbert



7 June 2011

E&OE

Subjects: Asylum-seeker deal, carbon tax.





KIERAN GILBERT: The Government is reportedly on the verge of

sealing its asylum-seeker deal with Malaysia  after finalising the text of the controversial  Memorandum of Understanding.

On another issue today, the Treasurer will

release some of the economic modelling  around the carbon tax. He says he's modelled  a variety of scenarios and will today give a  snapshot of results showing that GDP will grow  strongly with a carbon tax.

WAYNE SWAN: [Excerpt]

Page:  2

There's no commitment here to one particular

price, but through a variety of those prices that  are modelled in the modelling, we see that the  economy will continue to grow very strongly  while we make deep cuts in carbon pollution.

[End of excerpt]

GILBERT: The Treasurer there, talking to Fran Kelly on

the ABC this morning.

With me now the Trade Minister Craig

Emerson. We're going to be joined shortly by  the Deputy Opposition Leader in the Senate,  Senator Brandis. First, though, Craig Emerson,  if we look at the Malaysia deal - we'll get to the  carbon tax modelling in just a moment, but the  Malaysia deal - apparently it's about to be  sealed with the MOU being agreed to.

CRAIG EMERSON: Well, obviously, it's not my position to pre-empt  when that would happen but ...

GILBERT: It's close.

EMERSON: Well, a lot of work has gone into this from the

Immigration Minister Chris Bowen and the  Prime Minister, so a lot of effort justifies some  reward at the end of the that process and the  only document that will count will be the final  document rather than drafts that we've seen, I  think, ventilated and then a lot of speculation

Page:  3

about those drafts. Let’s reserve judgement to  the actual document.

KIERAN GILBERT: Okay but some of your colleagues, Melissa  Parke, the Fremantle MP, former United  Nations lawyer …

EMERSON: Yeah.

GILBERT: … and others who have raised concerns about

the prospect of sending unaccompanied  children for example to Malaysia or other  concerns about whether or not the United  Nations will have full oversight of this process.  Do you share those concerns? Do you  understand where they're coming from with  those?

EMERSON: Yeah, well Melissa's a good person and she

has a lot of experience working in and with the  United Nations. Obviously, everyone in the  Government and, I think, right across Australia  shares concerns about the welfare of children.  And we're working with the United Nations  High Commission for refugees in finalising this  agreement with Malaysia.

But let me just add a couple of other

dimensions. We also share concerns for  children arriving unauthorised in very risky  circumstances. We share concerns for the  children who lost their lives when they were

Page:  4

smashed up against rocks at Christmas Island  before Christmas of last year. We share  concerns for the children who are in Malaysia  now. There's a very large Burmese population  in Malaysia and there's a lot of children there,  and 4,000 for 800 would come - this is a five to  one ratio …

GILBERT: Andrew Wilkie …

EMERSON: … and they're children and we should be

concerned about those children.

GILBERT: Andrew Wilkie says the Government's lost its

moral compass on this and other issues. What  do you say to him?

EMERSON: Well my point is a continuation of the one I was

making and remains totally relevant, and that is  there are children who are assessed as  refugees in Malaysia right now - little Burmese  kids - and I'm concerned for their welfare too  and I'm sure Andrew Wilkie is …

GILBERT: So the Government hasn't lost its moral

compass?

EMERSON: Well, if we have the concern for children

coming across risky seas and losing their lives,  I wouldn't think that that would be a loss of  moral compass. If we have concerns for  children being brought to Australia as genuine

Page:  5

refugees, I wouldn't think that was a loss of  moral compass. And if we have concerns that  we work with the United Nations High  Commission for refugees and the Malaysian  Government on the treatment of children and,  in fact, all who may end up in Malaysia, I  wouldn't think we've lost our moral compass.

GILBERT: We've got the Deputy Opposition Leader in the

Senate, Senator George Brandis, with us in  Brisbane. Senator Brandis, the Coalition's  been critical of the Government attacking it  from the left and from the right. But is it not a  bit rich to take the moral high-ground when  hundreds of asylum seekers were left stranded  in limbo on Nauru for years under the

Coalition?

GEORGE BRANDIS: Well let me make a couple of points about that  Kieran. First of all, almost everyone who is a  participant in this debate now accepts that if  you are going to have offshore processing,  Nauru is a much better option than Malaysia.  Even people who are critics of offshore  processing, like Julian Burnside, came out on  the weekend and said ‘well, we don't agree  with offshore processing, but if there is to be  offshore processing, Nauru - where there is a  purpose-built Australian facility, where the  people who are sent to that facility are not at  risk as they are in Malaysia of being subjected  to cruel and inhumane punishments, including

Page:  6

corporal punishments - is a better option’. So  that's the first point to be made.

But secondly, of course the Coalition has the

moral high ground here. Because when we  went out of office in November 2007, do you  know how many children there were in  detention in Australia? Not one, not a single  child, because we released the children in  detention as a result of a decision made in the  Liberal Party room. Today there are more than  1,000 children in detention in Australia, among  the more than 6,000 asylum-seekers in  detention.

GILBERT: Okay we're going to have to move on because

we've got a few issues here. The carbon tax  modelling out today, Craig Emerson. Well,  some of the modelling released by the  Treasurer. The multi-party committee, though -  the Greens, Christine Milne, the Independent  Tony Windsor - they're not happy that the  Treasurer is releasing these numbers before  they were briefed. Obviously, you've got to be  fairly sensitive about this don't you, to bring  them with you?

EMERSON: Well, I think that whether they had a briefing

before or after won't determine the outcome of  the negotiations in the multi-party committee. I  mean they've registered their concern about  not having access to this document. Wayne

Page:  7

Swan will be releasing material at the National  Press Club …

GILBERT: Senator Milne said it was bad faith negotiations

here.

EMERSON: Well, as I say I don't think it's going to be a

factor determining the progress of negotiations,  and I think really that is what Australians are  concerned about. Australians are concerned  about reducing carbon emissions. We want to  put a price on carbon. We're being opposed  from every which way from Tony Abbott - who's  occupied, by the way, every possible position  on this, to no action, to climate change is crap,  to emissions trading scheme, to a carbon tax.  You name it, Tony Abbott has advocated it and  he actually went to Malcolm Turnbull and said  ‘I'm a weathervane on this: lick the finger, see  which way the wind's blowing and then I, Tony  Abbott, being very good at determining which  way the wind's going, will then advise Malcolm  Turnbull on what to do’. This is complete  cynicism, complete opportunism on the part of  Mr Abbott.

But what Wayne Swan will be releasing today  is modelling showing very strong growth in  Australian incomes with the existence of a  price on carbon.

Page:  8

GILBERT: So, Tony Abbott, a comment that he made a

few years ago re-emerged yesterday. The  comment was made on Sky News. I want to  play you a little bit of that and also Wayne  Swan's reaction before we go to Senator  Brandis.

TONY ABBOTT: [Excerpt]

If you want to put a price on carbon, why not

just do it with a simple tax. Why not ask  motorists to pay more? Why not ask electricity  consumers to pay more? And then, at the end  of the year, you can take your invoices to the  tax office and get a rebate.

[End of excerpt]

WAYNE SWAN: [Excerpt]

Tony Abbott is running round trying to scare

the pants off people at the moment and we  know that only two years ago he was an  advocate of a carbon tax. I mean this is phony  Tony in full scare campaign mode.

[End of excerpt]

GILBERT: That was Wayne Swan responding, and that

comment from Tony Abbott, as I say, was on  Sky News originally a couple of years ago. It  was replayed last night on the ABC. Senator

Page:  9

Brandis, tell me how do you reconcile those  comments with the position today?

BRANDIS: Well I must say - I'll come to your question, but

before I do let me say I think we all detect a  tone of plaintive desperation from Government  spokesmen, whether it be Wayne Swan or  Craig Emerson …

EMERSON: Yeah, yeah [indistinct] …

BRANDIS: … because ... yes you are because 64 per cent

of the people in the country say you shouldn't  do this without going to an election, and you  are scared to death of an election because you  know what the consequences for you would  be.

Now, coming to Tony Abbott's tape - it's not a

new tape by the way - I mean, this has been  about for years. I think all it tells you is that this  has been, on both sides of politics, an evolving  debate. There's no question  …

EMERSON: [Laughs].

BRANDIS: Of course, it's been an evolving debate. You

started with one scheme and you're now  proposing another scheme and the Coalition ...   the debate originally began with the Howard  Government proposing a CPRS. But as  everybody in Australia knows, in December

Page:  10

2009 as the inadequacies of that scheme  became apparent, the Coalition moved from  that position to a position of directly attacking  climate change … carbon pollution at source  with measures like reforestation, with  measures like soil sequestration of carbon and  retro-fitting power plants and other heavy  polluting industrial facilities.

Now, if anybody is questioning that this has

been an evolving debate and that at various  times both sides of politics have been  considering different approaches to this, then  they haven't been paying much attention to  Australian politics for the last few years. But  what matters is where the parties have  ultimately landed.

GILBERT: Okay, let me just ask you Craig Emerson a

question:  I just received an email from a  former Coalition staffer on economic modelling  and it is quoting you from an institute ... a Lowy  Institute speech where you said ‘modellers are  handed the assumptions by government  officials. The computer models produce the  results. This process is best described as an  expensive farce to hoodwink the public’.

EMERSON: Yeah, I was actually talking about contracting

out modelling to private organisations on the  impacts of free trade agreements.

Page:  11

GILBERT: But not Treasury modelling?

EMERSON: We're ... no. And - that's right. So, another bit

of mischievous, false, misleading crap from the  Coalition. Not Treasury modelling. I was  actually talking about this contracting-out  where they say, ‘oh, a free trade agreement  will achieve these particular impacts on gross  domestic product’, and so on, assuming total  free trade. They're the assumptions I was  talking about. Free trade agreements very  rarely, if ever, involve total free trade.

So, the little crap machine that operates out of

the Opposition Leader's office has got it wrong  again.

But what George was saying there, in his

inimitable way about evolving policy positions,  is that Tony Abbott has had every possible  policy position and George articulated them.  An emissions trading scheme, a carbon tax,  direct action, climate change is crap. This is it,  Tony Abbott saying ‘I have no values, I have  no beliefs whatsoever on these matters. I will  simply test the mood of the electorate and I'll  go with them, and then I'll run the mother of all  scare campaigns’.

GILBERT: Okay gentlemen, we've got to take …

BRANDIS: Craig, you can …

Page:  12

GILBERT: Okay, Senator Brandis …

EMERSON: That's not leadership, George.

BRANDIS: … score ... you could score…

GILBERT: Senator Brandis, just quickly. We've got to take

a break, but your response, yeah.

BRANDIS: Sure. You can score all the debating points you

like, and it won't get past the fact that by a  majority of more than two to one, the Australian  people don't want this carbon tax. And by a  majority of more than three to one they  demand that you not introduce it until you put it  to an election.

EMERSON: If we have economic reform in this country,

George, determined by opinion polls ... and  then governments will say, ‘we will not  implement ...  we will not…’

BRANDIS: Economic reform like the GST which John

Howard took to an election in 1998.

EMERSON: Yeah, which wasn't popular either, by the way.

BRANDIS: Yeah, that's right.

EMERSON: But we will ... if the proposition, George ... if

the proposition ...

Page:  13

BRANDIS: But John Howard had the courage to take it to

an election.

EMERSON: Can I finish, George? If the proposition is that

you do not implement anything that at a  particular point in time isn't top of the pops,  then that is exactly a recipe for doing nothing,  for doing absolutely nothing. The Liberal way.

BRANDIS: There's a huge difference between doing that

and implementing a tax you promised six days  before the election you wouldn't implement.

EMERSON: This is an important economic reform and you

know it actually, George, because you did  support an emissions trading scheme.

GILBERT: All right.

BRANDIS: Why did Julia Gillard lie about it six days before

the election?

EMERSON: Remember George, you used to support an

emissions trading scheme.

BRANDIS: But why did Julia Gillard lie about it six days

before the election, Craig?

EMERSON: You remember, George, you used to say to

me, ‘Craig, it's all right, we'll get the emissions  trading scheme through the Senate. I'll vote for

Page:  14

the emissions trading scheme’. Do you  remember saying that to me, George?  Because I certainly do. That was before Tony  Abbott said …

BRANDIS: Well I ... what ... I think what everybody

remembers, Craig …

EMERSON: … well, we've got [indistinct], which is to

harvest as many votes as you possibly can.

BRANDIS: … is Julia Gillard saying six days before the

election campaign there'll be no carbon tax  under the government I lead.

EMERSON: Well, do you deny saying to me that ‘we will’ -

that is we, the Coalition and Labor - ‘we'll get  the emissions trading scheme through the  Senate’?

BRANDIS: Craig, do you ... Craig, do you deny that Julia

Gillard went to the election promising …

EMERSON: I asked the question. We've been through ...

we've been through that matter.

BRANDIS: … there would be no carbon tax? And your

government is now trying to avoid …

EMERSON: Why don't you answer my question, George?

Page:  15

BRANDIS: … putting that issue to an election because it

knows the public is not with it.

EMERSON: You won't answer my question because you

know you said to me …

BRANDIS: Craig, it's your policy …

EMERSON: … that ‘we will get the ETS through the

Senate’.

BRANDIS: It's your side of politics that is breaking an

election promise. It's your side of politics that is  trying to rort the democratic system by  implementing a policy you promised not to  implement before the election.

GILBERT: All right, gentlemen …

EMERSON: Which you supported.

GILBERT: Okay, I've got to interrupt. I was going to

interrupt two minutes ago …

EMERSON: Which you supported time and time again.

GILBERT: … but I was enjoying the chat.

[Laughter]

Page:  16

Thank you both for your time this morning.

Trade Minister Craig Emerson and the Shadow  Attorney-General, Senator George Brandis,  thank you as well from Brisbane.

EMERSON: Thanks Kieran.

BRANDIS: Thanks Kieran.

