Search this site   Go

Home

Biographical details

Media Centre

Contact details

Department

Parliamentary  Secretary

Links



High Court decision, legislation to  restore Migration Act powers,  unaccompanied minors, Nauru Tuesday, 13 September 2011

Interview with Ali Moore, ABC Lateline

Ali Moore: Minister, many thanks for joining Lateline  tonight.

Chris Bowen: Pleasure, Ali.

Moore: You've said the government's amendments will be  broad in nature. How broad? Will they include objective,  measurable criteria for determining the suitability of a third  country, or will it be entirely at the minister's discretion,  whoever the minister happens to be?

Bowen: Well, Ali, I'll be releasing the detailed amendments  during the course of the week. We'll be providing them to  the Opposition, as you would expect. The nature of the

amendments is to return the law to its pre-High Court  understanding, the understanding of both sides of the  Parliament and the general understanding of the 2001  legislation, which it is to provide for the minister of the day  to have the discretion where the minister is satisfied with  the arrangements in place to nominate our country for third  party processing, third country processing. And that will be  the intent of the amendments and it will be very clear in  these amendments the intent of the Parliament.

Moore: At the same time, that legislation introduced in  2001 also did have, I guess, a number of criteria attached  to it. Do you foresee that there would continue to be criteria;  it won't be a totally discretionary thing?

Bowen: Well, Ali, the High Court read into those criteria  several understandings which had not previously been  there in relation to the demonstrable nature of the laws of

Chris Bowen MP Minister for Immigration and Citizenship

Page 1 of 7 High Court decision, legislation to restore Migration Act powers, unacco...

30/09/2011 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2011/cb171747.htm

the nation, to the standards that go into some detail in  terms of work rights in education and health, etcetera, and  that really did change the understanding of both sides. So

much so, that not only was the declaration of the Malaysia  agreement and Malaysia invalid under the High Court  ruling, but the clear level consensus is that Mr Ruddock's  declarations of Nauru and PNG must be held to be invalid  under that ruling as well.

I think it's appropriate that the government of the day have  some pretty broad discretion to nominate a country for third  party processing. Of course, it must be done in line with our  international obligations and of course I expect  governments of both persuasions would do that. But it's  clear that I think the Parliament intended that there'd be  some discretion for the minister of the day and the intent of  the changes will be to return to that pre-High Court position.

Moore: So, in essence, if we're talking pretty broad  discretion, as long as the minister is satisfied, that would be  sufficient?

Bowen: Well, that was the clear intention of the 2001  changes, that it's a matter for the government of the day,  that the executive's got to have the ability to make the  appropriate decisions in terms of the orderly migration  program and to nominate, in terms of our foreign relations  and our negotiations with other countries and the  protections that are negotiated for the people we transfer,  that it's a matter for the government of the day and then the  government's accountable: the government's accountable  to the Parliament, the government's accountable to the  people, the minister's accountable for the changes or the  decisions that are made and has to justify those decisions  to the Parliament, to the people, and I think that's an  appropriate thing.

Moore: And what's your legal advice about the ability to  mount a challenge under your amendments? Will they be  watertight?

Bowen: Well, clearly, we're taking our time to make sure  the amendments are as robust as possible, Ali, as you  would expect us to do, given the High Court decision. Now,  obviously this is a highly litigious area. We've seen that in a  very high-profile sense over the last few weeks, and no

doubt lawyers would be poring over the amendments to

Page 2 of 7 High Court decision, legislation to restore Migration Act powers, unacco...

30/09/2011 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2011/cb171747.htm

assess the possibilities for challenge and we can't discount  the possibility of further challenge. But our responsibility is  to take all the best advice to make sure that the  amendments are as robust as possible, and that's what  we've been doing and that's what we'll continue to do.

Moore: Of course, you want to amend both the Migration  Act, but also the Immigration (Guardianship of Children)  Act, which will allow minors to be sent to third countries. Is  that far more complicated, trying to amend the  Guardianship of Children Act because of the obligations of  the guardianship of the state and also of course obligations  under the Convention of the Rights of Children? Is it a far

more complicated business?

Bowen: No, I'm not sure I'd characterise it as being far  more complicated. The High Court's ruling effectively made  the transfer of unaccompanied minors impossible,  effectively, because it found that the unaccompanied minor  could only be transferred with the written agreement of the  minister who is the guardian, that that decision must be  based on the best interests of the child, which was then  judicially reviewable. And so you'd have a long process of  judicial review before any transfers could occur. And  importantly, that applied not only to asylum seekers, but to  people who not been regarded as refugees. So, if  somebody fails in their attempt to become a refugee, they're  rejected by the department, don't win on appeal, fail in the  courts, then they could then run the argument, ‘Look, I'm  under 18, it's not in my best interests to be transferred to  another country.' That, in our view, is not a sustainable  policy.

So, again, Ali, what we'd be simply attempting to do is  return the law to its pre-High Court understanding, which is  that the minister has obligations to consider the case of the  child, to consider the best interests, but there are also  obligations under the Migration Act and it had always been  held previously that the minister's responsibilities under the  Migration Act were to be read as important and the  responsibilities as guardian were not to trump, if you like,  the obligations for the minister under the Migration Act, and  we'll be seeking to return that pre-High Court  understanding.

Moore: And if the Malaysian solution does become enacted  under the final arrangements, who will do the assessment?

Page 3 of 7 High Court decision, legislation to restore Migration Act powers, unacco...

30/09/2011 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2011/cb171747.htm

Will it be child welfare officers or will it be Immigration  officers making the determination about the fitness of a  child to be sent to a third country?

Bowen: Well, they're not necessarily mutually exclusive,  Ali. We do have well-qualified assessors in the Department  of Immigration who do specialise in child welfare matters  and it will be Department of Immigration officials involved in  this, but they are well-qualified people who have wide  experience in managing these sorts of issues. We'll  continue to engage with organisations, particularly the  UNHCR. We have every seen them as a particularly  important partner in developing this policy -

Moore: And they've not approved those arrangements, yet,  have they? They haven't actually said to you they're happy?

Bowen: Well, they're not a signatory to the arrangement,  but we have taken their feedback very much on board and  their feedback very much shaped the final arrangement with  Malaysia, and we do regard their feedback in relation to  matters that go to unaccompanied minors and others as  important. But that is not to say that the Australian  Government and the Department of Immigration won't of  course be the final arbiters on these things, as we need to  be under the law.

Moore: You're yet to brief the Opposition on the details.  How confident are you of getting their support? Of course,  they've described this as ‘a legislative excuse to implement

an already failed and flawed policy'.

Bowen: Well, look, it's really a matter for them. Mr Abbott  said last week that he thought the government of the day  should have the discretion to implement the policy the  government of the day feels is necessary for border

protection. Now, we feel this is the necessary policy. We  made the briefings available to the Opposition so that they  had the same information available to them as we've had to  us. That advice, that information is that their policy would be  ineffective, that Nauru would an ineffective deterrent  because people would simply be processed on Nauru and  then the majority of people who are regarded as refugees  would be settled in Australia. The experience from last time  is that well over 90 per cent were settled in Australia or New  Zealand. Now, how is that a deterrent? It simply doesn't  work as a deterrent. What it does is break people's spirit

Page 4 of 7 High Court decision, legislation to restore Migration Act powers, unacco...

30/09/2011 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2011/cb171747.htm

along the way, and there are still people who were resettled  into Australia who have significant mental health issues as  a result of their time on Nauru. So it broke the people's  spirit, but it didn't break the people smugglers' business  model.

Now, we've made that advice available to the Opposition.  That's not just departmental advice; that's advice from all  the experts: from the Department of Immigration, from the  national security adviser, from the ambassador for people  smuggling issues. The government's top officials have been  made available to the Opposition. So if they ignore that  advice and if they, in an act of political bloody-mindedness,  say, ‘Well, if you won't do Nauru, we're not going to give  you the options or the ability to implement your policy,' well,  that will be a matter for them to explain to the Australian  people. We don't expect them to endorse the Malaysia  arrangement, we don't expect them to applaud it, we don't  expect them to welcome it. But it is the government's policy,  and given Mr Abbott's comments, if he sticks to those  comments, then he'll support the legislation.

Moore: Minister, there have been by anyone's, I guess,  estimate a few false starts in terms of asylum seeker policy.  Is this the last shot in the locker?

Bowen: Well, this is a difficult area, Ali, and we did have  the change in the High Court's interpretation of the law.  That was a setback; it was a disappointing setback, I've  made that clear in the past. But we've dealt with it. We took  it on board, we took our time to consider our response over  the last week-and-a-half, and we've announced that  response today and it's a strong response. It is a response  which has considered all the options. We went back and I  said everything's on the table; that's the appropriate thing to  do. But we examined all the options, we took the advice,  and all the advice to us is that the Malaysia arrangement is  the appropriate one for breaking that model.

Moore: And is there also advice from your department  about the potential impact of high levels of boat arrivals in  the context of having onshore processing only? Have you  had advice about potential social disharmony?

Bowen: Well, I know what you're referring to there, Ali, and  this is an important point, and some of the comments that  have been made by people who should know better in the

Page 5 of 7 High Court decision, legislation to restore Migration Act powers, unacco...

30/09/2011 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2011/cb171747.htm

political spectrum about senior department officials, most  notably the secretary, I think are most unfortunate. Clearly,  I've said in the past publicly that it's important that we have  an orderly migration program to support public confidence  and support for a high migration program. Now, there are

some senior departmental officials who made that point  who have been intimately involved for 30 years in the  migration of millions of people to Australia and who believe  passionately in a multicultural Australia and who believe  passionately in a non-discriminatory immigration policy. And  for people like Mr Metcalfe to be criticised in the most unfair  and unfortunate manner by people like Senator Brown, I  think is a very unfortunate development. And I think it's a  legitimate point for people in government and government  advisers to make that support for the orderly migration  program is important. And really, for people to make that  sort of commentary without having first-hand knowledge of  the advice of the department to the government, I think was  a most unfortunate thing.

Moore: A final quick question, minister. You said today that  offshore processing is in accord with Labor's platform.  Chapter Seven of the national platform says ‘Labor's  protection policies will be based on the following principles:  protection claims made in Australia will be assessed by  Australians on Australian territory'. How does that sit with  offshore processing?

Bowen: Well, I made the point to the caucus and more  generally that this is a policy which is firmly in accord with  Labor values. Now, there are various areas of the platform  that people can point to to support their arguments. We'll  have a discussion about the platform in December, and no  doubt -

Moore: Is it time to change the platform?

Bowen: Well, and no doubt in December, there will be, as  there normally is at Labor Party conferences around these  sorts of issues, a debate and I'll be participating in that as  Immigration Minister and I'll be putting the case for a  regional framework. I'll be putting the case for the people  who don't often have a say in this debate, the people who  sit in camps waiting for resettlement who often miss out, the  people who risk their lives on their boats and in many cases  lose their lives. These are people who deserve a say in this

Page 6 of 7 High Court decision, legislation to restore Migration Act powers, unacco...

30/09/2011 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2011/cb171747.htm

debate as well, and I'll be putting that case at the Labor  conference and I'll be putting it vigorously.

Moore: Chris Bowen, I'm sure many others will also put it  vigorously as well. Many thanks for joining Lateline. Thank  you.

Bowen: I'm quite sure you're right. My pleasure, Ali. Thank  you very much.

See: Index of Speeches

URL:  http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2011/cb171747.htm  Last update: Tuesday, 13 September 2011 at 15:06 AEST

Home Copyright & Disclaimer Privacy Department of Immigration and Citizenship

Page 7 of 7 High Court decision, legislation to restore Migration Act powers, unacco...

30/09/2011 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2011/cb171747.htm

