













Minister’s Office: 02 6277 7500 or 0434 664 589                                       Department: 02 6261 1555





MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS

The Hon. Kevin Rudd MP

TRANSCRIPT OF PRESS CONFERENCE

BALI, INDONESIA

23 JULY 2011



Subjects: Incidents in Norway; ASEAN Regional Forum and East Asia Summit; disaster  management; Horn of Africa famine; South China Sea; North Korea; PNG negotiations;  Australia’s trade relations with China

E & O E - PROOF ONLY



MR RUDD: Let me begin by just making some further remarks about Norway. The reports  which are now coming in from Olso are increasingly horrific. Of the deaths of some 87  people, 80 of whom seem to be young people on an island holiday camp for the Norwegian  Labour Party youth wing.

For young people involved in politics, for young people having fun during the summer, this is  just horrific, it’s inexplicable, we’re left dumbfounded by it.

For the country at large, the violence we’ve seen visited upon the city of Oslo and the good  people of Norway is beyond the pale—unacceptable by any human standard. I’ve been to  Oslo many times, over many years.  I have many friends in Norway among whom I count the  Prime Minister, Jens Stoltenberg  and the Foreign Minister Jonas Store.

And so to both of them and through the media I want to express again our fundamental  solidarity with the Norwegian Government and Norwegian people at this most difficult time.



Minister’s Office: 02 6277 7500 or 0434 664 589                                      Department: 02 6261 1555

2



On the meeting of the ASEAN Regional Forum and the East Asia Summit over the last couple  of days let me make a couple of remarks.

Now the first is the East Asia Summit, with, for the first time, the inclusion of the Secretary  of State of the United States and the Russian Foreign Minister Lavrov has reached an  historical point.

And that historic point is we now have a forum which will meet at summit level, with all the  principal players at the table, meeting regularly on an agenda which deals with all the  political, security and economic challenges of our region.

This has taken many, many years to do. But at last we’ve got there. At last we’ve got the  architecture that we need for the future in charting a peaceful and prosperous future for  East Asia.

Having the architecture is one thing. Building the house is something else. That will take  time. It will take patience. But what we now have is an ability to move forward on a number  of the contentious security policy and other questions which confront our neighbourhood.

Today, in the context of the ASEAN Regional Forum, we discussed a number of those  particular challenges.  There’s been a long and considered discussion on the problem of  nuclear proliferation on the Korean peninsula; the nuclear enrichment program of the North  Korean regime and its destabilising activities around the region.

In Australia, our view is very simple: the uranium enrichment program on the part of the  North Koreans equals a fundamental violation of international law as expressed through two  UN Security Council resolutions.

Furthermore, if you match the uranium enrichment program by the North Koreans with  their missile development program, progressively North Korea represents a threat not just  to the South, but also to the wider region, including Australia.

We take these developments in North Korea deeply seriously. This regime is fundamentally  destabilising to the wider region and also brings to bear Australia’s direct national security  interests.

Another matter of relevance to regional security as discussed is of course that of the South  China Sea.

We welcome the progress that has been achieved in recent days by the ASEANS and China,  agreeing on, for the first time, guidelines which give expression to the Declaration of  Conduct, which was agreed between ASEAN and China back in 2005.

Significantly, that Declaration provides for this: that for outstanding territorial disputes in  the South China Sea, one: they should be settled peacefully; two: they should not involve  either the threat or the use of force; and three:  they should be negotiations conducted on



Minister’s Office: 02 6277 7500 or 0434 664 589                                      Department: 02 6261 1555

3



the basis of all the relevant principles of international law, including the 1982 UN  Convention on the Law of the Sea. This is fundamental for the future.

All states, including Australia, have a deep interest in these matters being resolved  peacefully.

More than 60 per cent of Australia’s trade goes through the waters of the South China Sea.  We therefore have a direct interest in these matters being attended to peacefully.

Finally, there’s been extensive discussion both in the EAS, the East Asia Summit and also in  the ASEAN Regional Forum on Australia’s proposals for enhanced counter-disaster  management across wider East Asia.

Natural disasters regrettably have become a regular feature of our neighbourhood. We  think of Christchurch, we think of Japan, we think of the Sichuan earthquake, we think of  the Indonesian tsunami. And these are just some of the spate of natural disasters that afflict  the wider region.

If you look at UN data, there’s been a virtual doubling of the number of reported natural  disasters across this wider region since the 1980’s.

Therefore, the responsibility for governments is to have a better system to react. And to  manage natural disasters as well as to better prepare for them, is more acute than ever.

Australia has presented a non-paper on this subject which goes to a plan over the next three  years.

We’ve attracted a high degree of support from various countries participating in the East  Asia Summit and more broadly.

It will in time become a joint proposal between Indonesia and Australia, as they themselves  have also presented a non-paper.

But the key objective is this: to make sure that next time a big one hits, we are in a better  state of preparedness than we have in the past.

From Indonesia, I head to Nairobi. And from Nairobi and Kenya also with the World Food  Programme, to inspect directly the sort of support which the WFP is giving to the ongoing  drought in the Horn of Africa.

This drought is the worst in 60 years. It affects some 10.8 million people. And a combination  of Somalia, Djibouti, Ethiopia and of course Kenya itself.

The international agencies have declared a famine in parts of Somalia. We are particularly  concerned about 1.8 million people within Somalia, who, because of the security challenges  within the country, we have real problems with international agencies gaining proper access  to them.



Minister’s Office: 02 6277 7500 or 0434 664 589                                      Department: 02 6261 1555

4



So my job in going there is to underline, a)what Australia has done so far. We’re one of the  largest contributors to this humanitarian effort around the world at present—certainly  within the top five.

Secondly, to see what more needs to be done.

And to thirdly stand together globally with the Executive Director of the World Food  Programme calling on the rest of the world to rise to the occasion in order to prevent this  humanitarian crisis to become an absolute disaster.

Happy to take your questions.

JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, you had a meeting with Yang Jiechi this morning. What did you  discuss? Would you comment on that?

MR RUDD: Xie-xie. Are you from Chinese television? To our friends from Phoenix, let me say  this: I had a good discussion with the Chinese Foreign Minister as I had during this time in  Indonesia with the Foreign Minister of Japan, with Foreign Ministers from other regional  countries, obviously including Indonesia, as well as India and others besides, including  Secretary of State of the United States, Hillary Clinton.

With Foreign Minister Yang Jiechi obviously we discussed our bilateral relationship. We  discussed China’s new growth model, which has been released through the 12th Five-Year  Plan, about which I’ve been speaking about a lot in Australia in recent weeks.

That is why the Trade Minister will lead a trade delegation to China. To China’s five large  second-tier cities, including Guangzhou, Chongqing, Chengdu, Changsha and Wuhan.

This is a major thrust in Australian trade policy. And the delegation will include nearly a  hundred Australian significant exporters in the services sector.

The other thing that we discussed was the need to accelerate the negotiations for the  successful conclusion of the FTA between both countries.

The 16th round has occurred. There are still issues remaining. But it’s in both our countries  interest for this matter to be brought to a conclusion.

On top of that we also discussed wider developments in the region, including of course  what’s going on in the South China Sea and including in the Korean peninsula.  That’s  broadly the scope of our discussions.

JOURNALIST:  On North Korea, do you agree with the United States position that in order  for the Six Party talks to resume, North Korea needs to show a more concerted effort on  peace with South Korea?

MR RUDD:   Well the Foreign Minister of the DPRK recently articulated his Government’s  views on these matters.



Minister’s Office: 02 6277 7500 or 0434 664 589                                      Department: 02 6261 1555

5



On behalf of the Government of Australia I have just robustly responded in the meeting of  the ASEAN Regional Forum.

Concerning North Korea’s outrageous claims, concerning the actions of both the ROK and  the United States - indeed, the sources of provocation for instability on the Korean  Peninsula.  It’s clear to me that the Government of North Korea is detached from reality if it  believes that others are the source of this destabilisation rather than themselves.

North Korea stands in absolute violation of two UN Security Council resolutions over their  uranium enrichment program.

In the last 12 months they have torpedoed a South Korean naval vessel and murdered  nearly 50 South Korean sailors.  On top of that again we have had the unwarranted shelling  of South Korean territory by the North Koreans.

And yet at a gathering like this the North Koreans stand up and blame others.  This is  unacceptable.  Therefore it is absolutely clear that through the resumption of bilateral  contact between North and South Korea, and the wider dialogue with the North Koreans,  that the North Koreans must change their behaviour.

This is not abstract for Australia.  It’s a uranium enrichment program with the objective of  developing nuclear weapons.

It is a weapons program designed to be deployed within missiles.  That’s why they have a  missile development program.

That’s why I have said on a number of occasions in the past, this is of direct relevance to all  regional countries including Australia.  It’s a serious matter.  It’s not out there in the margins  of our national security concern.

It’s real.  And I’ve reflected those concerns to the North Koreans today.

JOURNALIST:  Just as a point of clarification there though.  You’re saying it poses a direct  threat to Australia.  Do you mean through general destabilisation in the region or are you  talking about these missiles actually reaching Australia?

MR RUDD:   What I’m talking about very bluntly is firstly the development of nuclear  weapons, secondly the weaponisation of nuclear material, and thirdly the deployment of  that weaponised material into missiles, short medium and, over time, long range.  If it’s a  long range missile which is developed over time - and that is the question, which is  developed over time - then of course it represents a threat to Australia.

What is uncertain is the current stage of development of the North Korean long range  missile program.



Minister’s Office: 02 6277 7500 or 0434 664 589                                      Department: 02 6261 1555

6



What we do know is this country having gone from nowhere into nuclear capabilities a  couple of decades ago - it’s come a long, long way and it’s a threat to all of us, including  Australia.

JOURNALIST:  When you gave your response in this morning’s session did you suggest to the  North Koreans that they needed to reengage with reality?

MR RUDD: Yes.

JOURNALIST:  In what terms?

MR RUDD:  My language in response to the North Korean intervention was that the  statement did not reflect reality in a number of quite specific areas and I ran through them  one by one - both in terms of their analysis of the actions of South Korea and in terms of  their analysis of the reaction of Japan on the question of abductions, but more particularly  on the question of their violation of UN Security Council resolutions concerning the uranium  enrichment program.

And so in the great tradition of Australian diplomacy, we were forthright, but legitimately  so, because the statements made today represented a complete departure from reality by  them.

Anything else?

JOURNALIST:  Mr Rudd, yes.  Just wondering how far away is the Australian Government  from making a decision on Manus Island, because our understanding is that you had  detailed discussions with PNG and they’ll be taking them back to the Cabinet within the next  couple of weeks.

MR RUDD:  Well, what PNG does with its own processes is a matter for PNG.

As I’ve said before, PNG is at a delicate time in PNG domestic politics.  And therefore things  will evolve in PNG at a time appropriate to them.  That’s the first point.

Second thing, as I said quite explicitly the other day, I had met with the PNG Foreign  Minister and we discussed the whole question of the future of possible processing of asylum  seekers within PNG.

That discussion is ongoing between myself and the Foreign Minister.  There’s certainly more  work to be done, but we are actively engaged on the question.

But always mindful - as I said - of this current delicate stage in PNG politics and entirely  respectful of PNG’s internal political processes.

JOURNALIST:  Just to follow up on that, in terms of the instability - or the uncertainty might  be a better word - we spoke to the Foreign Minister and he said the Government is intact,  there’s nothing to worry about, we can certainly deal with anything that comes up in  regards to this.



Minister’s Office: 02 6277 7500 or 0434 664 589                                      Department: 02 6261 1555

7



MR RUDD:  Well my own relationship with the Foreign Minister is terrific and as with most  Ministers in the PNG Government that’s not an issue.

What we are simply mindful of is the other uncertainties within broader PNG domestic  politics.

We are prosecuting those discussions effectively.  I did have a detailed discussion with my  PNG counterpart the other night.  We’ll continue those discussions over the period ahead.   And they do involve, obviously, the possibility of a processing centre within PNG.

JOURNALIST:  From your conversation with Minister Yang this morning, do you have any  sense of when the Chinese would be willing to convert the guidelines on negotiation  towards a Code of Conduct into an actual negotiation on a Code of Conduct?

MR RUDD:  One of the great uncertainties is how long this next process will take.  If I listen  to some of my friends in ASEAN, they have an expectation this will be done relatively swiftly.

If I listen to my friends in China, they have a different speedometer attached to this.

And of course the Chinese Foreign Minister has been very explicit about saying that the  conclusion of a Code of Conduct would be possible under what he described as “appropriate  conditions”.

So that is where that stands in terms of expectations.  From Australia’s point of view, we  have simply said that it’s important that a Code of Conduct be concluded as quickly as  possible.

There are two sets of issues here.  One is the methods which are deployed in the peaceful  resolution of outstanding territorial disputes - both terrestrial and maritime.

And the other is to maintain freedom of navigation across the seas themselves.

Australia has a particularly direct interest attached to the latter.  So our interests, therefore,  are underpinned by concluding a COC as soon as is physically possible.

But as I said this will be a matter between the ASEANs and the Chinese.

JOURNALIST:  Is there a sense of urgency, given the escalation in the number of incidents  and the seriousness of incidents since, say, early 2009?  And do you have any sense that the  Chinese in particular are prepared to pull back on that matter?

MR RUDD:  I think one thing we should acknowledge here is the important stabilising effect  the conclusion of the Declaration of Conduct guidelines on the South China Sea have had.

That is, after six years of negotiations, these guidelines have been concluded. And that is a  positive step forward.  And all governments have recognised that here.  Both the ASEAN  Regional Forum and in other forums over the last several days.



Minister’s Office: 02 6277 7500 or 0434 664 589                                      Department: 02 6261 1555

8



Secondly, however, we need to be very mindful about any impact over time any further  instability in the South China Sea might cause.

And therefore from the Australian Government point of view - as I said before - we would  want to see this Code of Conduct concluded as soon as is practicably possible.

One of the things of course that shippers will be mindful of is any associated increase in the  cost of insurance of shipping through the region. I’m unaware as to whether any of the  insurance companies have made any determinations on that.

But it’d be important to observe whether they do, including Lloyds of London.

JOURNALIST:  I just wanted to ask further on your discussions with the Chinese Foreign  Minister. Did you talk at all about the prospect of Chinese labour coming to Australia to deal  with our patchwork economy as was suggested by the second secretary a couple of weeks  ago?

MR RUDD:  I did reiterate what I’ve said on earlier occasions. If our good friends in China  would like a good and open debate about the degree of openness of the Australian  economy to foreign investment and the degree of openness of the Chinese economy to  foreign investment, I’m always willing to participate in such a debate. And I made this point  very clearly in the BOAO Forum in Perth only last week.

More broadly though, this is a very good bilateral economic relationship. And my point to  Australian business over the last several weeks has been: read the 12th Five-Year Plan.

Understand the change in China’s economic growth model away from labour-intensive  manufactures located in China’s coastal megacities towards a new growth model which  focuses increasingly on the services sector in other Chinese metropolitan centres.

And understand that this represents a whole new range of economic opportunities for  Australian business beyond agricultural commodities, beyond mining commodities and  beyond our traditional forms of engagement. And that goes to education services, health  services, environmental services, tourism services and the rest.

Folks, I think I’m going to get shot if I don’t jump on a plane. All the best. Thank you.



ENDS





