Minister for Defence - Interview with Barrie Cassidy, Insiders

11 September 2011

TRANSCRIPT: Interview with Barrie Cassidy on Insiders

TRANSCRIPTION: Proof copy and E & EO

DATE:  11 September 2011

TOPICS: Afghanistan; Defence EBA; AUSMIN; Offshore processing; Leadership.

BARRIE CASSIDY:  We’ll go to our program guest. The Defence Minister, Stephen Smith,

joins us from Perth. Minister, good morning, welcome.



STEPHEN SMITH:  Good morning Barrie, thank you.



BARRIE CASSIDY:  So 10 years on. Afghanistan then was a safe haven, as they said a safe

haven for terrorists. To what extent has that changed?



STEPHEN SMITH:  Well we’ve certainly made progress in Afghanistan. We’ve denuded and

degraded al Qaeda’s capacity. Al Qaeda has not gone away entirely in Afghanistan or

Pakistan. And the danger for us is that if we were to withdraw now or withdraw peremptorily

then we’d leave a vacuum into with al Qaeda or its remnants or other international terrorist

forces could fall. So that’s why we strongly support the international community’s transition

arrangements. So, yes, we’ve had some success in recent times. The death of bin Laden

obviously was both a symbolic and a practical, of practical effect. But we have to be ever

vigilant. And that applies not just to Afghanistan but generally.



BARRIE CASSIDY: But if you go through those transitional arrangements and Australia and its

allies effectively pull out by 2014, how easy would it be for the Taliban to return and to take

the situation back to square one?



STEPHEN SMITH: Well two things: Firstly the transition arrangements carefully hold in

prospect what we describe as post transition arrangements. And I’ve made it clear that I

expect that Australia may well continue in Afghanistan after transition, whether that’s Special

Forces for counter-terrorism purposes, whether it’s training, whether it’s capacity building

and development assistance. So at the end of 2014 when the transition occurs I’m not

expecting the international community will withdraw immediately. Indeed we see NATO in

Afghanistan engaged in discussions for a long term strategic partnership, the United States

and Afghanistan engaged in discussions for a long term partnership. So whilst we’ve got to

get the transition to Afghan security, Afghan responsibility for security purposes, there will

still be support and assistance for the Afghan institutions of state. But underlining all of that I

think importantly is the view very strongly held by the international community and Australia

that this can’t be won by military means alone.



There has to be a political settlement, a political solution as well. And those members of the

Taliban who are prepared to lay down their arms, to abide by the Afghan constitution; there

is a potential role for them to play in a political rapprochement, a political settlement, a

political reconciliation in a future Afghanistan.



BARRIE CASSIDY:  Now you mentioned the death of Osama bin Laden. But al Qaeda is still

recruiting. The head of ASIO, the Director-General David Irvine said in an interview with

News 24 that their ideals and their objects are being taken up by other groups.

So are we really any safer?



STEPHEN SMITH:  Well I think we are now more prepared and more effective against

international terrorism. But you can never give a guarantee. And that’s why the central

message I think of the Director General of ASIO, David Irvine’s central message in the last

couple of days has been one of we need to be ever vigilant. And I think that’s right. Whilst on

the one hand we can’t allow the threat or the prospect of international terrorism or home

grown terrorism to grind us down as a nation, we do have to be ever vigilant. And as we

reflect upon September the 11th, yes we understand the ongoing dangers. But it hasn’t

crushed the United States. It hasn’t crushed Australia. We continue to be prosperous and

thriving democracies. And I think it’s very important that we reflect that it hasn’t brow beaten

or ground down either the United States or the rest of the world.



BARRIE CASSIDY:  I want you to listen now to something else that David Irvine said, talking

about the risk levels in Australia.



DAVID IRVINE, ASIO DIRECTOR-GENERAL:  We’ve had a number of threats here in Australia

that yes they do follow the model set overseas. We’ve had people who’ve tried to get

together the elements to make up bombs. We’ve had people who want to get weapons to go

and do a lot of shooting and so on, yes. Currently ASIO has quite a large number of

investigations going on into Australians - mostly Australians - who are toying with the

ideology of extremism and could at any point you know tip over into extremist acts.



BARRIE CASSIDY:  Now I wonder if those potential extremists would be less likely to tip over

the edge, as he puts it, if Australia was not in Afghanistan.



STEPHEN SMITH:  Well I don’t believe there’s a link there Barrie. We are in Afghanistan

because we believe we can make a contribution to United Nations mandated International

Security Assistance Force to help stare down international terrorism. That’s the first point.

Secondly we know that the Afghanistan/Pakistan border area is not the only place where

there is a threat from international terrorism.



Al Qaeda we know is active on the Arabian Peninsula. And we also know we’ve got threats in

the Horn of Africa. The point that David Irvine has made about if you like home grown threats

is something we’ve also seen both in the United States and in the United Kingdom. What

we’re really combating here is not just extreme Muslim attitude, which is not tolerated by

mainstream Islamists, is not tolerated by mainstream members of the Islamic community,

whether that’s in Australia or elsewhere. What we’re combating here is violent extremism.

Whether that has as its alleged basis an Islamic belief or some other religious belief or some

other ideology is in some respects neither here nor there.



What we are battling against is extremism and violent extremism. And we need to do

everything we can both in a preventative security sense to make sure that we’re not on the

receiving end. But we also need to be doing the positive things which is holding Australia out

as a country which is tolerant, where people’s views are respected. And if you have a

different view that’s part of a natural and normal way of life. But an extremist violent view is

not one which is tolerated, condoned or accepted by Australia and nor should it by the rest of

the world.



BARRIE CASSIDY:  Well you’re saying being in Afghanistan doesn’t make a difference. But

would they be less likely to be toying with extremism if we hadn’t gone into Iraq?



STEPHEN SMITH:  Well I’ve often described Iraq as a distraction. We went into Afghanistan

subject to and supported by a United Nations mandate. Also we triggered the formal ANZUS

Treaty, our alliance with the United States, because a mainland attack had occurred on the

United States. And without completing the job we were distracted by Iraq. And when we

came back into Afghanistan the international community didn’t have a sufficiently focused

military or political strategy to do the job in a reasonable time. And one of the biggest

difficulties we have now with Afghanistan is the sapping of political will which comes as a

result of having been there for 10 years.



BARRIE CASSIDY:  Now this Age report, this estimate this morning that the ballpark figure

would be $30 billion that has been spent on security over 10 years, would that be of the

extent of the risk?



STEPHEN SMITH:   I haven’t tried to test that Barrie. What I do know is that our annual

Defence expenditure for the Department that I’m responsible for  on the civilian and military

side is $26 to $27 billion. So I haven’t done the tally but I’d make this very simple point:

When we are in the sure and certain knowledge that we are in the face of an international

terrorist threat, it’s not the money that we spend, it’s the preventative measures that we

take and the effectiveness of those measures. So it may well be a very large amount of

money. The key thing is, are we better prepared, are we doing better and has that money

been well spent? And I think we are much better prepared. Our agencies, both our

intelligence agencies and our national security agencies are much better integrated these

days than they were 10 years ago. There’s a much more effective whole of government or

across government consideration of these issues. In the past we made the mistake of

operating in silos. Well you can’t operate in departmental or agency silos when the threat you

are facing is, to use the jargon, a non state actor. So a lot of the original structures we had

were the traditional prospective arrangements for nation state versus nation state. We’re now

dealing with a modern challenge, a multi-headed challenge. And it requires that we are much

better integrated and much better prepared.



So I think the real question is: Do we think we’ve got value for effort, value for money? Do

we think we’re better prepared and better organised? And my answer is yes I think we are.

And I think that applies not just domestically but also with the cooperation we have on all

fronts with our partners, in particular the United States.



BARRIE CASSIDY:  You say you spend 26, $27 billion on Defence and yet you’re asking both

civilians and uniform people to take effectively a pay cut.



STEPHEN SMITH:  Well let’s, I wouldn’t characterise it in that way. And I wouldn’t get into the

mistake of believing that negotiations and a standard normal process which is under way will

be the eventual or the ultimate outcome. There are two things here. Firstly as part of the

general across government enterprise bargaining arrangements the civilian side of Defence is

currently in negotiations for a new enterprise agreement. The original offer from the

department has been rejected. It’s now the subject of the usual negotiations.



On the military side there is a standard set of negotiations and a process in place. The

Defence Remuneration Tribunal will make a judgement about these matters at the end of

October/early November. And the military side, the diggers will have every opportunity of

putting their view. The offer that’s been put on the table is essentially a 9% increase over

three years. But let’s not rush to judgment or characterise it as a pay cut. We are going

through the usual processes and in those usual processes both the civilian side of Defence

and the military side of Defence will be respected. We want to have a competitively paid

military and defence service and our recruitment levels show that we are doing very well on

that front.



BARRIE CASSIDY:  You are off to the AUSMIN (Australia-United States Ministerial

Consultations) talks this week in the United States together with the Foreign Minister Kevin

Rudd who is back in harness. Julia Gillard says that Australia will do more with the United

States. Given the experience of Iraq though wouldn’t it be a good idea to occasionally be a

little more cautious and a little more judgemental?



STEPHEN SMITH:  Well one of the things that will come up at AUSMIN will be the United

States Global Force Posture Review. And we’ve got a joint working group with the United

States. I’ve made the point very clearly that whilst that force posture review does throw up

the option and the opportunity of dealing at an operational level more closely with the United

States, this will in very many respects be the single biggest change or advance we have seen

to the practical operation of our Alliance arrangement with the United States since the Joint

Facilities Program was effected in the mid 1980s. So we are taking it very sensibly, very

carefully. And we are in very careful discussions with our alliance partner. So we’re not

rushing to judgement here.



But the notion that there might be as the whole world moves to the Asia Pacific, the rise of

China, the rise of India, the rise of the ASEAN economies combined, the emergence of

Indonesia as a global influence - it would be no surprise that the United States’ role in the

Pacific will not just continue but be enhanced. And so there is obviously a prospect of greater

practical, operational and training activity between Australia and the United States.



Whilst we haven’t made any judgements I think that would be an unambiguously good thing.



BARRIE CASSIDY:  Now Minister, on the issue of asylum seekers and you’ve got Cabinet and

caucus meeting tomorrow, clearly what you want to do is legislate to get around the

impediments thrown up by the High Court. To do that basically you are nakedly declaring that

you are not fussed about the way that these people are going to be treated in third countries.



STEPHEN SMITH:  Well I just don’t think that’s right Barrie. And that certainly wasn’t the

approach that the Minister for Immigration took when he painstakingly had discussions with

his Malaysian counterpart. But yes Cabinet and caucus tomorrow will consider this issue. Now

this is a very challenging and difficult issue for the Labor Party, for the Government, as it is

for the nation. The High Court has effectively changed the rules so far as offshore processing

is concerned. We went to the last election with a commitment to effect offshore processing,

together with a regional framework, a regional arrangement. But it’s clear that to pursue that

there needs to be legislative change.



But as the Minister for Immigration and the Prime Minister have said, because this is an issue

which throws up challenges not just for the Labor Party but also for Governments into the

future, including the current Opposition and the Opposition Leader, we need to work our way

through it very carefully. So we’ll have that discussion in Cabinet and at caucus tomorrow.



BARRIE CASSIDY:  How is it that under Julia Gillard’s leadership you’ve got a record low

primary vote and yet you and others say the leadership of the party is not an issue?



STEPHEN SMITH:  Because we are dealing with a range of very difficult challenges for the

country and the country’s future. And they are challenges which will be challenges for future

Governments as well. We want to stop the irregular movement of boats coming to Australia

because we don’t want people risking their lives on the open seas. But also our experience

and the history of Australia has been that if you have a large number of irregular boat

movements ultimately you undermine confidence in our migration system and we don’t want

to that occur.



We also have too much carbon in our economy and in our environment and we’re seeking to

effect a structural change to take account of that. So we are dealing with large and difficult

issues for the country’s future. And often that means that if you are in the first year of a term

of government you’re going to have some political difficulty and some political challenges.

And the Prime Minister is working her way in a very determined way through all those issues

and challenges.



BARRIE CASSIDY:  How long has she got?



STEPHEN SMITH:  Well she has until September, October, November of 2013 when we expect

the next election will be. And she will be the leader at that election and she will face a contest

with Tony Abbott, where Tony Abbott at that time will be called upon to put out an alternative

plan for the country’s future. And I just don’t believe that Tony Abbott can be relied upon to

put out an alternative plan for the country’s future, whether it’s national security, whether it’s

economic, whether it’s social. Mr Abbott wants to essentially whinge and whine his way into

office and he would prefer to do that before this term was up for its full term because he

hasn’t really accepted the fact that he didn’t become Prime Minister after the last election.



BARRIE CASSIDY:  But Kevin Rudd is more prominent in the weekend press than Tony

Abbott. There is a report in The Daily Telegraph saying that he has forgiven those who

plotted against him and there will be no jihad against those who knifed him. What does that

suggest to you?



STEPHEN SMITH:  Well what it suggests to me Barrie is what I have said in the past. I believe

the Prime Minister will be the Leader of the Labor Party from now until the next election. The

contrast that needs to be made, both by political commentators and by the community will be

the contrast between Julia Gillard as Leader of the Labor Party and Prime Minister and Tony

Abbott as Leader of the Opposition. So far as all those other issues are concern Barrie we’ve

made our judgements about leadership and I don’t believe there’s any enthusiasm on the

part of the party to revisit those issues.



BARRIE CASSIDY:  And it doesn’t suggest to you, those words from his backers, that it’s

those who pushed him out who are in need of forgiveness?



STEPHEN SMITH:  Well as I say Barrie I don’t believe there’s any enthusiasm on the part of

the caucus or the party generally to revisit any of the issues. They are essentially now

matters of history. And certainly the focus that the party and the Government needs is a

focus for dealing with the very substantial policy challenges that we have as a Government

but which the nation has as well. That’s the key point.



BARRIE CASSIDY:  There was another weekend report quoting a friend of Stephen Smith.

And it says what they are doing, that’s the Rudd backers, “what they are doing is they’re

starting up rumours about Smith as a way to get the debate going over the leadership. Then

they insert Rudd into the middle of it.” You’re the decoy apparently.



STEPHEN SMITH:  Well I’ll leave others to make that analysis Barrie. Whichever friend it was,

and presumably there are many, whichever friend it was hasn’t confessed to me that it was

him or her. I’ll leave others to make their judgement about that. I again make the single

point, all of these issues are issues which in my view the party has no enthusiasm to revisit.



BARRIE CASSIDY: Thanks for your time this morning.



STEPHEN SMITH: Thanks Barrie. Thanks very much.



