CHRIS BOWEN MP

MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP  *TRANSCRIPT*

INTERVIEW WITH PETER VAN ONSELEN, PAUL KELLY AND  MICHAEL STUTCHBURY

SKY NEWS AUSTRALIAN AGENDA

SUNDAY, 25 SEPTEMBER 2011



SUBJECTS: Legislative amendments to Migration Act, Malaysia  transfer arrangement, Knight Review into student visas, migration  levels.

PETER VAN ONSELEN: We are joined now by the Immigration Minister  Chris Bowen. Mr Bowen, thanks for your company.

CHRIS BOWEN: My pleasure, good morning.

VAN ONSELEN: I thought we might to something unusual in this interview  and actually spend a fair bit of time talking about things other than asylum  seekers, but we have to start on asylum seekers, it is the big issue.

Where is your Bill at? Are you confident that when Parliament resumes you’ve  got a chance of getting this thing through the Lower House?

BOWEN: Well the Bill of course has been introduced into the Lower House.  We’ve had a lot of debate. What is very clear is that Mr Abbott’s amendment  will fail, will fail in the House of Representatives and in the Senate. So he  indicated he would move that amendment.

The choice is now very clear and stark: either after his amendment has failed,  either he is for offshore processing or against it, either he believes that the  government of the day should have the ability to process asylum seekers in

other countries or he doesn’t. That is the very stark choice that he has before  him and the Liberal Party has before it.

VAN ONSELEN: Stark choice or not though, I mean, can Labor win on this  issue? I mean, senior people in the Coalition tell me that the more they are  talking about this the better off they are, and no matter what happens. You’re  trying to make the point, understandably, that that’s the stark choice, but at  the end of the day I’m not sure that punters look at that and will blame him  for that , but I think they’ll continue to blame the boats coming on Labor.

BOWEN: Well actually I think this is more about the national interest than  about the politics. If the Liberal Party says it’s in their short-term political  interest to keep talking about this, that may well be right, but the important

thing is does Mr Abbott believe in acting in the national interest or not? He  says it is in the national interest to have offshore processing but he won’t put  his votes where that national interest lies.



Now if he won’t act in the national interest when he is leader of the  Opposition, how can we know he’ll act in the national interest if he is Prime  Minister?

PAUL KELLY: Minister, what are the consequences if this legislation is in fact  defeated? The consequences for processing, the consequences for the  detention system if in fact we did get an extra 600 people a month as your  department predicted?

BOWEN: Well I think the consequences are pretty self-evident and  inescapable. If you don’t have lawful offshore processing and you have  onshore processing, all the work we’ve done in developing the regional  framework, which involves Australia taking a greater number of refugees from  the region but also building in those disincentives, making that journey by  boat, means that you will see an increase in arrivals. You will see increased  arrivals and that flowing through to our processing, and historically the high  level is about 600 a month and you work on that basis, and that has

implications across the board.

KELLY: What are those implications for the detention system? In fact, can  the detention system cope with that? I mean, surely it can’t.

BOWEN: Well there’s a couple of points to make. Firstly we have significantly  reduced the number of people in the detention network over recent months.  This is the result of a number of steps we’ve taken. We’ve now got under  4,000 people in our detention facilities across the country; it was more than  that not so long ago, a few months ago. That’s a result of the reduction in  boat arrivals, it’s a result of the faster processing and the streamlining of  processes, et cetera, and importantly, moving families and children into the  community - one of our initiatives.

So we have taken those steps. Now if you do see increased arrivals of course  you are going to see pressure on the detention network, and we’ll respond to  that accordingly at the time. But at the moment, Paul, my focus is on  ensuring that we don’t walk away from this historic opportunity to actually  have a genuine regional agreement. I mean, people said we’d never get a  regional framework, people said we’d never get a country to agree to work  with us on it. I remember talking to you about this in the early days when it  was put to us, ‘Well look, what’s in it for Indonesia or Malaysia or Thailand or  anybody else to work with us on this?’ We’ve shown that you can do that.

Now it would be a travesty for the Parliament, for cheap political reasons, to  walk away from that, and there is no other conclusion to reach. I mean Mr  Abbott says it can only be a Convention signatory country, but then he says it  is okay to turn the boats around and point them towards Indonesia - not a

signatory country, with no protections negotiated. I think that underlines his  hypocrisy on this issue.

KELLY: If we just look at the deal with Malaysia though. I mean, a number of  people have arrived already. If in fact you were to win and get your  legislation up, wouldn’t you have to renegotiate the Malaysian deal because  essentially it has been undermined?

BOWEN: No, I don’t believe that’s right Paul. Firstly, we have seen a  significant reduction in the number of arrivals. I don’t put all that down to the  Malaysia announcement of course, but some of it is because you would think  twice and three times about making the boat journey if you know that you’re  going to be returned to where you began the boat journey which is what  more than 80 per cent of people do.



Now, we think that 800 figure is an important one. Of course, after the High  Court decision and while the Parliament considers that we’re processing  people in Australia, so the 800 figure is quarantined and is still there to be  used.

I see the Liberal Party saying, ‘Look, people have arrived after the Malaysia  announcement so therefore it hasn’t worked’. Well almost 2,000 people  arrived after the Nauru announcement in a similar time frame. So if you are  going to use that test, Malaysia has been more effective clearly than Nauru,  and that matches the expert advice that we’ve received, that if you want to  provide a disincentive for boat journeys then you do exactly what we’ve done:  a proper regional agreement with countries like Malaysia in our region -  transit countries - and you really provide that disincentive for making the  boat journey; as opposed to Nauru where it is simply offshore processing and  if you are a refugees you get resettled to Australia.

VAN ONSELEN: From the Opposition’s perspective, Tony Abbott is talking  about amendments that he wants to make him happier with Malaysia as an  option. But that said, surely a compromise here could be as simple as, if he  agrees to the Malaysian component, then when you hit 800 - if you hit 800,  you say as a Government that we’ll look at opening Nauru. Isn’t that the kind-of halfway house that could then satisfy everyone and get this into law?

BOWEN: Well look, our position is simple: we believe the government of the  day should have the power to implement its policies. Mr Abbott said he  agreed with that as well and now he has changed his tune. Now if Mr Abbott  really wants to sit down and discuss and make suggestions in good faith then  he should do so.

The Prime Minister said to him, ‘Why don’t we ask Minister Bowen and Mr  Morrison to sit down and work these issues through’. It was an offer made by  the Prime Minister at their meeting. He didn’t take that up, he went out and  held a press conference, released his amendments, didn’t provide them to the  Government. So I don’t think he is really interested in discussing this in good

faith. If he wished to then our offer would remain.

KELLY: In the High Court decision, it was very tough about unaccompanied  minors. Isn’t the reality here that no offshore processing - Nauru or anywhere  else - can work unless the law is amended in that particular respect?

BOWEN: Yes, yes it is Paul. I think the High Court decision made it very,  very difficult, if not impossible, for unaccompanied minors to be processed  offshore. Now these are difficult issues, but the only conclusion to reach is  that if you have a blanket exemption - if you send the message that no  unaccompanied minor can ever be sent anywhere else - it is a very clear  signal to people smugglers that this is a way around Australia’s situation: you  send an unaccompanied minor and then they can be the anchor and they can  sponsor in their parents and other family members.

Now, there are arguments about the law, but I think the legal consensus is  very clear. Not only is the Malaysia arrangement under the High Court  decision invalid, so is PNG and so, very arguably, is Nauru. But what is even  clearer than that is that no unaccompanied minor will be sent offshore unless  the legislation was changed.

KELLY: And I think you’ve said, this particular provision, if it is left standing,  makes offshore processing, makes public policy in that sense untenable?

BOWEN: It does, because it goes further than even asylum seekers. Under  the High Court’s judgement, if a young person comes to Australia, claims  asylum - claims to be a refugee, is processed and that claim is declined, after

appeals, after the department, independent review and through the courts -  and they are still found not to be a genuine refugee because they’ve come for  other reasons, it would then still be impossible to remove them from  Australia. It would still have to be established it is in their best interest to be  removed from Australia, and that would be a very, very high bar, and I think  would be an unsustainable policy environment, and Mr Abbott and Mr  Morrison just seem to ignore that and say, ‘It will be alright on the night, its  okay, we don’t need to worry about it’. Well they are just ignoring the reality.

VAN ONSELEN: Minister, the tenor of the debate has caused some division  internally for the Labor Party of course, to give Tony Abbott the opportunity  to argue that Labor is only paying lip service to humanitarian issues and  rights, if you like. Let’s just take a look at something he had to say during the  week:

Clip of Tony Abbott in Parliament.

VAN ONSELEN: How did we get to this situation where Tony Abbott and the  Liberal Party, who long argued for offshore processing against the Labor Party  Opposition who was talking about humanitarian approaches. Its all flipped

around now, you’ve got the Labor Left almost agreeing with elements of Tony  Abbott on this without saying so. The debate has muddled up, how do you fix

that?

BOWEN: Well it is clearly crocodile tears from the Opposition as I say. I  mean, what a hypocritical position. Here we’ve got a situation where we have  gone to Malaysia - a good friend of Australia who the Liberal Party criticises

very relentlessly in this debate, and I think very unfortunately, but we’ll put  that to one side. We went to Malaysia, we put to them an arrangement where  we could work together to help them with the number of asylum seekers on  their shores and to provide that disincentive to come to Australia on boats.

But we said to Malaysia very clearly from the start, we’ll need to negotiate in  protections in this arrangement to ensure appropriate treatment: non-refoulement, that people won’t be returned to danger, that they’ll have access  to school and education and health rights, that they’d have work rights, for  example. Now it was a big call for Malaysia but they sat down in good faith  with us and negotiated those protections in and made commitments to  Australia.

And we involved the UNHCR in that process - and by the way, that wasn’t  just Australia had the view that the UNHCR should be involved, it was very  much Malaysia’s view, because they are dealing with these issues and  recognising that they do have complex issues they need to approach and do  want to improve their engagement with the UNHCR and other international  organisations on this. So we negotiate those protections in - firm  commitments.

Mr Abbott’s position is turn the boats around on the ocean, point them  towards Indonesia and see you later - no protections negotiated. He said  during the week, ‘Oh, I’m sure we can negotiate some understandings with  Indonesia’. Well a) I very much doubt it given Indonesia’s view about turning  the boats back, and b) ‘some sort of understanding’, not legally binding, and  he has the hide to criticise us for not negotiating protections in, enough  protections in the Malaysia arrangement. They are there, in black and white,  as clear as day, very firm commitment -

VAN ONSELEN: But they’re not legally binding.

BOWEN: Well the arrangement is not legally binding on Australia either. I  mean, this is a negotiation in good faith between two sovereign governments.  Nobody forced Malaysia into this. I mean, the Malaysian minister could’ve  said, ‘Oh look Chris, you’re a good friend but really this is your problem’. They  didn’t. They sat down and said let’s negotiate this through. Now why, having  negotiated in good faith, would Malaysia then walk away and not meet those  commitments that they’ve negotiated with us -

VAN ONSELEN: But if it is in good faith why not make it legally binding?

BOWEN: Well because governments often enter into arrangements in good  faith with each other on a basis of trust. It doesn’t need to go through the

process to an international treaty and a legally binding agreement. If a  government is good friends then you can enter into an arrangement and you  can enter into that in good faith as we have done, and for Mr Abbott to  complain it is not legally binding when he’d just send people off to Indonesia  with no commitments whatsoever just shows who is playing cheap politics in  this.

KELLY: If we can just focus on the Caucus for a minute. There’s a lot of  feeling about this issue inside the Caucus. Given how important each vote will  be on the floor of the House of Reps, how confident are you that all Labor  MPs will vote and you won’t have people abstaining?

BOWEN: Well look, the Caucus has always had long debates about these  issues, but I must say - without commenting on Caucus discussions - this  debate was held in the spirit of good faith and respect, and there was a lot of  understanding in the Caucus that these are difficult issues and that it is  important and the good work that we’ve done in terms of the regional

framework -

KELLY: So you are confident - are you confident?

BOWEN: Absolutely -

KELLY: There will be no abstentions?

BOWEN: It was a good debate and everybody recognised that the Caucus  processes were honoured, that the Prime Minister and I sat there for as long  as it took to talk these issues through with Caucus members, through the  Caucus committee process and the Caucus members know that they’ve had  good feedback and opportunities to be involved in these discussions.

VAN ONSELEN: So you’d be surprised if anyone from Caucus abstained?

BOWEN: Look, clearly these are emotional issues and there are people with  strong views, in the Liberal Party and in the Labor Party. But the Caucus  decision is clear.

VAN ONSELEN: And you’d have to agree that if it fails and therefore we  have onshore processing there’s going to be a lot of people in the Labor Party  that are going to be pretty happy.

BOWEN: Well look, there’ll be a lot of people who are very disappointed that  all the work that has gone into the regional framework and trying to avoid  people dying on their way to Australia in boat accidents, and all the work  that’s gone into increasing the refugee intake - the humanitarian intake - and  giving people who don’t have the chance to afford a people smuggler a better  go, whether they be in Malaysia or Africa or the Middle East; there would be a  lot of people disappointed about that.

MICHAEL STUTCHBURY: Minister, turning to an area where we are talking  about much bigger numbers than asylum seekers, say in the student  education, and during the week it seems that the Government has accepted  all 41 recommendation from former Sydney Olympic Minister Michael Knight’s  review into the student visa - the university student visa program.

Basically you’re saying that students who come to Australia, study in  Australian universities, can have more access to be able to work here and  then also to work after they graduate, and then in turn to migrate to Australia  afterwards. Are you doing this largely to help the universities sector which has

gone through tough times after the crackdown on the student visa program  which was rorted?

BOWEN: Yes, is the short answer. This is an important report and higher  international education is very important to Australia - very important  economically, very important in terms of the financing of our tertiary  institutions and very important frankly in terms of our long-term foreign policy  interests. It is very important to have the future leaders of countries in our  region having the opportunity to study in Australia and get to know Australia  better in their formative years.

The Knight Review is a very, very good review and we have adopted its  recommendations, with some modifications in some instances. But we have  adopted his recommendations, which is a streamlined, faster visa processing  regime for universities - basically regarding university applicants as low risk -  and providing, if the university makes some commitments to us in terms of  their integrity measures, giving them much more access to that low-risk  stream.

In addition, as you correctly point out, more work rights for post-university  study: two years for a Bachelors degree, three and four years for higher  degrees, which would then give people the opportunity to work in Australia  and if they are successful then to apply for permanent skilled migration under

our existing schemes, whether it be employer-nominated or points based.

So I think this is a good, important reform. We had to get the balance right  because if you let student numbers get out of control completely and it is a  big impact on the net overseas migration rate. Universities - and there are

only 39 of them - they are easier to monitor, and they are the leading edge  of our higher education sector.

VAN ONSELEN: What controls do you have though to keep them in line, as  opposed to seeing an absolute blow-out in foreign students so that  universities can supplement the money that they need to run?

BOWEN: Well look, what we’ve got is Mr Knight’s recommendation that a  genuine student visa - a genuine student entry category to establish that the  person is, a) genuinely going to study, and b), genuinely intends to return  home at the end of their visa, whether it be at the end of the study or at the

end of the work rights; and that’s an important safety net that he’s put in.

Also what we are saying to universities is that if you want access to this  streamlined processing, you are going to need to establish some checks and  balances and integrity measures to our satisfaction, and I think that is  important.

Let me just mention as well the other parts of the sector, vocational  education and training in particular - we have taken some steps there. We’ve  reduced the amount of money that is required for somebody to show they

can come and support themselves in Australia and we’ve reduced the amount  of time that they’ll need to have that money saved. We think that’s important,  but that sector is a lot harder to monitor and regulate than universities for the  reasons you point out, so there are other checks and balances in place.

STUTCHBURY: See, the numbers coming through the Bureau of Statistics  showing that the population growth in Australia is really slowed to a crawl  after being at close to record levels during the - when you came to office,  and it may be that the slowing in growth in people looking for work, entering  the workforce, is contributing to the slowdown in the Australian economy. Do  you think that being a factor and that we do need to - and in the May Budget  you increased your skilled migration intake - we do need to open the doors a  little bit more and allow the immigration back in?

BOWEN: Well look, as you say Michael, we did in the Budget and in the  annual budget figures, have a significant - not enormous - but a significant  increase in the skilled migration figures and for total permanent migration to  185,000. We thought that was the appropriate, measured, sensible thing to  do in light of the skilled labour demands and the labour demands more  generally. What is coming through very strongly to the Treasurer and I  whenever we talk to business, that those demands are there.

Now, we do the annual program on Budget day every year. I’ll turn my mind  to that closer to the next budget of course, but we’ve already had a  substantial increase in the skilled migration level, I think that’s appropriate  and I think business recognises that it is appropriate.

STUTCHBURY: And so in increasing the student intake as well are we  getting back to basically the migrant intake or - whether you call it them  migrants or whatever - whether the people flow that gets us back to that big  Australia debate?



BOWEN: I don’t think so. We had net overseas migration topping 300,000 at  one point. That was very much a result of the, if you like, student numbers  under previous regimes before Mr Evans made his sensible reforms when he  was Immigration Minister. I think the reforms that we’ve announced this  week, get very much the balance right in terms of student numbers; and it is  very much focussed on student outcomes, not achieving a migration outcome

by coming and pretending to study or studying not being your main goal.   I think the balance is right here. These are holistic pictures. We have the  university sector and the higher education sector, we have permanent skilled  migration and of course we have temporary skilled migration - we’ve made  announcements there about Enterprise Migration Agreements and faster  processing for 457s, for example.

All in all, when you take the changes that we’ve made over the last 12  months and previously, I think we’ve seen very substantial changes in our  immigration policy and settings and they are well calibrated to the economic  challenges that the country is facing at the moment.

VAN ONSELEN: But looking specifically at the Government’s response to the  Knight Review, the politics of this - in a sense following up from what Michael  was talking about - is a risk here for you. I mean, if the Opposition isn’t  talking about boats and we get to the numerical side of things, which is  policies like this, there is still a fear factor there about the big Australia in the  community.

Now, how do you - I think this is good policy for you, it’s good policy for the  skilling up of Australia in the long term, but it’s also risky politicly and it  exposes the Government to the sort of criticisms that it’s got too high a  migration intake. And as John Howard always talked about, if there’s not  confidence in the borders, then how do you create the confidence you need  for good policy such as this?

BOWEN: Well I think there’s two issues there. Firstly, in terms of the general  population debate, I think the Australian people want the reassurance that  the Government has the appropriate measures in place, for the sustainability  of the environment, the infrastructure investment, the decisions about where  people actually live. It’s not just about raw numbers. And I think that’s a  legitimate discussion. Tony Burke, the Population Minister, and I work very  closely on those things.

So I think it’s not just a matter of numbers, I think it’s also about people  wanting reassurance that the Government actually cares about sustainability  and investment and is actually doing it - and clearly we are. We have the  population strategy work that Tony Burke’s been doing, it melds very closely  to our immigration settings. I think the Australian people also recognise that  with the economy as strong as we have and in terms of how we compare  around the world, that we have labour force demand, that there are a lot of  skilled workers in other countries looking for migration outcomes, and we  should be trying to get the best and brightest into Australia to fill some of  those plugs - I think that’s important.

On the broader issue about the community support for our migration settings,  I do agree. I think if you have a proper regional framework and you can  assure people that we are taking migrants in an orderly fashion then it does  lend further support to higher migration levels.



STUTCHBURY: All those things about a strong economy; we do have a  jobless rate now edging up to 5.3 and we do have a bit of a shake-out in the  manufacturing sector, the Budget had the unemployment rate going down to  about four and three quarters or lower - so you’ve got a bit of a jobs shake-out. Is there an issue really in Australia that we’re getting a jobs shake-out in  manufacturing, we’ve got a mining boom and mining shortages, but  Australian workers are reluctant to move from one region, from one job, to  another region and another job. And we’re having to tap foreign workers  because of that.

BOWEN: I think the Australian workforce is fairly mobile. Of course there are  people who, for whatever reason, can’t or aren’t inclined to travel to regional  areas, to mining areas in particular -

STUTCHBURY: We would have done that once upon a time, Australians.

BOWEN: - And mining companies do have issues in getting skilled labour and  unskilled labour in some parts of the country, of course they do, and that’s  why we respond. Now, what’s important here is you get the checks and  balances right. You can’t have immigration, whether it be permanent or  temporary, as the easy option for employers to say, ‘Look we’re not going to  go out and train Australians or pay the rates that Australians would want,  we’re just going to have this source’. But nevertheless, what you do need is a  strong flow to provide the legitimate, the legitimate -

STUTCHBURY: You know once upon a time, Australians were much more  sort of resourceful. My parents moved states when I was young, for jobs.  These days they’re all a little bit too soft and comfortable, I mean there’s  huge paying jobs up there -

BOWEN: I think that’s a bit of a generalisation Michael.

STUTCHBURY: - You can make, like an average worker with reasonable  skills can make $300,000 working -

BOWEN: Lots of young people in particular do, I know. That’s one of the  issues in Perth, for example.

STUTCHBURY: It’s strange to move from Sydney to Perth -

BOWEN: A lot of Perth businesses tell me they have trouble getting  employees, because a lot of Perth employees have moved up north - either  fly-in, fly-out, or more permanently - hence some announcements I made not

long ago about making it easier for Perth employers.

I think it’s a bit of a generalisation. I know lots of people from the east coast  who have gone to the west or gone to Queensland to work on mines. But you  also have to bear in mind, people have family responsibilities, people have

their partners who may or may not be in work and they may have  responsibilities -

STUTCHBURY: Yeah, yeah, yeah, that’s the nature of how well we’ve got it  these days, isn’t it? You know, we’ve never had it so good and we’re not  prepared to get up and move.

BOWEN: I think the key for us as a nation is if people want to move, they  should be able to. We should provide those opportunities, but where for  whatever reason, whether because there are particular skills needs, or  particularly large projects and all happening at the same time, that  companies, particularly resource companies have difficulty in sourcing for  relevant workers; that we have the appropriate systems in place - whether it  be permanent migration or temporary through the Enterprise Migration  Agreements we announced and are implementing, regional agreements which  we’ve announced - all those mechanisms are available where appropriate,  where an employer can show that they have taken the necessary steps, but  there are legitimate and real shortages.

KELLY: Well you’ve explained this very well Minister, so can I ask, do you  believe in a big Australia?

BOWEN: Look, I believe in an appropriately sized Australia. I believe in an  Australia were we have the migration settings which fill our gaps, and we  have the migration settings which give people - highly-skilled workers - the  opportunity to come and contribute to our economy. For where the  Government of the day has taken necessary heed to the environmental,  infrastructure, environmental and infrastructure concerns -

VAN ONSELEN: Paul’s not asking, you’re not having to say whether you  barrack for Collingwood. You’re being asked, do you believe in a big Australia.

BOWEN: I’m a big supporter of the Western Sydney Giants. But I think you  can over simplify and you can say ‘big or small’, but it’s not a matter of big or  small, it’s a matter being appropriate, with the appropriate investment in  place and the appropriate long term planning in place. If you have that, then  you can have good confidence that your migration levels are appropriately  balanced.

KELLY: I think what you’re saying is that the best way to get to a big  Australia is not to have a target.

BOWEN: Well I don’t believe in targets and the Government doesn’t believe  in a target. What we do believe in is setting our migration levels, not only  annually but I’ve also said we’re going to have a more forward-looking  forecasting system for our migration levels, have a rolling analysis of  migration going forward, not just the annual figure. The annual figure is very  important, but I just think the debate gets over simplified. You’re either for or  against a big Australia. Well it’s not that simple. It’s an appropriate population

level, an appropriate migration target, annually.

STUTCHBURY: But no Australian government has every really set a target  for population into the future. But you do need to, don’t you, if you are going  to plan where you’re likely to go on certain settings? And it seems that the  Government has stepped back from saying that, ‘We think by 2020 it’s likely  to be this’, so that people who build houses, state governments develop their  cities. You don’t really have a setting.

BOWEN: No we do, we do Michael, with respect, and we’ve implemented  that. We’ve done a lot of work -

STUTCHBURY: How far out?

BOWEN: We work on a five year figure, five year program. We set our  figures annually, but we have now our long term migration planning  framework, which means that we do work exactly as you say, with state and  with regions -

STUTCHBURY: These big investments in the cities, you know roads and rail  systems, some of these take - like the Sydney rail stuff that’s being built now  and the roads - they take five to ten years -

BOWEN: But Michael, with respect you don’t need to know what the national  population figure will be in ten years to know that a city like Sydney needs  substantial investment in infrastructure. You don’t need to know that. That is  something which I think state governments and the federal governments  know very clearly.

VAN ONSELEN: You were chief of staff to Carl Scully, why wasn’t there more  investment in infrastructure when you were there? (Laughs)

BOWEN: (Laughs) Well, there was plenty of investment. And I could talk  about, at length about the legacy of the M5 and the rail network investment  at that time. But look, you don’t need a long term migration forecast or target  to know that where I come from in western Sydney, there is congestion  challenges, particularly in the north-west where so much of the new housing  has gone, more and more in the south-west into the future with the  expansion around the south-west of Sydney. You don’t need to know what  the population is going to be in 2035 to know that governments - state and  federal - need to invest in infrastructure in places like Sydney.

VAN ONSELEN: Minister, we’re out of time. But I’ve just got one final  question, which kinda goes against my self-interest as someone who teaches  in a Bachelor of Arts degrees, but the obvious question about the Knight  Review is that why aren’t you directing this only into people studying in real  areas that Australia needs, nursing or whatever that might be? The

perception in the community could be that this is just going to lead to a whole  bunch of foreigners coming in and studying for Arts degrees before they go

and do who knows what at the end of it.

BOWEN: No, I think universities are best place to develop their courses and  offer their courses, and supply and demand should be able to operate. I don’t  think me sitting in an office in Canberra saying, ‘Well, you know, I don’t like  Arts degrees’, I don’t think that’s a sustainable way forward. I think  universities - high quality universities - should be able to develop their  courses, offer their courses domestically and internationally, and if they have  good courses, internationally well-respected courses, then that will reflect in  the number of students coming to Australia.

VAN ONSELEN: All right, Chris Bowen, Immigration Minister, appreciate your  company on Australian Agenda.

BOWEN: My pleasure.

Ends

