CHRIS BOWEN MP

MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP  *TRANSCRIPT*

DOORSTOP, CANBERRA

MONDAY, 19 SEPTEMBER 2011

SUBJECTS: Legislation to restore Migration Act powers, Nauru,  Malaysia transfer arrangement.

CHRIS BOWEN: Thanks for coming, everybody.

Well, today Mr Abbott has decided to put his political interest ahead of the  national interest. This was a test for Tony Abbott’s leadership. It’s a test he’s  failed. Mr Abbott a little while ago announced to the media that he would be  proposing amendments to the Government’s migration changes to allow  offshore processing only in countries that are signatories to the Refugee  Convention.

I note in passing that despite the fact the Government had provided the  legislation on each occasion to the Opposition before releasing it publicly, he  has released his amendments to the media and not provided them to the

Government.

Clearly, Mr Abbott is doing this for one reason and one reason alone: because  he wants to stop the Malaysia agreement being implemented. The Australian  people are entitled to conclude that the Opposition has one objective here: to  stop the Malaysia agreement being implemented, because they are scared it  will work.

The Government’s advice has been consistently that the Malaysia  arrangement is the most effective deterrent to people smuggling. That advice  has been made available to Mr Abbott. He knows it. He’s been told it and yet  he’s trying to stop it. He doesn’t want it to work because it’s not in his  political interest for it to work. He doesn’t want to stop people smuggling  because he wants to keep his three-word slogans.

People are entitled to reach this conclusion because Mr Abbott’s approach is  highly hypocritical. It’s hypocritical because the Opposition cannot answer this  question: why is it okay to turn boats around on the high seas and point them  towards a non-signatory country with no protections, no guarantees, no  agreement, but it’s not okay to have an agreement with a non-signatory  country with negotiated protections and guarantees built in?

The Australian people are entitled to conclude that this is hypocrisy because  the Opposition had previously said being a signatory was not an issue. As late  as 21 June, Mr Morrison said in relation to Malaysia, ‘It was never our issue as  to whether they are a signatory to the Refugee Convention.’ On 27 July 2010,

Mr Morrison said in relation to Nauru when it was not a signatory, ‘It’s not a  pre-condition that Nauru is a signatory to the Refugee Convention’ in terms of  proceeding.

It’s highly hypocritical because very clearly being a refugee signatory country  alone is not an adequate guarantee to receiving adequate treatment. I note,  for example, that our two largest source countries for onshore arrivals, for  boat arrivals, are Afghanistan and Iran, both signatories to the Refugee  Convention, and Mr Morrison has previously proposed a transfer agreement  with Iran.

It’s highly hypocritical because the Government has previously said we would  return the legislation to its pre-High Court understanding. Mr Abbott had  previously said that he would support legislation which gave the Government

of the day the ability to implement its policies in accord with the pre-High  Court understanding.

Now, we will be introducing this legislation on Wednesday and we will not be  accepting the Opposition’s amendments. Mr Abbott needs to say what his  position will be if his amendments fail. We’ll be opposing the amendments in  the House and we’ll be opposing them in the Senate. I note the announced  position of the Greens party is that they will oppose the legislation and they  will not support any Opposition amendments. So we’ll need to see how this  plays out through the House of Representatives and the Senate. But we’ll be  opposing their amendments and we’ll be proceeding in both houses to ensure  that every Liberal and National Party member or senator, if it’s their position,  votes against the legalisation and normalisation of offshore processing, if they  want to pretend to the Australian people that offshore processing is okay,  then they need to support the Government’s amendments, otherwise their  position will be seen for the hollow one and hypocritical one that it is.

I’m happy to take a few questions. I do have another commitment elsewhere,  but I’m happy to take a few questions.

JOURNALIST: Isn’t your real choice now between Nauru and going back to  onshore?

BOWEN: I’ve said consistently, the Prime Minister has said consistently,  Nauru is not a disincentive in and of itself, it’s expensive and we would not be  going down that road.

JOURNALIST: But how can you really credibly criticise the Opposition  amendment when two minutes ago this was your policy, a year ago?

BOWEN: Well, because we’ve negotiated with Malaysia the fundamental  tenets of the Refugee Convention -

JOURNALIST: [inaudible] fundamental commitment a year ago.

BOWEN: - And, Michelle, if I could finish the point, we’ve negotiated those  commitments with Malaysia which achieves that objective.

Now it is Mr Abbott whose policy, not a year ago, not last week, not  yesterday - as we stand today is to send asylum seekers to a non-signatory  country with no protections built in. Now how he can justify that position is  beyond me. That is the hypocrisy that is very, very clear in the Liberal Party’s  position. This is not about history, they today as we speak, have two highly  contradictory policies and unless he can give you, and the Australian people  and the Parliament, adequate account for that inconsistency, then we are  entitled to call the hypocrisy for what it is.

JOURNALIST: Assuming that you stick to your position and the Opposition  sticks to its position, these amendments, what you want to get - the Malaysia  deal - won’t go ahead. So is it fair to say your policy is pretty much stuffed?

BOWEN: Well let’s see how it plays out in the Parliament. This is a  Parliament where neither side has a majority in either house. There will be  discussions with the crossbenchers I’m sure from both parties about the  Government’s position, the Opposition’s position and we need to see how that  plays out. Very clearly the Opposition will be moving amendments, we’ll be  opposing them. Whether the Opposition can carry the day in either house is  just simply not clear yet, they may be able to, they may not, we just don’t  know.

JOURNALIST: Is there any possibility that you would split the Bill to have  the bit concerning unaccompanied minors from the rest of it, or is it all - or  do you commit now that it all goes through as one?

BOWEN: In fairness, I’m not sure what the Liberal Party position is on  unaccompanied minors, I’m not sure if they’ve made announcements about  that. They certainly haven’t indicated anything to us. What’s very clear is that  the legal advice is unquestionable that transferring unaccompanied minors to

anywhere - Malaysia, Nauru, PNG, anywhere else - would be highly difficult  and subject to such a level of judicial review that it would not be workable in  any sense. So if you’re going to have offshore processing, you need to pass  the Government’s amendments on unaccompanied minors as well.

JOURNALIST: How confident are you that you can get your amendments  through the House, if not the Senate? I know that you’ve had discussions  with some of the crossbench.

BOWEN: This is a matter which we’ll need to see play out, Andrew. I’m not  going to predict, I can’t pre-empt. This is a Parliament where votes are  difficult to pre-empt; its difficult for the Opposition to pre-empt whether they

can get their legislation through - their amendments through - and we’ll be  taking each vote as it comes. There are many permutations here, many  possible outcomes of the results of different amendments in each House.

We won’t be resting, we’ll be introducing the legislation, we’ll be arguing for it  on the floor of the House, in discussions with crossbenchers, and we’ll be  arguing against their amendments and we’ll need to see how it pans out. And  as I say, I think its now for Mr Abbott to answer, if he can’t succeed in his  amendments - if he can’t - where will he stand on the legislation. Will he  oppose the legislation or not?

JOURNALIST: What’s the timetable, when would you expect the final vote?

BOWEN: Well, the Parliament is in many senses a master of its own destiny.  We’ll be introducing it on Wednesday, the Leader of the House will then make  determinations as to the relevant passage. The Opposition have previously  said that they would expedite the passage through the House, whether that is  still the case, you’d have to ask Mr Abbott.

JOURNALIST: On Thursday, could it be Thursday?

BOWEN: Look, the normal circumstances would apply, which is I would  introduce the legislation on Wednesday, it would then be adjourned and then  when it comes back on for a debate and a vote, I’m not yet in a position to  speculate.

JOURNALIST: What contingencies are in place to deal with onshore  processing should this fall over?

BOWEN: Well the situation is that onshore processing is the current situation  in the absence of any agreement; we do that. We’ve had a reduction in the  number of people in detention facilities over the last three months of a  considerable nature - of around 2,000 people - so we would obviously be  continuing to process people in existing detention facilities.

Over and above that, in the medium to long term, that’s something I would  then deal with. I’m not in a position at this stage to be pre-empting any  particular policy response in terms of onshore processing.

JOURNALIST: You have credited though that reduction - you’ve credited the  Malaysia deal with that reduction. So now if the Malaysia deal is stalled, what  is your fallback?

BOWEN: Well we want to see the Malaysia arrangement implemented  because you are right, it has had an impact in terms of announcement on  arrivals. It was always going to have the maximum impact after it was  implemented, when people saw planes taking people to Malaysia. You know,  the Opposition says, ‘Well, what’s your Plan B’? Well that is not the question,  the question is will you authorise Plan A? Will the Parliament allow Plan A?  That’s the question that the Opposition is yet to answer.

JOURNALIST: But does that mean that you don’t have a contingency plan? I  mean, you’re refusing to say whether the Government has a contingency plan  to something that is now totally up in the air.

BOWEN: Well, no. Look, very clearly if this legislation doesn’t pass then  offshore processing will be regarded as being unlawful and therefore the  obvious result of that is onshore processing, that’s the obvious result if the  legislation doesn’t pass, but we’re not there yet; we’re not there yet. We’ll be

moving the legislation, we’ll be opposing the Opposition’s position and then  we’ll be vigorously arguing it in the House and in the Senate.

Ends



