

THE HON DR CRAIG EMERSON MP  MINISTER FOR TRADE



Transcript

SKY’S AM AGENDA WITH KIERAN GILBERT  FEBRUARY 15, 2011

E&OE

Subjects:  Health funding, Cabinet leaks, Opposition rifts, US budget, Asylum-seekers.



KIERAN GILBERT: Joining me on the program to discuss this and the  other matters of the day, from Sydney the Trade  Minister, Craig Emerson, and from Brisbane the  Shadow Attorney-General, Senator George Brandis.  Gentlemen, good morning.

CRAIG EMERSON: Good morning.

GEORGE BRANDIS: Morning, Kieran.

GILBERT: Craig, first to you. The former Prime Minister there

stating publicly his support. Given he invested so much  time and energy into the previous plan, that would  have been hard to do, wouldn't it?

EMERSON: I don't think so, as Julia indicated in announcing our  plan, as she said, this has been built on the shoulders  of Kevin Rudd's plan. That is true. The major variation  is that there'll be a 50-50 partnership in the funding of

growth and the original plan that Kevin put to the  Premiers was 60-40.

Now the truth of the matter is that Premier Barnett did

not want to and didn't agree to forgoing some GST  revenue. There were two options: one, no health  reform or, two, make the variation  of a 50-50  partnership. That variation was made. Kevin's  endorsed the plan, as he would - he's a member of  Cabinet - and he is supportive of the plan, most of the  essential features of which he developed, so it's no  surprise.

GILBERT: But like his plan, Craig Emerson, this is not a done

deal yet, is it? It hasn't. . . the final deal hasn't been  signed and Barry O'Farrell - I spoke to him yesterday  on this program  -   he's far from endorsing this and,  indeed, has got a lot of doubts about the plan.

EMERSON: Well, he's the Opposition leader at this stage. There's  an election, I think in late-March, and I think in those  circumstances Mr O'Farrell's not really in a position to  say he endorses every particular feature of it, including  the detail which is still to be developed. This was the  heads of agreement. There are some matters of detail  to be determined but I thought in reading the papers  today, Kieran, and watching the electronic media last  night, that there's very strong support for this plan,  including from the AMA, from the architects of  Medicare.

And I note in passing that Peter Dutton has indicated  this morning that he would pull Medicare apart. That  puts him in the same category as John Howard, who  once promised to do that and suffered the

consequences. So I think Peter Dutton will follow the  same path as Peter Shack. You might say ‘Peter who?’

Well, he was the health minister - shadow health  minister - leading up to the 1990 election when he had  to confess that they completely botched health policy. I  reckon Peter Dutton will be going down that path too.

GILBERT: Senator Brandis, is there a risk here that through the

comments of Mr Dutton and Tony Abbott, the leader,  slamming this deal, if it is a national agreement, signed  and delivered later in the year, doesn't . . .  isn't this  just another example of the Liberal leader being too  negative, risking looking too negative on everything?

BRANDIS: It's not our job to endorse bad policy, it's our job to hold  the Government to account.

Now, Kieran, the only way in which you could say that

this plan is built on the shoulders of Kevin Rudd's  health plan is that Julia Gillard decapitated Kevin  Rudd's health plan. This is so much less than the  Labor Party promised. It's their third go at this in three  years but in each of their previous two iterations of  their health plan, the core concept was what was called  the dominant funding model, that the Commonwealth  would be the dominant funder of hospital costs. And  the Government, under pressure from some of the  state premiers who weren't prepared to accept the  GST clawback, has completely abandoned what Kevin  Rudd, time and again, described as the central reform  with which his health plan was identified.

Now, there are so many holes in this plan: there's

nothing for mental health, there's nothing for aged  care. Although it said that it's a 50-50 funding model, in  fact, that's only partly true. It's a funding model  whereby by 2017-18, so in two parliaments' time, the  Commonwealth would assume responsibility for 50 per  cent of extra hospital funding.

So this is in so many ways a woefully inadequate

substitute for the heroic rhetoric of Kevin Rudd.

GILBERT: But, Senator Brandis, if all the Liberal states do sign

up, don't you just look obstructionist and negative in  those comments if the other Liberal leaders back it?

BRANDIS: Well, Kieran, as an Opposition we're certainly entitled  to point out that this government has delivered so  much less than Mr Rudd promised to deliver through  the dominant funding model. That's the first point.

The second point is it's not a done deal yet, as you

pointed out in your question to Craig. Mr O'Farrell, who  almost everybody in the country expects will be the  Premier of New South Wales by the end of next month,  has reserved his position so we are , the Government,   is yet to deliver on this outcome. But, you know, we  can see it in the broad . . . we can see the skeleton  agreement in the heads of agreement and the point we  make is that this is far short of what Kevin Rudd  promised would be his signature reform in health.

EMERSON: Now, Kieran…

GILBERT: Craig Emerson, Craig, I'll let you comment but I also

want to talk to you about the nature of the debate out  of Cabinet the last week. You know, there's got to be  concerns among your colleagues whether or not Kevin  Rudd had a hissy fit or he didn't; the fact that that  interpretation out of the Cabinet room made its way  into the papers, has got to be a worry for the Prime  Minister, doesn't it?

EMERSON: And I'm happy to come to that but George Brandis, as  the Deputy Leader in the Senate, has just described

this health plan, which has been the subject of a  signed heads of agreement for all states and territories,  he described it, quote, ‘as poor policy’. Now, I think the  Australian people would like to know from the Deputy  Leader of the Coalition in the Senate whether he will,  and if his party room will support what he calls poor  policy, whether they are going to actually seek to block  this like they've sought to block everything else, like  Tony Abbott, before he'd even seen it, said he  opposed it. By the way, Tony Abbott's now saying, ‘oh,  Kevin Rudd's plan wasn't too bad’. He opposed that  too!

Now, I think the Australian people, who are concerned  much about the quality of the health care that they will  get rather than whether it's 60-40 or 50-50 they should  know whether the Coalition is going to block this or not  and George Brandis just described it as poor policy.

GILBERT: What about - tell us about the problems, though, within  your Cabinet. Because if it's leaking that's not a good  sign for any Prime Minister, is it?

EMERSON: I'm happy to come to that now but I would like an

answer from George. I think the Australian people  expect an answer from George Brandis on that.

In relation to the matters that you've raised, obviously

there was some disclosure about, or allegations or  suggestions about, what Kevin Rudd did or didn't do  towards the end of a Cabinet meeting. I was actually  there. He didn't leave in a hissy fit. That is incorrect.  But I accept your basic point, that there shouldn't be  such disclosures out of Cabinet. There's some more  media on it today. I think Julia Gillard's absolutely right.  We should be concentrating on delivering better health  care to the country. That's what we're doing through

this policy. We'll continue to focus on good policy and,  you know, we do want to actually deliver this health  agreement.

GILBERT: Okay. Before I go to Senator Brandis to respond to

your assertions, I want to ask you, have you got a  sense of who might be behind the leaks?

EMERSON: [Laughs] Good try, Kieran. I mean, if I knew I'm not

sure I'd tell you and I wouldn't know for sure anyway  so, look, these things happen. We certainly…

GILBERT: Just try.

EMERSON: We just…

GILBERT: Just tell us who you think it might be.

EMERSON: I have no idea, but I can certainly confirm this because  it was in the media all last week: and that is that the  Shadow Cabinet has been leaking like a sieve, seeking  to undermine Julie Bishop and so on and so on and on  it goes.

GILBERT: Nice - nice diversion. Let's got to Senator Brandis. You  heard what Craig Emerson had to say. Here's your  opportunity to respond.

BRANDIS: Well, first of all, we don't have an agreement yet. We

will - and we won't know whether there is an

agreement until after the New South Wales election. I  expect, and Mr O'Farrell, assuming that he would be  the new premier of New South Wales and his new  cabinet, will consider the matter. So let's not get ahead  of ourselves, Craig, but it's not the Opposition's…

EMERSON: But are you going to pass ‘poor policy’?

BRANDIS: It's not . . .  it's not the Opposition's role to support poor

policy, and we don't.

EMERSON: So, you've described it as ‘poor policy’ so you're saying  you won't support it.

BRANDIS: And if I may - if I may be allowed…

EMERSON: You'll vote against it?

BRANDIS: If I may be allowed to finish, please, Craig, nor are we

impressed with the fact that this seems to be a plan not  for more doctors and nurses but a whole layer of new  bureaucrats. That's the first point I want to make.

In relation to the leaks from the Cabinet, let me just say

this. I know Craig pretty well. I think he's a pretty  honest man. If Craig is telling the truth - which I think  we may assume he is - that raises this question: which  ministers, which cabinet ministers are putting it about  that Kevin Rudd did stalk out - storm out - of the  Cabinet room in a what was called a hissy fit, and if  that's not true why do we have members, senior  members of the Cabinet putting about mi… - untruths  about what Mr Rudd did?

The fact is that this government is deeply divided. It's

been deeply divided ever since the political  assassination of  Kevin Rudd by Julia Gillard on 23  June last year, and I don't think those problems are  going to go away…

EMERSON: George, you…

BRANDIS: …because they're endemic.

EMERSON: George, you have a fascination with internal politics.  That's fine but the Australian people want to know  whether, as a result of this historic deal, they are going  to get improved healthcare. And you've indicated two  things…

BRANDIS: Well, ha…

EMERSON: …one, that  this is ‘poor policy’…

BRANDIS: [indistinct] …as if they are.

EMERSON: You've indicated that this is ‘poor policy’ and the

Coalition will not vote for ‘poor policy’. You have  effectively indicated…

GILBERT: Well, let's. . .Craig, I think. . .

EMERSON:     . . . the Coalition will block this as they, as they sought  to block the last package.

BRANDIS: Craig, Craig, Craig. Craig, I'm sure I'm - Craig - I'm

sure I'm old enough and ugly enough to express my  own views in my own words, so please don't…

EMERSON: You're the Deputy Leader of the Opposition in the

Senate.

BRANDIS: Please don't put - please - indeed. Please don't put

words in my mouth.  I think the Australian people - I  think, I think the . . .

EMERSON: You said the Coalition will not support ‘poor policy’ and  that this is ‘poor policy’.

BRANDIS: Craig, just settle down, settle down.

EMERSON: I'm perfectly settled, George.

BRANDIS: The Opposition, I think, is entitled to draw attention to  the fact that this government is split down the middle,  with Cabinet Ministers leaking against the former Prime  Minister in a way that I don't think we've seen in this  country since the days of the Whitlam Government.

GILBERT: Okay. Senator Brandis, let me ask you, though, about  the - just quickly, we've got to take a break in a  moment - but the comments that Tony Abbott's made  to a few of your colleagues, apparently saying ‘you've  got to pull your head’ in as well. Not you specifically,  but some of your Liberal Party and Coalition  frontbenchers, that they also need to show a bit of  discipline.

Would you be supportive of Mr Abbott in that pursuit?

Do you have any idea of who might be causing some  issues on your side?

EMERSON: Name them, George.

BRANDIS: Look, look, look, look, last week was untidy for the

Opposition. I think that's freely conceded, although this  is as nothing compared with a Cabinet that is split  down the middle.

EMERSON: [Laughs]

BRANDIS: Having said that . . .

EMERSON: Righto, George, that's very persuasive.

BRANDIS: If I may finish. Having said that, as Christopher Pyne

said on Sunday morning on one of the chat shows,  there isn't a cigarette paper of difference between any  of the senior leadership of the Coalition, not a bit of it.  And Mr Robb . . .

EMERSON: Oh, come on George.

BRANDIS: And Mr Robb, I might say . . .

EMERSON: . . .wants Joe Hockey's job.

BRANDIS: . . .put out a statement on  . . . Craig, would you please

stop interrupting me? I didn't interrupt you! Please stop  interrupting me.

EMERSON: Well, these are very long monologues.

BRANDIS: Mr Robb put out a statement on Sunday in which he

drew attention to the fact that the press report that  excited this last bit of media excitability was in fact of a  story that was seven months old, a conversation that  happened before the election. And in that statement . .  .

GILBERT: Okay.

BRANDIS: . . . Mr Robb affirmed his complete support for Mr

Hockey.

EMERSON: So no undermining of Julie Bishop? There's

undermining of the . . .

BRANDIS: No.

EMERSON: . . . Deputy Leader of the Opposition. It's rampant, and  you know that.

BRANDIS: No, Craig, Craig, you're . . .

GILBERT: Gentlemen, let's take a break.

BRANDIS: . . . in Fantasyland.

GILBERT: Okay, Senator Brandis, thanks. Craig, pause for the

moment, hold fire. We'll take a break, we'll be right  back. Stay with us.

[Unrelated items - commercial break]

GILBERT: Welcome back to AM Agenda. Let's turn our attention  now to Washington for a moment, where US President  Obama has proposed a budget to slash that country's  deficit  $1.1 trillion over the next 10 years.

OBAMA: If we do this in part by eliminating waste and cutting

whatever spending, we can do without. As I start, as a  start, I've called for a freeze on annual domestic  spending over the next five years. Even as we cut  waste and inefficiency, this budget freeze will require  some tough choices. It will mean cutting things that I  care deeply about, for example, community action  programs in low-income neighbourhoods and towns,  and community development block rents that so many  of our cities and states rely on.

But if we're going to walk the walk when it comes to

fiscal discipline, these kinds of cuts will be necessary.

GILBERT: Sky News US reporter, David Lipson filed this report on  the proposed budget a short time ago.

REPORTER: During his inauguration speech two years ago, the US  President Barack Obama pledged to cut the US deficit  in half by the end of his first term. Well, the budget that  he has proposed, handed down, today does put his  administration on track to achieve that by cutting the  deficit to the tune of $1.1 trillion over the next 10 years.

To do that, he would increase taxes in areas like taxes

for the rich, tax incentives and subsidies for oil and  gas, and also increasing taxes for areas like financial  institutions. On the other hand, he is also talking about  cutting significant programs, 200 programs that  traditionally are favoured by the Democrat side of  politics here and also favoured by Barack Obama  himself. Also, cutting significantly domestic spending in  areas like defence and transportation.

But as he pulls one lever with one hand, he's pushing a

lever with the other hand hoping to stimulate growth  here in the US by investing, investing and spending in  areas like education, innovation and also a national  broadband plan, a wireless plan to increase high-speed internet for Americans, so some similarities,  some echoes there with the policy of the Gillard  Government itself.

Now, the biggest challenge that Barack Obama is

facing, despite these significant cuts, is going to be  getting this budget through the House. It's now of  course controlled by his opponents in the Republican  Party, and they say that these cuts simply don't go far

enough, and point out that even with the $1.1 trillion  reduction to the deficit, debt is continue - is going to  continue to spiral and will actually accumulate by $7.2  trillion over the next decade. And those Republicans  say that that's just not good enough. It'll be interesting  to see what they actually do when this budget comes  before them in the House on Capitol Hill.

In Washington DC, this is David Lipson for Sky News.

GILBERT: David Lipson there in Washington.

Trade Minister, Craig Emerson, as you've, you heard

there, some tough decisions being made by President  Obama, but the Republicans want him to go further.

EMERSON: Yes, they do. It's called de-leveraging, and this is

happening amongst governments around the world, it's  happening in the corporate sector, it's happening in the  household sector, and that is that people are winding  back on the debt that they've accumulated. And  obviously the United States, through the global  recession, has accumulated large debts and now  they're going to have to deal with that by cutting  expenditure and raising some taxes. As you say, the  Republicans want them to go further.

But what I think this means for Australia is that there

won't be rapid growth in the US economy; there'll be  moderate growth at best. Fortunately, a lot of our  growth prospects are related to our position and  government decisions made here in our own region.  So we're less directly linked to the US economy than  we were before, but it does mean that global growth  will not kick up, you know, to the sorts of levels we saw  before the global recession.

I also note that George, who will be speaking next, said

last week that the Coalition here in Australia would  never have gone into deficit in the first place. He was  joined by the health spokesman Peter Dutton in  making that remark. This new position means that the  Coalition, when confronted, if they were in government,  with a $200 billion hit to revenue, would have cut  government spending by $200 billion - exactly the  prescription that caused the Great Depression!

GILBERT: Okay, we're talking about Obama, and Craig, you've  managed to turn that back to a domestic . . .

EMERSON: It's all about economic policy, Kieran.

GILBERT: A domestic kick at Senator Brandis. So, Senator

Brandis, your thoughts, first of all on President Obama.  At least in the United States, it does look like things  have turned around. Unemployment continues to fall,  at least in recent months.

BRANDIS: Well, Kieran, without having studied the details of the  US Budget, I think what we can say is that President  Obama is doing what we in the Opposition have been  saying for a long time now the Australian Government  should be doing. That is, showing the character and  the discipline to seriously tackle waste and government  spending, so as to reduce debt. And it's something that  the Gillard Government has singularly failed to do,  even to the point of deciding to put on a new tax to  fund flood reconstruction, rather than find the money  out of fat in the budget.

Now, I think it's fair to say, if I may come to the point

Craig made, that the public knows that Coalition  governments always have a better record when it  comes to managing public sector spending and

keeping the country out of debt than Labor

governments do.

And it always brings a smile to my face, I must say,

Kieran, when I hear a Labor politician make a virtue of  bringing the budget back into surplus.

The only reason the budget is in the worst position it's

ever been in peace time is because of decisions ...

GILBERT: Okay.

BRANDIS: . . . wasteful decision made and billions of dollars

wasted by this Labor Government.

GILBERT: We have had that - we've had that debate many times.  I do want to ask Craig Emerson quickly about the costs  on another front, the asylum-seeker cost.

Craig, we've only got about two minutes - a bit under

two minutes left on the program. But apparently, two  and a half million dollars a month paid to house about  500 asylum-seekers outside detention centres, and  apparently $800,000 for one Darwin hotel over a  fortnight last year.

These figures do seem quite large. What's your

response to that?

EMERSON: Well, my response is that the Coalition Government  itself housed asylum-seekers in motels, including in my  own city of Brisbane. This is something that does  happen from time to time. It's more likely to be used  when there is a transition from detention, that is, where

asylum-seekers are moving into the community  because their asylum-seeker claims have been upheld.

I'm not saying that these are the circumstances here

because I simply don't know. But it is something that  has been done by the Coalition in the past and has  been done by Labor now. And I will add one PS to the  debate that we've just had. I'm glad George is  endorsing the US position of getting the budget back  into surplus. He failed to mention that the Australian  Government will get the budget back into surplus way,  way ahead of the US Government. . . .

GILBERT: Okay. Just quickly, Senator Brandis, we've only got

about 30 seconds left, but quickly your thoughts on the  asylum-seeker costs that we mentioned.

BRANDIS: Well, this is what happens when you lose control of the  borders through weak policy. And you can't run and  hide from the fact, Craig, that the Howard Government  had this problem solved. We had boat arrivals down to  an average of three a year. Last year, it was . . .

EMERSON: Well, why in 2007 - in 2007 they were in motels.

GEORGE BRANDIS: Please don't int . . . please stop interrupting, Craig.  Please stop interrupting, Craig.

Last year in 2010, as a result of your Government's

weak policies, the people smugglers got back into  business and last year we had 145 boats arrive. So, go  figure. That there's pressure on the system because  you've given a green light to the people smugglers and  they are coming in flotillas across the Timor Sea.

EMERSON: And if you licked the problem, why were  they in motels?

GILBERT: Senator Brandis and Craig Emerson,

gentlemen, thank you both very much  for your time, a lively debate this  morning.

EMERSON: Thanks a lot, Kieran.

GILBERT: That's all we've got time for on AM

Agenda. I'm Kieran Gilbert, thanks for  your company.





