CHRIS BOWEN MP

MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP  *TRANSCRIPT*

DOORSTOP, PERTH



TUESDAY, 19 JULY 2011



Subjects: Skilled migration in Perth, Malaysia transfer  arrangements.

CHRIS BOWEN: Thanks for coming everybody. It’s a great pleasure to be  here at the AMMA Conference in Perth.

This morning I’ve announced that Perth will be eligible under the Regional  Skilled Migration Scheme. Now, most of Australia is eligible under the  Regional Skilled Migration Scheme except for Sydney, Melbourne, Brisbane,  Gold Coast, Newcastle, Wollongong and until today, Perth.

Perth is a city where our labour needs are particularly acute. Every time I  come to Perth people talk to me about the difficulties in getting appropriate  skilled and labour requirements - whether it be restaurants, whether it be the  resources sector or the construction sector or across the board. It’s  appropriate, in my view, that Perth be covered by the Regional Skilled  Migration Scheme. This will give employers more flexibility. It means that  workers who are already here under the temporary 457 program, elsewhere  in the country, or in Western Australia, will be eligible for permanent  migration to Perth under this scheme under employer-sponsorship. It will also  give employers some more flexibility in sourcing skilled workers from  overseas.

This is a sensible step, it’s a measured step. It means that Perth - with the  most acute labour needs in the country - has the same access to offshore  migration and 457s as places as Darwin, Adelaide and Hobart have enjoyed  for some time. This complements the measures announced by the  Government in the Budget - the increase in the skilled migration program and  the introduction of enterprise migration agreements, the introduction of  regional migration agreements - ensuring that our skilled migration levels are  appropriate, across the country.

But, of course, national initiatives are not enough. We need local and regional  initiatives as well. That’s why the announcement that I’m making today is  perfectly appropriate for the Perth economy; and I think working with local  businesses, local industries and local unions will see some improvement in the  availability of workers in Perth and give Perth businesses the flexibility and  support they need to make the maximum contribution to the Australian

economy and society.

Happy to take some questions.

JOURNALIST: Has the State Government being lobbying for you to make  this move?

BOWEN: Yes, the State Government has been talking to me about this.  Minister Collier did ask me to consider this. Any state minister can ask me to  consider this. Regardless of where they’re from or what party they’re from, I  always take those measures seriously.

It’s not only the Western Australian State Government that’s asked for this, a  number of industry groups made the case to me in general, in broad terms,  over a period of time, that this sort of initiative would be beneficial for Perth.

JOURNALIST: You said that local workers would get priority, how will you  ensure that?

BOWEN: All our skilled migration programs have measures in place to ensure  that we have consideration to locally available workers. In addition, in the  Budget we had a $3 billion training and investment package to assist people  to get the skills they need to work in industries in demand, Welfare to Work,  and making sure that we have the opportunity for Australians to move into  jobs is always the first priority. But the simple fact is, even with all the  investment in the world, we will not have enough domestic workers to fill the  gaps in places such as Perth and throughout Western Australia.

JOURNALIST: How much easier will it be for workers to bring in skilled  migrants? Is it about cutting red-tape?

BOWEN: It is about cutting red-tape; it’s about two things. It’s about 457  workers already here in Australia, who are already making a contribution to  the Australian economy but are here on a temporary basis; who like it here,  who want to stay and where their employer is willing to give them a job. It’s  making it easier for them to stay in Australia longer, if they are semi-skilled  workers to stay in Australia permanently indeed.

It’s also about providing a bit more flexibility for business, if they’re unable to  fill particularly skills needs domestically in Australia, to have access to 457  visas and other migration programs offshore - for those particular skills  needs.

JOURNALIST: Will this new initiative make it harder for local workers to get  into the resources industry?

BOWEN: No, not at all. Of course, the resources sector is already covered  under this regional scheme - those parts of which operate outside Perth; and

I think if you talk to anybody in the resources sector, they will tell you that  the training of local Australian residents is very strong, that their demand is  very strong but it is simply not possible to meet all that demand simply with  domestic workers.

The opportunities for Australians to take jobs will always be the first priority  for the Government.

JOURNALIST: The State Government has asked you to consider other  changes to the migration program - I think around English language tests  and also the points test for other categories of visa. Will you make - consider  making those changes?

BOWEN: I’ll deal with each of them. On the points test: a new points test  came into place on the first of July this year. It’s a very important change. It  means we are matching the skills that are coming into Australia with the  demand for those skills. It’s better calibrating the demand for migration to  Australia with the demand for employment from Australian businesses. I think  those are important measures. We need to let those changes be implemented  and to work, and then to monitor their effectiveness. But I think we have the  balance right there.

In relation to other changes - what was the other one you mentioned?

JOURNALIST: English language tests.

BOWEN: English language tests: again, as I said at the Conference, English  language requirements are very important. It’s important that people speak  English so that they can make the maximum contribution to the Australian  economy. It’s also in their best interests: their health and welfare at work will  be much enhanced if they speak English, but also they will have a better  awareness of their rights and responsibilities.

Of course, I constantly monitor all the requirements under the skilled  migration program. If there are sensible changes to that can be made at  some point, to make sure that we have the balance right, then I would make  them. But at the moment I think that our English language requirements are  appropriately balanced.

JOURNALIST: So are you inclined to make any more changes or do you  think the balance is about right?

BOWEN: I think we have the balance about right; that’s not to rule out any  changes into the future. I always keep these matters under constant  monitoring. I think there is a balance to be struck. You do need to attract  workers from countries where English is not the first language - it’s pretty  self-evident as to what the major source countries of those workers are - and  there is a lot of demand for people from those countries.



At the same time, I do think it’s important that people who come and work in  Australia work in an environment where English is the national language,  English is the language of the workplace, and it’s appropriate for them to be  able to speak the language English, at a functional level - not at an academic  level, not at a level which requires them to be able to communicate over and  above the requirements of the workplace, but to be able to communicate in a  way appropriate for their workplace.

JOURNALIST: Mr Bowen it’s been more than two months since the  Malaysian proposed swap was announced. Are you frustrated that it’s taken  this length of time?

BOWEN: No, I’m pleased with the progress that we’ve made in our  consultations with Malaysia. Those consultations are at an advanced stage.  We’ve also, as I said publicly, been consulting the United Nations High  Commissioner for Refugees, those discussions are at a very advanced stage  and I look forward to being able to say more about that in the not to distant  future.

I’d also make this point: we’ve seen a very significant reduction in the number  of boat arrivals this year and since the announcement of the agreement with  Malaysia. I don’t say that the announcement of the agreement with Malaysia  is entirely responsible, but clearly it has had some impact on whether to make  the dangerous journey to Australia by boat. I think if people are concerned  about that, then they will welcome the fact that there has been a significant  reduction in the number of boat arrivals this year and since the  announcement of the arrangement with Malaysia.



JOURNALIST: Can you give an estimation of how long it will take?

BOWEN: We’re at an advanced stage.

JOURNALIST: Will Serco and DIAC process those people in Malaysia?

BOWEN: I’ll be announcing the full details, of course, of the Malaysia  arrangement when we are in a position to sign the announcement with  Malaysia. Of course, we will be transferring 800 people to Malaysia. They will  be processed by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees - that  has been publicly stated before. In turn, we will take 4,000 people who’ve  been mandated by the UNHCR in Malaysia, who have been waiting patiently  for resettlement, and I’m very pleased about the fact that we’re able to  increase our refugee intake to do that.

JOURNALIST: Your position is that the announcement of the Malaysia  Solution has actually already contributed to a lessening in the number of  boats?

BOWEN: I think it’s inarguable that we’ve seen a reduction in the number of  boats this year and a reduction since the announcement of the Malaysian  arrangement, I think that’s inarguable. We will, of course, continue to see  boats arrive, we will continue to see people smugglers try that on, testing the  resolve of the Australian Government and the Australian people.

Of course we will continue to see that, but as I said from the beginning, if you  have the situation whereby you pay your money to a people smuggler, take  the very dangerous boat journey to Australia, simply to face the prospect of  being transferred to Malaysia or another country and not to have guaranteed  resettlement in Australia, it is a very big call. And I’m glad that less people are  making that very dangerous journey to Australia.

We will of course continue to see more boat arrivals, but I think it’s a change  to the dynamic completely, to have people weighing the decision up, whether  to take that dangerous boat journey to Australia with no guarantee of being  processed or resettled in Australia.

JOURNALIST: You’re making the application for skilled migrant workers  such so they only have to wait a couple of days, why can’t you speed up the  process of refugee applications in the same way?



BOWEN: Well look, we put considerable resources into processing refugee  applications for asylum seekers. Of course, when you have large numbers it  does take time. I’ve made a number of changes: both a new system to  consider asylum claims, also I’ve been working very closely with the Attorney  General and seen a very considerable speed up of the security clearances  through ASIO which is a welcome thing. But the bottom line is, I want to see  Australia taking more genuine refugees who’ve been waiting for resettlement  offshore in different places.

JOURNALIST: What are the checks that you do on skilled migrants?

BOWEN: The skilled migrants go through the appropriate and normal  background checks.

JOURNALIST: When the Malaysia deal was first announced, the community  of Christmas Island was told at a public meeting that the people would stay  for 72 hours, three nights. Why has it taken this long, what have been some  of the sticking points?

BOWEN: Well I think you’re matching two different things with respect.  You’re talking about how long it would take to transfer people to Malaysia  once the arrangement was settled. At the time we announced the  arrangement with Malaysia, the Prime Minister and I said that it would take  some weeks to sort out the finer operational details and that’s exactly what’s  happened.

It’s important we get the balance right, I want to get every detail of this  policy correct and that does take some time. It also takes time to negotiate  and discuss with the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees as well  as the Malaysian Government. But progress is very well advanced and there  has been a spirit of goodwill between Malaysia, Australia and the United  Nations High Commissioner - all of us want to break the people smugglers  business model, all of us want to pull the rug out of the advertising campaign  for people smugglers. They sell a product which says you can come to  Australia and be guaranteed processing and resettlement in Australia; I want  to pull the rug out from that business model and that’s exactly what the  Malaysia arrangement does.

JOURNALIST: Mr Bowen, are you embarrassed about the five detainees at  Darwin that are still protesting [inaudible]?

BOWEN: Well look, you see protests in detention centres from time to time,  they protest over a range of matters. In some cases it is the length of time, in  other cases it’s because they don’t like the outcome of their processing: in

other words, it’s been indicated to them that the Department of Immigration  or the Independent Review regards them as not as refugees and they need to  take steps to return to their home country.

Of course, they don’t take that news well from time to time and you see  protests. Those protests are managed by my Department, by Serco and by  the relevant law enforcement authorities, with a view to all the circumstances.  I make this point: protests, jumping on rooves, other sorts of protests; make

no difference to people’s asylum claims, it makes no difference, it does not  increase the likelihood that they’ll be accepted as a refugee, and in fact if they  engage in violent activity of course, it means that the character test can come  into place and they can be denied a permanent visa.

JOURNALIST: It seems in this case that the five people on the roof are  actually protesting because they say that other asylum seekers who are lying  about their nationality are actually jumping the queue, getting ahead -

BOWEN: Well I’m not going to comment on their particular claims. Of  course, you do see some people who get their claims processed more quickly  than others because their case is stronger than others; you do see some  people with more simple cases and other people with more complex cases.  That can lead to some concerns amongst the detainee population. The  alternative that some people might put is that those people should not be  processed, that is not a proposition which I would agree with.

JOURNALIST: Curtin Detention Centre’s now by far and away the biggest in  Australia. Is there an acknowledgement by you or within the Department that  Christmas Island is just too expensive and logistically too difficult?

BOWEN: No, it’s not a matter of Christmas Island being too expensive.

Christmas Island has had its population reduced by the Government  deliberately because that was the appropriate thing to do. It has a certain  capacity, I think we have taken very clear steps, whether it be the  development of other detention centre’s across the country or other  operational steps to ensure that the detainee population is managed  appropriately and spread appropriately across a range of detention facilities,  and Christmas Island will continue to be one of those facilities.

JOURNALIST: From a budgetary point of view though, may I ask, do you  think it’s more practical to have more people on the mainland than…?

BOWEN: Oh look, Christmas Island will always be the detention centre of  first arrival in Australia. Depending on the numbers of detainees in any  particular time you’ll have a range of measures in place. I would envisage the  number of detainees falling as the Malaysian arrangement comes into place  and we’ve already seen that occurring.

JOURNALIST: Can I just ask one more question about the skilled migration  issue, the State Government says that you and your Government don’t  understand the impact this has for WA. What would you say about that?

BOWEN: Well I think the proof is in the pudding. Here I am today making an  announcement indicating that the Federal Government is taking steps to deal  with the labour shortages in Perth and in fact making employers in Perth have  the capacity to bring more skilled labour and semi-skilled labour into their  businesses. I think it shows the Federal Government not only understands the  issues but is prepared to act on them.

JOURNALIST: And Mr Bowen, there might be still some people within Perth  who may not actually see this as good news and they may actually be fearing  an influx of overseas migrants, whether temporary or permanent. What would  you say to them to quell their fears?

BOWEN: It’s not a matter on an influx, it’s a matter of a sensible and  prudent measure to give Perth employers the same opportunities as  employers in Darwin and Adelaide and elsewhere across the country have, to

be part of the Regional Skilled Migration Scheme. There are 16,000 places  allocated for the Regional Skilled Migration Scheme across the country. This  simply gives Perth’s employers a chance to be part of that.

Of course, it’s appropriate that we have measures in place to deal with  infrastructure and environmental concerns about population and immigration  more generally. The Population Minister, Tony Burke and I work closely on  those matters. It’s also appropriate we have a Regional Skilled Migration  Scheme which recognises the area of greatest regional need in Australia,  which is Perth.

JOURNALIST: Those extra numbers are obviously going to put pressure on

housing and so forth, public transport, etc. I know they’re State issues, but is  the Federal Government perhaps going to do anything to assist with that as  well?

BOWEN: Well this Government is a Government which has shown interest in  urban infrastructure and investment in public transport. We have invested  more in urban public transport than any other Government in Australian

history and that would continue, but of course that is an appropriate thing to  do and that would apply across the board, across the country.

JOURNALIST: Can you just talk about the numbers, say here in Western  Australia. How many workers will we need, say by 2015, and how many of  those will be filled by local workers and how many of those would be filled by  skilled migrants?

BOWEN: Well look, there are various estimates. I think everybody agrees  that there’s a shortage in Perth of labour: everybody agrees, whether it be  Chambers of Commerce, Government and indeed other people who are  involved in this discussion. You’ll see various estimates as to what those  shortages will be. I’m not going to provide a running commentary on those,  but the shortages are significant.

JOURNALIST: What’s your own estimate though; you must have your own  estimate, the Government’s?

BOWEN: Yeah, sure. The shortages are significant, for example I’ve talked in  my speech earlier today about shortages of tradespeople in the resources  sector of 35,000 people by 2015. 2015 is not far away, and that applies in the  resources sector across the board, but of course, that means that  tradespeople are attracted out of Perth and into regional parts of Western  Australia to work in the mining sector and construction elsewhere.

So what we’re providing now is more flexibility and opportunity for employers  to use a suite of measures available to them and that includes, of course,  hiring domestic local workers, and we have a $3 billion investment package in  the last Budget to encourage retraining, investment in education and skills;  but also, as I say with the best will in the world, that won’t be enough. Perth  businesses and businesses across the country will always need skilled  migration to fill some of the gaps.

JOURNALIST: Will employers though have to prove that they’ve tried to look  domestically first?

BOWEN: There’s a range of measures in place for employers in terms of  labour testing and they would continue to be in place.

JOURNALIST: [inaudible] semi-skilled workers, you said that employers  need to demonstrate need, what’s the level of need?



BOWEN: Well look, as I say, it depends what scheme people apply under,  but generally speaking it is appropriate that employers can access semi-skilled  workers through the 457 program, but they’re semi-skilled workers who are  already in Australia, who’ve already proven their worth, are good employees  and who want to stay in Australia. And they would be available now for the  first time for Perth employers.



ENDS.

