Scott Morrison, MP

Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship



15 June 2011

BOWEN CONFIRMS 'NO CARE, NO RESPONSIBLITY' PLAN FOR MALAYSIA

Minister Bowen has told Parliament today that protection against human rights abuses for  people sent to Malaysia will be in the hands of a volunteer paramilitary force that is paid by  the arrest, and that asylum seekers will be on their own after a one off payment for their  transfer, Shadow Minister for Productivity and Population and Shadow Minister for  Immigration and Citizenship, Scott Morrison said today.

“Minister Bowen was unable to answer the most basic questions about his proposed people  swap deal with Malaysia today, despite the fact he has committed almost $300 million of  taxpayers funds, including even whether the children he plans to send to Malaysia will go to  school,” Mr Morrison said.

“This is a deal that will send up to 800 people to Malaysia, detain them, tag them and then  release them into the community, where they will basically have to fend for themselves,” he  said.

“The inability of the Minister to say how much will be spent on schooling, health care,  accommodation and for how long, should lead every Australian to question the integrity of  the Government’s people swap deal with Malaysia.

“The Minister could not even say how much would be paid to the UNHCR and IOM and other  agencies involved, how they would make payments, or even how much they were planing to  spend to provide the detention facility in Malaysia where people would apparently spend  their first six weeks.

“The Minister was responding to a consideration in detail debate in the Parliament on the  Budget, including the $300 million allocated for the Government’s proposed people swap  deal, that almost seven weeks later is still not complete.

“A list of the key questions asked about the Malaysia deal is attached.

“The Minister also said today that it will be the Malaysian Government that will be  responsible for ensuring people are well treated. This includes, by the Minister’s own  admission, controlling the 500,000 volunteer members of the paramilitary civil corps, known  as RELA that is tasked to police illegal immigration in Malaysia.

“Australians will not be comforted by the fact that the Gillard Government is placing the  protection of human rights in the hands of a paramilitary force that has been paid by the  arrest, can search without a warrant, can demand documentation and arbitrarily decide

whether it is genuine, is immune to prosecution, has the right to carry a gun or other  weapon, and has been reported by human rights groups to destroy documentation and  extort bribes from vulnerable asylum seekers living in Malaysia.

“Today the Minister confirmed that the control of these RELA members would be a matter for  the Malaysian Government and refused to say whether any thought or funding had been

given to train or get the message to the 500,000 RELA officers, to keeps their hands off  people sent from Australia.

“These types of arrangements are foreign to Australia and do not accord with our standards  and should be rejected.

“There is a better way forward by reopening the processing centre in Nauru and  reintroducing temporary protection visas. These measures are proven, more humane and  more cost effective.

“Despite their hollow rhetoric, Labor can simply not back up any guarantees they pretend to  give on human rights in Malaysia. Once released into the community, asylum seekers will be  vulnerable and alone.

“At the initial press conference the Prime Minister boasted that those sent to Malaysia would  not receive preferential treatment. It was a core point in the joint Prime Ministerial statement  issued with Malaysia.

“The Government can choose between a solution where Australian style human rights are  upheld on Nauru, or they can send men, women and children to Malaysia where they will  just have to deal with whatever comes their way,” Mr Morrison said.

The questions Mr Bowen needs to answer on the Malaysia people swap -

Can the Minister provide a breakdown of the $65.7 million to be spent over 4 years paid to  the UNHCR, the IOM, any other NGOs, the Malaysian Government and any agencies of the  Malaysian Government, and the purpose of these payments, in other words what are these  payments paying for?

What is the per-capita payment being made for each of the 800 persons to be transferred to  Malaysia to these various agencies, and are the payments for each person being made on a  one off basis upon their transfer, or annually over a period of years, and if so how many?

Are the payments being made for those transferred intended to cover support for the entire  duration of their stay or for a fixed period? If not for a fixed period what is the estimated  length of stay for all of those transferred to Malaysia?

What amounts have been put aside for any capital, building or refurbishment works for  facilities in Malaysia to accommodate people transferred to Malaysia? Where are those  facilities? What works are involved and what is the cost?

What allocation has been made from this programme or any other programme for the  training of the approximately 500,000 RELA members in Malaysia, the paramilitary civil  volunteer corps formed by the Malaysian Government to enforce their illegal immigration  laws, to ensure they do not abuse the human rights and liberties of any of the 800 people  transferred to Malaysia?

Can the Minister provide a breakdown of the $65.7 million to be paid to support those  transferred to Malaysia, for expenditure on health, education, accommodation, meals ,  transfers (including airfares), immigration processing, refugee status assessment, legal  support?

Can the Minister confirm that all children transferred to Malaysia will be sent to school for the  entire duration of their stay?

Will the $65.7 million spent by the agencies receiving these funds be paid directly to service  providers in areas such as education, health, accommodation, meals on a consumption  basis, or a fixed payment to the provider, with no reference to whether services are actually  used?

How much of the $65.7 million will be spent by the agencies receiving these payments on  administration?

What audit process has been put in place to monitor and report on the disbursement of  funds in Malaysia provided under this arrangement to support those transferred to Malaysia?  How will the Government be reporting on the disbursement of these funds to the Parliament,  in particular will they be subject to scrutiny by the Auditor General and when?

Of the $10 million allocated in departmental expenses, please provide a breakdown of the  costs of staff, including number of FTE staff, accommodation, travel, training, contractors  and other expenses?

What is the annual average resettlement cost to the Department of Immigration for each of  the additional 4,000 refugees to be accepted under the Malaysian agreement?

What is the estimated annual additional cost in Centrelink payments and other costs to  resettle an addition 4,000 refugees?



