CHRIS BOWEN MP

MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP  *TRANSCRIPT*

INTERVIEW WITH GLEN BARTHOLOMEW, ABC NEWS RADIO

THURSDAY, 15 DECEMBER 2011

SUBJECTS: Anniversary of Christmas Island boat tragedy,  Malaysia Arrangement, Cabinet reshuffle.

GLEN BARTHOLOMEW: Immigration Minister Chris Bowen joins me  now to talk about where things stand this morning. Minister, good  morning.

CHRIS BOWEN: Good morning to you again.

BARTHOLOMEW: Twelve months on from the tragedy, what’s  changed in the Government’s approach?

BOWEN: Well firstly we should say that this is a day to reflect on that  terrible day 12 months ago, which I think shocked the nation and all  Australians, regardless of their views on border protection or refugee  policy, were appalled by those events and see an opportunity, an  obligation to remember them and also remember the people who  worked so hard to save so many.

On your question about what has changed in the Government’s  approach, I think that terrible tragedy steeled our resolve to have a  debate about measures to dissuade people getting on boats. We’d said  it was a dangerous way to come to Australia and I think that was the  starkest possible reminder.

And I think the real tragedy out of this is that, almost inevitably - and I  would say inevitably - there have been other people die between  Indonesia and Australia we just don’t know about, with no TV cameras  to record their plight, nothing to note their tragedy, that they’ve quietly  died on the high seas trying to make it to Australia. That’s why I say

there is nothing humanitarian about a policy which says that your best  chance of getting resettled in Australia is to risk your life to get here.  That’s why I support the regional approach that this Government has  developed.

BARTHOLOMEW: And is attempting to develop further. It’s been an  interesting year or so in this matter, hasn’t it? Because its fair to say,  isn’t it, that’s it’s almost like the roles have been reversed in federal  politics, that the Federal Government has been very keen to be seen to  be taking a hard-line on this to promote that disincentive, if you like,

and you’re being lectured about humanitarian solutions by the Federal  Opposition.

BOWEN: Well I think people see those lectures for what they are:  pretty clear hypocrisy when you’ve got the Liberal Party policy to turn  the boats around on the high seas and send people back to Indonesia,

which is not a signatory to the Refugee Convention. Of course, the  Liberal Party would not - did not or would not - be able to negotiate  protections with Indonesia because Indonesia doesn’t believe in the  ‘turn around the boats’ policy and wouldn’t accept them, so they’d be  turning around people to a very uncertain fate.

BARTHOLOMEW: But this is very much the similar noises that the  Labor Party was making until only a few years ago.

BOWEN: But this contrasts with our position, where we negotiated  with Malaysia and the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,  who was not a signatory to the agreement but closely consulted on the  appropriate protections to put in place for people who are transferred  to Malaysia. People transferred to Malaysia would then have their  refugee claims processed and the UNHCR would consider the need for  resettlement and make references to resettlement countries as  appropriate, but in line with the other 100,000 people waiting for  resettlement in Malaysia. So it was a holistic approach which  recognised the complex challenges of managing asylum seekers in our  region.

Now, as opposed to the Liberal Party’s approach, which is we’ll send  them to Nauru, pretend that they’re not going to make it to Australia -  though we all know that they are - and in some circumstances turn the  boats around on the high seas, which is very dangerous and risks the  lives of sailors and asylum seekers, but also means they are going to  be sent to a very uncertain fate with no protections negotiated for  them.

BARTHOLOMEW: In the meantime though that attempted solution is  still very much a work in progress. The boats continue to come: two  days ago, north of Christmas Island, about 100 asylum seekers and a  couple of crew. What can you do in the meantime?

BOWEN: Well look, the Prime Minister and I said at the time that it  was clear that this wouldn’t pass the - our legislation wouldn’t pass the  Parliament - that we could expect more boats to arrive, and  unfortunately we haven’t been proven wrong about that. We have  seen more boats arrive because the most effective deterrent is a  proper offshore processing regime with the proper holistic regional  approach, and we don’t have that.

We could have it, we could very easily have that now - we negotiated  with Malaysia. People said we wouldn’t be able to find a country in our  region to negotiate such a comprehensive deal, but we did successfully  negotiate that with Malaysia.

It’s an arrangement ready to go, we had planes on the tarmac waiting  when the High Court made its decision. We could reinvigorate that very  quickly - obviously there’d a time-lag - but we could reinvigorate that  reasonably quickly if the Parliament would pass our legislation and  that’s what we’ll continue to argue for. And if the Liberal Party says  they support offshore processing, here’s a novel idea, why not vote for

it?

BARTHOLOMEW: In the meantime though, how close are we to  capacity in the many detention facilities around Australia?

BOWEN: Well look, we do have spare capacity across the network,  there is spare capacity. We’ve seen a substantial reduction in boat  arrivals this year up until now and we’d also sped up our processing.  That has led to some spare capacity, as well as opening some new  centres; but with the rate of arrivals that we have, we can expect the  detention network to remain under some pressure.

We’ll continue to process people as quickly as possible. I’ll continue to  move families and children into the community, into what we call  community detention, and we’ll have bridging visas as one of the suite  of measures for managing people. There is no automatic right to a

bridging visa for people in detention, but it will be one of the suite of  measures for managing people who are having their claims considered.

BARTHOLOMEW: And interesting that the 42 survivors from last  year’s tragedy, that 35 of them have been granted permanent  residency. Is it the case that during all of the reshuffle negotiations  with the government in the last couple of weeks that you stated an  ambition to stay in your portfolio to finish the job?

BOWEN: Yes, that’s right. The Prime Minister very kindly had a long  conversation with me about the options and said that she’d prefer me  to stay in the job, but she’d completely understand if I wanted to  change to somewhere else and she’d make sure that I had a senior  portfolio. I agree with her that it is better to stay in the job, that was  my preference. I have a job to do in front of me and that’s what I’m  continuing to focus on and I’ll continue to do the job with every ounce  of energy that I have.

BARTHOLOMEW: Will the Government be represented at the  memorial today?

BOWEN: This memorial has mainly been organised by our  administrator on the Island and his office, and there will be various  government officials there of course.

BARTHOLOMEW: Chris Bowen, thanks for your time.

BOWEN: Good on you, cheers.

ENDS



