CHRIS BOWEN MP

MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP  *TRANSCRIPT*

INTERVIEW WITH FRAN KELLY, ABC RADIO NATIONAL  BREAKFAST

FRIDAY, 14 OCTOBER 2011



SUBJECTS: Offshore processing, Malaysia Arrangement, onshore  processing, community detention, bridging visas, boat arrivals.

FRAN KELLY: Minister, good morning.

CHRIS BOWEN: Good morning, Fran.

KELLY: Minister, do you feel humiliated at your failure on offshore processing  or happy to be now implementing a policy which many regard to be a more  humane approach?

BOWEN: Well, no, what I feel, Fran, is disappointment that the Parliament  hasn’t passed legislation which would enable the Government of the day to  implement its policy. I mean, both sides of politics are meant to believe in  offshore processing, yet the Liberal Party wouldn’t come to the party and  support the legislation. They wouldn’t put their votes where their mouth is  and I think that’s very disappointing for the nation. I think the Australian  people would look to Australia’s political leaders to sort this out.

What we’ve done over the last 12 months is, frankly, do things which people  said would be impossible. We achieved a regional framework through the Bali  Process, we struck an agreement with a major regional partner like Malaysia,  we made progress in terms of more consistent outcomes because I think a  properly constructed, well thought out regional framework would stop people  risking their lives and dying on the boat ride to Australia. It would mean  Australia could increase its humanitarian intake, give more people a chance to  have a better life in Australia and mean that we work with countries in our  region for better outcomes across the region, and I think it’s a missed  opportunity.

KELLY: The only hitch in that was the High Court ruled that your Malaysia  solution was not properly constructed, so I think -

BOWEN: Well, that also, on the same basis and the same logic, would apply  to other arrangements like Papua New Guinea and Nauru, and there’s legal  experts who would tell you under the High Court’s ruling that the only country  in our region you could process people would be New Zealand, so that just

underlines the short-sighted nature of the Liberal Party’s approach on this.

KELLY: Okay. Australians this morning trying to figure out what we’re left  with; how will the next boatload of asylum seekers now be processed under  this, your latest policy?

BOWEN: Well, look, they’ll be processed in the same way, frankly, as we  have already been processing people. That is, of course, their claims will be  considered, health, identity checks will occur and they’ll be processed. But  what we have said is that we’re not inclined or not intending to open more  detention centres. What we want to do is manage the network and that  means taking decisions on a case-by-case basis, expanding and utilising some  of the powers that we already have. For example, as you know, Fran, we’ve

discussed before, we’ve moved substantial numbers of children and families  into the community over the last 12 months. It’s been a big task but we’ve  done it: 2,000 people moved into the community over the course of the last  12 months, out of detention into more community-based services.

Now, we’ll continue to do that and we’ll utilise other mechanisms that we  already have available to us. For example, people who arrive by air and then  claim asylum are often, when their visa expires, given bridging visas. This is a  different type of arrangement to community detention. In some cases, it’ll be  more appropriate.

KELLY: So I’m just trying - I heard you say that last night - I’m trying to  work out what that means. Does that mean bridging visas will now be an  option afforded to people who arrive in this country by boat, after the initial  processing they’ll be given bridging visas and out, or are those people  currently in detention and awaiting the processing of their claims likely to be  put on these bridging visas, to move them out more quickly?

BOWEN: It would also apply to people currently in detention. You can’t say  to somebody, ‘You’ve been in detention for some time, but you’re staying in  while people who arrive now, they’ll have an opportunity for bridging visas.  So we will apply the case-by-case test to people who are already in detention.  That will mean that we’ll consider the sorts of things we already consider in  making appropriate arrangements. That is, how long somebody’s been in  detention, whether they’re on what my department would call a positive  pathway, which means they are likely in the end to be regarded as a refugee  or not, what their behaviour has been like in detention, whether they have  suffered trauma or torture.

KELLY: Just to interrupt you there, Minister, that process currently - and  we’ve discussed this before and your Government’s been heavily criticised for  it - is taking too long in some cases. In fact, Michael Raper from the Red  Cross told us earlier that the average stay in 2009 in a detention centre was  100 days; it’s currently 300 days. Are you planning on trying to speed up that  process by introducing these bridging visas? Will that quicken the whole

thing?

BOWEN: Well, let me just make a couple of points in response to that. First  of all, we have substantially quickened the process over the last 12 months in  a number of areas, particularly in relation to security clearances. We have a  much more efficient process, that’s been put in place by the Attorney-General  and I, with my department and ASIO.

KELLY: Are you going to expedite that again?

BOWEN: Well, no, that work’s already been done and that is working very,  very well. But what we have said is that there are some cases where people  who are currently in detention or who would normally be in detention are  having their claims processed. And you’ve got to remember, Fran, here, that

we are dealing with a lot of very different and sometimes complex  circumstances. So we’ve got some cases which are very simple and  straightforward: people are clearly refugees, they have no security concerns.  They are a lot more straightforward than some cases, for example,  remembering a number of people who arrive in Australia without  documentation - no passport, no visa, no identification - that makes the job  of my department very difficult in establishing their refugee claims. It also  complicates the role of ASIO. So when you’ve got that situation where people  have arrived in Australia without those documents, that does complicate  things and make it more difficult. Now, there are some cases where we would  continue that processing while people are in the community where that’s  appropriate.

KELLY: Okay. So the change is that more people will be allowed to spend  some of that time still in detention in the community and that will happen  more quickly. Won’t that have the opposite effect to what you’ve been telling  us for the last year is needed: a policy basically so unfriendly it will deter  people from risking their lives?

BOWEN: Well, Fran, I’ve been very clear, I think I’ve said to you a number of  times, I don’t believe you can make domestic arrangements more and more  punitive as a deterrent. If you’re going to have a deterrent, that’s why we’ve  worked so hard on not having punitive domestic arrangements, rather having  a properly constructed regional framework working with countries in our  region. I don’t believe - I’ve said plenty of times, Fran - I don’t believe, and  this is a key point of difference between us and the other side, I don’t believe  you can just make your domestic arrangements harsher and harsher, and  think that’s going to be a deterrent. What you can do is do the sorts of  innovative things we did do as part of the regional framework, and that’s why  I say that’s a missed opportunity in terms of deterring people from making  that boat journey to Australia.

KELLY: Okay. The Prime Minister warned last night that the upshot of all of  this is more boats will come. Do you have intelligence to that effect?



BOWEN: Well, Fran, you’ve been doing this long enough to know that  ministers don’t talk about intelligence, but what I have said is that you can  expect people smugglers to be maximising their marketing around the fact  that the High Court and the Parliament have ruled out offshore processing:

the High Court by its judgement and the Parliament by the Opposition’s  failure to pass the necessary legislation. They will be saying Australia is an  open destination in terms of you can’t be sent to another country and that is  exactly the opposite of what we are trying to achieve under the regional  framework.

KELLY: And Minister, I know your time is tight this morning, you’ve got a lot  of interviews to be doing, just finally and briefly, will you invest more now at  the source points of Indonesia and Malaysia to try and prevent people from  getting on those boats?

BOWEN: Well, we already do a lot of that, Fran.

KELLY: Are you beefing that up?

BOWEN: Yes, and we are examining what more we can do; we’re always  doing that. But of course, that does require a new focus. The Attorney-General, the Minister for Home Affairs and I, as well as the Minister for  Foreign Affairs, have been very focused on that. I must say, the relationship  between those key countries - Australia, Malaysia and Indonesia - is first  class and we work very closely and we’ve had a lot of positive developments  over the last couple of years. But we’ll continue to focus on it and, of course,  if there’s more to say about that then we would have more to say about it.

KELLY: Minister, thank you very much for joining us on Breakfast.

BOWEN: Always nice talking to you.

Ends



