THE HON BRENDAN O’CONNOR MP

MINISTER FOR HOME AFFAIRS AND JUSTICE



TRANSCRIPT



E&OE PROOF ONLY



ABC Australia Network, Asia Connect with Liam Cochrane

Friday, 8 April 2011

Topics: Indonesian Parliament criminalises people smuggling



Indonesia's Parliament has passed tough new laws aimed at tackling people smuggling. The  new law includes penalties of between 5 and 15 years in prison for those convicted. Corrupt  immigration officials, who often assist people smugglers, will face up to seven years in prison

for providing travel documents to people who do not qualify for them. Until now, people  smugglers have been prosecuted for simple immigration violations or breaches of the  maritime law, which carry a relatively light sentence.



COCHRANE: Now it's taken many years and a lot of hard work and pressure to get these  laws passed. Do you believe that they will be implemented?



O'CONNOR: Firstly I'd like to applaud the efforts of the Indonesian Parliament in passing  these important laws. For the first time, convicted people smugglers will face a minimum of  five years jail and a maximum 15 years behind bars and this will help tackle people  smuggling regionally.



COCHRANE: Will they be implemented though?



O'CONNOR: I think you've already seen the efforts by the Indonesian National Police  preventing 5,000 irregular arrivals embarking on vessels, having disrupted 200 ventures, so  even without these strong laws, the law enforcement agencies in Indonesia have done a very  good job working closely with the Australian Federal Police and other law enforcement  agencies. With these new laws, this will provide greater teeth for the people smuggling

activities to be deterred and stopped and for people smugglers to face justice and I believe the  Indonesian Parliament should be commended for their efforts.



COCHRANE: Presumably there's going to be more work involved though in prosecuting  these people on these more serious charges. Will Australia be providing more resources to  help Indonesia do that?



O'CONNOR: The President of Indonesia made clear he wanted to see the enactment of these  laws and indeed the Foreign Minister of Indonesia also recently echoed the views of the  President. So I believe there's a strong political will to tackle this issue regionally. We've seen  only some months ago the Malaysian Government introduce strong penalties. Now, of  course, on the back of that, you've seen the Indonesian Parliament enact these laws. What  we're seeing from around the region is governments taking a strong stand against people  smuggling and I believe it should be commended and I believe it's also going to deter people  operating within this vile trade.



COCHRANE: The new legislation also includes elements that suggest the people will be  deported, asylum seekers will be deported after a maximum of ten years in Indonesia. We  know that many people wait longer than that for their claims to be processed. Will there be

people do you think unfairly sent back to their countries that they've fled from under these  new laws?



O'CONNOR: Look, I haven't received advice on the deportation arrangements and indeed it's  entirely up to the Indonesian Government and its agencies about how they would deal with  that. But I believe it's really important that we recognise that these new laws, these specific  laws targeting people smugglers will deter that behaviour and I think it will strengthen our  hand in breaking the model, that is the people smuggling model, luring people in many cases  on unseaworthy vessels.



COCHRANE: Now, on a similar linked issue, the proposed processing centre in East Timor  appears to be dead. The idea appears to be dead. Is that the end of that idea from the  Australian perspective?



O'CONNOR: Look, I've seen reports in the newspapers, but the Australian Government will  continue to engage with the East Timorese Government in discussing these matters and, as  we've seen only last week, the Foreign Minister and the Minister for Immigration having  successfully prosecuted the need for a regional protection framework, that was important,  that's getting countries of origin, transit and destination, reaching agreement on significant  principles. Now there'll be further bilateral discussions about what else can be done and those  discussions are continuing with East Timor with respect to the centre.



COCHRANE: Specifically though on East Timor, are you going to push forward with this.  East Timor has made it clear that they don't want it?



O'CONNOR: That's currently being dealt with by the Minister for Immigration and I'm sure  we'll continue to do that. But what's important to note is, for the very first time, the region has  an agreed position on the way we will deal with this issue and that's very important.  Secondly, we'll continue to have bilateral discussions to make sure we have every element in  place to break the model for these people smugglers.





