Julie Bishop

Radio Australia, Connect Asia with Phil Kafcaloudes

Wednesday, 03 August 2011

Subjects: Malaysia asylum seeker swap deal

E&OE…

JULIE BISHOP    I think it will take more than YouTube footage to deter the people smuggling  syndicates. The people smugglers are clearly keeping the pressure on the Gillard Government, the  syndicates will test the arrangement.

This Malaysia swap deal is a one-off, it will be exhausted once 800 asylum seekers are sent to  Malaysia, and given that over 620 asylum seekers arrived in the 12 weeks after the Malaysia swap  deal was announced it could be exhaust quite soon then it is back to business as usual.

PHIL KAFCALOUDES    So you don’t have any doubts that it is going to slow down from this point  onwards?

JULIE BISHOP    Well we’ll have to wait and see what occurs. My point is there are reports that the  people smuggling syndicates will continue to test this arrangement, there is a great deal of uncertainty  about it.

The United Nations High Commission on Refugees is distancing itself from this deal, it is not a  signatory to the arrangement, it is just an arrangement between Australia and Malaysia and  specifically it is not legally binding.

PHIL KAFCALOUDES    If you were to get into government, if something was to happen - we know  the Government is on a knife edge here, they don’t hold government by a big majority - if for some  reason an election was held would you rescind the deal with Malaysia?

JULIE BISHOP    I would expect that the deal would have already been exhausted by that time,  whenever an election was held. As I said, 620 asylum seekers arrived in just the 12 weeks after the  deal was announced.

But we have a policy that we believe will work because it has worked in the past and that would  include opening Nauru, which is the taxpayer funded detention centre on that Pacific Island, we would  also reintroduce temporary protection visas and put back in place the policies that were in place under  the Howard Government and which were proven to work because they stopped the boats.

PHIL KAFCALOUDES    But the deal could not be exhausted just because the 800 go, we are still  part of the deal over the next five years to take 4,000 asylum seekers from Malaysia so there still  would be elements of the deal that are still in place there. Would you honour that part of the deal?

JULIE BISHOP    We would have a look at it very closely. The deal is not legally binding and there  are certainly many out clauses for the Malaysian Government from my reading of the document, and  so we would obviously consider what has occurred in the time between now and whenever an  election were held.

We are talking about a hypothetical situation. We have a proven policy to stop the boats, to put in  place temporary protection visas, to use the detention centre on Nauru. That was proven to work in  the past and it would do so again.

PHIL KAFCALOUDES    Is it a policy you think would be popular with voters in Australia though? I  mean your government was rejected at the last election and this was after a range of policies that  may have been on the nose, but do you think Australians would go for that policy again?



JULIE BISHOP    Well Australians were certainly supportive of the Howard Government policies.  When we lost government in 2007 there were less than half a dozen people from boat arrivals in our  detention network, today there are over 6,500 people in detention. It has cost the Australian taxpayer  over $3 billion since Labor came into office because it watered down the policies of the Howard  Government. And we’ve seen 11,000 people arrive by boat, violence in the detention centres because  of overcrowding. The Government has lurched from policy response to policy response.

This Malaysia deal is in fact an admission that it got it wrong for the last three years, that pull factors  were involved. Having denied for so many years that the Government’s policies had anything to do  with it, this Malaysia deal is in fact an admission that the Government got it wrong.

PHIL KAFCALOUDES    We’re hearing today that there are people smugglers in Indonesia saying to  people that he Government will not be sending children to Malaysia as part of this deal. Should the  Government be sending children to Malaysia?

JULIE BISHOP    Well as I said the people smugglers will clearly keep the pressure on the Gillard  Government, they will continue to test the arrangement and I suspect they will do that up until the 800  number is exhausted.

The Government is yet to actually make any arrangements for children; we are yet to see what they  propose to do. They say there will be no blanket exemptions but I find it hard to believe that Labor  backbenchers who said that they would only support the deal if it had the support of the UNHCR will  continue to support it if the Government carries through its threat.



