CHRIS BOWEN MP

MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP  *TRANSCRIPT*

INTERVIEW WITH LYNDAL CURTIS, ABC NEWS24

FRIDAY, 16 SEPTEMBER 2011



SUBJECTS: Opposition legal briefing, Malaysia arrangement.

LYNDAL CURTIS: Chris Bowen, welcome to News24.

CHRIS BOWEN:  Thanks Lyndal.

CURTIS: If we could start with the briefing that the Opposition will be given  this afternoon. Without going into the details of what the officials will put to  the Opposition, can you say the amendments you’ll put forward will be exactly  as you’ve described: changes that only go to allowing offshore processing;  not to any place it might happen in?

BOWEN: Well the changes that we are proposing to the Parliament - that  we’ll brief the Opposition on this afternoon - are as we’ve described, which is  to restore the common understanding of the law before the High Court’s  ruling: was that it was at the discretion of the government of the day and the  minister of the day in particular, as to where to conduct offshore processing.  That’s what we’ll be putting to the Opposition and that’s what our  amendments are designed to achieve.

CURTIS: And you won’t, if the Opposition agrees to them, in any way seek to  tie the Opposition to your Malaysian solution?

BOWEN: No, we’ve been very clear. The Opposition is opposed to the  Malaysia agreement; we understand that, we respect that and accept that.  We very strongly disagree with that. This is a matter of principle that the  government of the day should have the authority to implement its policies as  Mr Abbott said just a little while ago - within the last two weeks - that he

thought was the case, that the government of the day should have the  authority to implement its policies.

Now we think that Mr Abbott should be able to implement Nauru if he became  Prime Minister; we don’t agree with Nauru, we don’t think it is good policy or  sound policy based on all the advice we have, but we think he should have  the right to do it. So just as all the advice to us tells us that the best way to  deter people from getting on boats is the Malaysia agreement and we should  have the ability to implement it, we’ll be accountable for it. We’ll be  accountable for its successes, for its criticisms, et cetera; we won’t be saying  that Mr Abbott supported the Malaysia arrangement, we’ll be saying he  supported legislation in the national interest, if that’s what he does.



CURTIS: He’s written today in a blog that the Prime Minister is seeking to  break a pre-election commitment that the Government wouldn’t send asylum  seekers to a country that hadn’t signed the Refugee Convention, and he asks  at the end, ‘Why should the Coalition help her break her word?’ If he says no  to the changes, do you have another option?

BOWEN: Well we want to implement our option. I’ve seen the Opposition  saying, ‘Well, what’s Plan B?’ Well Plan A is what counts here and Plan A is  the Malaysia arrangement, and we want the flexibility to introduce the  Malaysia arrangement, to increase the refugee intake and to take the next  800 asylum seekers who arrive in Australia by boat to Malaysia as a very  significant deterrent.

Now here’s the test Lyndal, people are watching. People smugglers are  watching, others are watching. Is Australia going to blink? is Tony Abbott  going to blink? The Labor Party and the Liberal Party are both meant to  believe in offshore processing, the question is will Mr Abbott put his votes  behind offshore processing, will he support legislation for offshore processing?

I saw Mr Morrison today saying, ‘Oh, we won’t need legislation to do Nauru’,  that’s just wrong. I mean, it flies in the face of the legal consensus. They’re in  fantasy land if they think that they can implement offshore processing without  very significant risk of successful legal challenge, without supporting the  Government’s legislation.

CURTIS: But if Nauru implements domestic law to back its signing of the UN  Refugee Convention, isn’t there a prospect that it could bring its laws into line  with what the High Court wants without need for legislative change here?

BOWEN: Well the High Court made it clear on its interpretation of the  existing Act that it regarded the conditions across the board that apply to  asylum seekers in any offshore third country as having to be very comparable  to Australia’s. Hence you’ve had for example, Professor Donald Rothwell say  that the only country in our region which could comply with the High Court’s

interpretation is New Zealand; and that matches the legal advice, not only to  the Government from three senior counsel, but also from Ron Merkel QC and  Mr Estcourt QC, all of which have said that they would think that Nauru - a  detention centre at Nauru - would be open to a very significant risk of legal  challenge.

CURTIS: Even if Nauru did -

BOWEN: Yes.

CURTIS: - enact domestic law?

BOWEN: Yes, that’s the advice to us. And the Opposition also has this issue:  I think it’s very clear that the High Court ruling would make it unworkable to  remove unaccompanied minors to any third country. So the Opposition, if

they don’t support the legislation, would have to weigh up: ‘Well, are we  going to have boatloads of unaccompanied children arriving on our shores?,  because they can’t take them to Nauru or to anywhere else because the High  Court has said that that would be judicially reviewable as to the best interests  of the child, and that would make any practical implementation of the  removal of unaccompanied minors completely not possible. So the Opposition  has got a lot of problems if they think that they can carry on with an offshore  processing regime under existing law without supporting Government  legislation to amend it.

CURTIS: Malaysia has again said it wants the transfer deal with Australia to  happen, but all the guarantees still won’t have any legal force in Malaysia. Will  it be better if they did?

BOWEN: Well look, this is a firm agreement from the Malaysian Government.  I was very encouraged again, but not surprised, to see Minister  Hishammuddin’s comments in the media this morning saying that Malaysia is  committed to the arrangement, that they want to work with Australia, and  that they are very committed to providing the protections; and making the  point that I’ve made before that they’ll be open and accountable publicly and  they’ll be working to ensure those protections are implemented - and  Malaysia should be taken at its word.

I think some of the criticisms of Malaysia from the Opposition in the recent  week have been very unfortunate, and Malaysia is a good friend of Australia  and they are working with Australia to have consistent treatment of refugees  and asylum seekers across the region.

They recognise that it is a regional problem. I note that Malaysia has pointed  out today for example, Minister Hishammuddin, that they don’t see Nauru  having any deterrent effect or not being part of a regional framework. So  really I think people should take the commitments of Malaysia at face-value  and in good faith and I’m very disappointed in some of the criticisms and  commentary coming from Mr Abbott and Mr Morrison about Malaysia - I think  that does not do them any credit.

CURTIS: [inaudible]

BOWEN: Well Indonesia’s view is very clear and very firm and its not a  matter of who is in government, and in fact Minister Natalegawa made those  comments in relation to Liberal Party policy and said he wouldn’t support -  and Indonesia wouldn’t view favourably - that policy and would not cooperate  with it, but that’s just one reason why it is not feasible.

Of course, the other thing I point out in my piece this morning is that it is  highly dangerous, it leads to people sabotaging their boats and sinking their  boats so that they can then be rescued at sea and under international law  returned to Australia, and that would put at risk the lives of the asylum  seekers and the Navy personnel involved and it’s a highly irresponsible policy  and senior military personnel have pointed it out.



What I do say today is of course that the deterrent effect of turning back the  boats is strong because it returns people to where they began their journey,  which is exactly what the Malaysia arrangement does, but in a much more  orderly and safe way.

CURTIS: Finally Minister, will either you or the Prime Minister be negotiating  with the Opposition directly on the changes to the Migration Act?

BOWEN: Well we’ve made clear our position that we want to work with the  Opposition. If the Opposition has constructive comments to make then of  course we would respond accordingly and the Prime Minister will be obviously  responding accordingly to the Opposition’s position. We want to work  constructively with them, we are putting forward what we see is a very  sensible way forward. If the Opposition wants to work in good faith with us  then we’d work in good faith with them.

But our position is clear in putting the legislation there. We want the  legislation to be able to provide for the Malaysia arrangement because we  think it works; we want to provide for the Nauru arrangement, not because  we think it will work, we don’t think it would, but we think that the  government of the day, should it ever be Mr Abbott and the Liberal Party,  should have the right to implement their policies. Mr Abbott said as much  recently, if he’s changed that position that would be very disappointing and it  will see the Liberal Party walking away, not only from the government of the  day having the ability to implement its policies, but also from support for

offshore processing.

CURTIS: So will you pick up the phone to Mr Abbott after the briefing this  afternoon?

BOWEN: Well, let’s let the briefing occur and let’s let Mr Abbott and Mr  Morrison have the facts before them and then we’ll see the situation unfold  after that. But clearly our position is very clear: we want to see the  legislation, we want to see it in the form that we propose and then the ball is  in Mr Abbott’s court.

CURTIS: Chris Bowen, thank you very much for your time.

BOWEN: Thank you Lyndal.

ENDS









