CHRIS BOWEN MP

MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP  *TRANSCRIPT*



DOORSTOP, SYDNEY

Thursday, 20 October 2011

SUBJECTS: Coalition’s turning back boats policy, onshore  processing, offshore processing, Nauru, bridging visas.

CHRIS BOWEN: Thanks for coming, all.

Well, today we’ve seen Mr Abbott and the Liberal Party wilfully and recklessly  again ignoring the advice of Australia’s border protection and national security  experts.

Earlier this week, we saw the Secretary of the Department of Immigration, Mr  Metcalfe, outlining before Senate Estimates the Department of Immigration’s  advice as to the effectiveness of various policies that had been tried in the  past and the lack of effectiveness of those policies. And even Phillip Ruddock  yesterday acknowledged that his policies would not be effective in this  environment. And now, the head of Australia’s Navy, who was personally  involved in turning back the boats under earlier administrations, has given  sworn evidence before Senate Estimates that this is a policy which risks the  lives of Australia’s naval and defence personnel.

Mr Abbott and Mr Morrison have again wilfully and recklessly ignored that  advice. Now we see a pattern. Australia’s national security experts have told  Mr Abbott and Mr Morrison the sorts of policies that can be effective in  deterring the boats; Mr Abbott says he knows better. Australia’s head of Navy  has said that this is a policy which will risk the lives of Australian naval  personnel; Mr Abbott says he knows better.

Now, the Liberal Party has a policy of an offshore processing centre at Nauru  which is almost certainly unlawful without the passage of legislation. They  have a policy of turning back the boats which risks the lives of Australian  naval personnel and they have a policy of temporary protection visas which  will see the number of people arriving in Australia by boat increase as it did  last time.

So Mr Abbott had an opportunity today to listen for a change. He had an  opportunity today to say, ‘Well, I accept the advice of the experts’. Whether  it’s legal advice, whether it’s climate change, whether it’s economists or  whether it’s border security advice, Mr Abbott just arrogantly ploughs on,  ignoring that advice. Today, Mr Abbott had the opportunity to say he was  changing his policy in the light of that advice; he has rejected that

opportunity. He is ploughing on with his unrealistic policy, he is ploughing on  with his policy which has been shown publicly to be dangerous. This is  people’s lives at stake, this is the lives of Australia’s sailors at stake. Mr  Abbott needs to stop playing politics and act in the national interest for once,  to pick up the phone to the Prime Minister and to discuss the ways which the  Government’s legislation can be passed, and we can implement an effective  deterrent for people getting on the boat and making the dangerous boat  journey to Australia.

Happy to take your questions.

JOURNALIST: When you say [inaudible] are you referring to the Malaysian  solution?

BOWEN: Well, yes. We believe that the types of arrangements like Malaysia  are the most effective deterrent based on the advice we’ve received, yes.

JOURNALIST: So how are lives being put in danger?

BOWEN: Well, very clearly if you look at the advice of the head of the Navy,  he made it clear, as we have said in the past, that when boats are turned  around you see then people who are on those boats quite regularly taking  action to effect a rescue at sea, which would mean they would then be  transferred to Australia. That is dangerous: whether it is lighting a fire or  trying to sink the boat, Australia’s naval personnel, as well as the asylum  seekers themselves, would be in danger. Now, it would be reckless for an  alternative Prime Minister to pursue such a policy in the light of such strong  advice from Australia’s experts in border security.

JOURNALIST: The head of the Navy said that the policy was fraught with  risk, but he didn’t actually rule it out, he didn’t say it couldn’t be done. Has  the Government actually tried this, has the Government actually received

advice from anyone in the armed forces or Customs and Border Protection  that this can’t be done?

BOWEN: Well, the Navy will do their best to implement government policy, I  have no doubt about that. The Navy is a very professional operation, as is the  entire Australian Defence Force. So if they have an instruction from the  Government that ‘we want you to implement this policy’, then of course it will  do its best to implement that policy. But the Navy will also give advice that it  is highly risky, as they have done. So I think you can’t expect the Navy to  make a political decision about government policy.

And I just want to make this point too: we’ve seen again another shift. Mr  Abbott said in the election campaign he would personally make the decision,  he would be on the ‘boat phone’ instructing Australia’s naval personnel how to  do their job. A couple of weeks ago he walked away from that. Today Mr  Morrison said it would be a matter for the Government as to whether

individual boats were turned around, another shift. I think Mr Abbott has  contradicted Mr Morrison again today. It just underlines just how ill thought-out a policy it is, as well as being so dangerous.

JOURNALIST: Just on the question of advice, prior to the tendering of  evidence [inaudible] by the head of the Navy, have the Government actually  received advice from anybody in the armed forces or Customs and Border  Protection or anyone else for that matter that this policy could not be  pursued?

BOWEN: The consistent advice to the Government is that it would be highly  dangerous, and therefore a responsible, competent government would accept  that advice, which is what we’ve done.

JOURNALIST: How long do you anticipate that you would process boat  people onshore?

BOWEN: Well, the practical and legal reality is that people who arrive in  Australia by boat will be processed onshore until the Parliament passes  legislation enabling offshore processing. How long that takes is a matter for  Mr Abbott. We stand ready to vote for it at any time. At any time we would  stand ready to walk into the Parliament and vote for that legislation and  implement offshore processing.

JOURNALIST: How long are you going to keep blaming the Opposition for  your failed policy?

BOWEN: Well, we have a policy of offshore processing which cannot be  lawfully implemented without the passage of legislation. So until and unless  legislation is passed then we will have onshore processing, and Mr Abbott, if  he were ever Prime Minister, would face the same challenge: that he could  either risk successful legal challenge or pass legislation, and unless and until  the Parliament passes legislation onshore processing that is the practical and  legal reality.

JOURNALIST: You said on the question of legislation, you said that you  stand ready to pass this legislation at any point. Would a Labor Opposition  pass the Coalition Government’s amendments?

BOWEN: Well I’m not accepting that there’ll be a Labor Opposition any time  soon, that’s a hypothetical long way in the future.

JOURNALIST: Well, with respect, it is not an outrageous hypothetical, it  may happen in the next few years. Would a Labor Opposition support the  Government?

BOWEN: I can’t anticipate what the Labor Party might do at any point into  the future, and in future years if it ever arose that we were in opposition

that’s a matter that the Opposition executive at that point would need to  make. Mr Abbott can’t rely on the Labor Party taking any particular approach  in opposition; it would be a matter for the Labor Party to take in opposition.  We’re the Government, we have legislation before the House and we stand

ready to pass it.

JOURNALIST: Does the Government need to re-look at Nauru to get the  Opposition onside?

BOWEN: No, well, look, Mr Abbott has said very clearly that even if Nauru  was on the table he wouldn’t be passing this legislation. That just underlines  his lack of regard for the national interest. I mean, for three years he has  been saying, ‘Let’s pick up the phone to the President of Nauru’, and then it’s  put to him, ‘What if the Government put Nauru on the table?’ and he says, ‘I  still wouldn’t vote for it’. It just underlines his reckless approach.

JOURNALIST: When do you think we might see the first of these new  bridging visas issued?

BOWEN: Bridging visas are visas which are issued regularly to people who  arrive in Australia by aeroplane and then claim asylum. I’ve said that that is  something, one of the measures that we would be utilising, one of the suite  of measures we have at our disposal. I will provide further implementation  updates. We do have some capacity in the immigration detention network; of  course we wouldn’t wait for that capacity to be completely exhausted before  we implemented bridging visas. Work is very well advanced on determining  who should receive those bridging visas and the process for determining that.  I will provide further updates in due course.

JOURNALIST: Just one more question, the New South Wales Government  has threatened to [inaudible] because of the Nauru Solution not being on the  table. Are you concerned that -

BOWEN: Look, I don’t accept the premise of your question. I’ve seen  speculation to that effect, which I reject.

Thank you very much.

Ends



