Search this site   Go

Home

Biographical details

Media Centre

Contact details

Department

Parliamentary  Secretary

Links



Death of detainee at Sydney  Immigration Residential Housing,  mandatory detention, security  clearances, Egyptian Coptic  asylum seeker family Wednesday, 26 October 2011

Chris Bowen:  Thank you everybody. As you are aware, a  Sri Lankan man accommodated at the Sydney Immigration  Residential Housing facility died overnight. Arrangements  are being made to contact his next of kin who is believed to  be in SriLanka.

Obviously, any death, at any time, is a tragedy and our  thoughts and condolences are with his family and friends  today. There is a police investigation and there will no doubt  be a Coronial inquiry. The Department of Immigration will  fully cooperate of course with any investigation that occurs.

Before taking questions, I do want to say this: I've seen  some commentary in the media this morning alleging that  the deceased was found to be a refugee 12 months ago

and was awaiting security clearance. That is not the case.  The individual concerned was found to be a refugee in  August this year—over two months ago, not 12 months  ago. I think this is a reminder in sensitive cases, that all  commentators need to ensure that their comments are  based on factual information not an inaccurate speculation.

It is the situation that this was a long, involved, complex and  protracted case. The individual concerned was considered  for community placement, but this was not pursued  following consultation with the relevant security agencies.

Now within the constraints that I've outlined in relation to not  revealing individual details, I am happy to take some  questions.

Chris Bowen MP Minister for Immigration and Citizenship

Page 1 of 9 Death of detainee at Sydney Immigration Residential Housing, mandator...

31/01/2012 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2011/cb179699.htm

Journalist: Can you confirm he was poisoned, that he  poisoned himself?

Bowen: No, I am not able to confirm the cause of death.  Obviously there will be a full inquiry into that.

Journalist: Can you confirm that the man had applied to  attend a Hindu festival?

Bowen: There was a—there are Hindu festival celebrations  being undertaken, or were planned for Villawood today,  which all participants are able to participate in. I understand  this individual did request to leave the facility to visit a  friend—those requests are considered on a case by case  basis and that was not approved for today.

Journalist: Was he awaiting a security clearance from  ASIO?

Bowen: Ah, yes. Yes. In relation to that, he had been found  to be a refugee in August and the security—the full security  clearance process, was underway.

Journalist: The letter that he received denying to leave the  centre to attend this festival; did that come from the  department or was that from Serco?

Bowen: Look I'm not aware of how that was communicated  to him, in terms of his  request.

Journalist: Minister there were three deaths in 2010,  another death today, all from suicide. Does this tragedy  highlight maybe whether mandatory detention may be  unjust?

Bowen: Well look, I think you've got to recognise of course  these are complex situations, these are people in some  cases who've been through very difficult circumstances  before they get to Australia. But we're also facing the  situation where we have many people in immigration  detention who are not regarded as genuine refugees and  that leads to frustrations and concerns. That was not the  case in relation to this individual although it was a long,  protracted and difficult case in establishing, first, his refugee  status, and secondly, his security status.

Page 2 of 9 Death of detainee at Sydney Immigration Residential Housing, mandator...

31/01/2012 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2011/cb179699.htm

I've made announcements about a new approach in terms  of detention and we'll be implementing that, but there will  always be the case that if you come to Australia by boat  without documentation, there will need to be a period of  detention while your claim is being considered. That has  been the case for a long time in Australia and will remain  the case.

Journalist: Are you concerned that it could happen again?

Bowen: Well look, obviously there is always a risk of self  harm for people in difficult circumstances, whether they be  in detention or not, so obviously that will always be a  concern in relation to people who are having their claims for  asylum processed.

Journalist: I understand he had a STARTTS report. Did he  have post traumatic stress and was he on suicide watch?

Bowen: In relation to STARTTS, he had attended an  appointment and counselling in relation to trauma and  torture. I'm not going to go into any individual instances or  details over and above that.

Journalist: But was he on suicide watch?

Bowen: Look, I'm not going to go into any individual  circumstances. That will be something that will be  considered by all the relevant Coronial inquiry.

Journalist: You mentioned that he was considered for  community placement. Was that while he was waiting for  his security status to come through?

Bowen: Yes. To be clear, we do have a number of people  who have obviously been placed in the community, a large  number of people who have been placed into the  community, while either their refugee status has been  determined or their full security clearance has been  determined. In each case, we consult with the relevant  security agency about whether placement into the  community is appropriate for that individual.

Journalist: How long does a security clearance usually  take?

Page 3 of 9 Death of detainee at Sydney Immigration Residential Housing, mandator...

31/01/2012 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2011/cb179699.htm

Bowen: Well, they can be completed very quickly or they  can take longer in complex cases. The Attorney-General  and I have of course instituted a new system for security  clearances, which has meant that in the vast majority of  cases they occur much more quickly, and we've seen a  substantial number of people released into the community  as a result of that.

But there are cases—and this is one—which are more  complex and which ASIO will need to take more time to  consider whether the person will be a risk to national  security.

Journalist: To clarify something, why wasn't his community  placement seen to be appropriate?

Bowen: Well, there was consultation with the relevant  security agency, in this case ASIO, and the advice was that  it was not appropriate in this case.

Journalist: Do you find anything about this man having to  wait in detention for two years acceptable?

Bowen: Well, look, as I say, most cases, many cases are  determined a lot more quickly than that. And I want to see  people processed and into the community more quickly. We  have made substantial progress in that regard. In this  period, for example, this year 2011, we've had 2,623 people  arrive by boat. We have actually issued Protection Visas to  3,951 people. So this is the first period for quite a while that  we've actually released more people into the community  than have been placed into detention.

But there will be cases which are complex, which are  difficult, which involve the very serious consideration of  refugee claims and then, over and above that, serious  consideration of security concerns, which will take longer. I  understand people's frustration, but the government cannot  and will not compromise on matters of national security.

Journalist: But the ABC was told this morning that it's not  the first time he's tried to commit suicide. Are you aware of  that?

Bowen: Look, as I say, there will be a Coronial inquiry. It is  not appropriate for me to comment on any individual  circumstances that may be considered by the Coroner.

Page 4 of 9 Death of detainee at Sydney Immigration Residential Housing, mandator...

31/01/2012 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2011/cb179699.htm

Journalist: But if someone has tried to commit suicide  before, would you expect them to receive more than just a  single STARTTS counselling session?

Bowen: Well, we do have a mental health program which  assesses risks and which ensures that people are receiving  the appropriate mental health care in detention.

Journalist: But the fact that he, that it's been two months  since he was deemed to be a refugee, I mean, surely it was  regrettable it took two months until he got to this situation,  it's two months too long?

Bowen: Two months for a security clearance?

Journalist: Well, yes, it was from the time he was deemed  to be a refugee until now.

Bowen: Well, no, some security clearances are complex  and difficult and take time for ASIO to consider all the  circumstances, bearing in mind they are considering what  happened in another country, in a different place in a  different time, considering that person's ongoing links with  various organisations, and that does take time to consider.

Now, we have put in place measures to really speed up  security processing for many, many people. But we have  never said, we have never said that there wouldn't be cases  which are more complex, which would take longer, and this  is clearly one of them.

Journalist: You say ASIO is speeding things up, but does it  have too much of a backlog? What is that backlog?

Bowen: Well, no, as I say, we've sped up the process  considerably. It's well known that not too long ago there  were 1,000 people in detention who were awaiting their  security clearance. That has been more than halved. There  are now a lot less people in detention awaiting their security  clearances, but—

Journalist: How many?

Bowen: Four hundred and sixty-two people in detention  awaiting their full security clearance. That's substantially  less than it has been in the past. But ASIO does work very  assiduously to do these assessments as quickly as

Page 5 of 9 Death of detainee at Sydney Immigration Residential Housing, mandator...

31/01/2012 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2011/cb179699.htm

possible. As I say, there are some cases which are  particularly complex and which ASIO does need to pay  particular attention to.

Journalist: Can you confirm whether this man witnessed  two suicides at the centre last year?

Bowen: I do understand that he was in Villawood when  there were other suicides last year, yes.

Journalist: And did he see them, do you know?

Bowen: I'm not in a position to comment on that.

Journalist: When was he first house in Villawood? Was it  2010?

Bowen: That's correct. And to be clear he is  accommodated, he was accommodated in the Sydney  Immigration Residential Housing precinct of Villawood  which is not the full Villawood Detention Centre. It's the  place next to the Villawood Detention Centre which  accommodates families and people of greater vulnerability.

Journalist: Did he come via Curtin?

Bowen: I'm not aware. I'm not aware of everywhere he  might have been placed but he was transferred to Villawood  on the 27th of March, 2010.

Journalist: Another death. Is this (inaudible) that the  system is in crisis?

Bowen: No. I've acknowledged openly and freely that the  immigration detention does have its pressures, of course it  does. As I say we've released a considerable number of  people over the last six months into the community. But

where you have individuals who have complex cases which  need a very through assessment both in determining their  refugee status assessment then their security status, there  will be people for whom this will take longer and clearly this  is one of those cases.

Journalist: Will you consider building new centres? Does  there need to be more resources?

Bowen:  No. I'm not of a mind to build further detention  centres over and above those we have already announced.

Page 6 of 9 Death of detainee at Sydney Immigration Residential Housing, mandator...

31/01/2012 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2011/cb179699.htm

Of course, I've announced how we will deal with this, which  is a combination of people being held in detention,  community detention and bridging visas. I do not believe we  will need to build new centres.

Journalist:  Does the government take any responsibility  for this man's death?

Bowen: We take responsibility for ensuring that people  have the chance to make their claims and for ensuring the  national security is taken into account. We cannot and will  not compromise on matters on national security.

Journalist: But this man gave up hope.

Bowen: Well, look, I'm not going to comment on what may  have been going through this man's mind before this tragic  incident, before his death. That will be matters for further

investigation. But of course, people look to governments to  ensure that while people have the chance to have their  claims considered that national security is not compromised

and we won't be compromising on national security.

Journalist: On the next of kin issue, he's got a younger  brother I believe in Sri Lanka, is it who you're trying to  contact?

Bowen: Well I do understand we're trying to contact a  brother in Sri Lanka, yes. Whether it's younger or older I  can't comment.

Journalist: So Mr Bowen, did he, does have parents in Sri  Lanka as well?

Bowen: I'm not aware.

Journalist: So the department hasn't had success at this  stage in reaching them?

Bowen: Not that I am advised.

Journalist: Mr Bowen, just quickly on another case, there's  a family in Melbourne, I'm not sure if you're aware of the  case, they're a Coptic Christian family.

Bowen: Yes.

Page 7 of 9 Death of detainee at Sydney Immigration Residential Housing, mandator...

31/01/2012 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2011/cb179699.htm

Journalist: They're facing deportation back to Egypt. Can  you make any comment about them?

Bowen: Yes, I'm very aware of that case. And obviously  they have an application in for Ministerial Intervention,  which I have asked to be brought to my personal attention  and I'll be making a decision on that in the coming weeks.  But I am aware, very aware, of the fraught situation for  members of the Coptic community in Egypt, in fact I was at  a rally about this just on this weekend, and I will be taking  all those factors into account when considering their case. It  had been previously considered, as I understand it, by  previous ministers. I've asked to personally review their file  and I'll be making that decision very shortly.

Journalist: Had you not seen their file before?

Bowen: No, it had not previously been referred to me  because the situation is when a minister makes a decision,  even a previous minister, it is only then referred to the  current minister in particular circumstances, but in their  case I have asked for it to be referred to me personally.

Journalist: Are you expecting trouble at Villawood after  this?

Bowen: Well look, certainly experience does show us that  when you have an incident like this, a tragic incident, it does  and can lead to increased tension. We'll obviously be taking  whatever steps we can to ensure that the situation is  handled appropriately. I'm not going to speculate on what  may or may not happen at Villawood, but obviously when  you have an event like this it is disturbing and upsetting to  all involved—including staff, including other detainees,  including concerned members of the community.

Journalist:  Frank Minnelli of the NSW Police has recently  told the Parliamentary Inquiry that Villawood has poor  security, so do you have concerns about security at  Villawood, in light of what the NSW Police have said.

Bowen: Villawood is of course being rebuilt. It is not an  ideal centre in terms of the way it was constructed and of  course it is being substantially reconstructed. And of course  that reconstruction will take the opportunity to ensure that  security is at high a level as is appropriate. Okay, thank you

Page 8 of 9 Death of detainee at Sydney Immigration Residential Housing, mandator...

31/01/2012 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2011/cb179699.htm

See: Index of Speeches

URL:  http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2011/cb179699.htm  Last update: Wednesday, 26 October 2011 at 16:31 AEST

Home Copyright & Disclaimer Privacy Department of Immigration and Citizenship

Page 9 of 9 Death of detainee at Sydney Immigration Residential Housing, mandator...

31/01/2012 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2011/cb179699.htm

