Contact Jamie  Mt Barker Electorate Office

Tel: 08 8398 5566

Email: jamie.briggs.mp@aph.gov.au

Current Articles | Archives | Search



Transcript - ABC 891 Breakfast - Wednesday 12 October 2011   12 October 2011 in Media

To listen to the audio of this interview, please click here.



MATTHEW ABRAHAM:



Now they’d love to be here riding the bike because they did climb Mt

Lofty  for  us.  Amanda  Rishworth,  Labor  MP  for  Kingston.  Good

morning to you Amanda Rishworth.



AMANDA RISHsWORTH:



Good morning and I am disappointed that I’m missing so much lycra.



ABRAHAM:



Yes Amanda! You are! And Jamie Briggs, also Lycra deprived.



DAVID BEVAN:



Jamie Briggs, hello lady Briggs.



JAMIE BRIGGS:



I’m not disappointed on missing the lycra.



ABRAHAM:



Liberal MP for Mayo.



BEVAN:



To both of you, Canberra would be a very cycle-friendly city though wouldn’t it.



BRIGGS:



Because there is no cars on the road?



BEVAN:



Well it is fairly flat, isn’t it?



RISHWORTH:



You do see a lot of people cycling and it is fairly flat. Quite different from Hallett Cove where I live, which is a

little more difficult on the bike.



BEVAN:



Well I am hoping we can talk to Leon Bignell later on in the morning. He is a state Labor MP from down in the

southern suburbs; I think Kingston would take in some of his electorate. Amanda Rishworth, one of the things

he said to me yesterday was a lot of people from overseas probably have a better idea of the bike trials and

tracks,  including  down  in  the  southern  suburbs,  then  locals  do.  But  maybe  the  publicity  that  we  can  give  it

today  will  help  people  understand  where  they  can  find  this  information.  In  the  meantime  though,  it  is a  big

week in Canberra, what is going to be voted on today or over the next couple of days? We’ve got the carbon

tax, and we’ve got the asylum seeker bills. Is that right Amanda Rishworth?



RISHWORTH:



Yes, so today at 9am we will be voting the final vote on all the amendments and everything to do with the

pricing carbon. I think it is pretty historic day, an important day for this reform that will be so important for our

future. So that vote is on today, and then there’s also, will be a vote on restoring the offshore processing for

the Migration Act, which was previously understood to be the way that Governments can act and executives

can determine that legislation to restore that will also be on tomorrow.

Search this site:

Contact Jamie

Friends of Jamie



Join Jamie's  E-newsletter



Facebook

Liberal Party Website

Labor Waste Website





Govt Debt: $115,050,829,669

Your share: $5,032

Source: MYEFO 2011-12



Jamie's Latest Tweet  about 2 days ago I'm really sorry

that my friend Patrick Secker lost

today but ultimately it shows we are

run by grass roots members and not

faceless men







Home About Jamie Mayo Media Centre Photo Gallery Mobile Electorate Office Jamie’s View Survey Online Office



Page 1 of 3 Transcript - ABC 891 Breakfast - Wednesday 12 October 20...

6/03/2012 http://www.jamiebriggs.com.au/0esktopmodules/dnnforge%2...



ABRAHAM:



Amanda Rishworth, I was watching the first vote on the carbon tax last night on ABC TV, and your side of the

fence, the Government’s side applauded as that went through, and I thought I wonder if they’re applauding

their own demise.



RISHWORTH:



Well not at all. To be honest I think that everyone on our side is very pleased that we could vote something

in, to get in through a Parliament under obviously very difficult and very partisan circumstances, but because

it was equated to, I think in a number of speeches as big as the reforms on superannuation, a whole range of

things that businesses at that time said, with superannuation, the sky would fall in, and now we have seen in

the future been a massive reform that has benefited the country, and I think this is one of those reforms, as

the Prime Minister said, we will look back and see which side of history people were on.



ABRAHAM:



Although superannuation gave people money, albeit it was a part of a wage trade-off, whereas the carbon tax

takes money from people.



RISHWORTH:



Well no it doesn’t take money from people. What it does is it puts a price on pollution and through that price

on pollution, drives businesses to reduce their pollution. But householders will be getting assistance and a lot

will not have to pay any tax anymore.



ABRAHAM:



Jamie Briggs, sorry Jamie Briggs, we haven’t given him a chance yet.



RISHWORTH:



You better give him a chance.



ABRAHAM:



Does it at least show, it may be unpopular, but at least it shows they are doing something, as opposed to a

policy vacuum from the Coalition?



BRIGGS:



Well I think what they’re doing is something they said they wouldn’t do at the last election and I think that is

why people are so angry. I mean let’s not forget that four days before the last election Julia Gillard said there

will be no carbon tax under a government I lead. Amanda has just tried to say that this is a big new tax, which

won’t tax people. I mean it is quite extraordinary.



RISHWORTH:



It is a price on carbon and a price on pollution.



ABRAHAM:



Jamie  Briggs,  is  this  as  good  as  it  gets  though  for  the  Coalition?  Once  the  bill  has  actually  passed,  and

people see that the sky hasn’t fallen in, that will give Labor time to put some runs on the board. In fact, you

may find when people realise that the sky hasn’t fallen in that they start to turn on the Coalition over a scare

campaign.



BRIGGS:



Well I don’t think we are scare campaign when we are pointing out that this was a promise that was made at

the election which wouldn’t happen. If Amanda Rishworth and Kate Ellis and all the MPs in South Australia

believe that this is such a great policy, that this will do so much good, take it to an election. I mean I don’t see

what the problem  is with giving people a choice when they ruled it out specifically at the  last election, and

ultimately  we  have  made  that  point  up  hill  and  down  dale  and  we  have  got  an  amendment  before  the

parliament this morning which says this should not be proclaimed until an election is held, and we hope to get

that support. Obviously we’ll find out at 9am Canberra time whether we get the support or not.



ABRAHAM:



And those are the battle lines that have been drawn. We do thank you this morning. Jamie Briggs, Liberal MP

for Mayo. Amanda Rishworth, Labor MP for Kingston. Thank you for having a yarn to us on this ride to work

day.



ENDS

Home

About Jamie

Mayo

Media Centre

Photo Gallery

Mobile Electorate Office

Blog

Useful Links

Privacy Policy & Disclaimer

Accessibility Policy

Datasearch Web Design

Login

Page 2 of 3 Transcript - ABC 891 Breakfast - Wednesday 12 October 20...

6/03/2012 http://www.jamiebriggs.com.au/0esktopmodules/dnnforge%2...

Â© Jamie Briggs MP 2011 | Authorised by J. Briggs, Shop 1/72 Gawler Street, Mt Barker SA 5251

Page 3 of 3 Transcript - ABC 891 Breakfast - Wednesday 12 October 20...

6/03/2012 http://www.jamiebriggs.com.au/0esktopmodules/dnnforge%2...

