







THE HON DR CRAIG EMERSON MP  MINISTER FOR TRADE





Transcript

Sky News AM Agenda with Kieran Gilbert



10 May 2011

E&OE

Subjects: Budget, asylum-seekers.



KIERAN GILBERT: Good morning and welcome to AM Agenda.

It's Budget day in Canberra and Wayne  Swan's fourth Budget will include themes of  tighter spending, workforce participation, and it  will also see a major new investment in mental  health. We're hearing more than $2 billion is  expected to be outlaid for mental health; the  government delivering on the Prime Minister's  commitment to make that issue a priority of  this term of government.

We're waiting to take you live to the

Treasurer's news conference this morning.  We're expecting it in about 15 minutes here at  the Ministerial Door, on this big day for him as  his fourth Budget.

In the meantime, I'm joined here in the

Canberra studio by the Trade Minister Craig  Emerson and the Shadow Minister for the  Environment Greg Hunt.

2



Gentlemen, good morning to you.

CRAIG EMERSON: Good morning, Kieran.

GILBERT: First of all Craig, mental health: I've been told

more than $2 billion to be spent on this area.  This is something that the Opposition has led  the way on, committing more than $1.5 billion  in the last election. Today, it looks like the  Government's finally going to deliver.

EMERSON: Oh, well we're trebling funding on mental

health compared with Tony Abbott's time as  Health Minister. You see, this is one of the  relevant issues here that Tony Abbott talks the  talk. He was always going to do something on  mental health. They had 11 years to do  something substantial on mental health - didn't  get around to it. They were going to …

GILBERT: [Interrupts] Is that the current, before tonight?

EMERSON: Yes. That's right, yes.

GILBERT: You're not talking about what it will be beyond

tonight.

EMERSON: So, what I'm saying is, yes, there is a big

investment in mental health, but it's all very  easy for Opposition leaders go around,  to go  around saying ‘well, there should be a one-off  permanent increase in the age pension’, which  we did, which the Coalition had 11 years to do  and didn't do. Same thing with mental health.  So, of course, this is a vitally important area  and a priority for this Government.

3



GILBERT: But you know that Peter Dutton and the

Opposition did commit to this prior to the last  election? That was their commitment: if  elected they would have delivered $1.5 billion.  So you've caught up on this now.

EMERSON: And an $11 billion black hole. You see, it's

easy to commit to things if you don't actually  have to fund them, and they had an $11 billion  black hole. What this Budget do, will do, will  bring the Budget back into surplus.

GILBERT: Greg Hunt, this is something you would

welcome - a commitment to mental health.  And if it is over $2 billion, as I've been told,  that is a ...  that gazumps the Opposition's  numbers.

GREG HUNT: Look, if it does match Tony Abbott and Peter

Dutton's plan.

GILBERT: That exceeds, that exceeds that plan.

HUNT: If it matches it or if there's anything else, we'll

be positive about positive initiatives. It's  something we believe in. Remember, this is  about people on the streets, people in homes.  I've spent time with home ... with people in  homes recently, where they have had  distressed families. If that funding does come  and it matches what Tony set out, that's what  we're meant to do as political leaders.

GILBERT: Okay. Let's look at workforce participation,

Craig Emerson. We're being told that there is  going to be a crackdown on the work-for-the-dole, on the disability support pension, on  teenage mums. Does the Treasurer need to  get the balance right tonight between the

4



carrot and the stick, to say that there is ... this  is about opportunity, not just about

punishment?

EMERSON: And we do want to spread the opportunity of

the mining boom to everyone and that means  getting people into work. It means getting  people into work who are really keen to work  but have some sort of blockage.

It also means getting people into work who

may be less keen to work. So, yes, there is a  crackdown and it is a combination of

incentives, because people do need incentives  to get into the workforce off the dole. But for  those people who simply can't or won't  contemplate going back into work, of course  you need to create the right incentives there,  that is, to push them into the workforce where  they are reluctant.

I'll give an example. The proportion of people

who miss their first interview when they're on  Newstart is over 50 per cent. Now, that's not  acceptable, so we're going to require people to  go to those interviews. That's what getting  back into the workforce is all about.

GILBERT: Greg Hunt, this sounds like an agenda that

Tony Abbott and the Opposition would be very  comfortable with.

HUNT: Well, firstly, Tony is setting the agenda. We

set out a four-point plan to help people back  from welfare to work. It is clear that the  Opposition is leading the key issues in this  country.

5



The second thing is, with great respect to the

Prime Minister, she talks like Thatcher but  walks like Whitlam. What we see is somebody  who is maybe going to do something to try and  help people but about to deliver a second, $50  billion deficit in a row, a ninth ALP budget  deficit in a row - the last five under Whitlam,  the first four under Rudd and Gillard - nine  years of massive deficits …

EMERSON: Jeez, you missed out the whole Hawke-

Keating era. Don't know much about history.

HUNT: Nine years of massive deficits in a row versus

10 out of the last…

EMERSON: How can you have nine years…

HUNT: …11.

EMERSON: How can you have nine years of deficits in a

row going from Whitlam and then to Kevin  Rudd?

HUNT: The last five of Keating and the first four under

Rudd and Gillard have all been massive  deficits, and the question for Craig is ‘how can  you have such bad luck that nine massive  deficits have occurred in a row under the  ALP?’

EMERSON: Because it's just completely untrue.

HUNT: Well, no, I can run through the figures.

EMERSON: You just airbrushed the Hawke-Keating era

right out of history.

6



GILBERT: No, but ... no, Greg Hunt said the ... he said

the last …

HUNT: Twelve billion, 18 billion, 18 billion, 12 billion

…

GILBERT: …what was it? Four or five of Keating.

EMERSON: He said …

HUNT: The last five.

GILBERT: The last five of Keating.

EMERSON: He said nine in a row; there was Whitlam and

then …

GILBERT: Okay, let's ... we'll go five Keating, four Rudd

and Gillard.

EMERSON: And there was something which also has been

airbrushed out of history by the Coalition, and  that is called the deepest global recession  since the Great Depression. We now have  Coalition spokespeople saying that the  government Budget deficit should never have  occurred, there should never have been a  deficit. That would have absolutely smashed  workforce numbers in this country. We would  have lost so many jobs.

And I've also heard the Coalition Senator

George Brandis, Deputy Leader in the Senate,  saying there was no global recession - it was a  northern hemisphere phenomenon. Well, why  did New Zealand go into recession? Why did  Argentina, Chile; why did South Africa go into  recession: all southern hemisphere countries?

7



There was a global recession. That affects the  numbers. We're getting the budget back into  surplus in 2012-13.

HUNT: So why have you got …

GILBERT: Let's just quickly, before we move on, I do

want to ... I want to ask you about this

workforce participation agenda that the  Government is prosecuting and arguing  tonight in this,  in this Budget. It's going to be  one of the biggest spending measures, isn't it,  the training and skills? It seems inevitable that  that's where all the money is going to go,  beyond the mental health issues, that this is  going to get …

EMERSON: Well, let's wait and see but, I mean, the

Budget is hundreds of billions…

GILBERT: It costs a lot doesn't it, these sorts of things?

EMERSON: Well, it does cost money but at the same time

we are committed to ensuring that Australians  who can work do work. We actually support  the dignity of work. We actually expect that  those Australians who are able to work do  work. We're not a party of welfare; we're a  party of work.

GILBERT: Is the Government going to deliver on this

rhetoric, though, this tough budget rhetoric?  Are people really going to notice the cuts  tonight? We heard that the Prime Minister said  to Caucus yesterday this is not going to be  popular in large parts of your electorates. Are  we really going to see the rhetoric match with  action tonight?

8



EMERSON: Well, of course it will. Yes, it will be a tough

Budget. It will be a tough Budget. We will get  the Budget back into surplus in 2012-13 as we  indicated before, as the economy begins to  expand again, after the series of natural  disasters that have affected revenue right now  ...

HUNT: You already had $40 billion of deficit before.

EMERSON: ...  that have affected revenue right now. We

will get the Budget back into surplus in 2012-13. We've also committed, Kieran, as part of  that, to limit spending growth to no more than  2 per cent in real terms.

So these are the disciplines that need to be

applied as the economy gains momentum,  gains strength.

KIERAN GILBERT: Greg Hunt, is the Opposition happy to have a

debate about this broader agenda, about  workforce, about health? Because this  morning Tony Abbott, your Opposition Leader,  has showed up at the doors of Parliament -   the first thing he talked about on Budget Day is  the asylum-seeker deal with Malaysia. Where  is the credibility on economic matters if on  Budget Day your leader shows up and talks  about asylum-seekers as his first issue?

GREG HUNT: Well, the reason why that was done is

because overnight we've heard that what  started out as a two-for-one deal has become  a five-for-one farce in terms of the exchange  …

EMERSON: You're making it up as you go along.

9



GREG HUNT: … it's the ... I think you'd better read the facts

on this. A five-for-one farce with Malaysia, and  with a massive blowout in costs and massive  …

GILBERT: Doesn't that show that ... doesn't it show the

Opposition Leader just wants to narrow the  debate about asylum seekers…

GREG HUNT: … blowout in costs. The second thing is…

GILBERT: …and carbon, that's it?

HUNT: No. The second thing is, in terms of budget,

we are very happy to have a debate which  says nine consecutive ALP budget deficits in a  row, two consecutive $50 billion deficits in a  row. We have a massive blowout in borders, in  our costs on home insulation, in our costs on  building. And now, the set-top box scandal is  set to be pink batts for pensioners.

GILBERT: Okay. Well, let's get your response to that.

And I also want to get your response to this  story about the ... that Mr Hunt referred to in  relation to the deal with Malaysia, where they  look like they've got the deal they want, not  necessarily what our officials wanted  previously.

But first of all, the set-top box. Is this going to

be a rort? The Daily Telegraph this morning  says that it ... this is a new public waste

scandal looming after $400 a time has been  allocated to install digital TV top boxes?

EMERSON: Thirty-eight thousand pensioners and veterans

and other Australians have already been  assisted to get set-top boxes. So where is the

10



big story here about how this is being rorted?  Thirty-eight thousand!

Now, let the Coalition oppose giving

assistance to age pensioners to move from  analogue to digital by the installation of set-top  boxes. It wouldn't be the first time the Coalition  has said one thing and done another, like  oppose ... saying that there should be an  increase in the age pension, never doing it.  Since they get into Opposition, they say the  Government ought to do it. They are the  greatest 'gunnas' of all time. They're 'gunna'  do all of these things.

Now, in relation to asylum-seekers, we have

struck a deal with Malaysia. It is a very  important deal because it means that over four  years there will be 4,000 asylum ...  not

asylum-seekers but actual refugees in  Malaysia coming to Australia. And in exchange  for that, 800 asylum-seekers who think that  they might be able to get to Australia will be  going to Malaysia. And I'll point out this …

GILBERT: But Peter Hartcher and Phil Coorey in the

Herald today, in The Sydney Morning Herald,  are reporting that initially it was going to be a  two-for-one deal, a two-for-one deal. Now it  ends up being, what?, …

HUNT: Five for one.

GILBERT: … five for one.

EMERSON: Well, the deal is what has been announced …

GILBERT: Do you reckon that's true: 4,000 to 800?

11



EMERSON: … and I actually think that …

GILBERT: No, but has the Government been dudded? It

says Malaysia's out-gunned Australia on this.

EMERSON: That's their story. We are quite …

HUNT: Do you deny it?

EMERSON: …we are quite content with the deal…

GILBERT: We'd take any deal you could get?

EMERSON: No, we are quite content with the deal that is

there. Now, again, let Greg Hunt, let the  Coalition say that they are opposed to 1,000  mainly Burmese refugees coming to Australia.  You see, they have every possible position.

Scott Morrison said that under the Coalition

there would be an increase in the

humanitarian intake. When we increase the  humanitarian intake, predominantly Burmese,  what does Greg Hunt do? What does Tony  Abbott do? What they always do - oppose it.

HUNT: There's a simple solution: pick up the phone to

the President of Nauru, who is willing  immediately to reopen the centre there, to do  this without …

EMERSON: It's not ready to be reopened.

GILBERT: Are there double standards? Is there ... is

there hypocrisy there?

EMERSON: It is not yet ready to be reopened.

12



GILBERT: But is there hypocrisy there? You did say

before in the context of the Budget, where  there's positive, or positive developments as  you see it and you welcome it. It seems on  asylum-seekers that rule does not apply …

HUNT: This is not a…

GILBERT: …because you did say…

HUNT: … this is not a good deal for Australia…

GILBERT: … but the Government did say it will …

EMERSON: So you oppose the Burmese coming to

Australia?

HUNT: This is not a good deal.

EMERSON: Okay, there it is: opposition!

HUNT: It started out at two for one. It's ended up at

five for one, and it's not going to stop the  boats. It's a temporary solution and, most  significantly, what you see is that Malaysia  looks at the Australian Prime Minister, they  see a diminished figure, and Malaysia says,  ‘she is the Alan Bond of international

relations…’

EMERSON: Yeah, yeah, well, look, the Burmese …

HUNT: You get one deal like this in a lifetime.

EMERSON: Who would argue with this: that there is

repression in Burma? Who would say that  Aung Sun Suu Kyi isn't barracking and

13



championing on behalf of oppressed people in  Burma? And those Burmese …

GILBERT: Were there concerns in Caucus about this,

though? The fact that if you look at the  humanitarian side of this …

EMERSON: ... those Burmese are genuine refugees.

GILBERT: Yes, but, in terms …

EMERSON: And they are opposed to them coming to

Australia.

GILBERT: But Craig Emerson, in terms of the

humanitarian …

HUNT: What if they only want two for one?

GILBERT: Please, please. In terms of the humanitarian

aspect of this in the Caucus: were there  concerns that you’re shunting a group of  people to the back of the queue in Malaysia  where human rights abuses have been noted  for many years?

EMERSON: And you know I'm constrained about

discussing what actually happened in Caucus.  But I can tell you about the general

atmosphere. There was very little discussion  about this in the full Caucus. Whether there  were discussions with individual Ministers  beforehand or whatever, quite possibly. There  was very little discussion about it in the  Caucus. And you've seen the newspaper  reports on the Caucus saying the Caucus  accepted the proposition that was put to them.

14



GILBERT: The Prime Minister told the Caucus,

apparently, Greg Hunt, that ... and this is  something that obviously Tony Abbott ... is  working for Tony Abbott, that his narrow  debate on carbon price and on asylum-seekers, the political debate, that's what he's  been driving, the roadshow around Australia  on the carbon price and on asylum-seekers.

Is this, you know, is this going to be the modus

operandi for the foreseeable future, or is Tony  Abbott going to broaden the debate at all?

HUNT: No, there are two parts to this. One is holding

the Government to account on the massive  failures on border protection and the carbon  tax. Just yesterday we saw the CEO of Incitec  Pivot and the Chairman of BHP again  criticised the Government's approach on this  and say that it's got it wrong.

Secondly, at the same time, Tony is also

working on a very constructive agenda for  Australia in terms of a better way: mental  health; Indigenous health; welfare to work;  financial reform. This is both a Leader of the  Opposition and an alternative prime minister.

EMERSON: All right. Well, here's a great opportunity.

Thursday night the Opposition Leader delivers  his Budget reply. During last week, the  Shadow Treasurer said that the Coalition  would have the Budget back into surplus in  2011-12. Here's the opportunity for Tony  Abbott to spell out how he's going to get the  Budget back into surplus in 2011-12 and  beyond.

And I'm saying beyond the rubbish $50 billion

figures that Joe Hockey's been talking about,

15



which includes not proceeding with small  business tax breaks funded by the mining tax,  not proceeding with the cut in the company  tax, not proceeding in superannuation, but  forgetting that they don't get the revenue out of  the tax.

GILBERT: Okay, well let's ask Greg.

EMERSON: How absurd is that?

GILBERT: Is this ... was that a legitimate commitment, or

is this the Government just trying to beat this  up? Is this a commitment that the Coalition  would actually see that as viable: return to  surplus a year earlier?

EMERSON: [Indistinct]

HUNT: Well, if we had been in government, I believe

we would have delivered it. I don't have any  doubt about it.

EMERSON: Another 'gunna'.

HUNT: The next thing, though, is our record compares

with the Government's. Ten of our last 11  Budgets were surplus Budgets. Nine out of  nine of the last ALP Budgets have been  massive deficit Budgets. That's the history that  Australia is facing at the moment. Surpluses  versus deficits, and tonight there will be no  carbon tax in the budget and there will be,  therefore, a $35 billion to $40 billion revenue  shortfall …

EMERSON: Let me make this point, let me make this

point…

16



HUNT: … compared with what they're proposing to

extend.

EMERSON: … about no carbon tax in the budget. In mid-

in May 1997, John Howard announced a GST.  It was not in the next Budget, it was not in the  next Budget. In mid-2007, John Howard  announced an emissions trading scheme. It  was not in the Budget updates. Hypocrisy, thy  name is Liberal!

HUNT: I think that's the …

GILBERT: Okay, is that a fair comparison that Craig

Emerson's making? With the GST, it wasn't  included until the details were finalised. So  surely, you do it when it's done?

HUNT: No the diff … with respect, there is a great

difference, and the difference is this: that this  tax is proposed to start just over a year from  now, just over a year from now. Not some  multiples of years later right now. It's a critical  element …

EMERSON: Same thing with the GST.

HUNT: … it should be in the Budget. It's being

withheld from the Budget because it would  destroy their promises on both revenue and  expenditure.

GILBERT: And I suppose the other difference is, Craig

Emerson, that Mr Howard went to the election,  went to the election in '98 with a GST.

EMERSON: And spelled out the details but didn't put it in

the Budget.

17



GILBERT: But took it to the people.

EMERSON: Yeah, didn't put it in the Budget. This is about

…

GILBERT: You're not taking this carbon tax to the people.

EMERSON: What we're talking about is whether it's in the

Budget or not. Now, the Coalition's made a big  deal about the carbon tax, which starts on 1  July 2012, right after the next Budget, after the  next Budget. So why would you put it in this  Budget when we're still working through the  details, when the Coalition …

HUNT: Four-year estimates…

EMERSON: … didn't on either the ETS and the GST?

GILBERT: Well, we're going to wrap up our discussion

now, gents. Thank you very much for that on  Budget Day. We can see some pictures there  of Treasurer Wayne Swan approaching the  Ministerial door of Parliament House here in  Canberra. Thank you very much.

EMERSON: Go Swanny!

GILBERT: Have a good day [laughs]. It should be an

interesting week, Greg Hunt, Craig Emerson.  Thank you very much for that.







