CHRIS BOWEN MP

MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP  *TRANSCRIPT*

INTERVIEW WITH HUGH RIMINTON, MICHELLE GRATTAN  AND SIMON BENSON, MEET THE PRESS, TEN NETWORK

SUNDAY, 16 OCTOBER 2011



E&OE PROOF ONLY

SUBJECTS: Onshore processing, offshore processing, Malaysia  arrangement, Nauru, bridging visas, community detention, ALP  national conference, leadership.

HUGH RIMINTON: And now welcome to the program, Immigration Minister,  Chris Bowen. Good morning to you.

CHRIS BOWEN: Good morning, Hugh.

RIMINTON: It’s not the normal business for a man in my position to feel  sympathy for a minister, but I’m starting to get that way. It’s been a hell of a  week.

BOWEN: Well, it has its challenges. I got into politics to make a difference  and that means tackling tough issues and tough jobs.

RIMINTON: Have you tackled the issue or has it tackled you?

BOWEN: This has been an issue which has bedevilled governments in  Australia for 30 or 40 years, finding the right balance. And this Government  set out to deliver a regional framework. People said we wouldn’t be able to  deliver it, people said we wouldn’t be able to get other countries in the region  to agree -

RIMINTON: And you haven’t delivered it.

BOWEN: But what we have done is reached agreement with other countries  in the region about a proper regional approach. Now, the Opposition has  taken a politically opportunistic approach and decided to stop offshore  processing because they believe that’s in their short-term political best

interest.

RIMINTON: Whatever you make of the Opposition tactics in this, you’ve  fought the good fight, the High Court was against the Malaysian solution, the  parliamentary numbers were against the Malaysian solution. Now we hear

that Cabinet was against you in your new solution, which was to deal Nauru  back onto the table. Is it time for fresh eyes; is it time for you to give up the  post?

BOWEN: Oh no, and this is Scott Morrison’s shrill hyperbole that we hear  from time to time and it’s also highly hypocritical on his behalf. But look, I  have a job to do; I’m focused on the job. It’s not the easiest job in the world,  of course. But I don’t walk away from challenges just because the political  situation throws up challenges, just because the Opposition, I mean, here’s  their hypocrisy: they get a briefing, we arrange briefings for them from the  nation’s national security experts about what is the most effective method to  break the people smugglers’ business model; they get the briefing and they  ignore it.

RIMINTON: But none of that matters any more.

BOWEN: And then all of a sudden, all of a sudden, they use that to call for  my resignation. I mean, I just don’t get the logic.

RIMINTON: But that’s the game, isn’t it, that none of this matters anymore  because it is the Government’s fault? Whatever tactics they use, the brutal  fact of it is that the Government’s responsible for delivering a policy.

BOWEN: Well, there’s a time for politics and there’s a time for acting in the  national interest. For example, I think it was 2001, Mr Howard needed to  change the laws on border protection. He went to Mr Beazley and said, ‘I  need your support to get this through the Parliament.’ To his great political  cost, Kim Beazley acted in the national interest. It’s just a pity Tony Abbott  isn’t of the calibre that Kim Beazley was in acting in the nation’s interest.

RIMINTON: Well, technically, you’ve still got the Malaysian solution on the  table. You say that is still your preferred policy. So what are you doing to  advance that; are you intending to have meetings with Tony Crook? Are there  any procedures in place to change the parliamentary numbers?

BOWEN: Well look, the parliamentary numbers are the parliamentary  numbers. That’s the fact of life in this Parliament, that we need the support of  others to get our legislation through.

RIMINTON: So, you’ve given up on Tony Crook, that’s all over now?

BOWEN: The person who can deliver this is frankly not Tony Crook, it’s Tony  Abbott. Tony Abbott can pick up the phone to Prime Minister Gillard and say  he’s decided to act in the national interest. He can for once, put the national  interest first.

RIMINTON: He’s got you on the run.

BOWEN: Well no, the Australian -

RIMINTON: And furthermore, if you talk about the Australian people, the  Australian people, at the moment, have got you on the nose, so he can argue  that he’s acting in the national interest to get rid of a Government that’s  unpopular.

BOWEN: I think the Australian people see through cheap political  opportunism. The Australian people would say, ‘Hang on, the Labor Party  supports offshore processing, the Liberal Party’s meant to support offshore  processing, why can’t they sort it out, why can’t Mr Abbott for once say yes?  Does he have to try and wreck everything?’ Now, he knows this is in the  national interest. If he won’t act in the national interest when he’s Leader of  the Opposition, what chance do we have of him acting in the national interest  if he were ever Prime Minister?

RIMINTON: If the Australian people can see through his politicking, they  can also now see into the workings of Cabinet. There is major leaking,  detailed leaking of a Cabinet meeting coming out almost in real time. What  does that say about the workability of this Government, the Government  processes from here on?

BOWEN: Well, look, things happen from time to time that shouldn’t happen.  In terms of that, it happens on both sides of politics. There’s been Shadow  Cabinet leaks, some about Mr Morrison himself from time to time, and it

happens.

RIMINTON: Nothing of this scale on a matter of policy at the real time. This  surely means that the Prime Minister goes into Cabinet knowing that she  might as well be broadcasting it in a news conference across Australia. How  do you make Government work when you are in that circumstance?

BOWEN: Well, look, as I say, I think, I agree with you that Cabinet meetings  should be confidential. From time to time, that is breached. That’s  unfortunate but you get on with the job and you focus on the job at hand.

RIMINTON: Who’s the leaker?

BOWEN: Well, look, I’m just not going to speculate.

RIMINTON: Because the bad news all comes to the Right faction. If you  read those reports, the Right is getting rolled. That seems to be the point of  the leaking.

BOWEN: Well, look, I’m not going to speculate. We can all sit around and  speculate about all these things. As you pointed out already, Hugh, I’ve got a  job on my hands. I’m doing that job and I’m focused on that job.

[Commercial break]

MICHELLE GRATTAN: Mr Bowen, we now know you were an advocate of  putting Nauru into the mix late in the piece at this now infamous Cabinet  discussion. Why didn’t you make such a proposal earlier when you might have  perhaps had more chance of getting Tony Abbott’s support?

BOWEN: I’m obviously not going into details of the Cabinet discussion. I will  say this: you would expect for a big and important issue that the Cabinet had  laid before it various options with pros and cons, of various approaches, not  only on policy, but also how to deal with a political impasse, when Mr Abbott  says he supports offshore processing but won’t vote for it. Now, you would  expect the ideas to be tossed around and I think it would be negligent if they  weren’t tossed around and the pros and cons considered at all stages, and  that’s exactly how we approached these issues.

GRATTAN: Why not earlier? You had weeks on this.

BOWEN: Well Michelle, Mr Abbott has had weeks to act in the national  interest. When he indicated he would oppose the legislation and Mr Crook,  after deep consideration on his behalf, indicated he would oppose the  legislation, it was appropriate for the Cabinet to consider its options for  breaking a parliamentary impasse; as simple as that.

SIMON BENSON: The leak, though, the Cabinet leak, was designed to  damage you as much as it was the PM. Who’s out to get you in Cabinet?

BOWEN: Look, Simon, I’m just not going to speculate or comment. We can  all - as I said before - we can all sit around and talk about those sorts of  things. I’ve got a job to do and I’m just focused on that job.

BENSON: All right, can we go to some detail about this new arrangement?  When are we going to see the first people released into the community on the  bridging visas; where will they go? I mean, there was some talk this morning  about sending them to regional areas.

BOWEN: Well, look, as Immigration Minister, from time to time I do get  approaches from rural and regional areas saying, ‘We have shortages of  labour and we are happy to welcome people.’ And obviously where that  happens, we would engage with that area. And there may well be  opportunities to work with local authorities, local councils etcetera, to say, ‘If  we have people who are being processed for claims in the community, could  we arrange something of mutual benefit?’ And I do get those approaches  from time to time. It won’t always be appropriate or won’t always work, but  we would certainly pursue that with those local authorities.

GRATTAN: Would people have to report regularly? How will you keep track  of them? And surely you’ll have to be pretty certain that, in fact, their claims

will be upheld because they’ll be even harder to deport later if their claims are  rejected and they’ve already been operating in the community.

BOWEN: Well, there are a couple of points to make there, Michelle . Firstly,  we already obviously have people in the community being processed. It’s  something I introduced as minister: moving families and children into the  community as they’re processed. That’s been happening for -

GRATTAN: They’re only ‘semi’ in the community, though, aren’t they?

BOWEN: Well, no, they live in a house, they are free to come and go. It’s not  detention in any meaningful sense, the only obligation is that they live in the  house that we designate. But the kids go to school, the parents are free to go  about their business, and that has worked well. That has worked well; there  have been very few issues with that. And what I have indicated and my clear  policy position was and continues to be, that if you’re going to have onshore  processing - because of the Opposition’s approach, that is the only logical  conclusion - that it doesn’t make sense to keep expanding the detention  networks, but to try different things.

Now, we already have people on bridging visas in the community. People  arrive in Australia by aeroplane, for example, and then claim asylum and need  to be on a bridging visa. They are issued routinely. We do find that those  people, if their claims fail, by and large, do go home. They are not happy  about it , they appeal it, they exercise their rights, but we do have to return  people from the community regularly to other countries and that just happens  quietly, and probably it’s only the Immigration Minister, Immigration  Department who would realise just how regularly that happens.

RIMINTON: The Prime Minister says that there will be community anxiety  over more people arriving. Is the community on good grounds to be anxious?  What are the grounds for that anxiety?

BOWEN: Well, look, I think the Prime Minister was just pointing out that  these are difficult issues and it’s important to bear in mind that regardless of  what you think about border protection or asylum seekers, these are  individuals, these are human beings who deserve to be treated with dignity  and respect.

RIMINTON: So there’s nothing to fear?

BOWEN: No, no, no. And as I say, we already have people living in the  community. It just happens quietly, they go about their business as they are  being processed. That happens for the families and children that we’ve  released from detention. It also happens for people who’ve arrived in  Australia by airplane, as I say, by and large. Some are detained but mainly  processed in the community.

GRATTAN: The Prime Minister had said she wants the ALP policy, which is  somewhat ambiguous, clarified at the national conference. Some in the left  will obviously argue that it should be clarified to the onshore direction and  some not on the left that it should be clarified to a harder line. Which way  would you go?

BOWEN: Well, look, we’ll have this debate at the national conference.  Clearly, I think this Government and myself as minister have taken the  approach that there is nothing humane about encouraging people to get on a  boat and risk their life. There’s nothing humane about saying that because we  have processed people in that way, that means that there are a whole lot of  other people - some of the 43 million displaced people in the world - miss  out on a chance of resettling in Australia. So we’ll continue to argue the case  for a proper regional framework, and as a part of that proper regional  framework, the appropriate measures to provide the deterrent to get on the  boat to come to Australia.

BENSON: All of this, the Cabinet leak, the policy failure on this issue, will  inevitably lead to more instability in terms of the Prime Minister’s leadership  and more speculation about it, of course. What do you do, what does the  Labor Party do, if you cannot get out of the 20s, in terms of your primary  vote? Surely at some stage surely you have to reassess your commitment to  the current leadership if it means you’re all going to go down the tube?

BOWEN: Well, look, governments and prime ministers go through difficult  periods. I can’t think of a prime minister who has hasn’t been through a  difficult period.  And you use the word ‘speculation’, it’s a pattern of  Australian politics that when a prime minister or government’s going through  a difficult period, you see that speculation in my -

BENSON: The speculation is coming from within your Caucus.

BOWEN: And in my experience, the speculation is primarily in the media, and  that’s how these things operate. The job for the Government is to deliver and  to focus. I think the Australian people just want governments to get on with  the job.

RIMINTON: Who’ll be the next Australian Prime Minister?

BOWEN: Well, Julia Gillard will remain Prime Minister and then -

RIMINTON: Forever?

BOWEN: Well, there’s an election every so often and these things get  reassessed by the Australian people.

BENSON: Can I ask you then, do you ever have pause for thought to wake  up and wish you were still the Finance Minister?



BOWEN: [Laughs] Look, as I said at the beginning, Simon, Government does  have some tough jobs and there’s plenty of people who come up to me in the  street and say, ‘Mate, I wouldn’t want your job, but just keep going’, and  that’s what I do. Tough jobs is what I think I got into politics to do. Some

people will criticise, some people will say they could do it better, well, fine,  but I’m the bloke in the job making the calls, calling it as I see it.

GRATTAN: But do you think a party at some point has an obligation to  reassess the leadership for the sake of the long-term future of the party? If  you have a wipeout at the next election, then that could set the Labor Party  back for two, three terms.

BOWEN: The next election is two years away.

GRATTAN: Maybe.

BOWEN: Well, I mean, I can’t see any evidence that this Parliament won’t go  full term. Clearly, it’s a difficult Parliament with the numbers, but nevertheless  this Government - I think it’s remarkable, frankly, that this week is the first  week the Government has had to contemplate a defeat on legislation. We  have had a very significant record of delivering legislation. As I recall the  analysis, more legislation passed this year than under several years of the  Howard Government when they had a majority, very clear majorities in the  House of Representatives. So we are actually just quietly delivering and  getting on with the job and that’s what we’ll remain focused on.

RIMINTON: Isn’t it tough that you are only remembered for the one that  doesn’t work for you?

BOWEN: Well, look, that’s politics.

RIMINTON: Indeed. Chris Bowen, thank you very much for joining us.

BOWEN: My great pleasure. Go the Wallabies.

Ends



