CHRIS BOWEN MP

MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP  *TRANSCRIPT*

INTERVIEW WITH FRAN KELLY, ABC RADIO NATIONAL  BREAKFAST

TUESDAY, 9 AUGUST 2011



SUBJECTS: Malaysia transfer arrangement, High Court case.

FRAN KELLY: Immigration Minister, Chris Bowen, is in our Parliament House  studio. Minister, good morning.

CHRIS BOWEN: Good morning to you Fran.

KELLY: Can you speed up this High Court hearing, or do you have to wait a  couple of weeks?

BOWEN: Well we’re certainly exploring doing that and it would be up to the  court at the end of the day, but we believe we’re on very strong ground, very  solid ground in this case, as we do believe it would be better that it be heard  as soon as possible. So the Solicitor-General will make that case to the High  Court, but it’s a matter for the High Court as to how they respond to that.

KELLY: This is a real mess for the Government, isn’t it? Far from delivering  certainty and closing the door to people smugglers, which you say is the  mission here, the signal now, at least for the next fortnight, is anyone who  comes here won’t be sent to Malaysia, they’ll stay right here.

BOWEN: Well I’ve been very clear in my comments Fran, deliberately, that  people smugglers and asylum seekers should be clear that this is an interim  injunction: it’s not a result of a court case; and that anybody contemplating  coming to Australia on the basis of this injunction should not. It is clear, of  course, and one of our arguments to the court is that people smugglers will  spin this and lie about this and say that this is some sort of green light: it’s  not. But nevertheless, we will be making the case that it would be better that  there is more certainty.

These are always difficult issues and controversial issues Fran. I said on May  7 when we announced this that we would expect protest, resistance and legal  challenge - I don’t think I’ve been proven wrong. But what is important is  how you respond to it. Of course, there is a pattern to this, I mean, the  previous Government’s Nauru option was declared invalid by the Federal  Court at one stage. That’s not happened to us on this, it’s simply an  injunction; but unlike the previous Government, where Nauru was declared

invalid and then that was overturned on appeal, my point is that these are  always complex and controversial matters.

KELLY: This is not the Federal Court, this is the High Court. Why are you  confident that your plan is safe from a successful High Court challenge?

BOWEN: Well of course Fran we didn’t do this lightly, and we didn’t do it  based on a view that this wasn’t legal. We had legal advice all the way  through that this was legal, the Act is clear that a third country can be  declared and that the Minister can declare that third country, and we’ve  followed the Act to the letter -

KELLY: A third country can be decreed, but a third country that is not a  signatory to the Convention, a third country with an appalling human rights  record? Is the Act clear on that?

BOWEN: With respect Fran, Malaysia is a country which has given  commitments to Australia in terms of the arrangement we have with them.  It’s also a country, by the way, which has agreed to the fundamental tenant  of the Refugee Convention as part of this arrangement, non-refoulement,  which is a big step forward. And Malaysia has, for some time, given asylum  seekers the capacity to have their claims heard through the UNHCR.

And so look, we’ve made this declaration based on strong ground, strong  advice, and we would argue it vigorously before the court and we think it is  better it would occur sooner rather than later.

KELLY: Minister, Malaysia has given commitments to Australia, but there has  not - these are not legally-binding commitments, and it is the case isn’t it,  that the Australian Government cannot guarantee human rights in any foreign  country where it has no jurisdiction, not much less in Malaysia which, as I say  again, is not a signatory to the Convention?

BOWEN: Well Fran, the majority of the world’s asylum seekers are in  countries that aren’t Refugee Convention signatories. We’ll work with Malaysia  -



KELLY: Is that any reason for us to send more there?

BOWEN: No - well, we’re taking 4,000 out let’s not forget Fran, and we’re  taking 4,000 people and giving them a chance of a better life in Australia, the  first of which arrive this week and they are people who didn’t have standing  in yesterday’s court case.

The people who didn’t have standing in yesterday’s court case are people  who’ve been waiting for resettlement in Malaysia who don’t have the money  to afford a people smuggler. The people who didn’t have standing in  yesterday’s court case are the people who die on the boats on the way to

Australia because they think that gives them a better chance of resettlement.  There are people without a voice in this argument: these are the people who  don’t have the resources to get to a people smuggler, these are the people  who feel they have to risk their lives and some die on the way.

I make no apologies for a tough line, and I make no apologies for arguing the  case vigorously that these people should have the right to have a say in this  as well.

KELLY: But the people who are launching this case against you are people  who have risked their lives to get here. This is - you say this is about  stopping the people smugglers, but it’s also about denying people who are  fleeing persecution, fleeing violence, seeking a safe haven in Australia,  coming here and asking for protection. That’s who you’re stopping.

BOWEN: Well, we’re stopping people getting on a boat to do so Fran. What  we’re doing is we’re saying that we will give people - we want to take more  refugees and I make no apologies for saying we want to take more refugees.

I also make no apologies for saying that we should not have the situation, it  is not morally acceptable to me, to say to people, ‘If you risk your life on a  boat to Australia, that will give you a better chance for resettlement’. We  should be saying, and we are saying, ‘If you go through the UNHCR and you  get mandated as a refugee, you will have a better chance of resettlement in  Australia’, and we will not encourage people to take the risky journey.

Now people who go out there and say, you know, ‘this is morally  unacceptable’, well my question to them is this: is it morally acceptable to  force people onto a dangerous boat to have a chance of resettlement, and if  it isn’t, what are you going to do to discourage it? The Government’s position  is clear.

KELLY: In policy terms, if the High Court strikes down the Malaysia swap  altogether though, it’s a free-for-all: people smugglers know the Australian  Government is powerless to stop them bringing people to Christmas Island,  it’s a debacle.

BOWEN: Well we’re not working on that basis Fran, we’re working on the  basis we’re on strong legal grounds, we have very strong legal advice and  we’ll be arguing vigorously.

KELLY: What about the legal grounds in terms of the challenge to your role  and responsibilities as the legal guardian of unaccompanied children seeking  asylum here? What choice do you have, as the legal guardian, in good  conscience, to - you know, surely its very difficult for you to argue that its  within your responsibilities to send children to another country, like Malaysia,  where they may - they will be at greater risk than they are here?

BOWEN: Well Fran, the Minister for Immigration has many responsibilities, of  course I do, and the Act is very clear about those responsibilities, and the  responsibility is to administer the Act and to ensure the integrity of our  immigration system. And of course -

KELLY: And to act as a legal guardian to unaccompanied children.

BOWEN: And of course Fran, I have special responsibilities to  unaccompanied minors, of course I do. That’s why we’ve negotiated with  Malaysia the protections that we have. Now Fran, these are difficult issues, of

course they are.

Now, if you had the position that an unaccompanied minor could never be  taken from Australia, that would be an untenable position. I’ll give you one  example: one example is Fran, we have an agreement with Afghanistan,  signed between Australia and Afghanistan and the UNHCR, to return people  who’ve failed as asylum seekers, now that has special protections in it for  unaccompanied minors.

But you can’t have the situation where you say, ‘Look, if you’re an  unaccompanied minor, and even if you’re not a refugee and you can’t make a  case that you’re a refugee, then therefore you have an automatic right of stay  in Australia’, because that would not be a sustainable outcome. What’s  important is that we have all the appropriate care and protection in place as  we deal with the complex issue of unaccompanied minors.

My responsibilities as guardian are very important, I’m the Minister who’s  taken kids out of detention for example, I take those responsibilities seriously.  But I also take my responsibility seriously to the 18,000 children in Malaysia  waiting for resettlement and the 1,200 unaccompanied minors wandering the  streets of Kuala Lumpur looking for resettlement, and I take my responsibility  seriously to try and stop children being on boats because I never want to take  another call like I did on the 16th of December last year, telling me that  children, including a two month old baby, had drowned off Christmas Island.

KELLY: Minister, but if you take these responsibilities seriously, and you’ve  given all signs ever since you’ve taken up this portfolio that you do: you’ve  criticised the Nauru option in the past for leaving children in limbo for up to  five years; how do you reconcile then the fact that children - unaccompanied  minors you send to Malaysia - could be there for much longer than that, and  how can you, just explain to everyone listening, how you can ensure that  these children are protected, their welfare is protected in Malaysia?

BOWEN: Well, because we’ve been working with the UNHCR and the IOM on  the appropriate arrangements, and of course -

KELLY: But what are those arrangements? Can you explain to us how you  are going to keep tabs on all the unaccompanied minors sent under this

Malaysian solution to Malaysia?

BOWEN: Well Fran, again, let me go back to basics and I’ll answer your  question. What we’ve said is no blanket exemptions and a case-by-case  approach on the vulnerabilities of any particular minor. That goes to the  decision as to whether to transfer and the care and support that would be in  place after transfer, and that goes to them being in the transit centre and to  an assessment of their needs for appropriate care and support to be put in  place, in conjunction with the IOM, in conjunction with various non-government organisations in Malaysia, et cetera. And of course, we would  make sure that that was in place for any individual concerned.

I hope we don’t have to send any children to Malaysia because I hope the  boats stop coming and I hope that people don’t make that dangerous decision  to put their kids on boats -

KELLY: Well there’s 16 on there now, on the first boat.

BOWEN: Yes -

KELLY: Will you be sending them?

BOWEN: Well we’ve said no blanket exemptions and people can work on the  basis that they’ll be sent to Malaysia. Now we also have the situation of  people sometimes claiming to be minors: we’ve had one person who claimed  to be a minor on that boat, it has not been established clearly that he’s not a  minor; that happens, not irregularly in this area. That underlines the  unworkability of the blanket exemption. That frankly, would be a naive and  unworkable approach.

KELLY: Okay, but if word comes after this is in place and an unaccompanied  minor is sent to Malaysia, that they have not been cared for, that they have  been abused, suffered violence or abuse of some form, that’s on your head.

BOWEN: Well Fran, I’m the Minister, I take responsibility for what happens in  my portfolio and I take responsibility for breaking the people smugglers’  business model. That means making tough and unpopular decisions from time  to time, but that’s the role that I’ve taken and that’s my job, and I’ll do it.

KELLY: Chris Bowen, thank you very much for joining us.

BOWEN: Thank you Fran.

ENDS



