1









LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  THE HON. TONY ABBOTT MHR  FEDERAL MEMBER FOR WARRINGAH



**CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY**

4 May 2011

ADDRESS TO THE VICTORIAN EMPLOYERS’ CHAMBER OF   COMMERCE AND INDUSTRY,  INDUSTRY HOUSE, MELBOURNE

E&OE……………………….……………………………………………………………………

The essential test for next week’s budget is whether it eases the cost of living pressures on Australian  families. If it fails to restrain spending to put downward pressure on interest rates, flags new taxes without  being transparent about them, and glosses over the high price of the government’s botched policies, it will  reinforce the sense that Australia is drifting and that we have become a great country with lousy  government. The budget should demonstrate that the government has learned to avoid the extravagant  spending and incoherent policies that have characterised the past three and a half years. Any further failure  to learn from its mistakes would reinforce the growing doubt that the Labor-Green government deserves to  serve out its full term.

The budget is a government’s annual opportunity to show taxpayers that it takes them seriously and respects  the resources that have been entrusted to it. It’s a test of the government’s competence and seriousness.  After installing and removing combustible roof batts, funding government school halls at nearly twice the  price of their non-government counterparts, starting Australia’s biggest ever infrastructure project without a  published cost benefit analysis, threatening Australia’s most important export industry with an investment-destroying new tax, and now proposing another new tax on the way every Australian lives and works, in this  budget the government is on trial for its life.

There are four tests against which the budget and the government will be judged: can the government  demonstrate a real rather than just a rhetorical commitment to spending discipline; does it have a credible  strategy to pay off debt as well as to return to surplus; does it come clean about the costs of its policy  failures such as roof batts and border protection; and is it capable of being honest about the real costs of its  policy initiatives such as the National Broadband Network and the carbon tax?

What Australia needs now is a steady, orthodox government which doesn’t over-promise, which treats  respectfully the people its decisions will affect, which builds incrementally on our country’s strengths and  which understands that its first duty is to do no harm. Instead, we have a government that’s struggling to  dispel the pervasive sense that it can’t be trusted with money and therefore that it can’t be trusted with the  Australian people’s future.



The government has to dispel the pervasive sense that it is helplessly reacting to events rather than shaping  them and that it has no plausible plan to tackle the real problems in people’s lives other than to spend money  in mostly counterproductive ways. If it can’t, the public could easily conclude that it’s a government without

2



vision or competence with a Prime Minister who’s not up to the job. To remain credible, the government  can’t afford another failure.

Whenever the Prime Minister and the Treasurer talk in the abstract about the strength of the Australian  economy, the public is inclined to think about the pressure on cost of living and to conclude that the  government has forgotten families. Since December 2007, the average cost of power has risen 50 per cent,  water has risen 46 per cent, gas has risen 30 per cent, health costs are up 20 per cent, education is up 24 per  cent, groceries are up 14 per cent and rent is up 21 per cent. Since mid-2009, interest rate rises have added  $500 a month to the average mortgage repayment. It’s little wonder that people are feeling squeezed because  average full-time wages have increased by just seven per cent over the same period.

The headline GDP growth that the government likes to focus on reflects higher immigration rather than  increased prosperity.  Since December 2007, real GDP per person has crawled up at an annual rate of just  one quarter of one per cent. By contrast, over the life of the former government, real GDP per person rose by  two and a quarter per cent on average every year. This is why the Howard years now seem like a lost golden  age of prosperity.

The government likes to compare Australia’s economic situation with that of other countries. The public,  though, is inclined to a much less satisfactory comparison: its experience of the economy today with that of  just a few years ago. It’s on this comparison that the current government seems to have the Midas touch in  reverse.

Increasingly, the government is not credited for keeping Australia out of a global recession but for  squandering its fiscal inheritance. It was the reforms of previous governments that brought Australia through  the Global Financial Crisis, not the spending spree of the current one which has turned a $20 billion surplus  into a $50 billion deficit. It’s turned $70 billion in net assets into $90 billion in net debt without anything  much to show for it.

People are starting to recall that the Asian financial crisis of 1998 actually had no less an impact on  Australia’s trading partners as the GFC but the then-government managed to steer us through without  busting the budget. A decade ago, the then-government provided a two per cent of GDP stimulus in response  to the one per cent rise in unemployment associated with the tech wreck recession. By contrast, the current  government’s panicked response to the GFC-linked one and three quarter per cent rise in unemployment was  a six per cent of GDP fiscal easing.

This is why the government’s claims to have saved Australia from the Global Financial Crisis end up  reminding people about installing and then removing combustible roof batts. People under daily financial  pressure wonder what four years of building overpriced school halls had to do with averting a crisis that  occurred over just a few months at the end of 2008.

What the government has firmly established in the public mind, though, is its addiction to debt and deficits.  In the current financial year, with unemployment at five per cent and Australia’s terms of trade at record  highs, the budget deficit will be well over three per cent of GDP. In 2004-05, by contrast, with  unemployment also at five per cent and Australia’s terms of trade 40 per cent lower than now, there was a  budget surplus of one and a half per cent of GDP. The Howard government ran a structural surplus in all but  one of its last five years in office, a recent Treasury study shows, while the current government has run a  structural deficit every single year.

The government is citing a return to surplus in 2012-13 as its badge of economic virtue but Labor has been  much better at forecasting a surplus than at delivering one. The Prime Minister and the Treasurer insist that  deficits have been entirely due to circumstances beyond their control. Unfortunately, when it comes to  deficits, Labor governments never seem to run out of bad luck. Labor’s last eight Commonwealth budgets  have produced $198 billion in cumulative deficit. Actually, every single one of the Hawke/Keating  government’s last five budgets as well as the Rudd/Gillard government’s first three budgets was in deficit  greater than two per cent of GDP.

3



Even now, the Rudd/Gillard government is running up debt at the rate of over $100 million a day. In the 20  minutes or so that it will take to deliver this speech, Commonwealth government debt will increase by $1.5  million. Even under current forecasts, by the time the government stops adding to debt in 2012-13, the  interest repayments will be $5.9 billion in just that year. This would be almost enough to finish the Brisbane  city rail loop, enough to finish the duplication of the Pacific Highway between Newcastle and Tweed Heads  or to build the M4 between Strathfield and the Sydney CBD and more than enough to build the inland  railway from Melbourne to Brisbane.

In any event, the surplus forecast for 2012-13 is smaller than the blow-out in the deficit that’s now expected  this year. It’s but a fraction larger than the blow-out in the school hall programme or the potential blow-out  in asylum seeker costs now that the government has totally lost control of our borders and is losing control  of detention centres. Moreover, it’s almost entirely generated by the return to stronger economic growth that  the current government’s policies have done nothing to foster.

The forecast return to surplus is not the result of tough-minded cuts to government spending like those  implemented by Peter Walsh in the late 1980s or Peter Costello in the late 1990s. It’s not the result of tough-minded economic reforms like those of the Hawke or Howard governments. It’s an inertia-induced surplus  not a policy-induced one. It’s the result of a government that’s lazy, not a government that’s brave.

If they eventuate, the 500,000 jobs that the Treasurer says will be created over the next two years will  happen despite government policies rather than because of them. If they are implemented, the government’s  policies will reduce job creation in the mining industry and destroy jobs in every industry that uses energy  and is exposed to export competition. It’s increasingly hard to take seriously a Treasurer who scoffs at the  impact of a carbon tax on the steel industry, for instance, when the head of BlueScope says that it will add  up to a billion dollars to costs over the next eight years and could spell the end of serious manufacturing in  this country.

In its fourth budget, the government has finally to demonstrate that it understands the fundamentals of  economics and the iron laws of public finances.  Every cost that government imposes on industry is a cost  that industry passes onto consumers or loses from its bottom line. Every cost that government imposes on  industry means higher costs to consumers, less competitive businesses and fewer people with jobs. Every  dollar that government spends comes from citizens either through tax or through borrowing. Every dollar  that government spends on its priorities is a dollar that citizens don’t have to spend on theirs. Every  borrowed dollar that government spends today is more than a dollar that it can’t spend tomorrow as it meets  loan repayments plus interest.

The first thing that the government has to demonstrate in this budget is the capacity to bring its own  spending under much tighter control. It’s not enough to limit real growth in further government spending to  two per cent a year when the government has previously increased its existing spending by nearly 20 per  cent. It’s not enough to limp to a wafer thin surplus in 2012-13 on the back of assumptions about the  continuing strength of the Chinese economy and the first boom in human history which is assumed never to  end.

A prudent government would guard against the possibility that economic growth in Asia might prove as  bumpy as everywhere else, especially if the US and other big economies fail to restore fiscal balance. It’s  naÃÂ¯ve to assume that Australia’s terms of trade can’t decline and that the current windfall need not be  harnessed for tougher times ahead.

That said, the current government has shown little understanding of the difference between smart and dumb  ways to rein in spending. The smart way to rein in spending is not to engage in wasteful environmental  programmes like green loans and to limit the growth in the number of new government employees. Prior to  the last election, the Coalition identified $50 billion worth of savings over the forward estimates by not  continuing with unnecessary new spending and by making do with 12,000 fewer public sector workers.



4



A dumb way would be to threaten family benefits or to means test them further because this jeopardises  women’s abilities to be economic as well as social contributors. What this government sometimes derides as  middle class welfare is actually a tax cut for families. Another dumb way would be to threaten medical  research funding because that would prejudice finding new treatments for a trifling saving. Yet another  dumb way would be to change the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme from a demand driven to a budget  limited programme by substituting political decision-making for a scientific assessment of which drugs are  long-term value for money.

An honest government would detail in the budget a credible strategy and time frame not just to return to  surplus but to pay off the debt. An honest government would detail in the budget the expected future costs of  checking all the houses insulated under the failed roof batts programme or explain why this is not necessary;  and it would detail in the budget the costs of detaining an extra 7000 illegal boat arrivals or explain how the  government will stop the boats now that its East Timor detention centre has been exposed as a sham.

Above all, an honest government would come clean about the impact of the government’s big initiatives: the  NBN on government finances and the carbon tax on people’s jobs and cost of living.

The government has to be more transparent about its so-called reforms. Imposing a new $10.5 billion mining  tax, if that’s truly what it will raise, in return for $4 billion in company tax cuts is not even the beginning of  tax reform. Robbing Peter to pay Paul is not cutting tax especially when Peter loses more than Paul gains.  Merely substituting one tax for another is a tax fiddle rather than a tax cut. The only way to cut taxes is to  cut spending or to boost productivity yet policies to lift productivity and participation seem as unlikely from  this government as spending discipline.

The government should consider the productivity-boosting reforms that the Coalition has proposed for  schools and hospitals. Devolving the management of schools and hospitals to local boards with the power to  appoint the principal or the CEO and to supervise the budget would, over time, ensure that schools and  hospitals ran more efficiently.  The challenge for the Prime Minister is to be as ready to take on the public  sector unions in the cause of bigger reforms as she has been in a relatively small one like the MySchool  website. That would be a real education revolution.

The Coalition has recently proposed a four point plan to boost participation that would significantly increase  the numbers of workers and dramatically increase the strength of the Australian economy. Mandatory work  for the dole for all long term unemployment beneficiaries under 50 would improve their work culture and  also send a strong signal that people who can work should work: preferably for a wage but, if not, for the  dole. Extending welfare quarantining from the Northern Territory to all long term unemployment  beneficiaries would put more food on families’ tables and send a strong signal that welfare money should be  kept for the necessities of life.

Suspending dole payments for people under 30 in areas where unskilled work is readily available would  boost the size of the local labour force and send a strong signal to young people that job snobs won’t be  supported by the taxpayer. A more sophisticated approach to the disability pension that distinguishes  between disabilities that are likely to be permanent and those that are not would help to prevent older  unemployed people being parked on welfare.

The government’s alliance with the Greens means that none of these policies is likely to be accepted  notwithstanding their long term economic benefits. This is despite the fact that Labor claims to support work  for the dole; a former Labor Party national president supports suspending unemployment payments where  there is work available; Labor actually introduced across the board welfare quarantining in the Territory; and  a highly respected charity, Mission Australia, has accepted that changes are needed to the disability pension.

The Coalition is committed to publishing cost benefit analyses prior to all infrastructure spending above  $100 million because we understand that taxpayers are entitled to value for their money. The current  government, though, is not only undertaking the largest infrastructure project in Australia’s history without a  published cost benefit analysis but it’s trying to reduce public scrutiny by spending most of the money off-budget.

5



The government says that extending fibre to nearly every home can be done for $36 billion and that NBN  Co will attract private finance because the return on investment will approximate the long-term bond rate.  This assumes that 70 per cent of households will actually connect at prices significantly higher than Telstra  and its competitors’ current charges. Not only has the government dramatically under-estimated the capital  cost, as the collapse of the tender-to-build process demonstrates, but only 15 per cent of Tasmanian  households are connecting even though it’s being offered virtually for free.

If NBN Co fails to attract private investment and fails to generate the claimed returns, the vast amounts  borrowed and spent will come back on the government’s books. An honest government would use next  week’s budget to demonstrate how the NBN will be delivered, at what cost and over what time frame based  on the cost blow-outs and the delays that have so far been experienced.

There’s no point to a carbon tax if it doesn’t make turning on electricity or driving a car more expensive. It’s  only by making carbon emissions from coal and gas burning power stations and from petrol and diesel  powered cars more expensive that the tax is supposed to reduce them and to drive the change to a carbon  constrained future. A carbon tax that doesn’t raise the price of power and transport and that doesn’t drive a  shift out of energy intensive industries is not doing what is supposed to be its job.

It follows that an honest government would detail in the budget papers how much electricity prices and fuel  prices will rise and the impact this will have on families’ cost of living. It would detail the impact of the  carbon tax on the steel industry, the aluminium industry, the cement industry and the motor industry and  explain why it makes sense for Australia to import steel, aluminium, cement, and cars from China and  elsewhere rather than make them ourselves - as will inevitably be the case if we impose a carbon tax before  the rest of the world does. People need to understand why the government thinks that it’s so important to  export jobs and to import emissions.

The government should detail in the budget just how high the carbon tax or the carbon price will have to be  in order to meet the five per cent emissions reduction target by 2020 and how much higher it will need to be  to meet the government’s goal of a 60 per cent reduction in emissions by mid-century. The government  should explain what proportion of carbon tax revenue will be compensation to households and what  proportion will go to industry. It should then explain how households can be no worse off if half the  compensation goes to industry and how industry can be no worse off if half the compensation goes to  households.

The government should explain why it’s necessary to set a price to reduce emissions - rather than to take  direct action as the Coalition is proposing such as planting more trees, improving carbon in soils and using  technology to turn carbon dioxide from an unwanted waste product to an input into the production of stock  feed and bio-diesel. The government should explain why a great big new tax, to create a great big new slush  fund, administered by a great big new bureaucracy to make great big new payments to favoured political  constituencies is an environmental policy rather than wealth redistribution by stealth.

The government should be able to give the guarantee sought by the Australian Workers’ Union that the  carbon tax must not cost a single job or the guarantee sought by 40 major companies and business  organisations that the carbon tax must not diminish Australia’s competitiveness in any way. If it can’t give  these guarantees as part of the budget process it should explain the policy objectives that the carbon tax  serves that are more important than preserving jobs and competitiveness. If the government can’t answer  these obvious questions about the carbon tax and its impact on Australians’ future, it hardly deserves to stay  in office.

Of course, the government will claim that the carbon tax needn’t be in the budget because the policy  parameters haven’t yet been finalised even though the legislation is supposed to be passed this year and the  tax is supposed to be in place from July next year; even though Kevin Rudd’s emissions trading scheme was  included in the 2009 budget before Julia Gillard sabotaged it in 2010; and even though the mining tax which  will start on the same day is in the budget though its details haven’t been finalised either.

6



The Treasury has already modelled the impact of a carbon tax of up to $30 a tonne so why is the government  so coy about including in the budget a tax that it’s already committed to? Including the carbon tax in the  budget would make it obvious that the government has broken its promise to keep total tax below 23.5 per  cent of GDP and to keep real spending growth below two per cent but excluding the carbon tax makes the  government sneaky as well as incapable of keeping its commitments. It’s odd that the government should be  so squeamish about breaking this undertaking when it’s already broken the most solemn commitment of all:  namely the commitment not to have a carbon tax in the first place.

If the government fails to include in the budget the revenue and expenditure impact of a tax that’s supposed  to start within 14 months, the budget will not be worth the paper that it’s printed on. There will be at least an  $11 billion a year hole in the heart of the budget. There will be a $35 billion revenue hole in the forward  estimates. A company that produced a prospectus that omitted this kind of information wouldn’t be allowed  to list and its promoters would be prosecuted yet the current government expects such a misleading and  materially incomplete document to be taken seriously.

Nothing would more surely demonstrate just how bad this government is than a budget that didn’t actually  deal with its key policies. The Prime Minister might feel that excluding the carbon tax from the budget could  make her pre-election declaration that “there will be no carbon tax under the government I lead” less  embarrassing and incriminating but it’s much more likely that voters will feel cheated twice.

The current government is not illegitimate because it lacks a stable majority in the parliament but it risks  becoming illegitimate if it can’t competently govern the country. A failure to be honest about the carbon tax  in this budget will compound the Prime Minister’s failure to be honest about it before the election.

The government has no right whatsoever to sneak in a carbon tax that it denied before the election and that it  hasn’t detailed in the budget. Not only would introducing a carbon tax in a parliament that has no mandate  for it be a travesty of democracy but introducing in a few months time a tax that wasn’t even in the budget  would be a travesty of every principle of public finance. It would show that this government is clearly the  worst since Whitlam and most likely the worst government that Australia has ever had.

[ends]



