Search this site   Go

Home

Biographical details

Media Centre

Contact details

Department

Parliamentary  Secretary

Links



Legislation to restore Migration Act  powers, turning back boats,  Regional Cooperation Framework Tuesday, 20 September 2011

Interview with Fran Kelly, ABC Radio  National Breakfast

Fran Kelly: Minister, welcome to Breakfast.

Chris Bowen: Good morning Fran, again. How are you?

Kelly: I'm very well, thank you, Minister. Can you just tell  me what is so wrong with the Opposition's amendment? It  used to be your policy not to send anyone to countries that  were not signatories to the Refugee Convention.

Bowen: Well, Fran, we take the approach it's better to work  with countries to negotiate the appropriate protections and  to work with countries in our region. If you want a proper  regional solution it means working with Malaysia, Indonesia,  Thailand, which aren't signatories. And so that's the  appropriate thing to do if you can negotiate those  protections —

Kelly: Yeah, but just again, within even less than a year  ago, your firm view was that Australia would not send  people to countries that were not signed up to the Refugee  Convention and that's why you were ruling out Nauru.

Bowen: Well, Fran, have we developed our position? Yes,  yes, we have. When I became Minister I looked at this and  said, 'Look, why don't we work with these countries and

work with them proactively?'

Now the party with a complete inconsistency here is the  Liberal Party. They have two policies at once which are  completely inconsistent. I mean, Mr Abbott says the  centrepiece of his policy is turning back boats on the high

Chris Bowen MP Minister for Immigration and Citizenship

Page 1 of 7 Legislation to restore Migration Act powers, turning back boats, Regiona...

30/09/2011 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2011/cb172219.htm

seas and pointing them towards Indonesia, not a signatory  to the Refugee Convention. So apparently it's okay to send  a boat to Indonesia with no protections negotiated, no  guarantee of non-refoulement, no talks or negotiations  about education, rights for children, about how to deal with  unaccompanied minors, but it's a terrible thing, a terrible  thing, if you send a plane to Malaysia when you've  negotiated all those safeguards. I mean, that's just  completely inconsistent and Mr Abbott has not been able to  come up with one coherent defence of that completely  hypocritical position.

Kelly: Well, the defence put by Senator Brandis this  morning was that Australia's obligations don't kick in until  boats arrive in Australian waters.

Bowen: Well, that's a very convenient legalistic defence. It  is not a moral or in any way defensible position to say, 'It's  okay if we stop somebody on the sea, but if they happen to  be lucky enough to make it to Australia, well, then we would  never do it.'

Kelly: How proactively are we working with Malaysia?  Because the quick solution to match the Coalition's new  bottom line is to get Malaysia to sign onto the Refugee  Convention. Have you asked them to do that?

Bowen: No, and —

Kelly: Why not?

Bowen: Well, what we do is we work with countries and we  make progress. Now, Malaysia have indicated that they are  changing their approach to asylum seekers and they've  made very significant progress, even over the last 12  months, and our negotiations and discussions with them  have been an important part of that. And of course we work  with them and we work with the UNHCR. And the UNHCR  itself have commented and other people have commented  on the very significant change in Malaysia's approach over  recent years and you've seen other developments just in  recent days from Malaysia.

But this whole point about why can't we get them to make  firm legal commitments, I mean, nobody forced Malaysia to  go into this arrangement. Malaysia went into this  arrangement in good faith. They could have said, 'Look,

Page 2 of 7 Legislation to restore Migration Act powers, turning back boats, Regiona...

30/09/2011 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2011/cb172219.htm

sorry, Australia, that's your problem, we're not going to  help', but they didn't and they went into this arrangement.  And why should we or anybody in Australia doubt their  commitment to abiding by the undertakings as given to

Australia in the arrangement that's been negotiated in  consultation with the UNHCR?

Kelly: Well, I guess the answer to that is because they're  not signing the UN Convention. Why won't Malaysia sign up  to the international protections?

Bowen: Well Fran, being a signatory to the Refugee  Convention is important, but it's not the be all and end all —

Kelly: Well, it's a pretty good umbrella of suite of  protections, isn't it?

Bowen: Well, Mr Morrison suggested a transfer  arrangement with Iran. Okay, I can see they're a signatory  to the Refugee Convention; that wouldn't have given me the  comfort I would need. You know Zimbabwe, the Republic of  Congo —

Kelly: But I'm just interested, why does Malaysia, what do  you know about why Malaysia won't sign onto the Refugee  Convention?

Bowen: As I say, Fran, Malaysia has experienced a  massive increase in asylum seekers coming to its shores  over recent years. And they have, like other countries in our  region - Thailand, Indonesia, etcetera - have been, frankly,  dealing with the very significant challenges of asylum  seekers and taking the lion's share of that responsibility.

Now, I don't think it's in Australia's interest or it's Australia's  role to lecture other countries. But what it is our role to do is  exactly what we've been doing and work with them  proactively, and say ' Look, if we would together can we get  more consistent refugee processing across the region. Can  we improve protection outcomes across the region? And  we're prepared to take more refugees from you.' And that's  exactly what we're doing; that's a proper regional  framework, as opposed to, say, Nauru, which is just a one-off deal, not part of the regional framework.

And Mr Abbott and Mr Morrison have previously said it's  completely irrelevant whether somebody is a signatory to

Page 3 of 7 Legislation to restore Migration Act powers, turning back boats, Regiona...

30/09/2011 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2011/cb172219.htm

the Refugee Convention or not. They've said it was a furphy  to care about whether is somebody is a signatory to the  Refugee Convention or not. So this is just very cheap and  cynical politics from them now.

Kelly: Can we, I'd like you to spell it out, in terms of  improving protection outcomes in negotiations with  Malaysia. What human rights protections is Malaysia  offering to people who are sent there from Australia? I note  they're not signing a legally binding agreement with  Australia. What are they offering?

Bowen: They have guaranteed to respect the principle of  non-refoulement. They have indicated in the undertakings  to us that they will provide the right to self reliance, ie. work  rights, that they would provide access to the UNCHR for  processing, that there would be appropriate access to  health and education. I mean, these are the sorts of things  people said we wouldn't be able to negotiate with Malaysia,  and we did, and we did it in conjunction with the UNCHR,  which is not a signatory - let me clear, not a signatory to  the arrangement - but who we consulted closely along the  way.

Kelly: So these are guarantees, but in your changes to the  Migration Act you make it very clear there is no legal  agreement binding Malaysia, it's all good faith. If Malaysia,  why won't Malaysia sign a legally binding document that  outlines all those protections?

Bowen: Because I think between two sovereign nations  you don't necessarily need to go through the entire process  of making a legally binding treaty etcetera, for two nations

to reach an agreement on how they're going to deal with  these issues.

Let me put it back to you, Fran: what basis is there for  anybody saying that Malaysia, which of its free will entered  into this arrangement, negotiated over a period of months,  would then turn around and say, 'We know we negotiated  that, we know we gave those undertakings but now we've

changed our mind'?

Kelly: Well, there's the anecdotal evidence coming from  people who are refugees in Malaysia currently who say they  don't enjoy those protections.

Page 4 of 7 Legislation to restore Migration Act powers, turning back boats, Regiona...

30/09/2011 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2011/cb172219.htm

Bowen: But what's been clear is that we have negotiated  these protections with Malaysia. Am I suggesting that  Malaysia has always dealt with these issues this way? No,  of course they haven't. Am I suggesting that Malaysia's law  is completely reflecting of the requirements of other  countries? Of course it isn't. But we have negotiated this in  good faith with Malaysia and I really think that some of the  Malaysia bashing that's been going on from the Opposition  - for one of our key friends in this region - is really very  unfortunate.

Kelly: Exactly what will you introduce into the Parliament  tomorrow: the reworked amendments that you released  yesterday, no further changes, that's it?

Bowen: Well, that's the Government's position. Obviously  I'll be taking that through the Caucus today and that reflects  what we said it would, which is to ensure that the minister of  the day has the discretion, where the minister is satisfied of  the protections in place, to ensure that that country can be  designated as a third country for offshore processing.

Kelly: Well, you can take that into parliament, but we now  are pretty clear that it's going nowhere. Does that mean  Australia reverts to onshore processing?

Bowen: Let me answer that question in two parts, Fran.  Firstly, we'll need to see how this goes through the  Parliament. Mr Abbott has said he will move amendments;  we don't know how those amendments will go. I'm not going  to —

Kelly: Well, they will not support your Malaysia solution.

Bowen: Well, they have said that they would move  amendments to our legislation. Now we'll see whether those  amendments pass the House. They may, they may not, it's  very hard to predict. If those amendments do not pass, then  it's up to the Liberal Party whether they vote for the entire  legislation or not, and I'm not aware that they've indicated  that position.

Now if, to answer the question, now if legislation does fail,  the that would mean that any offshore processing would, in  our view, not be legally sound and we would not be able to  proceed with it.

Page 5 of 7 Legislation to restore Migration Act powers, turning back boats, Regiona...

30/09/2011 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2011/cb172219.htm

Kelly: You're listening to ABC Radio National Breakfast.  Our guest this morning is immigration minister, Chris  Bowen. Chris Bowen, so if we're left with onshore  processing, what's wrong with that anyway? I mean, a lot of  Australians prefer it. It's underpinned Labor's asylum seeker  policy for decades. It'd save you a lot of trouble and  expense if you just brought people onshore. That was just  three years ago, that was Labor's firm policy and you  moved heaven and earth to make onshore processing more  humane.

Bowen: I think if we miss out on a regional framework,  where we're working with countries in our region and having  offshore processing as part of a properly thought out  regional framework, I think that would be a massive missed  opportunity for Australia. It will mean that people will  continue to take that boat journey to Australia and we will  continue to see people risking their lives, and inevitably  people losing their lives, because they feel that they will  have a better chance of resettlement in Australia by doing  that.

I think we have the opportunity here to have a situation  where people can say, 'Well if I stay here because of  Australia's regional framework and the arrangements that  have been negotiated, that is a better option than getting on  a boat and risking my life only to know that I'll be returned to  where I began that boat journey.'

Kelly: Doesn't history tell us that people will do anything to  escape torture, persecution, fear of their lives?

Bowen: Well, of course, Fran, many people are in a  desperate situation. You also have the position where  people come to Australia and if they are not processed as a

refugee, if they are not regarded as a refugee, then we  need to deal with that as well. There are considerable  numbers of those people and it is often very difficult to  negotiate their return to their home country. So these are all  challenges but that all to me underlines the need and the  benefits of a proper regional solution to this.

Kelly: Minister, thank you for joining us.

Bowen: Thanks, Fran.

Page 6 of 7 Legislation to restore Migration Act powers, turning back boats, Regiona...

30/09/2011 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2011/cb172219.htm

See: Index of Speeches

URL:  http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2011/cb172219.htm  Last update: Tuesday, 20 September 2011 at 18:24 AEST

Home Copyright & Disclaimer Privacy Department of Immigration and Citizenship

Page 7 of 7 Legislation to restore Migration Act powers, turning back boats, Regiona...

30/09/2011 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2011/cb172219.htm

