Search this site   Go

Home

Biographical details

Media Centre

Contact details

Department

Parliamentary  Secretary

Links



Onshore processing, legislative  amendments to Migration Act,  Malaysia Arrangement,  immigration detention, asylum  seekers Monday, 17 October 2011

Interview with Steve Price, MTR Breakfast

Steve Price: Immigration and Citizenship Minister Chris  Bowen joins us on the line. Minister, good morning.

Chris Bowen: Good morning Steve.

Price: That's a bit rich isn't it?

Bowen: Look I think the Australian people look to the  Parliament to sort this out. Now Mr Abbott says he believes  in off-shore processing, he believes in processing in  people's asylum claims in different countries but he just  won't vote for the law to make it happen.

Price: But you wouldn't have been in this position if your  legal advice had been better on the original Malaysian deal  and it hadn't gone down in front of the High Court.

Bowen: Well, no, because the High Court ruled-out not  only the Malaysian Arrangement but their logic when  applied to PNG and Nauru, means we couldn't pursue  those either. So the declarations made by my predecessor  Minister Ruddock that PNG and Nauru were appropriate  places would be struck down by the High Court on the  same logic.

Price: Well that's a moot point isn't it? I mean there is legal  advice that says that's not the case.

Chris Bowen MP Minister for Immigration and Citizenship

Page 1 of 8 Onshore processing, legislative amendments to Migration Act, Malaysia ...

30/01/2012 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2011/cb179315.htm

Bowen: There's plenty legal advice that says that is Steve,  and any competent government would not pursue that  without changing the legislation.

Price: You're in government, Tony Abbott isn't. You've got  to protect our borders, he doesn't. You've got to come up  with the way to stop refugees coming to this country. Isn't it

about time you stopped blaming the Opposition and started  working out how to do it?

Bowen: We've made offers to the Opposition in very good  faith -Price: Get them out of it - forget them.

Bowen: But this is the Parliament Steve. The simple  political reality in this Parliament is that this legislation  would not pass without the Liberal Party voting for it. You  can say that's blame or you can say that's a fact - it's a

simple fact.

Price: John Howard never ever got you in opposition to  rubber-stamp and tick his Nauru plan.

Bowen: Well frankly, actually - and we won't go through  the finer details - there were times when he went to Kim  Beazley and said, 'I need this legislation in the national  interest; you've got the numbers in the Senate', and Kim  Beazley - to his political cost - said okay.

So there are plenty of times when that has happened  Steve, and I bet my bottom dollar if Kim Beazley had said  no, John Howard would have been saying I can't pass this  legislation because Kim Beazley won't let me.

Price: Are you saying that Malaysia is, or a scheme similar  to Malaysia, the only solution? I mean, don't you  increasingly get the feeling that Australians are quite happy  with on-shore processing?

Bowen: No -Price: - You don't?

Bowen: No, I think firstly, this decision's based on what we  think is the right policy. I also think that the majority of  Australians believe that we should have a good refugee  intake but that we need a process to make sure that that's

Page 2 of 8 Onshore processing, legislative amendments to Migration Act, Malaysia ...

30/01/2012 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2011/cb179315.htm

orderly and that off-shore processing could and should be a  part of that.

All the advice to us, Steve - and as you can imagine, over  the last 12 months that I've been minister I have spent  hours going through this - all the advice to us is that if want  to stop people coming to Australia by boat, then the type of  arrangement like we did with Malaysia is the only effective  model; because if you just do an off-shore detention centre,  you could choose Nauru or you could choose anywhere,  and you'd say 'we're going to send you to this country and  we're going to process you, and if you're a refugee then  we're going to take you to Australia'. Now asylum seekers  are going to say, 'yeah okay, a bit of time in another country  -Price: But when you came to government in 2007, the  figures are a little bit confusing here but you'll correct me if  I'm wrong, there was five or six people in detention and the  boats stopped? Doesn't that tell you that that was working?

Bowen: No, look, as I say, all the advice to us is that if you  really want an effective model - and it makes sense Steve  that advice, it's common sense -Price: But minister, 2007 must have been an effective

model?

Bowen: No, there are a range of factors that go into it; and  even if, Steve, you think that - because you've got to  remember, what did the Howard Government say to  people? The Howard Government said to people, 'we're  going to take you to Nauru and you're not going to be taken  to Australia'. They couldn't deliver that. The people were  brought to Australia - everybody knows that now.

Price: The boats stopped, didn't they? You'd be happy with  that outcome of 2007, wouldn't you?

Bowen: Of course I'd like to see nobody arriving in  Australia by boat, of course. That's why we worked so hard  to deliver the Malaysia Arrangement which everybody says  - all the experts who look at this say - that would break the  people smugglers business model, because people would  be sent back to Malaysia, be processed there -Price: - but it was broken.

Page 3 of 8 Onshore processing, legislative amendments to Migration Act, Malaysia ...

30/01/2012 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2011/cb179315.htm

Bowen: Well, no it wasn't Steve because what are people  smugglers selling?

Price: Hope.

Bowen: Well, more than that, a ticket to a permanent  residency in Australia; and when you get sent to Nauru -  unless Mr Abbott's got something he's not telling us. Now, if  Tony Abbott says, 'we'll send you to Nauru and then we're  going to send the refugees to a different country', well let us  know what that country is. If he's not going to say that then  you can work on the basis - as people smugglers and  asylum seekers would - that that country is Australia.

Price: The public, as you know - and you've got a lot of  emotional skin in this game - don't want to see more people  risking their lives. The people stopped risking their lives  before Kevin Rudd was elected in 2007. It would seem to  make sense to average Australians that that would be a  simple place to go back to. Now, you say the High Court  won't allow that to happen; is that what you're saying?

Bowen: Yes, that's our legal advice, that it would be highly  subject to challenge.

Price: So, what are we going to do?

Bowen: The offer's still on the table Steve. We want to  pass this legislation, we want off-shore processing, we want  the Malaysia Arrangement, we want to give Mr Abbott the  chance if he's Prime Minister to implement Nauru.

If he goes to an election promising Nauru, we think he  should be able to do it. We think the law should be clear  that he should be able to do it. He perversely, is voting  against a bill that would give him the power to do what he  says is his policy.

Price: What is going to happen now, if we get more  arrivals? You say you're not going to build more detention  centres, so where are they going to end up?

Bowen: Well, firstly, we've seen a lot of people moved out  of detention over recent months so there's a little bit of  excess capacity in the system. I was hoping to close more  detention centres if we had the Malaysia Arrangement  implemented but that's not possible.

Page 4 of 8 Onshore processing, legislative amendments to Migration Act, Malaysia ...

30/01/2012 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2011/cb179315.htm

What I've said is that we have a range of mechanisms in  place; we have some people in community detention. We  also have people who currently arrive in Australia by  aeroplane and then claim protection; they're usually granted  what's called a bridging visa which is a visa with very limited  rights but they live in the community while they're  processed.

Price: So how many places have we got with people who  are still not, they're refugee status is not determined? How  many different places now?

Bowen: How do you mean Steve?

Price: How many different places in Australia are you  holding people where you're still trying to work out whether  they're genuine refugees or not?

Bowen: Well the big one's are obviously Christmas Island,  we have a big centre at Darwin, we've gone one up at  Weipa, we've got Villawood, we've got two in Melbourne -  the one at Maribyrnong and the one at Broadmeadows.

Price: Pontville?

Bowen: Pontville in Tasmania is a smaller centre - and  that's a temporary one. We also have a family facility in  Adelaide Hills, in Inverbrackie.

Price: And Pontville, we had a call about that earlier, is  largely full, is it, of single males?

Bowen: Yes, it's had its numbers increased.

Price: So you're saying that you've got capacity. Where's  the capacity?

Bowen: Well it's spread across the network Steve. Now,  look, I don't overstate that surge capacity but there is some  capacity there. It's not like we're in a situation where we  don't have any spots if people arrive tomorrow; but what I  am saying is that we would move people through and we  would use the range of measures in place because I don't  want to open more detention centres. I don't think anybody  wants to see more detention centres and they expect to be  able to manage the system.

Price: What's the detention bill weekly running at?

Page 5 of 8 Onshore processing, legislative amendments to Migration Act, Malaysia ...

30/01/2012 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2011/cb179315.htm

Bowen: Well it depends on how you define it but it's  expensive Steve; it's $100,000 for an individual over a year.  It's expensive whatever you do. Community detention is  expensive. Bridging visas are less expensive and they'll be  utilised from time to time.

Price: Why did you insist on not putting the Bill before the  Parliament yesterday?

Bowen: We will put the Bill before the Parliament if Mr  Abbott says that he concedes that he'll act in the national  interest, there's no -Price: Did you withdraw it to avoid embarrassment of the  Prime Minister?

Bowen: It wasn't withdrawn. It simply didn't get to be  debated, but there's no - look, everybody knows that if the  Bill's introduced what the outcome will be; if the Bill's voted  on, what the outcome will be. Why would you do that?  What we will do is we will continue to -

Price: It's not going to go through the Senate anyway, so  what's the point?

Bowen: Steve, I think it's appropriate. The Australian  people will say, 'hang on, the government believes in off-shore processing, the Opposition believes in off-shore  processing; why wouldn't the government introduce a law to  allow it?' So we did.

We thought that maybe, just this once, Tony Abbott might  do the right thing and not just be the blocker and say no but  actually do what he know is the right thing for Australia.

Price: What's your intelligence saying to you about more  boats on the way?

Bowen: Well, I can't talk about intelligence Steve, for pretty  obvious reasons but what we do know is that people  smugglers will use every opportunity to sell their product  and they have been using the opportunity of the High Court  case and now they are using the opportunity of the  Parliament not passing legislation, to say 'this is a good  option guys; come to Australia because the Australian  politicians can't sort it out'.

Page 6 of 8 Onshore processing, legislative amendments to Migration Act, Malaysia ...

30/01/2012 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2011/cb179315.htm

Price: And if a boat arrives next week, should we blame  you or should we blame Tony Abbott?

Bowen: Well, we're the side who are willing to do off-shore  processing and more important than that, we're prepared to  introduce a law to let Tony Abbott do it if he were ever  Prime Minister. We're the ones who actually want to get on  with the job of doing off-shore processing. Tony Abbott's the  one who seems intent to want more boats to arrive because  he thinks this is good politics for him.

Price: The other people who don't agree with you - of  course - are the Greens and the Independents in the  Senate. Are you similarly blaming them for the outcomes  here?

Bowen: I'd say this Steve: I fundamentally disagree with -

Price: Isn't Bob Brown also to blame?

Bowen: Well, let me just make this point Steve: I  fundamentally disagree with Bob Brown and the Greens on  this policy. We are very very far apart -Price: - Why do we only blame Abbott though?

Bowen: - Hang on, but hang on. I just want to make this  point: I fundamentally disagree with them and I think their  policy is completely wrong; but it's clearly their policy. They  have never pretended to believe in off-shore processing.  They are not, in fairness, being hypocritical. They are doing

what they believe is the right thing. I disagree with them -

Price: - They are frustrating your outcomes though?

Bowen: Well, I disagree with them fundamentally about  what is the right thing but I respect their opinion. Whereas  Tony Abbott is saying, 'I believe in off-shore processing, I

just won't vote for it'. He's the one who's actually playing  politics, so there's an important distinction here.

Tony Abbott's policy is off-shore processing, ours is off-shore processing. We're prepared to vote for it, he's not.  The Greens policy is not off-shore processing. I think that's  wrong, but I respect it's their policy.

Price: And I also respect you for always making yourself  available. Thanks a lot.

Page 7 of 8 Onshore processing, legislative amendments to Migration Act, Malaysia ...

30/01/2012 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2011/cb179315.htm

Bowen: Good on you Steve.

See: Index of Speeches

URL:  http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2011/cb179315.htm  Last update: Monday, 17 October 2011 at 11:02 AEST

Home Copyright & Disclaimer Privacy Department of Immigration and Citizenship

Page 8 of 8 Onshore processing, legislative amendments to Migration Act, Malaysia ...

30/01/2012 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2011/cb179315.htm

