



Interview with Lyndal Curtis on Capital Hill - ABC News 24

9 September 2011

Subject: Asylum Seekers, Parliament, September 11 and National Security

LYNDAL CURTIS: Robert McClelland, welcome to Capital Hill.

ROBERT McCLELLAND: Thanks for having me.

CURTIS: When the High Court decision on Malaysia came down, the Prime Minister  suggested that the Chief Justice had given a different decision when he was on the  Federal Court and she also said an opportunity had been missed to send a message  to people smugglers. And when you were in Opposition, you gave a speech  defending the courts and effectively saying that the Attorney-General should stand

up for the institution of the courts. Should you stand up for the courts now?

McCLELLAND: The Attorney-General's role is to defend the court against any  personal attacks. Judgements and the reasoning containing judgements is always  fair game. The Prime Minister intended no criticism of the individuals or the court  itself, rather questioning the reasoning…

CURTIS: But she did single out the High Court Chief Justice Robert French and  compared the decision now with one he'd taken earlier.

McCLELLAND: Yes she did compare the difference in his reasoning, as she  perceived it in the recent decision to an earlier decision. But again, she at no stage,  was questioning his motives, his decency or his competence. It is certainly an  important role of the Attorney-General to ensure that the public has confidence in all  courts quite frankly, all federal courts but, but most specifically, the High Court. I can

confirm unreservedly that the government has full confidence obviously in the High  Court and each and every judge of the High Court.  It goes without saying. The  criticism of the reasoning contained in judgements is, however, the legitimately the  subject of discussion.

CURTIS: As a result of that High Court decision, the option the Government's left  with, if you want to chose to restart offshore processing of asylum seekers is to  change s.198A of the Migration Act. Can that be done, on your advice, in a way that

will stand up in the courts given the High Court decision?

McCLELLAND: Yes, we believe so.  We believe that an amendment is appropriate.  Obviously the Cabinet and Caucus have to consider these issues but, yes, we

believe that an amendment is desirable to put offshore processing beyond doubt. We  think that should be done.

CURTIS: An amendment that, in all likelihood, would stand up in the courts if  challenged?

McCLELLAND: Yes we believe so. We believe an amendment can be crafted that  essentially gives, if you like, a stronger discretion to the Minister to determine the  appropriate destination for offshore processing. We think that can be crafted.

CURTIS: And you think, given that the High Court decision - the High Court seemed  to say that under the current law, that any  protections that are offered have to be  confirmed by domestic law in the third country or by signing the refugee convention,  effectively you just side-stepped that and craft an amendment which gets around  that?

McCLELLAND: Well essentially the Court said either they have to be a party to the  refugee convention or have domestic law in place to reflect the provisions of the  convention and probably to have those laws and principles administered in practice.  The court's reasoning was that the current Minister for Immigration had to have

regard to those factors before making a decision and so what the amendment would  do would define or restrict or, more precisely define the factors that the Parliament  wanted the Minister to have regard to that is narrower than those construed by the  court.

CURTIS: So effectively the Minister wouldn't have to be certain that there were the  rights and protections legally in the third country?

McCLELLAND: Well again, it is a question as to how it is applied but that certainly  could be done to narrow the range of factors that the Minister had to consider before  making his decision. That is, if there was an amendment to be made it is likely to be  made in that form.

CURTIS: Can you craft an amendment too that will cover the offshore processing of  unaccompanied minors or is that actually a more difficult issue given the court  decision?

McCLELLAND: That issue could also be addressed but, clearly, when it comes to  unaccompanied minors there are public policy considerations that the government  would have to weigh up very carefully. It is a very difficult issue, there's no question  about that.   Obviously all Australians would like to see minors, and we have  international obligations to ensure that minors are treated properly and humanely.  Equally we don't want to see a situation where the people smugglers take advantage  of any weakness in the laws to simply stack these rickety unseaworthy boats with  young people.

CURTIS: We’ve been talking about decisions which could possibly get through the  courts. Is there a chance that a decision to reinstate offshore processing might not  get through your own Party because the Left, at least, wants onshore processing  only?

McCLELLAND: It would be wrong of me to try and pre-empt the debate. It is certainly  going to be an issue and the public would expect there would be an issue of debate  and there will be arguments of substance put both ways. I don't want to pre-empt  that. Clearly there will be intense discussion and debate about the matter.

CURTIS: As you mentioned, there will be a detailed discussion and debate about  this issue. Parliament starts next week and there will be debate and discussion about  the carbon and the mining tax. There is already rancour over the issue of pairing of  votes. You have given a speech where you say you're worried about the lack of  civility in the parliament and that has the potential to damage the credibility of the  institution. That would apply to both sides of the Parliament, wouldn't it?  It’s been  particular rancorous over the last year or so.

McCLELLAND: In my fifteen years in parliament I have not seen it as vindictive. I  don't think it is constructive. I don't think it is an attractive image for the public.  I think  the public wants to see more civility in the Parliament and I think we all have an  obligation to lift our standards.

CURTIS: Is it incumbent on the Labor Party as the party of government to take the  lead on this and make sure you answer the questions you're asked in Parliament to  make sure you don't includes personal attacks in those answers?

McCLELLAND: I think it is incumbent on both sides but certainly people in positions  of leadership unquestionably have additional responsibilities. I think that is a fair  point to make.

CURTIS: It’s been 10 years since the September 11 attacks in the United States. Do  Australians still face significant terrorist threats from at home and abroad?

McCLELLAND: Regrettably that is the case and will remain the case in the  foreseeable future. Unfortunately, and it should be stressed, that there is a small  element in our community that would harm their fellow citizens for extremist motives  and regrettably that is the reality and will remain so for unfortunately the foreseeable  future.

CURTIS: When you came to Government you inherited a much beefed up police and  security institutions. ASIO, for example, has been built a new building that is one of  the biggest in Canberra. Do you think the security institutions have grown too much  in the time since September 11?

McCLELLAND: No, I think they have required the resources. They are substantial  resources that are being devoted to domestic security, there is no question about  that. The greatest physical threat to an Australian today is not from an invasion from  a foreign country, it is from the potential of a terrorist attack. I think these resources

are justified. I think the agencies are performing well. They are individually of a high  calibre but, more importantly working together very cooperatively, I think in that  sense giving us a good return.

CURTIS: Robert McClelland, thank you for your time.

McCLELLAND: My pleasure.

ENDS



