1









LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  THE HON. TONY ABBOTT MHR  FEDERAL MEMBER FOR WARRINGAH

10 October 2011

TRANSCRIPT OF THE HON. TONY ABBOTT MHR,  REMARKS TO SHADOW CABINET MEETING,  CANBERRA

E&OE……………………….……………………………………………………………

Colleagues, this is obviously the start of another important week. While the Government is going from bad  to worse our responsibility is to prepare our strong plans for a better future for the forgotten families of  Australia.

It’s interesting that the Labor Party couldn’t actually invite the cameras into a meeting of cabinet at the  moment because of the palpable hostility between the Prime Minister and the Foreign Minister and while the  Prime Minister is watching her back she obviously is not getting on with the job of governing the country.

We know that the faceless men who took Kevin Rudd out of the prime ministership are now debating  whether to put him back into the prime ministership and that’s the problem. Regardless of who is at the head  of the Labor Party it’s the faceless men who are really in charge.

Now, the fact is that it’s the policies of this Government that have got to change. They’ve got to change their  policies and not just rotate the leader because if you look at their policies their policies are doing harm to our  country. There’s the infamous Malaysian people swap which is obviously a cruel deal for boat people but  worse than that it’s a dud deal for our country. No self-respecting country would agree to a five-for-one  people swap arrangement. Then, of course, there’s the carbon tax which is basically the Labor Party’s  foreign content plan for Australia. If you want to ensure that manufacturing in Australia stops and that  everything we buy in Australia is full of foreign content bring in a carbon tax that will put our  manufacturing at a permanent competitive disadvantage.

But colleagues, there is a better way. It’s our way. On border protection, as you know, for the last decade  we’ve had a three point plan to stop the boats: it’s offshore processing at Nauru, it’s temporary protection  visas and it’s turning boats around where it’s safe to do so. We’ve got a direct action plan to improve the  environment as opposed to Labor’s carbon tax and under our direct action plan we’ll have more trees, we’ll  have better soil and we’ll have smarter technology.

Most of all, though, we’ve got a clear plan for a stronger economy because if you get government spending  down you take the pressure off interest rates, you take the pressure off the dollar and if we’ve got the  pressure off interest rates and the dollar our economy starts to grow. In the end that’s what we need. We  need a growing economy. That’s the way to get more money into people’s pockets. That’s the way you give  hope, reward and opportunity to the forgotten families of Australia.

2



So colleagues, I want to thank you for the good work you’ve done ever since the election but particularly for  the good work over the last fortnight’s break.

I think that more and more - as the Government starts to disintegrate - we look like the real hope for the  people of Australia.

[ends]



