CHRIS BOWEN MP

MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP  *TRANSCRIPT*

INTERVIEW WITH STEVE PRICE, MTR BREAKFAST

FRIDAY, 14 OCTOBER 2011

E&OE PROOF ONLY

SUBJECTS: Onshore processing, legislative amendments to  Migration Act, Malaysia Arrangement, immigration detention,  asylum seekers.

STEVE PRICE: Immigration and Citizenship Minister Chris Bowen joins us on  the line. Minister, good morning.

CHRIS BOWEN: Good morning Steve.

PRICE: That’s a bit rich isn’t it?

BOWEN: Look I think the Australian people look to the Parliament to sort this  out. Now Mr Abbott says he believes in off-shore processing, he believes in  processing in people’s asylum claims in different countries but he just won’t  vote for the law to make it happen.

PRICE: But you wouldn’t have been in this position if your legal advice had  been better on the original Malaysian deal and it hadn’t gone down in front of  the High Court.

BOWEN: Well, no, because the High Court ruled-out not only the Malaysian  Arrangement but their logic when applied to PNG and Nauru, means we  couldn’t pursue those either. So the declarations made by my predecessor  Minister Ruddock that PNG and Nauru were appropriate places would be  struck down by the High Court on the same logic.

PRICE: Well that’s a moot point isn’t it? I mean there is legal advice that  says that’s not the case.

BOWEN: There’s plenty legal advice that says that is Steve, and any  competent government would not pursue that without changing the  legislation.



PRICE: You’re in government, Tony Abbott isn’t. You’ve got to protect our  borders, he doesn’t. You’ve got to come up with the way to stop refugees  coming to this country. Isn’t it about time you stopped blaming the  Opposition and started working out how to do it?

BOWEN: We’ve made offers to the Opposition in very good faith -

PRICE: Get them out of it - forget them.

BOWEN: But this is the Parliament Steve. The simple political reality in this  Parliament is that this legislation would not pass without the Liberal Party  voting for it. You can say that’s blame or you can say that’s a fact - it’s a  simple fact.

PRICE: John Howard never ever got you in opposition to rubber-stamp and  tick his Nauru plan.

BOWEN: Well frankly, actually - and we won’t go through the finer details -  there were times when he went to Kim Beazley and said, ‘I need this  legislation in the national interest; you’ve got the numbers in the Senate’, and  Kim Beazley - to his political cost - said okay.

So there are plenty of times when that has happened Steve, and I bet my  bottom dollar if Kim Beazley had said no, John Howard would have been  saying I can’t pass this legislation because Kim Beazley won’t let me.

PRICE: Are you saying that Malaysia is, or a scheme similar to Malaysia, the  only solution? I mean, don’t you increasingly get the feeling that Australians  are quite happy with on-shore processing?

BOWEN: No -

PRICE: - You don’t?

BOWEN: No, I think firstly, this decision’s based on what we think is the right  policy. I also think that the majority of Australians believe that we should  have a good refugee intake but that we need a process to make sure that  that’s orderly and that off-shore processing could and should be a part of  that.

All the advice to us, Steve - and as you can imagine, over the last 12 months  that I’ve been Minister I have spent hours going through this - all the advice  to us is that if want to stop people coming to Australia by boat, then the type

of arrangement like we did with Malaysia is the only effective model; because  if you just do an off-shore detention centre, you could choose Nauru or you  could choose anywhere, and you’d say ‘we’re going to send you to this  country and we’re going to process you, and if you’re a refugee then we’re  going to take you to Australia’. Now asylum seekers are going to say, ‘yeah  okay, a bit of time in another country -

PRICE: But when you came to Government in 2007, the figures are a little bit  confusing here but you’ll correct me if I’m wrong, there was five or six people  in detention and the boats stopped? Doesn’t that tell you that that was

working?

BOWEN: No, look, as I say, all the advice to us is that if you really want an  effective model - and it makes sense Steve that advice, it’s common sense -

PRICE: But Minister, 2007 must have been an effective model?

BOWEN: No, there are a range of factors that go into it; and even if, Steve,  you think that - because you’ve got to remember, what did the Howard  Government say to people? The Howard Government said to people, ‘we’re  going to take you to Nauru and you’re not going to be taken to Australia’.  They couldn’t deliver that. The people were brought to Australia - everybody  knows that now.

PRICE: The boats stopped, didn’t they? You’d be happy with that outcome of  2007, wouldn’t you?

BOWEN: Of course I’d like to see nobody arriving in Australia by boat, of  course. That’s why we worked so hard to deliver the Malaysia Arrangement  which everybody says - all the experts who look at this say - that would  break the people smugglers business model, because people would be sent  back to Malaysia, be processed there -

PRICE: - but it was broken.

BOWEN: Well, no it wasn’t Steve because what are people smugglers  selling?

PRICE: Hope.

BOWEN: Well, more than that, a ticket to a permanent residency in  Australia; and when you get sent to Nauru - unless Mr Abbott’s got  something he’s not telling us. Now, if Tony Abbott says, ‘we’ll send you to  Nauru and then we’re going to send the refugees to a different country’, well  let us know what that country is. If he’s not going to say that then you can  work on the basis - as people smugglers and asylum seekers would - that  that country is Australia.

PRICE: The public, as you know - and you’ve got a lot of emotional skin in  this game - don’t want to see more people risking their lives. The people  stopped risking their lives before Kevin Rudd was elected in 2007. It would  seem to make sense to average Australians that that would be a simple place  to go back to. Now, you say the High Court won’t allow that to happen; is  that what you’re saying?

BOWEN: Yes, that’s our legal advice, that it would be highly subject to  challenge.

PRICE: So, what are we going to do?

BOWEN: The offer’s still on the table Steve. We want to pass this legislation,  we want off-shore processing, we want the Malaysia Arrangement, we want  to give Mr Abbott the chance if he’s Prime Minister to implement Nauru.

If he goes to an election promising Nauru, we think he should be able to do  it. We think the law should be clear that he should be able to do it. He  perversely, is voting against a bill that would give him the power to do what  he says is his policy.

PRICE: What is going to happen now, if we get more arrivals? You say you’re  not going to build more detention centres, so where are they going to end  up?

BOWEN: Well, firstly, we’ve seen a lot of people moved out of detention over  recent months so there’s a little bit of excess capacity in the system. I was  hoping to close more detention centres if we had the Malaysia Arrangement  implemented but that’s not possible.

What I’ve said is that we have a range of mechanisms in place; we have  some people in community detention. We also have people who currently  arrive in Australia by aeroplane and then claim protection; they’re usually  granted what’s called a bridging visa which is a visa with very limited rights  but they live in the community while they’re processed.

PRICE: So how many places have we got with people who are still not,  they’re refugee status is not determined? How many different places now?

BOWEN: How do you mean Steve?

PRICE: How many different places in Australia are you holding people where  you’re still trying to work out whether they’re genuine refugees or not?

BOWEN: Well the big one’s are obviously Christmas Island, we have a big  centre at Darwin, we’ve gone one up at Weipa, we’ve got Villawood, we’ve  got two in Melbourne - the one at Maribyrnong and the one at

Broadmeadows.

PRICE: Pontville?

BOWEN: Pontville in Tasmania is a smaller centre - and that’s a temporary  one. We also have a family facility in Adelaide Hills, in Inverbrackie.

PRICE: And Pontville, we had a call about that earlier, is largely full, is it, of  single males?

BOWEN: Yes, it’s had its numbers increased.



PRICE: So you’re saying that you’ve got capacity. Where’s the capacity?

BOWEN: Well it’s spread across the network Steve. Now, look, I don’t  overstate that surge capacity but there is some capacity there. It’s not like  we’re in a situation where we don’t have any spots if people arrive tomorrow;  but what I am saying is that we would move people through and we would

use the range of measures in place because I don’t want to open more  detention centres. I don’t think anybody wants to see more detention centres  and they expect to be able to manage the system.

PRICE: What’s the detention bill weekly running at?

BOWEN: Well it depends on how you define it but it’s expensive Steve; it’s  $100,000 for an individual over a year. It’s expensive whatever you do.  Community detention is expensive. Bridging visas are less expensive and  they’ll be utilised from time to time.

PRICE: Why did you insist on not putting the Bill before the Parliament  yesterday?

BOWEN: We will put the Bill before the Parliament if Mr Abbott says that he  concedes that he’ll act in the national interest, there’s no -

PRICE: Did you withdraw it to avoid embarrassment of the Prime Minister?

BOWEN: It wasn’t withdrawn. It simply didn’t get to be debated, but there’s  no - look, everybody knows that if the Bill’s introduced what the outcome will  be; if the Bill’s voted on, what the outcome will be. Why would you do that?   What we will do is we will continue to -

PRICE: It’s not going to go through the Senate anyway, so what’s the point?

BOWEN: Steve, I think it’s appropriate. The Australian people will say, ‘hang  on, the Government believes in off-shore processing, the Opposition believes  in off-shore processing; why wouldn’t the Government introduce a law to  allow it?’ So we did.

We thought that maybe, just this once, Tony Abbott might do the right thing  and not just be the blocker and say no but actually do what he know is the  right thing for Australia.

PRICE: What’s your intelligence saying to you about more boats on the way?

BOWEN: Well, I can’t talk about intelligence Steve, for pretty obvious  reasons but what we do know is that people smugglers will use every  opportunity to sell their product and they have been using the opportunity of  the High Court case and now they are using the opportunity of the Parliament

not passing legislation, to say ‘this is a good option guys; come to Australia  because the Australian politicians can’t sort it out’.

PRICE: And if a boat arrives next week, should we blame you or should we  blame Tony Abbott?

BOWEN: Well, we’re the side who are willing to do off-shore processing and  more important than that, we’re prepared to introduce a law to let Tony  Abbott do it if he were ever Prime Minister. We’re the ones who actually want  to get on with the job of doing off-shore processing. Tony Abbott’s the one  who seems intent to want more boats to arrive because he thinks this is good  politics for him.

PRICE: The other people who don’t agree with you - of course - are the  Greens and the Independents in the Senate. Are you similarly blaming them  for the outcomes here?

BOWEN: I’d say this Steve: I fundamentally disagree with -

PRICE: Isn’t Bob Brown also to blame?

BOWEN: Well, let me just make this point Steve: I fundamentally disagree  with Bob Brown and the Greens on this policy. We are very very far apart -

PRICE: - Why do we only blame Abbott though?

BOWEN: - Hang on, but hang on. I just want to make this point: I  fundamentally disagree with them and I think they’re policy is completely  wrong; but it’s clearly their policy. They have never pretended to believe in  off-shore processing. They are not, in fairness, being hypocritical. They are  doing what they believe is the right thing. I disagree with them -

PRICE: - They are frustrating your outcomes though?

BOWEN: Well, I disagree with them fundamentally about what is the right  thing but I respect their opinion. Whereas Tony Abbott is saying, ‘I believe in  off-shore processing, I just won’t vote for it’. He’s the one who’s actually  playing politics, so there’s an important distinction here.

Tony Abbott’s policy is off-shore processing, ours is off-shore processing.  We’re prepared to vote for it, he’s not. The Greens policy is not off-shore  processing. I think that’s wrong, but I respect it’s their policy.

PRICE: And I also respect you for always making yourself available. Thanks a  lot.

BOWEN: Good on you Steve.



Ends



