

The Hon Julie Bishop MP  Acting Leader of the Opposition

Shadow Minister for Foreign Affairs

Shadow Minister for Trade





Parliament House, Canberra ACT 2600  Ph: 02 6277 2102 Fax: 02 6277 8497

5 August 2011

TODAY SHOW

INTERVIEW WITH LISA WILKINSON



Subjects: Malaysia asylum seeker deal; Essential Research poll; high speed rail network;  Productivity Commission report on online sales

E&OE…

LISA WILKINSON    Tony Abbott is having a well deserved week off so taking his place this  week is Deputy and Acting Opposition Leader Julie Bishop, and she is up very early in Perth  this morning. Good morning to you Julie Bishop, well done!

JULIE BISHOP    Good morning Lisa. On the way here I didn’t see too many cars! I think  even the roosters are fast asleep at this hour.

LISA WILKINSON    That’s right, that is what happens that early in the morning. Now first  up, lets get to it, the first boat load of asylum seekers en route to Malaysia arrived at  Christmas Island for processing yesterday. There are 14 unaccompanied children on that  boat, should they be sent onto Malaysia on their own?

JULIE BISHOP    Well Lisa I think this is a truly awful piece of public policy. Julia Gillard  promised that no asylum seekers would be sent to a country that was not a signatory to the  United Nations Convention on Refugees. Malaysia is not a signatory. Julia Gillard can’t  provide any guarantees as to what will happen to the people that are sent to Malaysia.

That is why I think our alternative solution of sending people to Nauru where Australia was in  charge, where we would know what was happening to the asylum seekers there 24 hours a  day, is a much better option.

LISA WILKINSON    So what would you do with those 14 unaccompanied children?

JULIE BISHOP    Well if we were sending them to Nauru the Australians would be in charge  of the detention centre in Nauru. Australians were there, the officials were there, we knew  exactly what was happening, we were providing their health and education and all those  other services.

Transcript



Parliament House, Canberra ACT 2600  Ph: 02 6277 2102 Fax: 02 6277 8497

In the case of Malaysia Julia Gillard can’t guarantee what will happen to the children that are  being sent to Malaysia, and I point out that Malaysia is not a signatory to the United Nations  Convention on Refugees. I think it is an awful piece of policy.

LISA WILKINSON    This obviously is all about deterring asylum seekers coming to this  country which is something I know the Opposition supports. What about the Government’s  plans to film the transfer to Malaysia and put it on YouTube as a deterrent to others?

JULIE BISHOP    I don’t think a YouTube film will deter the people smuggling syndicates.  There are already reports that the syndicates are going to continue to put pressure on the  Government, that they will exhaust this arrangement very quickly. After all there are only 800  people going to be sent to Malaysia and 620 had arrived since the Prime Minister  announced this Malaysia five-for-one people swap deal.

So I think the people smugglers will continue to pressure the Government to exhaust this  process so that it can be back to business as usual.

It is just a one-off deal, just an arrangement with Malaysia. It is not a regional solution at all.

LISA WILKINSON    Alright, moving on, you would have seen the polls this week with  Malcolm Turnbull hot on the heels of the PM as preferred Labor leader. Whose side is he  on?

JULIE BISHOP    Oh Malcolm Turnbull’s definitely on our side. I thought that was a pretty  devastating poll for Julia Gillard. Only 12 per cent of people thought that Julia Gillard should  lead the Labor Party and about the same number thought a Liberal should lead the Labor  Party - would be better at doing it than Julia Gillard.

But I think more interestingly almost three times as many people thought that Kevin Rudd  should lead the Labor Party rather than Julia Gillard. Those Labor members of parliament  must be shaking their heads when they think about that decision they made 12 months ago  to replace Kevin Rudd with Julia Gillard.

LISA WILKINSON    But for all of that Malcolm Turnbull turning up as one of the preferred  Labor leaders does give an indication that most people know that you can’t really tell  Malcolm Turnbull what to do, so how do you get him to stop talking about things like climate  change?

JULIE BISHOP    I think the pollsters were being very mischievous putting a Liberal in there  and having almost as many people prefer a Liberal to lead the Labor Party than Julia Gillard.  I think the pollsters were being mischievous.

But Malcolm is a very bright and capable person, he is doing a fantastic job as our  Communications spokesman. He made an outstanding speech at the National Press Club  the other day on communications and pointed out how the Coalition would be able to deliver  high speed broadband but at a fraction of the cost of Labor’s National Broadband Network.



Parliament House, Canberra ACT 2600  Ph: 02 6277 2102 Fax: 02 6277 8497



LISA WILKINSON    Alright well proposals are on the table at the moment for a $106 billion  high speed east coast rail network linking Brisbane, Sydney and Melbourne. It is pretty  ambitions but a great nation infrastructure project, what do you think?

JULIE BISHOP    High speed rail certainly does sound very appealing. It would depend very  much on the viability, whether we could sustain it with our population but I think it was just an  announcement with no actual intention to deliver it. I don’t think the Labor Party intends to  actually deliver this. They have made the announcement, I think it is more of a diversion so  that we don’t talk about the carbon tax. And I wouldn’t trust this Government to implement  something as complex as a high speed rail network I can assure you of that.

LISA WILKINSON    If you were to get into Government, is it something you would support?

JULIE BISHOP    It would come down to a cost benefit analysis Lisa. It would depend very  much on whether high speed rail could be made financially viable, whether it would be  profitable, whether it would be sustainable in the long term.

It is an appealing concept but I don’t believe this Government will deliver a high speed rail  network. It is one of those 'I’ll believe it when I see it' policy announcements.

LISA WILKINSON    Alright, well the Productivity Commission has handed down its findings  on online shopping, you would know how popular that is these days, but of course delays  any decision on the GST on purchases under $1,000. The retail industry is doing it very  tough at the moment, doesn’t there need to be some sort of action to help local retailers at  the moment?

JULIE BISHOP    Lisa the issue of the price differential between online purchases and  purchases here at home is rather complex and it is not just a matter of the GST because in  many instances the price differential is two, three times, and a 10 per cent GST really isn’t  the issue here.

I think most Australians would like to understand far better why it is that you can purchase  things for sometimes 50 per cent less online than you can buy it here in Australia. And there  could be all sorts of hurdles, import arrangements, exclusive licence arrangements, and I  think we really need to have a good understanding of why it is that online purchases can be  so much cheaper. It is not just a question of a 10 per cent GST.

LISA WILKINSON    Yeah it does seem that the difference is enormous. Well Julie Bishop  well done getting up so early, we really do appreciate it. When does Tony get back from  holidays?

JULIE BISHOP    Oh he will be back shortly but I am certainly enjoying sitting in the chair in  his place. But these early mornings they do test the character don’t they? I am so impressed  by you all being able to do it morning after morning. Good on you!



Parliament House, Canberra ACT 2600  Ph: 02 6277 2102 Fax: 02 6277 8497

LISA WILKINSON    By the sounds of things you don’t know when he is getting back.

JULIE BISHOP    Oh well I know he is getting back shortly, it is not for me to announce  when Tony…

LISA WILKINSON    Or have you told him not to bother?

JULIE BISHOP    I have told him it is in capable hands, it is in capable hands.

LISA WILKINSON    Okay, alright, Julie Bishop thank you very much, you have a lovely  weekend.

JULIE BISHOP    Thank you so much, same to you.

- Ends -

