Transcript - Interview with Steve Price MTR 2  September 2011   Friday, 02 September 2011 10:17

Steve Price: We spoke earlier in the program to one of the locals down in Tasmania who lives

in Bagdad, just near Pontville and he told us that without any notice at all the Pontville Detention

Centre began to be filled with inmates yesterday, asylum seekers who are going to be there.

They were told, the locals, that they are predominantly single males from Afghanistan. Senator

Eric Abetz, of course, Liberal Senator for Tasmania, has had concerns about this establishment

for a while. He’s on the line, Senator, good morning.

Senator Abetz: Good morning Steve, good to be on the program.

Steve Price: The locals not told anything as usual, dead of night people moved in there, and

they suspect more are on the way. It’s not an appropriate place to have a detention centre, is it?

Senator Abetz: The Pontville Detention Centre was scrambled together at a time when Labor

was bereft of any policy, they still are of course, but they wanted to show that they were acting

and as a result they issued a press release saying that there would be a new facility at Pontville.

They told us that inmates would be coming as of May of this year and the centre would be

closed as of October this year. And of course with everything that this Government does it just

got delayed and delayed, they didn’t plan it properly. So here we are in September and receiving

the first entrants to the detention centre and it’s going to be closed next month. Now Chris

Bowen has said now it’s going to be open for another six months up until around about March or

April next year. So this is a clear indication that the border protection policies has failed. When

you have to start opening detention centres in Tasmania, about as far away as you can get from

Christmas Island you know that you’ve got a problem with your border protection policy.

Steve Price: Well given what happened in the High Court this week, you’re going to need

Pontville?

Senator Abetz: That is my fear Steve that given the East Timor solution fell over, the

Malaysian solution has now fallen over, there is no doubt in my mind that we will have this

Pontville Detention Centre for quite some time. But Steve if I might just quickly say on the

Malaysian solution, I could not help but notice last night on TV how angry Julia Gillard was that

she thought the High Court had changed its mind and that the Chief Justice had changed his

mind in relation to the issue of detention centres, offshore detention centres. And it just made

me think hopefully Julia Gillard has not got an understanding of how angry the Australian people

are with her change of mind in relation to the Carbon Tax.

Steve Price: It was quite a remarkable attack; almost a personal attack on the High Court

and the Chief Justice wasn’t it?

Senator Abetz: I would have thought it was a completely unbecoming attack by the Prime

Minister on the Chief Justice. And look we have all scratched our heads from time to time as to

decisions by the judiciary but we do have the separation of powers in our country. We do have

the High Court as the independent umpire. Sometimes we don’t like the decisions but you

respect them, you don’t attack them and you acknowledge that they make the best decision on

the best of their consideration at the time, even if you might have reservations about that. And

can I simply say, you know for the Prime Minister to attack the Chief Justice in the way she did I

think is indicative of huge pressure that she is under and that she is now really feeling the strain

and saying things that I would have thought in the cool light of day she might regret. And I don’t

think it’s asking too much for her to in fact apologise for the comments.

Steve Price: Will she survive as Labor Prime Minister?

Senator Abetz: That is for the Labor Party to decide, whether she survives as Labor leader.

Steve Price: Does she deserve to?

Senator Abetz: Well I look at Ms Gillard and then say if you wouldn’t have her, who would

you have? And it reminds me that if you were to change things in the leadership stakes it would

be like changing or moving the deck chairs on the Titanic. I’m not sure, would you have Chris

Bowen, would you have Peter Garrett, or do we think that Steve Smith’s done such a good job in

Defence? You look around and it is a team that is wholly bereft of talent and they’ve gone from

Kevin Rudd to Julia Gillard. Nobody’s talking about Wayne Swan, thank goodness, but he of

course is a person in charge of the Treasury in this country. So there is a real dearth of talent in

the Labor Party and it’s for them to choose who they want to have as their leader, but we are

firmly behind Tony Abbott. He is leading the Coalition exceptionally well, we’re very united and

we do realise that we do have a huge task ahead of us. We aren’t as arrogant to talk about the

historic pasts and the hyperbole that Ms Gillard’s engaged in this morning. We simply know that

we’ve got a task and that is to try to represent the people of Australia to the best of our ability.

Steve Price: Alright Senator, thank you very much for your time, Senator Eric Abetz there

from Tasmania.



