CHRIS BOWEN MP

MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP  *TRANSCRIPT*

INTERVIEW WITH WALEED ALY, ABC RADIO NATIONAL  BREAKFAST

FRIDAY, 23 DECEMBER 2011



SUBJECTS: Negotiating with the Coalition, Malaysia Arrangement,  Nauru, refugee intake.

WALEED ALY: Immigration Minister Chris Bowen is the man in the middle and  he joins me now. Good morning.

CHRIS BOWEN: Good morning to you Waleed.

ALY: The path of compromise on this was always open to you. Why did you  have to wait until 150 asylum seekers died at sea before making this move?

BOWEN: Well we’ve been working, as you know Waleed, for offshore processing  for 12 months and we negotiated an agreement with Malaysia. It’s quite clear  that we need legislation not only to implement Malaysia, but the Liberal Party  would need the same legislation if they were ever wanting to implement Nauru.  Now we put that up, the Liberal Party originally said that they would support  moves to give the government-of-the-day the power it needed to implement its  policies; they changed their position, they said they wouldn’t support the  legislation.

So we do need to find a compromise, we’ve got to get this done. People are  dying on the high seas -

ALY: Just restating my question though. The point I’m making is you could have  done this a long time ago, you’ve waited until 150 asylum seekers have died at  sea, its two days before Christmas, a whole lot of journalists are not around, why  wait until now?

BOWEN: Well it’s not about journalists being around or not around - it’s neither  here nor there Waleed, it’s about getting the job done so that people don’t die at  sea. Now -

ALY: So why didn’t you get it done before they died at sea?



BOWEN: Well Waleed, we have implemented the Malaysia agreement, we’ve  negotiated that with Malaysia - it took months of negotiation. Then the High  Court changed its interpretation of the law, which would mean that not only is  Malaysia not lawful, but so would not be Papua New Guinea and Nauru. So  therefore we need the legislation. Now to pass the legislation we need to find a  compromise with the Opposition.

Now we’ve shown - nine days ago, Waleed, the Prime Minister wrote to Tony  Abbott with a very simple proposition: let’s have a meeting to sort it through. He  said ‘no’, he said he wanted a proposal in writing. The Prime Minister said she  would recall Parliament if necessary to pass the legislation if they said that they  would support the legislation. We thought a meeting was a pretty simple  proposition, something that was pretty hard to say ‘no’ to, but Tony Abbott said  ‘no’ to the simple idea of negotiation and a meeting. He said he wanted a written  proposal so we’ve given him one -

ALY:  - I’m just not sure this answers the question that I was asking though,  which is, I mean, there’s nothing new that’s happened here apart from the fact  that 150 asylum seekers have died at sea. You’ve known for a long time that the  Opposition was not going to support your legislation. You’ve had the option of  coming up with some kind of compromise before. The timing of this just seems  as though it just popped into your mind, because it took a tragedy to get you to  focus.

BOWEN: Well with respect Waleed, we wrote to the leader of the Opposition  before the tragedy, so your thesis does not hold water. We wrote to the Leader  of the Opposition because we had warned that there would be an increase in

boat arrivals if Malaysia wasn’t implemented. We warned that you’d see more  people arriving by boat and you’d see more people risking their lives.

We wrote to Tony Abbott because that warning was borne out. We wrote to  Tony Abbott because we then said, ‘Look, very clearly the evidence is now in,  please reflect on your position, we have been trying to avoid this increase in  arrivals but it has occurred; so now that its occurred let’s sit down and work it  through and find a solution’.

ALY: But just to be clear that the compromise that you offered has only just  been offered, that was only offered yesterday. Is that right?

BOWEN: Well, nine days ago we wrote to -

ALY: No, no, that was for a meeting, but the specific compromise you’ve only  just offered.

BOWEN: A meeting is about a compromise. We made it clear -

ALY: Not necessarily, it depends what’s in the meeting.

BOWEN: Well Waleed, with respect, when you write to somebody and say, ‘Let’s  have a meeting to try and find a mutually agreed position, a position both sides  can support’ - that means compromise. We were offering compromise nine days  ago.

ALY: Okay, now you’ve contacted Tony Abbott. I don’t know if he has responded  to you privately or personally, but this what he’s had to say publicly: [recording]

TONY ABBOTT: The Malaysia deal is a bad deal. It was a bad deal six  months ago, it’s a bad deal today, it’ll be a bad deal tomorrow and the  day after. We don’t believe in having one position one day and a different  position the next day, we stick with policies that have been proven to  work and what we know works is offshore processing at Nauru, temporary  protection visas and the option of turning boats around where it is safe to  do so. The Greens are the Government’s alliance partners and if they  think that it is absolutely essential to have Malaysia, well, they need to  declare it a matter of confidence and insist that the Greens support them.

ALY: ‘Not interested, go and talk to the Greens’, is what I get out of that. Chris  Bowen?

BOWEN: Well today is the test, isn’t it? We’re going to have the meeting today  between the Government and the Opposition, and that’s a welcome step and I  wish it had happened nine days ago, but it’s - I really do genuinely welcome the  fact that it’s going to happen today. The test is whether that meeting is held in  good faith, whether the Liberal Party comes to the table in good faith. If we’re  going to have a meeting where we lecture each other about the benefits of our  policy and the drawbacks of the other side’s policy then there’s no point.

ALY: Are you confident that you’ll get a deal?

BOWEN: Well we’ll have to see. I believe Mr Morrison is a man of good faith and  I believe that he and I can sit down and reach an agreement. The question is  whether the Liberal Party provides him with the authorisation and authority to do  so. We’ll see this afternoon.

I’m authorised to negotiate on behalf of the Government, we want to sit down in  good faith. Now remember, we said we wanted everything on the table. Tony  Abbott said, ‘No, no, I don’t want everything on the table, make me an offer’. So  we’ve made him an offer, we’ve said we’re prepared to talk about it, we’ll talk it  through. We need an outcome here, the Australian people are looking at us

saying both sides support offshore processing, surely you can sort it out - and I  think they’re right.

ALY: I’m very worried about how this deal would work, that this compromise  would work. The whole point of the ‘Malaysia Solution’ is, in your words, to break  the people smugglers’ business model - that is the whole idea is to make clear  that if you get on a boat to Australia, you don’t get in, you get sent to Malaysia  and you don’t return to Australia. Nauru on the other hand is a totally different  idea, it’s a detention centre that’s overseas, it’s a detour, and people ultimately  end up in Australia, I think 95 per cent or something.

So doesn’t that - those two things together, once you add Nauru to that mix,  don’t you just completely undermine the Malaysia plan, because under this  arrangement if you get on a boat - this compromise that you’re trying to strike -

if you get on a boat, you know you’ve got a chance, you could end up at Nauru  and then in Australia, or you could end up in Malaysia, and so the Malaysia thing  just ceases to be effective.

BOWEN: No, I don’t agree with that last point, but I do agree with your general  point, and that’s why we say Nauru by itself is no solution. And I heard your clip  of the Prime Minister and everything the Prime Minister said before in August  holds now, that’s our view. That’s why we won’t agree to just a detention centre  at Nauru, which is the Liberal Party’s policy. And I saw Tony Abbott say if you  got Nauru you don’t need Malaysia: dead plain wrong. Dead plain wrong.

ALY: No, but the point is if you got Nauru, Malaysia doesn’t work.

BOWEN: No, it does, because look: this has been our position, that we need the  Malaysia agreement because you need that disincentive. We’ve also said that an  offshore processing centre, as a complement to Malaysia, is important. We’ve got  one negotiated with Papua New Guinea, so that’s been our policy all along: we  need Malaysia, plus we need one other.

ALY: But how does it work? If I get on a boat to Australia, how do I know if I’m  going to end up in Malaysia or Nauru?

BOWEN: Well that’s the important point, because do you really want to take  that risk? Do you really want to spend $20,000 on a people smuggler to know  that if you come to Australia by boat, there’s a fair chance that you’re going to  be sent back to Malaysia. Do you want to take that - is that worth the risk of  $20,000 or thereabouts?

ALY: If I know that there’s a chance that I might also go to Nauru and then  make it to Australia, perhaps. Because the people who are getting on these  boats are really, really desperate people, so they’d probably still take that

chance.

BOWEN: No, well this is the point, this is the point I’m making: that if you just  have Nauru, you have Christmas Island further away and more expensive; that’s  not a part of the solution by itself -

ALY: No, but -

BOWEN: It can be a useful complement if, for whatever reason, you need to  have extra places over and above those that are available in Malaysia. That’s  why I said we needed another detention centre. Now -

ALY: The way I understand the Malaysia plan is -

BOWEN: - Now whether the detention centre is in Papua New Guinea or Nauru  or elsewhere isn’t really that relevant.

ALY: No, but it’s relevant though if you’re going to have both of these policies  running in parallel. Are you only going to use Nauru once Malaysia is spent?

BOWEN: Well look there’ll be details to be sorted through with the Opposition. I  mean, we’re coming to the table with a proposal and we’re prepared to talk  about it -

ALY: Okay, but -

BOWEN: - And of course there’s operational details. But I make this point  Waleed and I think, you know, we disagree with the conclusion but I agree with  your central point, that Nauru is another detention centre, its Christmas Island  further away. That’s why I have said ad nauseam, that’s why the Prime Minister  has said ad nauseam, that it is not a deterrent. But if its part of a regional  framework, it complements the agreement with Malaysia, then it can play a role.

We still have concerns about Nauru, of course we do, but this is about coming to  the table in a spirit of compromise to get it done.

ALY: Okay, but what I’m saying is the only way that it can complement Nauru -  sorry, Malaysia - is if it only kicks in at the point where your swap deal with  Malaysia is spent -

BOWEN: No -

ALY: - Otherwise there is that chance, if you come to Australia, there is that  chance you will end up processed, essentially, in the Australian system -

BOWEN: Waleed, I can tell you this: all the evidence I see, all the analysis that  goes into people’s decisions to come to Australia by boat, et cetera, supports the  case that if you have the chance of being sent to Malaysia - not because  Malaysia’s a bad place but because it means you lose the chance of resettlement  in Australia because you’ve come by boat - then that is the disincentive, that is  the real disincentive.

If people are sitting in Indonesia or Malaysia, thinking, ‘Hmm, I can spend my  $20,000, I can go to Australia, I might be sent to Malaysia, I might be sent to  Papua New Guinea, I might be sent to Nauru, but I’m not going to be processed  in Australia, and if I’m sent to Malaysia then I’ll be processed in line with the  other 100,000 asylum seekers in Malaysia, that’s not going to get me the

outcome I want.’

ALY: Okay, sure.

BOWEN: ‘If I’m sent to Nauru, yes, there’s a chance I’ll be processed.’ You’ve  got to take a punt that you’ll be found to be a refugee.

ALY: Okay, I understand that, we’ve been over that. We’ve thrashed that out.  There has to be a better way of doing this, though. At the moment, if you  succeed with this, this policy will be a combination of sending people to Nauru  where in the past they’ve suffered high levels of mental illness as a result of that  and they get to Australia anyway. A combination of that; and banishing people to  Malaysia where refugees have scant legal recognition, could be beaten or treated

in all sorts of horrific ways.

BOWEN: Well, no, I’m going to pull you up there; not under the agreement we  have with Malaysia.

ALY: No, but your agreement, first of all, it was an arrangement, I think, not an  agreement technically, and that was why the High Court was not terribly  impressed with it. There are no legal safeguards in place, nothing about it is  legally enforceable.

BOWEN: Well, we have an agreement between two governments, two  sovereign governments.

ALY: That is not binding in any way.

BOWEN: Well, it’s not binding on Australia either. When a government enters  into an agreement in good faith, I happen to believe that you should respect that  good faith.

Let me make this point, Waleed. What should be the aim of our refugee policy?

What should be our aim? Our aim should be to be able to lift the maximum  number of people out of misery.

ALY: Even if it means inflicting misery on others?

BOWEN: Now, hang on a second. I want to increase our refugee intake. The  Malaysia agreement delivers an automatic increase of 1,000 places a year -  1,000 more people with a chance of a life in Australia. And we’ll take it to over  20,000 in time, if we can get the proper agreements in place, which would make  us the second largest refugee intake country in the world.

That’s important to me. I want to do that. But you know what else I want to do?  I want to stop this bizarre situation where we say to people if you want a chance  of a new life in Australia, you’ve got to risk your life to get here. That must stop.

ALY: Chris Bowen, we have to leave it there. I appreciate your time.

BOWEN: Good on you, Waleed.

ENDS



