Julie Bishop

Network Ten, The Bolt Report with Andrew Bolt

Sunday, 11 September 2011

Subjects: United States; War on Terror; border protection

E&OE…

ANDREW BOLT    Joining me is the Opposition’s Foreign Affairs spokeswoman Julie Bishop. Julie,  10 years after this War on Terror America seems weak financially and now weaker also in its  willingness to be the world’s policeman, does that worry you?

JULIE BISHOP    Andrew I know the United States is facing economic challenges, grave economic  challenges, but think of this: 10 years after that terrible attack in New York and in Washington there  has not been another terrorist attack on US soil. And that was the main mission of the United States  after September 11, to prevent another terrorist attack on US soil, and that has largely been achieved,  not because the terrorists didn’t intend it, but because the United States has managed to disrupt al  Qaeda’s command and control structure, and with its allies, has been able to resist any further  attempts on the US. So I think their efforts have been largely successful. As far as the future is  concerned I have great faith in the resilience of the United States.

ANDREW BOLT    There is such a deep financial hole Julie and I notice the Pew survey of [inaudible]  countries has just come out, the result with most people thinking China is already, or will, replace the  US as the strongest power. Does that concern you at all?

JULIE BISHOP    I don’t accept that China will automatically replace the United States as the world’s  super power. The United States has an ability to rebound, to come back and I believe it will.

But it is not just the United States; its strength comes from its allies and its network of global military  and economic democracies that work with the United States. So I have great faith that the United  States will continue as the world’s super power.

ANDREW BOLT    Now the War on Terror and our engagements in Afghanistan and Iraq together  end up costing about nearly $30 billion. We’ve only lost - I mean each life is a tragedy - we’ve only  lost about 100 civilians, have we overreacted?

JULIE BISHOP    I believe that terrorism is still a real and present danger. Sure the United States had  prevented another terrorist attack of the same magnitude on their soil after September 11 but terrorist  attacks have occurred elsewhere - in Spain, in Britain, we had our own attacks in Bali not that long  after September 11.

According to David Irvine, the ASIO chief, terrorist attacks and terrorism is still present, the threat of it.  We can’t be complacent and we must continue to maintain our vigilance against terrorism at every  turn.

ANDREW BOLT    Now one of the consequences of being a heightened awareness of the boat  people issue, and in some cases this has been addressed as a security issue. Tomorrow the  Government is going to try and ram through a special meeting - its proposal for legislation to make its  Malaysian deal safe from a High Court challenge that will also presumably embrace your Nauru  solution. Why wouldn’t you support legislation that would help you, and you need that help, as much  as it would help the Government?

JULIE BISHOP    Andrew let’s try something really innovative. Let’s try and hold Julia Gillard to at  least one promise that she made before the last election and that promise was she would keep  offshore processing but she would not send asylum seekers to any country that was not a signatory to

the UN Convention on Refugees. That was her pre-election promise. Let’s hold her to it and if we do  that means that her policy should be Nauru not Malaysia.

ANDREW BOLT    But you need this legislation as well. If you come into Government, as the polls  say you will, you will need your Nauru solution governed by the same legislation the Government is  planning to make its Malaysian safe with.

JULIE BISHOP    We believe that the Nauru solution would be able to proceed even after the High  Court decision. It was a solution that we put in place in 2001 and it worked. Nauru was a deterrent  and coupled with the temporary protection visas and our threat, and in fact we did, to turn back the  boats working with Indonesia we were able to deter boat people and…

ANDREW BOLT    So you’ll block this even if it helps you? You’re going to block if the Government  goes ahead with Malaysia?

JULIE BISHOP    Andrew I haven’t seen the draft legislation, I will wait till we’ve seen the legislation.  But my point is this, Julia Gillard promised that she would support offshore processing but she  wouldn’t send any asylum seekers to a country that was not a signatory to the Convention. Let’s hold  her to that promise.

ANDREW BOLT    Julie Bishop, thank you very much for joining us.

JULIE BISHOP    My pleasure.





