1





MINISTER FOR DEFENCE

STEPHEN SMITH, MP



TRANSCRIPT: INTERVIEW WITH KIERAN GILBERT, AM AGENDA  SKY

TRANSCRIPTION: PROOF COPY E & OE

DATE: 16 FEBRUARY 2011



TOPICS: Funerals  of  the  Christmas  Island  boat  tragedy  victims;  Amphibious  ships   fleet; HMAS Success Commission of Inquiry



KIERAN GILBERT: Defence Minister, I want to ask you about a speech you gave yesterday  and some developments in Defence matters. But first and foremost on this issue of the asylum  seekers, the funerals yesterday, what do you make of criticism from Scott Morrison that the  cost was not reasonable to fly relatives to those funerals?

STEPHEN SMITH: Well, I think it is very regrettable and most unfortunate that Mr Morrison  has  chosen  to  effectively  create  a  political  controversy  off  the  back  of  people  who  are   grieving as a result of the loss of family and loved ones in a terrible tragedy.

The only sensible thing to do in these circumstances is to apply common sense, understand  that people are entitled to bury their loved ones in an atmosphere of civility and dignity, with  as  much  compassion  as  the  state  or  the  community  can  summon.  And  I  think  Mr  Morrison   has made a very bad mistake here and that's been reflected by comments to the contrary that  we've seen come from his own colleagues.

2

KIERAN  GILBERT:  The  Prime  Minister  was  asked  about  this  yesterday  in  New  Zealand.   Initially she said it was a matter for relevant Ministers. It took her a while to find her voice on  this issue. Was she treading a little bit carefully because of the politics of this?

STEPHEN  SMITH:  No  no,  she  was  also  asked  some  questions  about  my  speech  and  she   sensibly  said  portfolio  Ministers  are  dealing  with  these  matters  in  Australia,  I'm  on  an   overseas trip.

So that's a sensible approach. But I think you've seen overnight and this morning a number of  things  occur.  Firstly,  I  think  there  would  be  a  generally  held  community  view  that  in  the   aftermath  of  a  tragedy  of  that  nature,  people  should  give  every  assistance  that  they  can  to   enable loved ones to say a dignified farewell at the funeral of their family members.

Secondly, it's never sensible, it's never a good thing for the community, it's never a good thing  for our country when either deliberately or inadvertently, events like these are politicised. It  doesn't help anyone. Invariably they rebound and they've rebounded on Mr Morrison today.  And  they've  rebounded  on  Mr  Morrison  because  members  of  his  own  political  party  have

made comparable points to the points that I make.

KIERAN GILBERT: On to Defence matters. You've set up an expert advisory panel to assess  why  the  transport  ships  Manoora, Kanimbla,  and  Tobruk  were  all  out  of  action  at  the  time   when the Government wanted them to support the response to Cyclone Yasi. You must have  been flabbergasted that none of them were in operation at that time?

STEPHEN  SMITH:  Well,  I've  expressed  my  disappointment  both  in  private  and  in  public,   firstly. Secondly, I've been very frank with the community with the problem that we have and  the need to address it. That's why I've established an expert independent review team chaired  by Mr Rizzo who's well experienced in such matters. But I’ve also asked Defence to provide  formally a new transition plan for our amphibious or heavy-lift fleet.

These things are disappointing. But as the materials and the remarks I made yesterday made  clear,  they're  problems  of  long  standing.  And  one  of  the  good  initiatives  that  the  Chief  of   Navy has effected in recent years has been the Seaworthiness Board. It was really the report  of the Seaworthiness Board into the Manoora and the Kanimbla which really brought a focus  on these things.

KIERAN GILBERT: So why are you just focusing on these three ships then? Shouldn't this  panel be tasked with looking at the Navy across the board?

STEPHEN  SMITH:  The  terms  of  reference  and  my  public  remarks  make  it  clear  that   whatever  lessons  we  learn  from  this  in  terms  of  changes  that  we  need  to  make  for  the

3

maintenance and sustainment of our amphibious fleet, any lessons that we learn which apply  more generally will be utilised.

Our  heavy  amphibious  lift  is  required  for  two  reasons.  One,  the  obvious  military   transportation,  but  secondly  for  disaster  relief  and  humanitarian  assistance.  And  in  recent   weeks  I  have  indicated  to  our  United  Kingdom  counterparts  and  colleagues  that  we're  very   interested in either leasing or buying one of their amphibious lift fleet. And also when I was  in  New  Zealand  last  week,  reaffirmed  by  the  two  Prime  Ministers  yesterday,  a  much   enhanced  shared  arrangement  so  far  as  the  use  of  a  New  Zealand  amphibious  lift  ship,  the   HMNZS Canterbury,  is  concerned.  And  that  will  apply  for  regional  disaster  relief  and   development assistance.

KIERAN GILBERT: Given the amount of money that goes into Defence though, the fact that  the three amphibious vessels, we had all three of them out of action, it seems remarkable. Is  this a dysfunctional part of the military that we're talking about here?

STEPHEN SMITH: I've made it very clear that there is clearly a cultural problem here. There  seems  to  have  been  over  a  long  period  of  time, more than a decade, a decade and a half, a   view that in some respects these were second-class ships. They weren't given the priority that  they deserved.

We  also  have,  in  my  view,  significant  personnel  and  institutional  accountability  issues  in   Defence.  And  in  my  speech  yesterday  I  indicate  that  I  yesterday  received  from  Dr  Rufus   Black his review into accountability - personnel and institutional accountability - which will  form a very significant feature of the reforms that I will roll out in the next few months.

There's  also  a  lag  effect  here.  I  made  the  point  yesterday  the  Chief  of  Navy  is  to  be   complimented  for  establishing the  Seaworthiness  Board.  That  was inevitably  going  to  draw  attention to difficulties of the past. But one of the good things we hope and are confident in is  that will be a significant factor in helping to ensure that this situation never emerges again.

KIERAN GILBERT: And Minister, just finally, I understand you've got an update for us on  the report into alleged misconduct aboard HMAS Success.

STEPHEN SMITH: I've indicated that I want to make that report from Commissioner Gyles  public. But I have to be very careful about the way in which that is done to protect people's  individual  and  personal  rights.  I'll  be  in  a  position  to  release  substantial  parts  of  that  report   early next week. And I'll do that when the Parliament resumes in the first part of next week.

KIERAN GILBERT: Okay, Defence Minister, appreciate your time, thanks.

STEPHEN SMITH: Thank you, thank you very much.

