Julie Bishop  Federal Member for Curtin  Deputy Leader of the Federal Opposition  Shadow Minister for Foreign Affairs  Shadow Minister for Trade



MTR 1377, Nights with Luke Grant

Thursday, 02 June 2011

Subjects: Carbon tax; United Nations Green Climate Fund; Senate Inquiry into the  Government’s handling of asylum seekers; plain packaging of cigarettes; taxes

E&OE…

Introductory remarks…

LUKE GRANT    Answer me this if you can, I don’t understand how Bob Hawke, whether  you love him or don’t love him, or a bunch of religious figures or former political figures or  actors or anyone can go out and say this carbon tax is a beauty. Because like you and like me  and like everyone else none of us have seen the detail. How can they just put their hand up  and say get behind this when they don’t even know what the hell it is?

JULIE BISHOP    Well that is why Labor should get all the details out there, come to  whatever agreement they want to with Bob Brown and the Greens and then put their proposal  to the Australian people at an election.

Now that is what they should do, the Prime Minister does not have a mandate to introduce  this tax. She says it is going to transform the economy, we know it is going to affect people’s  cost of living, their standard of living, it’s going to drive up prices, change the way people  live and yet she has refused to put it to the people for a vote.

Now we say that that is not good enough. She said before the election there wouldn’t be a  carbon tax. If she so believed that this carbon tax will be good for Australia then put it to the  people and campaign for it and then have a vote on it.

LUKE GRANT    Yeah, I don’t know if you’ll say it but I’ll say it, it was just a barefaced lie  six days before in order to make sure she got re-elected when they were looking down the  barrel of you know what.

You asked a question yesterday of Wayne Swan. Just let me replay the question here, have a  listen.

JULIE BISHOP (QUESTION TIME)    Thank you Mr Speaker. My question is to the  Treasurer. I refer the Treasurer to his remarks in the House yesterday on the carbon price:   We will use every cent from that price paid to assist households and to assist industry.   Treasurer, is it not a fact that the government has committed to paying a proportion of the

carbon tax revenue to the United Nations Green Climate Fund? How does the Treasurer  reconcile that fact with his statement to the House yesterday?

LUKE GRANT    Yeah, very nicely put too if I may say so. But you didn’t get an answer did  you? He just ranted and raved and did everything but answer the question.

JULIE BISHOP    You see Luke this is what Labor doesn’t want people to know about the  carbon tax. They tell you that only the big polluters will pay the tax - meaning electricity  generators, manufacturers and steel makers - they won’t tell you the costs will all be past on  to the households.

And Labor says all the tax revenue will be redistributed to households or business to  compensate for higher costs of living but they won’t admit it has already committed to  provide billions of dollars of carbon tax revenue, raised in Australia, to the United Nations  Green Climate Fund.

Now I have also asked the Prime Minister, as well as the Treasurer, direct questions about the  amount of carbon tax revenue raised in Australia that the Government has already agreed will  go to this United Nations Green Climate Fund not to households to meet these cost of living  increases that the households will bear.

They are not going to tell me. They don’t deny that the Government has committed to the UN  Green Climate Fund but they refuse to say how much.

But Luke, we’ve done a bit of research. The United Nations report in question says that  Australia has signed up to give 10 per cent of total revenues to the fund.

LUKE GRANT    10 per cent!

JULIE BISHOP    Now think about this, with a carbon tax at $20 - $25 a tonne, something  like that, that will be over $1 billion to the United Nations fund. But it gets even more  outrageous because Professor Garnaut in his latest report says that the Government is  committed to this fund and he estimates it is likely to be $1.8 billion every year by 2020 to  the United Nations, that’s a massive amount of money.

LUKE GRANT    It is appalling. What is that United Nations fund go to do?

JULIE BISHOP    Well it is a massive amount of money raised by the carbon tax in  Australia that won’t be used to compensate households who are going to be hit hard by the  carbon tax.

The United Nations Green Climate Fund is to assist other countries move to a low carbon  economy. Now that is why a global agreement is absolutely essential before Australia does  anything that is going to harm our economy, drive jobs and investment offshore yet do  nothing to reduce global greenhouse gas emissions.

This is not about the environment Luke. This is a tax to gather revenue to redistribute it  around the economy and to buy themselves some brownie points at the United Nations.

LUKE GRANT    Yeah 100 per cent, agree with you 100 per cent. That is exactly what it is.

You were able through the Senate with the help of the Greens today get a further  investigation in the Government’s handling of asylum seekers. What do you think is at the  end of this process?

JULIE BISHOP    Luke, you must remember that when Labor took office in 2007 there  were about six boat people, people who’d arrived by boat, in our detention network. Today  there are about 6,700 including 1,000 children and that is just in three years since Labor  changed the Howard Government policy.

We’ve heard of, and seen film footage of, riots and protests and tension in the detention  centre network, of some appalling incidents that have occurred. We know that the Australian  Federal Police actually had to take back control of Christmas Island because of the riots  amongst the asylum seekers there. And this is the kind of scandal that the Government wants  to cover up but we’ve managed with the assistance of the minor parties to get an inquiry into  it, and I think the Australian people want to know what is going on inside our detention  centre network because the Government has clearly lost control.

LUKE GRANT    Yeah, that is exactly right. Just dwelling on that figure, to just backtrack  one question to that conversation we were having about the money going to this UN Green  Fund. I also replayed last night, and I know he is probably not always your favourite person,  but Andrew Wilkie’s question to the Prime Minister where he talked about that Tasmanian  grandmother who has tried now after battling bowel cancer for eight years, her drugs will  now cost $60,000. They are available and they are potentially lifesaving and to meet the cost  she had got to take out a credit card.

I am sure you know, but I am sure also that the Government doesn’t get the fact that lots of  Australians - if we were rich and wealthy country, we should be doing all we can for  Australians that are here now not sending $1 billion or more to the United Nations to try and  cool the planet, that’s outrageous.

JULIE BISHOP    Well Andrew Wilkie asked a very pertinent question, he didn’t get a  satisfactory response. That doesn’t help his constituent who is obviously facing very, very  difficult circumstances. We know that the drug - the Government has been advised they  should recommend approval of this and it appears that they’ve done nothing.

Now these are the kind of tragic issues that come up every day and we would hope that the  Government would get its priorities right. When Australians hear that something like $1  billion or, according to Professor Garnaut, $1.8 billion every year by 2020 will be diverted  from taxes raised in Australia to a UN Green Climate Fund they really do question this  Government’s priorities.

LUKE GRANT    Yes, indeed. But before I let you go there was a release today from  plainpack.com, I assume that is the tobacco people. And I know the Government has tried to  generate some heat on the Coalition this week and you I think, yesterday or the day before  came out and decided that you would back the Government’s legislation with one or two  amendments.

But the author of this release who I think is a fella called Scott Macintyre, he makes the point  that Canada went through the process of reviewing the possible repercussions of plain  packaging including the costs due to legalities of removing intellectual property. And they

also, I think, the Canadians though that it wouldn’t work as well as direct measures trying to  get people off cigarettes.

Even though you’ve agreed this week with the Government, surely there is enough doubt just  to be a bit more careful? The idea of going first in the world is noble but not at the risk of  billions of dollars surely?

JULIE BISHOP    We haven’t yet seen the legislation. The Government’s been talking  about this for two years now and I am very surprised that having made this a priority back in  2009 they’ve done nothing about it.

Now, Tony Abbott made the fair point that we wanted to see the legislation and we still  haven’t seen it, but we will support steps that reduce the incidence of smoking particularly  encouraging young people not to take up smoking. But the Government will have to produce  legislation that contains a regulatory impact statement. In other words, they will have to set  out the cost to business, the cost to shopkeepers, people who sell cigarettes, what cost there  will be throughout the Australian business community before the introduction of this policy.  So they must put in regulatory impact statements and then we’ll see the true costs.

I know that other countries have been through this process and have made decisions not to  proceed. Let’s see what it is going to cost but the Coalition does support genuine efforts  based on evidence that will stop smoking.

LUKE GRANT    I know you are busy but if I could ask you to listen to Robert for one sec.  Robert what’s your question for Julie Bishop mate?

CALLER: ROBERT    Yeah, Julie, listen it doesn’t matter which Government is in I was  under the impression at the last election - there was a lot of us who didn’t vote for Labor and  voted Liberals - and you were going to be more honest about where the money goes. You’re  Government’s in Victoria and we still don’t know where the money goes. Where are all the  taxes from all the years and all the royalties from the mining companies and all that. I can’t  [inaudible] but you know what I mean don’t you?

LUKE GRANT    Yeah I am sure she does. Robert thanks.

JULIE BISHOP    Yeah I know what you mean Robert and Joe Hockey actually put up an  idea that the Government publish, with people’s tax returns, publish a statement as to where  people‘s taxes went - how much went on welfare, how much went on defence, how much  went on public servants - and the Government knocked us back. So that is something we’ll  take up when we get into Government.

LUKE GRANT    Very good. Thank you very much for your time, always good to talk to  you.

JULIE BISHOP    Thanks Luke.

