Julie Bishop  Federal Member for Curtin  Deputy Leader of the Federal Opposition  Shadow Minister for Foreign Affairs  Shadow Minister for Trade

ABC, Lateline with Ali Moore

Tuesday, 14 June 2011

Subjects: Malaysian Solution; Nauru; Labor’s live export ban to Indonesia; tobacco  donations; Liberal Party Conference

E&OE…

ALI MOORE    Now to our guest tonight, Deputy Liberal Leader and Shadow Minister for  Foreign Affairs, Julie Bishop, who joins us from Canberra. Julie Bishop thanks for joining  Lateline.

JULIE BISHOP    Good evening.

ALI MOORE    Let me go overseas first; it appears a deal between the Government and  Malaysia over asylum seekers is close, what would the Coalition do with that deal if it wins  government?

JULIE BISHOP    Ali I think the deal has already unravelled. We must remember that Julia  Gillard has been involved in this matter for many years. It was her policy to unravel the  Howard Government's asylum seeker laws that has led the policy failure of this Government  in the first place.

When she was in Opposition, it was her policy to roll back the Howard Government laws.  When in Government they implemented that policy and the people smugglers were put back  in business. Julia Gillard then used that policy failure to roll Kevin Rudd.

She announced the East Timor solution and insisted that it was being negotiated when it  wasn't. She then announced the Malaysian solution, and yet in the time since she announced  the solution more boats have arrived in Australia in the last six weeks than in the last six  years of the Howard Government.

So this so-called Malaysian Solution has already been a failure.

ALI MOORE    Well it hasn't actually even been signed yet. But all expectation is that it will  be in the next few days, if not the next week; what will the Coalition do with it if it wins  government?

JULIE BISHOP    What we find extraordinary is that the Government has railed for years  when it Opposition and in Government against the Howard Government's Pacific Solution  because they said that Nauru, one of the islands involved in the Pacific Solution, was not a

signatory to the UN Convention on Refugees. Now, Julia Gillard is signing a deal,  apparently, with a country that is not a signatory to the UN Convention of Refugees ...

ALI MOORE    So to go to that question. If they are signing a deal and you're stuck with it,  because you're the next government, what do you do? Do you rescind it?

JULIE BISHOP    Well there are very, very genuine concerns at present as to the status of  the 800 people who are to be sent by Australia to Malaysia. There is concern about the status  of asylum seekers in Malaysia generally, but there's concern about the status of the 800 to be  sent.

There are genuine concerns about the status of children to be sent to Malaysia and also there  are genuine concerns about the human rights record in Malaysia.

Our policy has been for some time that the Prime Minister should pick up the phone, speak to  the president of Nauru, because there is an Australian-funded, taxpayer-funded detention  centre on Nauru…

ALI MOORE    And I'll ask you about Nauru in a moment but the point, or the question is,  that if the Government goes ahead with this deal in Malaysia and you win the next election,  what do you do? Do you bring back the refugees that have been sent to Malaysia?

JULIE BISHOP    Ali, let's see if the deal ever gets done. Remember Julia Gillard  announced that she was going to negotiate a deal with East Timor and she kept insisting for  months and months and months that it was being negotiated when in fact it wasn't being  negotiated. She announced a deal with Malaysia six weeks ago and the details still haven't  been finalised.

So let's see if there is a deal and the details of that deal, because of course it was on this  program that we saw some of the details that have raised all these concerns about what the  Gillard Government is trying to achieve.

ALI MOORE    Your preferred option, as you've pointed out, to house asylum seekers is  Nauru and as part of today's censure motion in Parliament, Tony Abbott said inhumanity is  inherent in what the Government is proposing. Was Nauru, in your opinion, really a humane  option?

JULIE BISHOP    The option in Nauru worked. It was a detention centre built by the  Australian Government, it was manned by Australian public servants, it had the auspices of  the International Organisation for Migration, and the people of Nauru welcomed the asylum  seekers there. They had the freedom to roam and the island, they weren't locked away. They  had access to Australian standards ...

ALI MOORE    But there was also significant ...

JULIE BISHOP    ... of treatment for ...

ALI MOORE    ... mental health issues, weren't there? There was significant concern  amongst mental health experts and indeed reports today that some are still seeking treatment  now?

JULIE BISHOP    And you're suggesting that by sending 800 people to Malaysia they will  be in a better position than those who were sent to Nauru? I don't think there's anybody in  Australia who would believe that is going to be the case.

So what Tony Abbott was saying, and what we say, is that Julia Gillard has opted for the  worst option. There is an option available to reopen the Australian taxpayer-funded detention  centre on Nauru.

Tony Abbott and Scott Morrison visited the island last weekend. They saw the detention  centre, they saw the schools where the children would be sent, they saw the facilities, the  health services and the like.

The Minister for Immigration has not visited the Malaysian facilities where the Gillard  Government intends to send 800 asylum seekers.

ALI MOORE    Well just to move on to another issue, also involving our northern  neighbours, and that of course is the decision to ban all live exports to Indonesia. Do you  support the Government's move to force Meat and Livestock Australia to provide $5 million  in compensation to graziers?

JULIE BISHOP    Look, this is another example of the Government's shambolic handling of  difficult issues.

The Government announced a temporary suspension on the livestock that was going to the  noncompliant abattoirs and we supported that. We understand that. But the Government has  now overreacted enormously by banning the export of beef to even compliant abattoirs in  Indonesia. This has ...

ALI MOORE    But I asked you about the issue of compensation. Do you support Meat and  Livestock being made to pay it? To provide the funds?

JULIE BISHOP    Well on the ... can I just finish on my point about the, what's happened to  the industry. There's now been the most extraordinary ramifications as a result of this and it  just seems that the Government has absolutely no understanding of the impact of its decision  to impose this total ban. Once more, a knee jerk reaction and the Government has no regard  to the consequences of its actions.

In relation to the matter of compensation, I understand that the cattle industry will be hard hit  by this, that people's livelihoods will be affected, and in that instance I think it's incumbent  upon the Government to support the livestock industry because after all it's this total ban by  the Government that will cause the damage.

ALI MOORE    So you don't support forcing Meat and Livestock Australia to pay $5  million?

JULIE BISHOP    Well I don't have the details of those negotiations and where the  Government is up to and whether the MLA will agree ultimately to pay it or not.

My point is this, the Government made this decision to ban totally beef exports into Indonesia  even to compliant abattoirs and this will have enormous consequences for the beef cattle  industry across Australia.

In my home state of Western Australia about 50 per cent of the live cattle exports into  Indonesia come from the West, the rest from the Northern Territory and Queensland. But it's  not just the cattle producers, it's all the attendant industries like transport and shipping and  feed producers and the like. There will be enormous ramifications across the beef industry  generally as a result of the Government's decision to ban all exports to all of the abattoirs in  Indonesia.

ALI MOORE    Well let's look at issues closer to home. We've heard a mea culpa tonight  from Nicola Roxon regarding seeking support from big tobacco. When is the Liberal Party  going to break its links with big tobacco or is the money just too important?

JULIE BISHOP    Nicola Roxon has been caught out soliciting donations from tobacco  companies a year after the Labor Party announced that they had ceased taking such donations  and yet for years she's been lecturing anybody about, anybody in her hearing, about taking  donations from tobacco companies. She now has absolutely no credibility on this issue.

And she's personally attacked Tony Abbott time and time again over the Liberal Party's  stance. Tony Abbott doesn't have a say over whether the Liberal Party accepts those  donations or not, it's a matter for the Federal Liberal Party.

ALI MOORE    So what are you telling me? If Tony Abbott, as the leader, said 'we should  not do this', the Federal Liberal Party would not follow him?

JULIE BISHOP    It's a matter for the Liberal Party. We separate the issue of donations from  the federal members of parliament. But what I think is interesting is you're asking the Liberal  Party about accepting donations when we've had Nicola Roxon on her high horse for two  years, at least, lecturing people about taking money from tobacco companies and she has  been caught out soliciting donations for her own re-election from tobacco companies. ...

ALI MOORE    But do you personally support ...

JULIE BISHOP    ... that kind of hypocrisy is extraordinary.

ALI MOORE    Do you support your party taking money from big tobacco?

JULIE BISHOP    Tobacco companies are legally operating entities in Australia. If the  Government thinks that they should not make donations to political parties, well then they  should ban them operating as legally structured entities in Australia.

ALI MOORE    Does it sit well though with a party that is led by a former Health Minister  and one who is very much into physical fitness, as you yourself are, does the image sit well  that on the one hand you promote that sort of lifestyle and on the other you are happy to take  money from big tobacco?

JULIE BISHOP    As Health Minister Tony Abbott has done more than any previous and  certainly a lot more than the current Health Minister to reduce the rates of smoking in

Australia and he's proud of that record, as am I. Tony Abbott was a very, very good Health  Minister.

I just find the hypocrisy of Labor over this issue to be quite breathtaking. We get lectured  about taking donations from tobacco companies and Nicola Roxon has been caught out  soliciting donations for her own re-election. I think that's just extraordinary.

ALI MOORE    Well in 10 days the Liberal Party will elect a new Federal Director and it  seems that Peter Reith is building some fairly solid support, including from John Howard; has  he got your backing?

JULIE BISHOP    You mean a Federal President?

ALI MOORE    Sorry, a Federal President, yes.

JULIE BISHOP    There will be an election in two weeks time. I'm not sure who's standing  yet, who's nominated, I'm not aware of that ...

ALI MOORE    Peter Reith has publicly said that he will be standing ...

JULIE BISHOP    ... and I'm not sure if there any others ...

ALI MOORE    ... and you have an incumbent who's said that he wishes to stay on.

JULIE BISHOP    And I'm not aware if there're any others. I'll make any judgment at the  conference, as I'm sure everybody else will.

ALI MOORE    Peter Reith is running on a change platform and whether or not you're going  to support him, he completed a review of the last election. On the other side of politics, of  course, we've seen John Faulkner say that Labor is moribund and it's lost a whole generation  of activists, it's closed off avenues of debate. Is the branch situation any different for rank and  file Liberal members?

JULIE BISHOP    We have seen some significant reforms in a number of our divisions  around Australia. For example, in Victoria a number of reforms to the constitution in that  division have meant that there have been significant changes to the way candidates are  preselected. And in some of our preselections we've had hundreds of people turning up to  cast a vote as to who they want to represent them in an upcoming election.

So we have put in place some significant reforms around Australia.

Peter Reith has conducted a review into the last election, as one would expect, and that  review, that report is currently with the Federal President, the Federal Director. It will be a  matter for consideration by the Federal Executive in due course and I'm sure there will be a  number of recommendations we will take on board.

We didn't win the last election. We had an extraordinary result. The Government lost its  majority. We now have a hung parliament. So from one perspective it was an outstanding  election result but we're still in a hung parliament. So there will be lessons to be learned and

I'm sure Peter Reith will have done a very fine job in putting a report together that we can  learn from.

ALI MOORE    Do you think, though, as Deputy Leader of the Party that there is room for  further change? For example, do you support choosing candidates by primaries?

JULIE BISHOP    These are the sorts of issues that we will be debating when the Reith  Report is made available to the Federal Executive and I'll look forward to seeing the  recommendations. We have seen significant change in some of the divisions around  Australia, some of the state divisions, and this will be looking to see what we do on a national  level.

And of course there's always room for improvement. There's always room for change and I  think the broader the preselection process can be then the better it is for the party. It has  certainly attracts high calibre candidates and that is what we pride ourselves on, being able to  attract people from a broad cross-section across the community. We're not straitjacketed into  these stereotypical Labor apparatchiks that seem to dominate the Labor benches.

ALI MOORE    So is that a yes to primaries?

JULIE BISHOP    Well I'll have a look at the recommendations of the Reith Report, but  there have been many changes to our preselection process in Victoria and other divisions and  they seem to be working extremely well. Whether it would work for every state or territory  division, well I obviously want to be part of that debate.

ALI MOORE    Julie Bishop, many thanks for joining Lateline.

JULIE BISHOP    My pleasure.

