

Scott Morrison

Shadow Minister for Productivity & Population,  Immigration & Citizenship

Malaysian people swap deal is  simply not necessary, says Coalition   08/06/11

The Government’s anything but Nauru strategy has forced Labor into a series  of vanity driven policy contortions that are simply unnecessary, Shadow  Minister for Productivity and Population and Shadow Minister for  Immigration and Citizenship, Scott Morrison said today.

“The plain fact is that a deal with Malaysia is simply not necessary, when the  proven alternative of reopening Nauru and introducing temporary protection  visas (TPVs) is available and can be introduced without the cost, fuss and

panic that has characterised Labor’s alternative approach,” Mr Morrison said.

“For the past month the Government has changed policy positions on what  seems like a daily basis, having failed to think through the consequences of  their flawed proposal to send 800 illegal arrivals to Malaysia,” he said.

“Fundamental issues such as whether people would be caned and how children  would be treated were all left up in the air when the Prime Minister rushed her  desperate announcement out a month ago, prior to the budget.

“Regardless of whether and how these issues are resolved, the truth is they just  should not have gone there in the first place.

“In just one month since the arrangement with Malaysia was announced, 274  people have turned up on illegal boats which is more than the total number  that arrived in the last six years of the Howard Government after the Pacific  Solution was introduced.

“The Government has zealously tried to avoid the Coalition’s proven policies  for no other reason than their political vanity.

“The price of Labor’s pride can be measured in the additional costs we will  pay for their one sided Malaysian deal, the damage to our regional reputation  for the farcical nature of Labor’s policy flip flops and desperate negotiations,

and ultimately the conditions faced by those who we send to Malayaia, who  would be treated more humanely on Nauru.

“Other key reasons why Nauru and TPVs present the better way forward are  as follows:

- The Malaysian deal will apply to just 800 illegal arrivals, with almost 300  having turned up since the arrangement was announced. It is a stop gap  arrangement with a highly perishable use by date.

- Labor’s temporary measure in Malaysia will cost Australian taxpayers at  least $292 million, without including the cost of additional welfare and  benefits that will need to be provided to increase our annual refugee intake by  another 1,000 every year.

- The Australian taxpayer funded facility at Nauru is already able to take the  first 500 people with minimum improvements, and a capacity to take at least  another thousand if necessary.

- Temporary Protection Visas can be introduced without costing a cent and  will apply to every person who arrives illegally in Australia, whether by boat  or by plane.

- The sheer fact that Australia would need to get a guarantee that illegal  arrivals would not be caned in Malaysia should have been a good enough  reason to not send people there in the first place - there was never a need to

obtain, let alone ask for, such an assurance in Nauru.

- In Nauru children went to school, everyone received health care and people  could move freely around the Island, without having to fear for their safety or  welfare.

“The Pacific Solution combined with TPVs are a proven solution, that will  apply to every illegal boat that turns up, not just the next dozen.

“Australians are asking Julia Gillard a simple question - why are you engaging  in this contorted arrangement with Malaysia when a proven solution is already  available?

“The answer is that Julia Gillard and Labor are more concerned about their  own political vanity than good policy.

“Labor have already tacitly confessed that it is their own failed policies that  have underpinned the people smugglers business model for the past three  years.

“Their decision to change these policies is proof they believe they have got it  wrong. But the bungles, contortions and hypocrisy of their Malaysian people  swap deal, prove they still do not know how to get it right.

“Julia Gillard should listen to the Australian people who are saying quite  clearly, pick up the phone to Nauru and reintroduce TPVs.

“Julia Gillard must simply restore what Labor destroyed when they abandoned  John Howard’s strong border protection regime,” Mr Morrison said.



