









THE HON DR CRAIG EMERSON MP  MINISTER FOR TRADE



Transcript

ABC The World Today  8 September 2011

E&OE

Subjects: Craig Thomson.

BRENDAN TREMBATH: The New South Wales Federal Labor MP Craig  Thomson says he's always rejected allegations  of wrongdoing regarding claims he misused a  credit card while he was the National Secretary  of the Health Services Union.  Mr Thomson  says he'll make a comprehensive statement in  the near future.  The New South Wales Police  say there's no evidence to warrant a formal  investigation.  The matter has now been  referred to Victoria Police.

The Opposition says it will keep pursuing the

case.

But Ministers say the Coalition should stop

slinging mud, apologise, and let investigations  continue without political sniping.  One Minister  has accused the Opposition of trying to  achieve the easy, sleazy way to The Lodge.

Chief political correspondent, Sabra Lane.









SABRA LANE: New South Wales Police made its decision to

drop the investigation after reviewing  documents given to it by the Federal Shadow  Attorney-General George Brandis, and material  from the Health Services Union.  They include  the findings of a 120-page union investigation  into the allegations that more than $100,000  was misused, and spent on things like escorts  in hotel rooms.

New South Wales Police media spokeswoman

Joanne Elliott.

JOANNE ELLIOTT: After the examination of that information, it was  concluded that there was no evidence to  warrant a formal investigation by New South  Wales Police.  However, due to the fact that  these financial controls at that union were  being conducted by the Melbourne office of the  union, and the timing of the MP's service with  the union was in Victoria, we are forwarding  that file to Victoria Police for its consideration.

LANE: Victoria Police say it's yet to receive the

referral.  Fair Work Australia has been  conducting an investigation into the claim since  2009.  It's expected to announce its findings by  the end of this year.  The Shadow Attorney-General George Brandis, who referred the  matter to the New South Wales Police, says  he's not going to stop his pursuit of Mr

Thomson.









GEORGE BRANDIS: I put material before the New South Wales  Police some weeks ago, as did the Health  Services Union, which seemed to me - and to  the Health Services Union, I might say - to  suggest that Mr Thomson had used members’  money as his own and that there was prima  facie reason to believe that there may have  been a breach of New South Wales criminal  law.

Now the police have examined a great deal of

material.  They have concluded, as I

understand, their statement that the material  doesn't reach the threshold at which they  would institute a prosecution. And as I have  said from the start of this matter, this is entirely  a matter for the professional judgment of the  New South Wales Police.  And the Opposition  will abide their decision.

LANE: The matter will now be forwarded to Victoria

Police.  It's been reported this morning that the  police there are unlikely to reach a different  conclusion than their New South Wales  counterparts.

BRANDIS: Well, that's a comment made by the person

who wrote the story: so let's just wait and see  what the Victorian Police do.

LANE: Do you owe an apology to Craig Thomson?









GEORGE BRANDIS: Not at all.

LANE: And the Opposition Leader, Tony Abbott, this

morning visited Craig Thomson's electorate of  Dobell, saying the Opposition's attack won't  cease.

TONY ABBOTT: There are still a lot of questions for Craig

Thomson to answer.  Why was his credit card  misused?  Why were the union dues of lowly-paid workers misused in this way?  There are  still a lot of questions for the Prime Minister to  answer.

LANE: The Acting Foreign Affairs Minister Craig

Emerson.

CRAIG EMERSON: Well, this is obviously a bitter disappointment  to Tony Abbott and George Brandis, who  thought this was going to be their cheap, easy  way to The Lodge.  Now they're actually going  to have to do some policy work to put in front of  the Australian people, instead of sleazing their  way, trying to get into the Lodge the easy,  cheap way.

The New South Wales Police have said that

they have completed an assessment, and  there is no evidence to warrant an investigation  - so they haven't even moved past the  assessment phase.  They have actually  concluded on the basis of the information that









there is no evidence to warrant an

investigation.

LANE: Senator George Brandis says it shows that it

doesn't pass the evidence threshold test here,  and that he doesn't owe Craig Thomson an  apology.

EMERSON: Well Mr Brandis is wrong about this.

It is not a matter of being insufficient evidence;

it's that there is no evidence, and Mr Brandis  parades himself as some sort of high, highly-qualified legal adviser.  I wouldn't be taking any  legal advice from Senator Brandis, including on  issues of asylum-seekers or any other matter.   And for Mr Brandis to seek to mislead people  by saying there was insufficient evidence when  the police statement says there is no evidence  is a very bad reflection upon him indeed.

And he should apologise to Mr Thomson for

this muckraking.

And he claimed in the media that he believed

there was a prima facie case that Craig  Thomson has committed an offence against  the New South Wales Crimes Act.

That has proved to be completely false, and it

exposes this: and that is that Senator Brandis's  motivations were political all along.









LANE: The matter against Craig Thomson isn't

completely closed.  The Fair Work Australia  investigation is still continuing.

EMERSON: Yes.  And there is a Fair Work investigation

underway, and Mr Abbott should now back off,  and stop seeking to pressure that investigation.



LANE: You know Craig Thomson well. I don't know

whether you've had a chance to talk to him this  morning...

EMERSON: I've had a chance to talk to Craig Thomson.

He obviously has felt a great burden from all of  this.  He has a seven-month pregnant wife with  their second child.  It will be a relief to them  that the muckraking has come to nothing.

TREMBATH: The Acting Foreign Minister Craig Emerson

ending that report from chief political

correspondent Sabra Lane.

















