CHRIS BOWEN MP

MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP  *TRANSCRIPT*

INTERVIEW WITH PAUL MURRAY, 6PR MORNINGS

WEDNESDAY, 27 JULY 2011



SUBJECTS: Malaysian transfer arrangement.

PAUL MURRAY: The Minister joins me now. Good morning, Chris.

CHRIS BOWEN: Good morning, Paul.

MURRAY: Chris, one question in this whole thing puzzles me the most: what  happens when the 800 quota is filled?

BOWEN: Well, we’ll need to see how long that takes. Obviously, I think this  will make a big difference to people’s decision as to whether they get on a  boat or not. Now, we’ve already seen a reduction: for example, since the  announcement we’ve had about 1000 less people arrive over the last two  months in the same period last year.

But look, the Malaysian Minister has said that let’s see how it works and then  we’ll talk about extending it if necessary. I think that’s a sensible approach.  Let’s see how it works and we’ll see where we go from there.

MURRAY: So plan B would be to extend it?

BOWEN: Well, look, we’re not at plan B yet, Paul. We’ve got to let this work.  We’ve only just, as you said, we only just signed it the other day. We’ve got  to implement it. Let’s see how it works. We’ve got a regional framework now,  which encourages discussions between countries to work together to deal  with these issues and that’s what we would do. But let’s just let this plan work  and let’s get it under way.

MURRAY: But the threat of it didn’t stop 568 people in two months. What  guarantee can you offer that the deal itself will stop the boats?

BOWEN: Well, as I say, I think we have seen a substantial reduction and  these things do take time. I think people smugglers will test our resolve:  they’ll be out there lying to people, they’ll be out there saying, ‘This won’t  apply to you, still give me your money, I can get you there, I can get around  it’. That sort of nonsense will continue, of course it will. It does take time. I  do think it’s encouraging we’ve seen a reduction in recent times. I’m not  saying the Malaysia announcement is entirely responsible for that. Of course,

there’s always a range of factors that go into it.

But I think, you know, if you’re in Malaysia or you’re in Indonesia, you’re  thinking about getting on a boat, you’ve got to think twice, three times, think,  ‘Will I pay my money’ - it can be up to $20,000 - ‘Will I pay that money, will  I risk my life simply to be sent back to Malaysia?’ It’s not an equation which  really works, I don’t think.

MURRAY: Chris, from your comments on the ABC’s Lateline program, I  understand that you did tell them that you would be prepared to extend the  program once the first 800 positions were filled?

BOWEN: Well, what I said was that the option should be open and look, we  don’t know how long it will take to get to the 800; I don’t think we should be  jumping the gun. I was just agreeing with the Malaysian Minister who’s said,  ‘Look, we see this as a pilot; let’s see how it works. If it works well, we’ll look  at extending it, we’ll talk then’. And I think that’s a sensible approach to take.



MURRAY: But if 800 come, isn’t it therefore absolutely clear that the plan  has failed?

BOWEN: Well, let’s see. Let’s see, Paul: that’s what I’m saying. I think this  changes the dynamic completely. I think it really does make a big difference.  As I say, it’s really a very big call to get on a boat now in the knowledge that  you’d be sent back to Malaysia. Really, the people smugglers now, their  challenge is to find 800 volunteers to say, ‘Let’s go to Australia and let’s try it.  Let’s risk our lives and do our money. Let’s try it on’.

Now, some will no doubt try. I have no doubt that some will try. Some will be  lied to and one of the challenges in this is making sure the message is spread  through the region to make sure everybody knows the new policy. We’re  doing that but it’s obviously a challenge, all through Indonesia, Malaysia,  Afghanistan, Iraq and all the source countries. But it does take time to have  its full impact. But I think it’ll make a big difference.

MURRAY: But Chris, 568 came under the threat that you were going to send  them to another country, to a third country, not even to Malaysia, to a  completely unknown destiny.

BOWEN: Well, some of those came just after the announcement; they  wouldn’t have known about the announcement. Others might have known  and thought, ‘Well, we’ll try our luck’. And as I say, people smugglers will try  everything. They will tell their lies, they will tell people that this doesn’t apply  to them. And it does take time to have an effect.

MURRAY: But they were turning up as late as the day before you signed the  deal.

BOWEN: Sure, we have had arrivals. But those arrivals, as I say, are way  down. There’s two comparisons that might be relevant. If you look at, say,  the same time last year, as I say, about 1000 less. If you look at the same  period after the Howard Government announced Nauru, for example, we had  1700 arrivals. 1700 arrivals in the period that we’ve had between 500 and  600. So I think that saying, ‘Well, look, 500 people arrived so this hasn’t  worked’, I don’t think that’s a fair assumption.

MURRAY: Chris, why are Australian taxpayers picking up all the costs under  this deal? Shouldn’t Malaysia contribute at least to the 4000, to the upkeep of  the 4000 that we’re bringing down here from Malaysia?

BOWEN: Sure, I understand that question. Look, I think a couple of points  there. Firstly, Australia currently takes 13,750 refugees a year. Now, nobody  pays us to do that. We don’t get anything in return. We do it because it’s the  right thing to do. And that’s the largest per capita intake in the world. Now,  we’ve increased that by 1000 a year over four years - so from 13,750 a year  to 14,750 a year - as part of this arrangement. I think that’s a good thing. I  think it’s a good thing that we can take more refugees who’ve been waiting  for a long time for resettlement. But that’s something that we pay for.

But we’re doing it in return with Malaysia working with us to break this people  smugglers’ business model. Now, Malaysia could well have said, ‘Look, we’ve  got 90,000 asylum seekers and refugees here, we’ve got half a million illegal  migrants here, we’ve really got enough problems of our own; we don’t want

to work with you on this’. Malaysia could have said that, but they didn’t. They  said, ‘No, let’s work together on it’. And I think that’s a good thing and with  the arrangement we’ve got, I think it’s a good one for Australia.

And yes, there are costs. But detention is expensive in Australia as it is, as  you know, very expensive. If this makes a big impact on the people  smugglers’ business model and we can reduce the number of people in  Australia in detention, well, the Australian taxpayer obviously will get a  dividend out of that as well.

MURRAY: How was the five-for-one ratio struck, the 800 to 4000? What’s  the rationale there?

BOWEN: Well, look, the rationale, again, is that it is bearing in mind the  90,000 asylum seekers that Malaysia’s dealing with, that Malaysia’s dealing  with a very large problem that we can help with, that sending more people  than 800 to Malaysia is not necessarily necessary if this works. It sends a very  strong message: they’ve got to find 800 volunteers to come. So it’s really part  of that framework and us saying to Malaysia, ‘Look, part of the issue here is  that you’ve got 90,000 asylum seekers. It’s very hard for them to get  resettled, so let’s resettle more of them so that there’s less incentive to get on  a boat. And for those people who do have the money to get on a boat and  pay the people smugglers, well, let’s send the clear message that there’s no

point doing that because you get sent back to Malaysia’.

MURRAY: Chris, you’ve said that there’ll be human rights guarantees for the  800 we send to Malaysia: they’ll be given rights to work, healthcare and  education, unlike those 90,000 you’ve mentioned who are the asylum seekers  who are in Malaysia now. Why weren’t those guarantees explicitly put into the  agreement?

BOWEN: They are. They are. They’re very much there, Paul. There’s a  couple of clauses of the agreement: the agreement says that all people  transferred to Malaysia will be treated with dignity and respect, and in  accordance with human rights standards; the agreement and the operational

guidelines make it clear that they will have work rights, which is an important  thing and means that they’ll have the right to legal work, and that they’ll have  rights to health and education. The education and health rights access that  most asylum seekers currently get in Malaysia, but we’ve codified it and  guaranteed it in the agreement.

I think that’s one of the other good things about this agreement: it’s working  with Malaysia and the United Nations to get those better outcomes. Malaysia  is developing the way it deals with these issues and they’re looking at work  rights across the board for their asylum seekers. But this is an important first  step.

MURRAY: Under the Immigration Act, as I understand it, you’re the legal  guardian for unaccompanied children who arrive on these boats. How can you  argue it’s in their best interests to send them away to Malaysia? Don’t you, in  fact, breach your duty to these children by rejecting them?

BOWEN: Well, look, a couple of points. Firstly, I think we’d be breaching our  national duty if we had blanket exemptions and said, look, children are  exempt, because I know what happens, I know what would happen. As sure  as night follows day, people smugglers would then say, ‘Look, don’t you get  on a boat; put your kids on the boat and we’ll get your kids there and they  can sponsor you in under Australian law’. And the last thing we want is  boatloads full of children taking that risky journey. I never want to get  another phone call like the one I got on 15 December telling me that children  had drowned off Christmas Island, two-month-old babies had drowned off  Christmas Island. More children would drown inevitably, I think, if we didn’t  have a very clear and firm message about that.

At the same time, yes, we have a responsibility to unaccompanied minors.  That responsibility is to take -

MURRAY: You do, you do.

BOWEN: Yes, yes. We as a nation and me as Minister.

MURRAY: No, you, explicitly as the Minister, are their guardian.

BOWEN: Correct, I agree. I do have responsibilities and the important  responsibility is to ensure that their interests are taken into account and we  take a case-by-case approach to each child as to what’s in the best interests

and what’s the best way of dealing with that child.

The other point I’d make is that of the 4000 people we resettle in Australia,  some of those will be children. Some of them will be unaccompanied minors.  There are 18,000 children in Malaysia, asylum seekers. I want to give them a  chance of a better life in Australia. I’m really determined to do that and I

think that’s a good thing.

MURRAY: But you would be prepared to send unaccompanied minors back  to Malaysia?

BOWEN: I just don’t think you could have a blanket exemption and say, you  know, no particular type of person will be sent, because I know how people  smugglers work and they will use that loophole and abuse people. The other  point, Paul, is that we do have people coming to Australia - and this would  happen more, I think - who say, ‘Look, I’m a minor’. Now, my department  looks at them and thinks, ‘I don’t think you are a minor’. But we do get  people saying, ‘Look, I’m under 18’. Now, clearly some people are children.  Clearly, that’s obvious. But in other cases, it’s not obvious. I do think you get  people trying it on, saying, ‘Look, I’m a minor’ when perhaps they’re not.

MURRAY: Yeah, but there’ll be some who are clearly, there’s no argument  about them being minors.

BOWEN: No question, I agree with that. Then we’d take a case-by-case  approach to that. But I do think if you said, ‘Look, we wouldn’t send any  unaccompanied minors’, we would get more people. We already get people  doing this now, saying, ‘Look, I’m under 18’. They have no documentation;  it’s very difficult to establish their age. The science is very difficult in terms of  proving just how old someone is. So I do think you get people saying, ‘I’m  under 18’, and then us having, you know, a very difficult time in just  establishing how old they are and they may be, you know, well up to 25 at  times.

MURRAY: Chris, there’s a double back-down in this deal. You and the Prime  Minister previously said that we wouldn’t repatriate people to non-UN  signatory countries, and you also said about the arrivals who came between  the announcement of this deal and the signing of the deal that they’d go to a  third country. So you backed down on both of those. Don’t you see that these  constant changes by your Government, saying one thing and then doing  another, completely dents your credibility with the public?

BOWEN: Oh, look, on those two issues, firstly, on the UN Convention: what

we’ve got Malaysia to agree to in this arrangement is a fundamental tenet of  the UN Convention on Refugees, which is what’s called non-refoulement - not  returning people to a country from which they are fleeing persecution. And  Malaysia has agreed to that, the first time Malaysia’s ever agreed to that, and  it’s a big step forward in terms of Malaysia’s commitment to that fundamental

tenet of the Refugee Convention. The majority of asylum seekers and  refugees around the world are living in countries that aren’t signatories to the  Refugee Convention. So I don’t think that means that we don’t work with

those countries.

On the 500 people, yes, we’ve had to change our position there. I think it was  an important message to send, to say to people, ‘Look, the Australian  Government’s changed our approach to this. We no longer can guarantee you  being processed or resettled in Australia and you’d be transferred to a third  country’. It was well known at the time it became public that we were in  discussions with Papua New Guinea so that was the appropriate thing to say.  Those discussions have taken longer than we might have thought they would  because Papua New Guinea’s been in a lot of political disarray, and so the  only responsible and appropriate thing to do is say, ‘Yep, okay, we’ve had to  change our position’. And I accept that: we have had to change our position  on that; I don’t deny that.

MURRAY: But by the sounds of that, you’re saying that you knowingly said  that, knowing you were going to do something else?

BOWEN: No, not at all. That was our position at the time; we believed it to  be the case. But the simple reality was it had to be changed when it became  clear that we weren’t going to get an agreement with Papua New Guinea in  the timeframe which we might have expected to.

MURRAY: Okay. Look, I appreciate the time you’ve given us this morning to  flesh out this issue. Just one last question.

BOWEN: Sure.

MURRAY: The Opposition is saying that this deal is tacit acceptance by your  Government that the changes you made to the Howard Government policies  had failed. What’s your response to that?

BOWEN: Well, my response to that is that we’ve said for some time now that  we needed a regional agreement and that’s what we’ve got. If you look at the  previous Government’s approach, they had temporary protection visas; the  number of people arriving in Australia after the introduction of temporary  protection visas actually went up. They had Nauru; the majority of refugees

from Nauru ended up in Australia. And people know that now, people  smugglers and asylum seekers know that. So they would know, ‘Okay, we  come to Australia, we’ll spend a bit of time on Nauru and then we’ll end up in  Australia’. So that’s not a great price to pay.



As opposed to this arrangement, where they get taken back to Malaysia and  they’ve got to wait for resettlement with the other 90,000 asylum seekers in  Malaysia. So I think it sends a much clearer message.

MURRAY: Okay, thanks for talking to us today. I appreciate it. I look forward  to the next occasion.

BOWEN: Sure, good on you, Paul. Nice talking to you.

Ends



