Julie Bishop  Federal Member for Curtin  Deputy Leader of the Federal Opposition  Shadow Minister for Foreign Affairs  Shadow Minister for Trade



MTR 1377, Mornings with Steve Vizard

Monday, 11 July 2011

Subjects: Carbon tax; visit to Papua New Guinea

E&OE…

STEVE VIZARD    A huge day for the Government, but is it a huge opportunity for the  Opposition? Even if the carbon tax stirs community anger now, will the generous tax cuts and  compensation buy off the publics distaste? On the line from Papua New Guinea, interestingly  enough don’t get to say that that often, Deputy Opposition Leader, Shadow Foreign Affairs  Minister Julie Bishop joins me. Good to talk to you Julie.

JULIE BISHOP    Good morning, Steve.

STEVE VIZARD    Where do I find you?

JULIE BISHOP    There is no carbon tax in Papua New Guinea I can assure you.

STEVE VIZARD    [laughs] Where are you today?

JULIE BISHOP    I am in Port Moresby today. I have been meeting with government  ministers and officials to establish relationships with decision makers in PNG.

It is our close neighbour, we have a long shared history, Papua New Guinea is our largest  recipient of development assistance and I feel it is one of our most important relationships.

STEVE VIZARD    I want to ask you about Manus Island, obviously part of the territory up  there, part of the country up there, and playing a critical role arguably in respect of this  Government’s approach to asylum seekers and previously the old Coalition Government’s  view of dealing with the issue. I want to ask you about that in one second, but first let’s start  with the carbon tax. Who is going to be hardest hit?

JULIE BISHOP    The big question for Australians is, why is the Government doing this?  What is the point? Putting a tax on energy and electricity means we are the only country in  the world putting an economy-wide tax on carbon emissions, so every other country has  competitive advantage over Australia; households will be worse off, the Government’s own  modelling shows that prices will go up and up and up year on year so it will lower our  standard of living; marginal tax rates for low to middle income earners will increase, and that  is the first time in about 30 years that income tax rates have gone up; the Government is

actually spending more than the tax raises so it is an over $4 billion hit to the budget bottom  line; and we are going to be buying carbon abatements from overseas, about $3 billion will  go overseas and then it is not going to reduce our emissions, in fact our carbon emissions will  increase.

So I think the question that people are asking themselves today, what on earth is the point of  this huge complex tax? And of course they don’t trust Julia Gillard or Labor to introduce  something of this complexity.

When a government says that “this tax is the Labor way”, well people will immediately think  of the pink batts scandal, the school halls debacle, the live cattle trade crisis, the waste, the  mismanagement, the incompetence of this government.

So I think people will be waking up this morning saying Julia Gillard and Labor can’t be  trusted to implement this tax and we can’t see the point of it anyway.

STEVE VIZARD    Julie Bishop, what do you think the discovery, the announcement that  this is going to no longer going to be budget neutral it is actually going to cost us about $4.3  billion by 2014-15?

In respect of a budget that was only announced a few weeks ago, and in respect of a  commitment by this government to balance the books, what do you think the announcement  of that hit means in terms of the way this process has been undertaken?

JULIE BISHOP    Oh Steve this is just a broken promise. The Government promised it  would be budget neutral and we now find it is going to cost the federal budget an extra $4.3  billion.

It is a $9 billion a year new tax, it means a 10 per cent hike in electricity in the first year  alone, a 9 per cent hike in gas bills in the first year alone, and the tax continues to go up and  up.

Every time Julia Gillard tells the Australian people that groceries won’t rise by that much I  think the Australian people will remember that she promised there would be no carbon tax  under the government she led. So the deceit just continues.

People don’t trust Julia Gillard, she can’t be believed on this and she is trying to create an  impression that no one will be worse off under this massive tax yet her own modelling, which  we must assume is a best case scenario, shows millions of people will be worse off.

STEVE VIZARD    Do you see this as about carbon reduction, carbon dioxide reduction, or  social re-engineering?

JULIE BISHOP    It is social re-engineering dressed up as an environmental policy because  the bottom line is it will not reduce our emissions, in fact our carbon emissions will increase.

But I think Steve the overarching point is, if Julia Gillard really believed that this carbon tax  was good environmental policy and that people would be better off as a result and that it  would be good for our economy, why didn’t she announce it before the election?

At the last election her policy was there would be no carbon tax, and Labor won 72 seats in  the House of Representatives. The Coalition, our policy was there would be no carbon tax  and we won 72 seats. The Greens had a policy of a carbon tax at $23 a tonne, then moving to  an emissions trading scheme and the Greens won 1 seat in the House of Representatives. So  how can it be that 144 Members of Parliament are elected on a platform of no carbon tax yet  Julia Gillard has adopted the election policy of 1 Member of Parliament after campaigning on  no carbon tax? And I think people will find that quite disturbing.

And that is why this complex tax should not be considered until after the next election.  People must have a vote on this before it is introduced as law.

STEVE VIZARD    Julie Bishop, there are seeming anomalies as there are in any legislation,  proposed legislation. For example, a single income family with two children aged under 5  earning $80,0000 will be worse off, at $100,0000 they will be $3.25 a week behind. Do you  regard these people as “rich families”?

JULIE BISHOP    Absolutely not. These are people who are already struggling to make  ends meet. And that is not the only anomaly. We have been going through the detail as it has  been coming out from the Government and there is example after example of people who you  would not put in the “rich” category, you would not put in the “well off” category, who are  going to be worse off under this Government’s tax. And that is the concerning part let alone  business and industry who are already warning about the impact on jobs. And Steve, no  compensation can make up for people losing their jobs, no amount of compensation can  compensate for the loss of jobs.

STEVE VIZARD    One of the things that most people are having difficulty understanding is  the idea that local manufacturers, suppliers, people who are trying to create enterprise  business here will be subject to a carbon tax but the coal that is transferred offshore, used for  example to manufacture in China, will be exempt from that taxation and arguably the whole  exercise will be carbon neutral, it will be exactly the same as it is today, but the difference is  that potentially Australians could lose jobs.

JULIE BISHOP    Well first of all it won’t be carbon neutral; in fact our emissions will  continue to increase. In order for it to be carbon neutral we have to buy abatements from  overseas, so $3 billion of Australia’s taxpayers’ money will go overseas.

But secondly, industry and business are already warning about the impact of this tax. For  example, food manufacturers in Australia will find their prices go up so the cost of food in  Australia will go up but imported food will now be much more competitive.

In mining it will be much cheaper to mine and produce minerals are resources offshore than it  will be in Australia because no other country has an economy-wide emissions trading scheme  or carbon tax.

So what we are doing is making Australian industry, businesses, manufacturing, production  more expensive and less competitive.

STEVE VIZARD    And yet this will be implemented. Will you be able to unpick this? Once  people have received the benefit of compensation, of tax cuts, it is in their pocket, things are

basically an accomplishment, how do you believe you will be able to unpick this, make this a  fresh issue as you come up to an election?

JULIE BISHOP    Well Steve that is why the tax should not be introduced until after the  next election and that is why we will continue to campaign on this issue that people must be  allowed to have their say on this tax before it is introduced as law.

Julia Gillard says she is out campaigning over the next few weeks across the country to get  the support of the Australian people yet she is refusing to have an election at the end of it.

Now this tax is going to send jobs offshore, increase the cost of living here and do nothing to  reduce global greenhouse gas emissions. So, put simply, what is the point of this?

STEVE VIZARD    Julie Bishop you are in Papua New Guinea at the moment, presumably  on your way to visit, amongst other places, Manus Island. Will you be asking the  Government about the prospect of Manus Island being reused, reopened as part of housing  asylum seekers much as it was under the Howard Government’s Pacific solution?

JULIE BISHOP    I have already met with the Foreign Minister Ano Pala here and spoken to  him about this very issue, and it is a matter for consideration by the Papua New Guinean  Government now.

But the Australian Government seems to still be focussed on its Malaysian 5-1 asylum seeker  swap. Even though that was announced some weeks, at least 9 or 10 weeks ago now, the  Government still maintains that it is negotiating the Malaysian swap deal.

I suspect it may go the same way as the East Timor detention centre that is where Julia  Gillard announced it without properly advising the East Timorese Government. Said for  months and months she was negotiating a detention centre on East Timor even though the  East Timorese said they were not negotiating and then it suddenly disappeared.

I suspect this might be the case in respect of PNG.

STEVE VIZARD    Julie Bishop, always good to talk to you. Don’t forget to take you  Malaria tablets.

JULIE BISHOP    No, I’ve been doing that! But it is a delightful country, I have met a lot of  local people and business and community workers and I am getting a much better  understanding of the Australia-Papua New Guinea relationship. It’s really been a very  worthwhile visit.

STEVE VIZARD    It is a very deep and long term relationship that one going back to  protectorate days. So enjoy your stay and I hope you come back with information that will be  useful in the future.

JULIE BISHOP    That’s the plan. Thanks Steve.

STEVE VIZARD    That’s Shadow Foreign Affairs Minister and Deputy Opposition Leader  Julie Bishop.

