CHRIS BOWEN MP

MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP  *TRANSCRIPT*

INTERVIEW WITH CLAIRE BOLDERSON, BBC NEWSHOUR

Monday, 25 July 2011



SUBJECTS: Malaysia transfer arrangement.

CLAIRE BOLDERSON: Australia’s Immigration Minister, Chris Bowen, signed  the agreement in Kuala Lumpur, from where he told me Australia’s reasons  for making the deal.



CHRIS BOWEN: We’re doing it for two reasons: one is to pull the rug out of  the people smugglers business model. People smugglers are telling people if  they get on a boat and make the very dangerous journey from Malaysia and  Indonesia to Australia that they can get guaranteed processing and  resettlement in Australia. That’s no longer the case, people will be returned to  Malaysia.

Secondly, Australia can take more refugees, we want to take more refugees.  We’ll take 4,000 more refugees over the next four years. They’ll be people  who’ve been through the UNHCR mandating process and referred to us for  resettlement by the UNHCR.

BOLDERSON: But you’re only returning 800 people, that only deters people  initially. Are you going to go on returning people to Malaysia?

BOWEN: Australia and Malaysia have both said we’ll see how this goes and if  it works, we’ll look at extending it, and we’re happy to have discussions with  other countries who have expressed interest in this arrangement and are  watching its implementation, under our regional protection framework that  was negotiated and concluded by Ministers in Bali back in March.

BOLDERSON: So it could see a lot more people going back to Malaysia, a lot  more refugees who’ve already been processed going to Australia?

BOWEN: We’ve just entered into this arrangement, it’s a good arrangement,  we should let it work. I’m not pre-empting any other extensions with Malaysia  or any other arrangements with other countries, simply to say that we need  to see how this is implemented and we’ll monitor progress after that.

BOLDERSON: There is evidence though, from human rights groups, that  Malaysia does not treat asylum seekers and refugees very well at all, that  they’re possibly some of them are tortured, beaten in detention. Its wrong

isn’t it, to send people to a country where there are very strong allegations -  strong evidence of that sort of treatment?

BOWEN: No, because you’d need to look at the arrangements in place under  this arrangement that we’ve entered into. The agreement is very specific,  people transferred from Australia to Malaysia will be treated with dignity and  respect, in accordance with human rights standards. They will have the lawful  right to remain in Malaysia, it’s very explicit that they won’t be placed into  long-term detention, that they’ll have access to work rights, access to health  and education.

So it’s a big step forward for more consistent processing and protection for  asylum seekers in Malaysia. They’re working closely with the United Nations  High Commissioner for Refugees on the arrangements and their feedback has  very much shaped those protection clauses.

BOLDERSON: How will you check on that, because Malaysia’s also sent  people back to their country of origin in the past?

BOWEN: Well, there’s a very clear commitment again, to respect the  principle of non-refoulement, which is the basic tenant of the Refugee  Convention, and we’ll have a monitoring taskforce and implementation  taskforce, consisting of representatives of Malaysia, Australia, the UNHCR and  the IOM, and we’ll have an advisory group with non-government  representatives on it as well.

BOLDERSON: It sounds to me then, going back to this point you made  about deterring the people smugglers, that this might not deter people,  because you’ve got a chance, if you get to Australia safely, of being returned  to Malaysia and having a life there that’s an awful lot better than the  undocumented asylum seekers of which there are tens of thousands in  Malaysia. You’re actually going to be guaranteed a lot of rights.

BOWEN: Well people come to Australia, not for any other reason but to be  resettled in Australia. I think it’s a big call for a people smuggler to charge  somebody $20,000 to get to Australia, to take that risky journey, when they

know that they’re going to go back to where they started that journey: 80 to  90 per cent of the people who come to Australia by boats start that boat  journey in Malaysia. If you know that you’re going to take the dangerous boat  journey to Indonesia and then on to Australia, simply to be taken back to  where you started, I really don’t think the equation makes sense.

ENDS



