CHRIS BOWEN MP

MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP  *TRANSCRIPT*

INTERVIEW WITH MARIUS BENSON, ABC NEWSRADIO

THURSDAY, 24 NOVEMBER 2011



SUBJECTS: Asylum seeker boat arrivals, Malaysia Arrangement, Nauru.

MARIUS BENSON: Chris Bowen, one thing you agreed with the Opposition was  that when offshore detention was ended, the prospect thereof was ended, there  would be an influx of arrivals and you have both been proven right.

CHRIS BOWEN: Well, this is exactly what we warned would happen, Marius,  when the Opposition indicated they would oppose our legislation. The Prime  Minister and I said we could expect more boat arrivals and that is exactly what  we’re seeing. It stands to reason.

Now, I think it’s interesting, Marius; we had in June the lowest month for boat  arrivals in years, which was 183. June, of course, was immediately after we  announced the Malaysia arrangement. I made the point at the time that the very  announcement of the Malaysia arrangement had a significant impact.

Now, in the month after it was announced that the Government, that Australia  would not have offshore processing, we’ve seen 680 arrivals by boat this month.  That just indicates the sorts of effects that this decision by the Opposition to  oppose offshore processing, to oppose the regional framework and to oppose the  Government having the ability to implement its policy has.

BENSON: So what’s your plan now?

BOWEN: Well, Marius, we’ll continue to make the point that we have an  arrangement in place that could be implemented this afternoon if Tony Abbott  would just vote for what he says he believes in. He says he believes in offshore  processing. We could have that vote. All he’s got to do is pick up the phone to  the Prime Minister and say, ‘We believe the Government of the day should be  able to implement its policies, we want you to be able to implement yours and if  we’re ever in government we want to be able to implement ours so we’ll vote for  your legislation.’

BENSON: But apart from having a shot at the Opposition, is there anything you

can do to change the situation where you have about 700 arrivals a month?

BOWEN: Well, Marius, we need to work in the constraints of the law. Now, after  the High Court decision, the High Court decision’s practical effect was that any  offshore processing would be unlawful, highly difficult and subject to successful  legal challenge. That’s the case for us, it’s the case for the Opposition if they  were ever to form office.

BENSON: So there is no Plan B? There’s no regional initiative, there’s no action  you have planned to try and restrict the number of boats arriving?

BOWEN: Well, look, we continue to work with countries in the region. We’ve still  got the Bali Framework, we still have a range of initiatives. We work with  Indonesia very closely, for example, on identifying ventures and working with  them to do what we can to stop those ventures. We continue to work with  countries like Malaysia on biometric testing, etcetera.

However, Marius, the key to this is, in our view, to increase the refugee intake so  people have an alternative pathway into Australia, and Australia can and should  settle more refugees, and that was our policy under Malaysia and it was what I’d  indicated, I’d like to see the refugee intake increase. But also, that we need to  be able to say to people, ‘If you come to Australia by boat, if you’re going to take  that dangerous journey, then we need to have a situation in place where you do  not get an incentive to do so’.

BENSON: You’re not in favour of the Opposition’s suggestion that offshore  detention be restored with Nauru as the destination; you say that won’t work.  But by your own logic, isn’t that better than the existing situation, isn’t that a  less worse option than having simply onshore detention, by your own logic?

BOWEN: No, no, Marius, it’s not and let me make a couple of points. Firstly,  we’re not going to implement a policy which we don’t believe would work and  would come at considerable cost, at least a billion dollars in operational  expenses.

BENSON: Is the prospect now that this high level of arrivals will continue?

BOWEN: Well, I think that, you know, in the absence of a breakthrough which  would see our regional framework implemented, it’s difficult to see the situation  changing. I don’t comment on intelligence or speculation, and of course numbers

go up and down, but the points that the Prime Minister and I made at the time  that we would see increased boat arrivals remains valid.

BENSON: So in summary, while the political deadlock on this issue continues  between you and the Opposition, boat arrivals will be a problem without a

solution?

BOWEN: Well, as I say, Marius, we negotiated in a painstaking fashion over a  period of several months with Malaysia, with the United Nations High  Commissioner for Refugees, in a way which met our obligations under the  Refugee Convention to have an innovative arrangement which provided that  disincentive to make the boat journeys to Australia.

Now, if Mr Abbott won’t act in the national interest when he’s the Leader of the  Opposition, when he won’t act on the expert advice from our national security  advisers when he’s the Leader of the Opposition, what hope, what indication do  we have that he would act in the national interest if he were ever Prime Minister  of this country? This is just his addiction to saying ‘no’; no to any sensible  Government policy because he’s made a political calculation that it’s in his best  interest. That is completely irresponsible.

BENSON: Chris Bowen, thanks very much.

BOWEN: Nice talking to you, Marius.

Ends



