UNCLASSIFIED



THE HON. JASON CLARE MP

MINISTER FOR HOME AFFAIRS

MINISTER FOR JUSTICE



Transcript

Interview with Kieran Gilbert, Sky    7:33 AM  Friday, 23 December 2011



Topics: Asylum seeker meeting.

KIERAN GILBERT:       Sydney’s CBD Studio as the Minister for Home Affairs,  Jason Clare.  Minister thank you very much for your time.

You’ve heard what the Opposition Leader has to say.

Even before the talks are held, the prospects of a  compromise don’t look good.

JASON CLARE:             Well I think the people of Australia are demanding that we  compromise. They’ve had a gutful of the politics, they’re sick  of all of this.

Most people that I speak to say that the Government

believes in Malaysia, the Opposition supports Nauru, why  don’t we just do both and we’ve made a very big  compromise overnight.  We need the Opposition to do the  same and we can reach an agreement potentially today.

KIERAN GILBERT:       The Government said yesterday all options were on the  table Minister, only to then rule out temporary protection  visas in this compromised proposal.  Hasn’t the Acting Prime  Minister contradicted himself within just a couple of hours?

JASON CLARE:             Well we offered to sit down and talk about all options.  The  Leader of the Opposition wanted a written proposal so we’ve  provided one.

It’s our view that temporary protection visas do more

harm than they do good.  We’ve seen 200 people die over  the weekend.  It’s the second largest tragedy at sea in the  last decade.

Ten years ago Kieran, you’ll remember SIEV X where

350 people died.  That included 140 odd women and 140  children.

Now they were women and children that were coming to

Australia because their husband or their father was on a  temporary protection visa and the only way to get here was  by boat because they couldn’t get family reunion.

So, we are concerned that a temporary protection visa

will do more harm than good.  It actually could encourage  people to get on a boat because it’s the only way to get to  Australia to be reunited with your father or with your  husband.

But the core element of this agreement Kieran is the

Government is committed to Malaysia.  We think that’s what  will stop people from getting on a boat because they’ll end  up in Malaysia rather than Australia.

We understand that the Opposition are committed to

Nauru.  We’re not sure that it will work, but we’ve seen 200  people die over the weekend. There’s a risk that more  people will die and the common sense compromise here is  to do both, get it done.

If we can make an agreement today, we can reduce the

risk of more people coming by boat over the next few weeks  and more people potentially.

KIERAN GILBERT:       Is the Government’s position on the TPVs though is that  open - is it open to compromise, is that on the table?

JASON CLARE:             Well, look I’m hopeful that people of goodwill, good people  that will be around the table today - and I include in that  Scott Morrison sitting together with Chris Bowen - can talk  through all of these issues and come to an agreement and  shake hands.

I’ve got to tell you Kieran that my department is telling me

that there’s a potential for more boats and the potential for  several hundred more people to try and make a journey to  Australia between now and New Year’s Eve.

If we can get Tony Abbott to say yes and if we can agree

on a compromise, then it will take effect immediately.

Now that means that anyone that comes to Australia by

boat from the time that the two major parties shake hands  and agree, will end up in Malaysia or Manus Island or Nauru.

Now that sends a very strong message to the people

smugglers and the people that are thinking about getting on  a boat right now that you won’t end up in Australia, so don’t  take that risk. Don’t take the risk of getting on a boat right  now, particularly with the bad weather conditions that are  forecast over the next few days.

KIERAN GILBERT:       So what is your - but what is your department telling you  about the number of boats? How many boats or how many  people?

JASON CLARE:             What they’re telling me is a number of boats over the -  between now and New Year’s Eve - there’s the potential for  a number of boats and several hundred people to be on  those boats.

Now if we can put down our swords, if we can get rid of

the politics and compromise and, you know, the essence of  this compromise, the common sense solution is if we support  Malaysia and the Opposition support Nauru - do both.

If we can say yes today and reach an agreement, then it

will take effect immediately.

That will mean that anyone that’s thinking about getting

on a boat now will have second thoughts about paying ten  thousand dollars to a people smuggler because they’ll end  up in Malaysia or Nauru or Manus Island.

It will reduce the risk of people getting on a boat and

potentially dying at sea.

KIERAN GILBERT:       Indonesian authorities who’ve arrested eight, including four  soldiers Minister, that would be a major concern would it not  if soldiers were involved and I suppose it would explain in  part the relative impunity many of these syndicates have  been operating with in recent times?

JASON CLARE:             Well if it’s true it is a concern and Indonesian National  Police are conducting an investigation into that and  Australian Federal Police are assisting with that  investigation.

It would be premature for me to comment anymore, we’ve

got to let that investigation take its course.

More generally though Kieran if we’re going to solve this

problem, the way to solve it is with offshore processing.

You’ll solve it by removing the incentive to even pay any

money to a people smuggler to get on a boat and as I said  earlier - we think that the best option, the one that will work  is Malaysia. But I accept that Scott and Tony Abbott believe  that Nauru is the best option to do that.

When I talk to people in the street, I suspect people at

airports and people that are watching this program now, are  saying if the Government believes Malaysia is the best  option and the Opposition believe that Nauru is the best  option - then the common sense compromise here is just do  both.

KIERAN GILBERT:       Minister for Home Affairs, Jason Clare, appreciate your time.

JASON CLARE:             Thanks Kieran.





- ENDS -



