CHRIS BOWEN MP

MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP  *TRANSCRIPT*

INTERVIEW WITH LYNDAL CURTIS, ABC 24

WEDNESDAY, 7 SEPTEMBER 2011

SUBJECTS: High Court decision, asylum seeker processing,  Opposition briefing, Cory Bernardi.

LYNDAL CURTIS: Chris Bowen, welcome to ABC News 24.

CHRIS BOWEN: Thanks, Lyndal.

CURTIS: Tony Abbott’s receiving a briefing today from your officials.  Presumably they’re going to tell him the same things they’re telling you?

BOWEN: Well, we thought it was important that Tony Abbott had the expert  advice that we received. We thought, given the circumstances of this  significant change in the law last week by the High Court - which means both  the Government and the Opposition need to reflect - that it was the fair and  reasonable thing to do to make that advice available to him. That advice is  that we need a regional framework, that we need to provide a disincentive for  people to come to Australia by boat and that the sorts of arrangements we’ve  put in place under the regional framework are the most effective. But it’s  appropriate that he get that advice directly from the experts.

CURTIS: Is he going to be told or have you been told, as was in a leaked  email from your Immigration Department Secretary Metcalfe that the part of  the Pacific Solution that worked was towing the boats back or the threat to do  that, and that is no longer an option because Indonesia won’t cooperate?

BOWEN: Yes, certainly the advice to us is that the most effective deterrent is  to return people to where they began the boat journey and tell them that  they do not receive any preferential treatment in terms of resettlement in  Australia. As opposed to Nauru, where people do end up in Australia if they’re  regarded as genuine refugees; ninety-five per cent of people regarded as  genuine refugees ended up in Australia or New Zealand under the Howard  Government Pacific model. That’s not a disincentive.

But the Malaysia arrangement, whereby we take more genuine refugees  who’ve been processed, but people who come to Australia by boat are  returned to Malaysia to be processed in line with everybody else awaiting  resettlement under the UNHCR, is a more effective deterrent.

CURTIS: Are there options to return people to Indonesia, because many  boats leave from Indonesia, don’t they?



BOWEN: Well, look, this is what the Howard Government tried to do, as you  referred to, with turning the boats back. Now, Indonesia’s made it clear as  late as yesterday that they would regard turning boats back on the high seas  as not only dangerous but counterproductive to good relations with them, and  that it may affect the cooperation between Indonesia and Australia on border  protection matters.

So this is the great hypocrisy of the Opposition: their policy is to turn the  boats back; it would be counterproductive and dangerous. But the Malaysian  arrangement is, if you like, achieving the same outcome: returning people to  where they began the boat journey, but doing so in a much more orderly  fashion and with the protections built in.

CURTIS: You’ve also been exploring your option of reopening the processing  centre on Manus Island in Papua New Guinea. Doesn’t that have the same  lack of deterrent effect that Nauru has, for the same reasons?

BOWEN: Well, I agree that offshore processing in and of itself, if it wasn’t  complementary to the Malaysia arrangement, would be of very, very limited  value. Yes, I do accept the premise of your question, Lyndal. I have  consistently said that Manus Island would only work effectively as a  complement to the Malaysian arrangement. Standing alone by itself as an  offshore processing centre would simply be another Christmas Island that  happened to be in a different country.

Now, Mr Abbott said two days ago he was prepared to work constructively  with the Government to look at legislative change. He said as far as he was  concerned, all things were on the table, he wasn’t going to rule things in or  out. Now, he appears to have walked back from that today. I hope he sticks  to his original position and says that he’s prepared to work with the  Government constructively with all options on the table. We’ve said that we’d  go back and reflect on our policies in light of the High Court decision; I hope  that Mr Abbott’s doing that too and that’s why we’ve made the expert briefing  available to him to assist him to do that.

CURTIS: If Mr Abbott does want to limit legislative changes to only apply to  Manus Island and Nauru, can you accept those changes? Under those  changes, is it possible to make country-specific changes to the Migration Act?

BOWEN: Well, look, I’m not going to get into hypotheticals about the  legislative change that we might propose or Mr Abbott might accept. But I will  say this: our position has been consistent that offshore processing can be an  important part of the regional framework, combined with other measures.

But simply reopening Nauru and Manus, just by themselves, with the majority  of people regarded as refugees ending up in Australia, is not an effective  deterrent and it would not work just standing alone.

CURTIS: Do you accept, though, that you do need the Opposition to pass  any legislative change, that the Greens wouldn’t pass it in the Senate so you’d  need the Opposition to back it, and you might be left with no option but to  accept limited cooperation from the Coalition?



BOWEN: Well, I certainly accept the numbers in the Parliament and that  means that the situation is that the legislation would have a much, much  better chance of passing if it’s supported by the Government and the  Opposition; yes, I agree with you on that, Lyndal. But I am not going to get  into the minutia of the hypotheticals of negotiation, other than to say we will  obviously be making announcements about our approach. The Opposition  have said that they’re prepared to work constructively with us and I think Mr  Abbott should stick to that.

CURTIS: Have you actually devised, though, if it is possible to change the  legislation to allow, if you wanted, the option of offshore processing for  unaccompanied minors?



BOWEN: Well, obviously, the High Court judgement had a big impact on  unaccompanied minors: it effectively made the transfer of unaccompanied  minors to anywhere unworkable, and that’s something that Mr Abbott should  really have a close look at, because he appears to be ignoring that. The High

Court judgement was that an unaccompanied minor could only be transferred  after certain procedures, with judicial review, which would make the transfer  of unaccompanied minors to Nauru or anywhere else effectively impossible.

Obviously, the same goes with all the other legislative changes. We’d consider  that and we are considering that in light of the High Court judgement. But  really, Mr Abbott, who seems to be saying or is saying that there’s no impact  of the High Court judgement on Nauru, is just wrong. There are five Queen’s  Counsel or Senior Counsel who have said it has a big impact. And in addition  to that, it’s very clear and inarguable that the transfer of unaccompanied  minors would be unworkable to anywhere under the High Court judgement  without legislative change.

CURTIS: And have you got advice that that legislative change is possible to  allow that option of offshore processing for unaccompanied minors?

BOWEN: Well, I’m not going to go through the advice that we’ve received,  Lyndal, and continue to receive, other than to say of course we’re examining  all options and getting expert legal advice on it.

CURTIS: The Left of your party and the Greens want onshore processing. Is  it your advice that onshore processing only would trigger a flood of arrivals  that could possibly overwhelm the current detention system, that that could  lead to community detention and that may lead to civil unrest?

BOWEN: Well, it’s my advice and my position that offshore processing as  part of a regional framework, together with the other initiatives and Australia

taking more of a role in resettling refugees from our region, is a proper  disincentive to people getting on boats. And it follows if you didn’t have those  proper regional arrangements in place, there’d be less disincentive to get on  boats and more people making that dangerous boat journey to Australia.  That’s the case.

In terms of, you know, extrapolating that out and making predictions, well, I’ll  leave that to others at this point. I’d simply make the point that we’ve been  working very hard to get offshore processing as part of a holistic response, a  proper, considered response, not just as a bilateral measure with other  governments or a unilateral measure by Australia, but as part of a regional  framework. That’s what I’ve spent 12 months working on and that’s why we  think it’s important to have offshore processing as part of that regional,  holistic framework.

CURTIS: But it is possible, isn’t it, or is it a possibility that onshore  processing only could easily overwhelm the current detention centres and that  could lead to community problems?

BOWEN: Well, Lyndal, I agree that offshore processing as part of the  regional framework can be a proper disincentive and therefore that it does  provide that disincentive to get on boats, and if you don’t have that you will  encourage more people to get on boats.

We have seen a significant reduction in our detention population over the last  few months. We had about 6000 people in detention centres and facilities;  that’s now down to around 4000 people. That’s a significant improvement as  a result of some of the changes we’ve made, but also because of the  reduction in the number of boats arriving in Australia in recent months partly  as a result of the announcement of the Malaysia agreement.

CURTIS: Julia Gillard is at South Pacific Forum in New Zealand. She’s  meeting leaders of South Pacific countries, including the leader of Papua New  Guinea. She says she’s not going to raise the question of the options for  asylum seekers. Why should that be the case? Why shouldn’t she, if she’s

face to face with the leaders, just have a little discussion, say what’s going on  in Australia and what options you’re exploring?

BOWEN: Well, Lyndal, the situation at the moment is that offshore  processing is effectively unlawful in the view of the High Court in many, many  cases, and our legal advice is that offshore processing on PNG and Nauru, the  two countries most commonly mentioned, would be highly vulnerable to  challenge. So how could the Prime Minister explore those matters with those  leaders with that legal situation in Australia?

CURTIS: With legislation that’s likely to change though isn’t it?

BOWEN: But we have a Memorandum of Understanding with Papua New  Guinea, Lyndal; we’ve signed an agreement with Papua New Guinea to open

a detention centre on Manus Island. But we’ve had to put that on hold as we  deal with the legal implications of the High Court judgement. Now, of course  we’ve communicated that to Papua New Guinea; they understand the  situation.

While that’s being progressed here in Australia, it would be of no benefit to  have further discussions because unless and until the Act is amended and the  situation in Australia is clarified, there could be no offshore processing in  Papua New Guinea.

CURTIS: When are you likely to have a decision on what you’re going to do  for asylum seekers, because presumably in the interim there may be people  in the wake of the High Court decision considering getting on boats to come  to Australia?

BOWEN: Well, we’re dealing with it expeditiously, as you would expect, but  we’re also dealing with it carefully. I mean, this is a big change from the High  Court last week and this has been a policy area that’s bedevilled governments  for 20 years, so we want to make sure we get it right. We’re not going to  knee-jerk a reaction. Yes, it’s appropriate that we do it quickly, but it’s also  appropriate that we take a little bit of time to make sure we get it right and

that’s what we’ll be doing.

CURTIS: The Acting Prime Minister, Wayne Swan, has called for Liberal  Senator Cory Bernardi to be sacked from his frontbench duties for apparently  helping a controversial Dutch politician visit Australia. Senator Bernardi has  been quoted today as clarifying [inaudible], saying neither he nor the

Coalition is organising any visit by Geert Wilders. Isn’t that enough?

BOWEN: Well, the trouble is that Cory Bernardi’s a serial offender when it  comes to inappropriate commentary on multiculturalism, on matters of  religion. If Mr Bernardi says he’s clarified, well, that’s a matter for Mr  Bernardi. But it’s been widely reported that he’s been involved in bringing out  this individual to Australia, and frankly, it fits with his form and his behaviour.  He makes inappropriate comments about other people’s religions and it’s, I  think, high time that Mr Abbott dealt with him.

CURTIS: If Mr Wilders did want to come to Australia, would you grant him a  visa?

BOWEN: Well, look, I’m not aware that he’s applied for a visa, and we have  a process in place for people with issues of character who’ve had criminal  convictions against them: they get considered, it’s elevated to me as minister  in appropriate circumstances; that’s not occurred in this case yet. As I say,  I’m not even aware that he’s applied for a visa.

If he has, then it would go through the processes and would be brought to  my attention at an appropriate time, and I as minister would weigh up the  countervailing arguments, the seriousness of the offences that he’s conducted

and the matters that go to his character. And really, I couldn’t judge an  individual case without looking at all the elements. It’s something which  happens regularly, ministers making decisions on visa applications where  there have been character concerns raised. I don’t comment on the individual  cases and I wouldn’t comment on his. There’d be a process to go through.

CURTIS: Given that the Labor Party has been under pressure for some time  over allegations being faced by one of your MPs, Craig Thomson, is it a little  hypocritical to call for the sacking of a Liberal Senator when it’s not entirely  clear on what he is and isn’t doing in relation to this Dutch politician?

BOWEN: Well, Mr Bernardi is a member of the Liberal Party frontbench. Last  time I looked, I think he was Tony Abbott’s Parliamentary Secretary, his right-hand man. Craig Thomson is a backbench Member of the Parliament. He was  a chair of a parliamentary committee; he has resigned from that position. Mr

Thomson hasn’t been charged with anything. There’s been no charges  brought against him, whereas Mr Bernardi is a serial offender when it comes  to matters of inappropriate commentary on other people’s religion and he is  Tony Abbott’s right-hand man. I don’t think anybody’s calling for Mr Bernardi  necessarily to leave the Parliament, but clearly his frontbench position and his  position as a key adviser to Tony Abbott really needs to be brought into  question.

CURTIS: Chris Bowen, thank you very much for your time.

BOWEN: Thanks, Lyndal.

Ends



