Senator Kate Lundy  Parliamentary Secretary to the Prime Minister  Parliamentary Secretary for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs



More than $4 Million to Enhance Queensland  Settlement Services  Thursday, 16 June 2011

Joint Media Release with Senator Kate Lundy -  Parliamentary Secretary for Immigration  and Multicultural Affairs and Chris Bowen MP - Minister for  Immigration and Citizenship

The Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Chris Bowen MP, and  Parliamentary Secretary for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs,  Senator Kate Lundy, today announced that $4.88 million would be allocated to  Queensland agencies under the Settlement Grants Program (SGP) to help refugees  and migrants settle into their new communities.

As part of the grants program funding allocated to Queensland this coming financial  year, the Government will provide $35 428 to Refugee and Immigration  Legal Service (RAILS) in Brisbane to provide school-age migrants and refugees with  information about the Australian legal system and their rights and responsibilities.

'One of the issues we face in settling refugee and migrant youth in this country is  making sure these young people understand their rights and responsibilities under  Australia's legal system,' Mr Bowen said.

'It is important to provide young new arrivals with appropriate information about  family relationships, police, traffic, drugs, discrimination, harassment and conflict  resolution, and where they can find assistance if they need it.'

The legal education program at RAILS will assist migrant youth to navigate the  Australian legal system and to access assistance when necessary.

In the 2011-12 financial year, the settlement grants program will provide $3.2 million  to fund 27 new projects that will help new arrivals settle in Queensland. Funding is  also provided for a number of successful projects continued from previous years.

Senator Lundy said the successful applicant organisations included migrant resource  centres, multicultural service agencies and community and welfare organisations.

'I commend all organisations for their contribution to the successful settlement of  migrants and refugees in Queensland,' Senator Lundy said.

'The many projects supported by the settlement grants program will help migrants  and refugees to settle successfully into their new communities, promoting social  participation and assisting in their cultural transition into Australia.'

A complete list of successful applicants in the 2011-12 funding round is available on  the Department of Immigration website.  See: Settlement Grants Program





