CHRIS BOWEN MP

MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP  *TRANSCRIPT*

INTERVIEW WITH Naomi Woodley, ABC AM

Friday, 12 August 2011



SUBJECTS: Papua New Guinea, Malaysia transfer arrangement,  Comcare report.

HOST: Chris Bowen is speaking here to Naomi Woodley.

CHRIS BOWEN: Well look, I think the arrangements with Papua New Guinea  complement the arrangement with Malaysia. It means if you are thinking of  making a boat journey to Australia, then there is - it’s very clear to you that you  may be sent to Malaysia or Papua New Guinea, but you are not going to be  processed in Australia.

NAOMI WOODLEY: Who will be assessing the claims? Will it be Australian  officials?

BOWEN: Oh look, there’s a range of details that are being discussed between  Papua New Guinea and Australian officials, and we’d make more statements  about those in the not too distant future.



WOODLEY: But they also say that Australia will pay for the centre and be  responsible for its operation. Would you like the UNHCR or the International  Organisation for Migration to be involved?



BOWEN: No, we certainly don’t envisage UNHCR involvement. We would talk to  the UNHCR, I have spoken to the UNHCR and I will continue to talk with them  about the concept. We would envisage that the centre would be appropriately  administered and that Australia would play a role in that.

WOODLEY: Both countries are signatories to the UN Refugee Convention,  doesn’t that mean that you have an obligation to resettle those found to be  refugees, and if so, what’s the deterrent there?

BOWEN: If you have only offshore processing as part of your regime then that’s  not a deterrent, because the majority of people who are found to be refugees  who are processed on Nauru, for example, ended up in Australia. It doesn’t

break the people smugglers business model.

If you have offshore processing as a complement to other initiatives, such as the  Arrangement with Malaysia, then that can be part of the deterrent. We are not  saying that Manus Island in and of itself of course, is the answer to our  problems, otherwise we would’ve done it by itself. But we’ve done it as a  complement to other arrangements.

WOODLEY: How much detail still needs to be worked out?

BOWEN: There will be several weeks, at least, before the centre is beginning to  be operationalised because there is work to do. It is a centre that has been used  before but it hasn’t been used for some time; there’s upgrading work to do and  measures to take to make sure it’s of an appropriate standard.

WOODLEY: You mentioned the Malaysia Solution, but with another boat arriving  at Christmas Island you are just over 200 people into the Malaysia deal quota, so  doesn’t that show that this doesn’t appear to be acting as a deterrent to people  smugglers yet?

BOWEN: Quite the contrary. I think when you look at the reduction in the  number of people who’ve arrived in Australia, compared to the same time last  year, we’ve had a thousand less arrivals. People smugglers will try it on and I’ve  got no doubt people smugglers are trying it on and spinning all sorts of lies  about the current situation with the Malaysia court case, et cetera.

WOODLEY: Lateline has obtained a report from Comcare into immigration  detention centres and found your department is in breach of its duties under the  Occupational Health and Safety Act in terms of a number of things: risk-management, staffing ratios, staff training. Have these concerns been addressed  since that report was finalised?

BOWEN: There are some things in that report which we accept and we would  have remedied or are in the process of remedying. There are other things in that  report which we respectfully disagree with and we don’t believe are an accurate  reflection. But of course, Comcare is an important organisation, we take their  report seriously.

HOST: The Immigration Minister Chris Bowen speaking to Naomi Woodley.

ENDS





