CHRIS BOWEN MP

MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP  *TRANSCRIPT*

INTERVIEW WITH MARIUS BENSON, ABC NEWSRADIO

THURSDAY, 20 OCTOBER 2011



SUBJECTS: Coalition’s turning back boats policy, boat arrivals, offshore  processing, onshore processing, Commonwealth Ombudsman.

MARIUS BENSON: Chris Bowen, you have been warning against the  Opposition’s policy of turning boats around. Now the admiral in charge of the  Australian Navy, Ray Griggs, is warning of the dangers involved. You’d obviously  be pleased to hear that warning from the admiral?

CHRIS BOWEN: Well, Marius, this is just the latest in a long line of respected  public officials who’ve pointed out the dangerous nature of the Opposition’s  policy, its unworkable nature. And the Liberal Party just has its head in the sand,  refusing to acknowledge the reality. This is a policy that would put the lives of  asylum seekers at risk, the lives of Australian Defence Force personnel at risk,  and despite all the evidence the Liberal Party just refuses to acknowledge the  reality.

Now, Tony Abbott should come out today and admit they’ve got it wrong, admit  that the respected officials are right and for once face reality that one of his  policies is unworkable.

BENSON: Mr Bowen, another boat arrived off the coast of Western Australia  yesterday carrying 51 asylum seekers. That’s the first since the Malaysia deal  was scrapped. Is this the beginning of a new wave of arrivals post-Malaysia, in  your view?

BOWEN: Look, we’ve consistently said that you could expect more boats to  arrive because Parliament has failed to reach agreement on offshore processing,  and that is very unfortunate. We had a massive opportunity here to actually, for  the first time, have a proper regional agreement to deal with people smuggling  to provide a deterrent for people to get on the boat.

Now, the Liberal Party has missed that opportunity because of political  opportunism. Now, it’s still open to Mr Abbott to act in the national interest. We  are still prepared to pass the legislation and have offshore processing but he has

to be reasonable and accept the position of the Government that the flexibility  needs to be there. We want him to have the flexibility to implement his option if  he were in office and we think the government of the day should have the same  opportunities.

BENSON: This is a classic blame game in the eyes of many. You’re saying the  Liberal Party’s guilty of political opportunism, the Liberal Party is accusing you of  something similar. And people on your side will agree with you; Liberal loyalists  will agree with the Liberal Party. But most people will see this as the triumph of  partisan politics over policy. Is that a reasonable conclusion?

BOWEN: Yes, it is. I agree: it’s the triumph of partisan politics because the  Liberal Party’s playing partisan politics. We’ve acted in good faith here, we have  made every endeavour. The Prime Minister made it clear to Mr Abbott that she  was happy for me to sit down with Mr Morrison and work out whether there was  a way forward. The Liberal Party insisted on its amendments which would make  the Bill unworkable. They’re saying they’re happy to cooperate, providing it’s  their way.

BENSON: A broad question: does the Government now have a policy to handle  boat arrivals and asylum seekers, or are you in some sort of state of flux?

BOWEN: No, no, we do very clearly have a policy and it was a policy I just  articulated to you, which is regional arrangements with offshore processing as  part of that. Now, as a practical and legal reality, offshore processing in any  meaningful sense would be unlawful following the High Court’s decision and so  we have acknowledged that. We acknowledge the practical and legal reality, but  we still have the view that if you’re going to provide a deterrent for people to  make a dangerous boat journey you need to have international and regional  arrangements in place.

BENSON: Well, if your policy is unlawful, offshore detention is unlawful, what  are you doing now? What’s the policy now?

BOWEN: Well, we’re processing people in Australia. That is the practical reality  that all governments would need to deal with. That’s what we are needing to  deal with. It’s what Mr Abbott would need to deal with if he were Prime Minister  in the face of his failure to pass the legislation. You know, he says he likes  offshore processing, he says his policy is offshore processing, he’s just not  prepared to vote to make it lawful.

Again, this is just another example, Marius, of them living in fantasy land,  refusing to accept the reality, refusing to accept the legal advice. Whether it’s  the advice of experts in border protection, whether it’s legal advice, or whether  it’s economists or climate change experts, Mr Abbott just thinks he knows better

than everybody.

BENSON: Chris Bowen, can I ask you a question, finally, in your capacity as a  senior Cabinet minister rather than as Immigration Minister, there are reports  around today that the Ombudsman, the Federal Ombudsman, Allan Asher, will  resign because of the controversy over his advice to the Greens. Should the  Ombudsman go?

BOWEN: Well, look, my view is, Marius, that the Ombudsman’s office must be  beyond reproach. It must comply with the standards that they set out, that the  Ombudsman himself has set out, openness, accountability, transparency. I think  there have been very real questions raised and it’s a matter for the Ombudsman  to respond to those. I think you do see a strong political consensus the  Ombudsman’s office is very important and those values have been brought into  question.

BENSON: Chris Bowen, thanks again.

BOWEN: Good on you, Marius.

Ends



