













Minister’s Office: 02 6277 7500 or 0466 745 615                                       Department: 02 6261 1555





MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS

The Hon. Kevin Rudd MP

TRANSCRIPT OF INTERVIEW WITH MARIUS BENSON

ABC NEWSRADIO BREAKFAST

2 MARCH 2011





Subjects: Libya



E & O E - PROOF ONLY

GLEN BARTHOLOMEW:  In the last half hour we've heard about the emergency building on  Libya's borders as tens of thousands of people attempt to flee the country.

Australia has just announced a package of humanitarian aid to try and assist in alleviating  that crisis.

The Foreign Minister of course is Kevin Rudd and he's been outlining the Australian  assistance, to our own Marius Benson.

FOREIGN MINISTER KEVIN RUDD: This crisis is real. I've spoken to the head of the UNHCR  in Geneva as well as to the Tunisian Foreign Minister dealing with their border with Libya.

The agencies, the International Office of Migration and others need support now and so we,  Australia, will be allocating $5 million worth of immediate emergency assistance. This is on  top of the funds we've allocated to the International Council of the Red Cross.

MARIUS BENSON: And is other assistance going to be considered further down the  track?

KEVIN RUDD: We'll continue to monitor the situation.



Minister’s Office: 02 6277 7500 or 0466 745 615                                      Department: 02 6261 1555

2



The appeals launched by the IOM, the International Office of Migration and the UNHCR,  UNICEF, the International Council of the Red Cross, go to operations which are on foot or  about to be on foot now on the ground on the Libyan border with Egypt and the Libyan  border with Tunisia.

These agencies need financial support immediately. Therefore I've authorised the allocation  of these funds immediately. We are facing a large scale humanitarian crisis which must be  responded to now.

MARIUS BENSON:  The Immigration Minister Chris Bowen has been canvassing the  possibility of additional assistance being provided to refugees because of the exodus from  Libya and from neighbouring countries. Is any progress being made on that issue?

KEVIN RUDD: Well it's a matter for the Immigration Minister and of course the normal  processes which apply to the consideration of any applications.

But keeping that I as Foreign Minister am responsible for now in dealing with the  humanitarian crisis on the borders and keeping literally hundreds of thousands of people  safe and in some cases alive; given that the problems of food, water, shelter and a very  inhospitable environment where the circumstances are in fact becoming critical and  dangerous, therefore as Australia we're responding immediately and this is a reflection of  our commitment to the requests for funds from these agencies which always respond in  times of crisis.

MARIUS BENSON:  Mr Rudd, in terms of international pressure on Libya, the latest move  from the United Nations has been to suspend that country from the UN Human Rights  Council. Do you think that sort of Action will carry any weight with Muammar Qaddafi?

KEVIN RUDD: Each action by the international community, particularly unanimous action of  the type that we have seen again from the UN on this suspension of Libya carries weight  within Libya, if not with Qaddafi himself then with those who support him.

If you add that to the decision recently to refer the matter of Libya's actions against civilian  population to the International Criminal Court, this adds up to one level of pressure after  another being applied and for those who operate beneath Qaddafi, they know therefore  that the international community is as one. The objective here is to fracture Qaddafi's  internal support and that is what we're seeking collectively to do.

MARIUS BENSON: Is the world any closer to collective action of a more direct sort such  as a no-fly zone being established in Libya?

KEVIN RUDD: Australia's position on this has been consistent for some several days now. I  notice comments just now by the British Prime Minister indicating that the matter of the no-fly zone should now be examined by the relevant authorities within the air forces of NATO,  including that of the United Kingdom. Therefore this debate goes on internally in terms of  its logistics. Our view nonetheless is clear, this is a necessary course of action and of course  it would warrant further action in all probability by the UN Security Council.



Minister’s Office: 02 6277 7500 or 0466 745 615                                      Department: 02 6261 1555

3



GLEN BARTHOLOMEW:  Australian Foreign Minister Kevin Rudd outlining measures of  Australian assistance to refugees to Marius Benson, also commenting on some of the more  geo-political responses to the Libyan crisis.



ENDS

