Julie Bishop

Address to the Sydney Mining Club, Sydney - In Defence of Mining

Thursday, 01 September 2011

***Check against delivery***

I am an avowed supporter of the mining industry in Australia.

Not everyone in the Federal Parliament can make that claim.

Government Ministers are increasingly talking of the success of the mining industry in terms of the  problem it is causing for Australia, creating a ‘patchwork economy’ riddled with Dutch disease caused  by the high Australian dollar.

The Government appears blind to the obvious threat of a recession in the Australian economy, were it  not for the mining industry.

Our mining industry is critical for our nation’s future success.

It is a story of achievement, of rising national prosperity, development and opportunity.

That is why I am opposed to any measures that would cripple our mining industry.

Near the end of the last term of the Howard Government, we were talking confidently about Australia  as an energy super power - Australia as the 21st century equivalent of a Middle East of Energy.

Four years later and the talk from the Government is gloom and doom, lamenting the impact of the  mining sector on other areas of the economy, particularly manufacturing - and acting as if we have  previously lived in a one-speed economy.

With Unions and the Government’s coalition partner, The Greens, reverting to protectionist rhetoric, I  fear that the old socialist mindset is creeping back into the national debate, as they seek ways to soak  money out of the most productive part of the economy.

The Liberal Party is opposed to the mining tax.

We are opposed to the carbon tax.

Rather than adding cost burdens to the mining sector, we believe that it should be as internationally  competitive as possible, for we recognise that in a global economy, capital can easily move to  countries where the rate of return is the greatest.

The Liberal Party will not support mandatory purchase laws.

The suggestion that the mining sector should be forced or mandated to purchase Australian steel for  example, as a form of subsidisation, should be rejected outright.

We will not support tariff increases that raise cost structures for inputs for the Australian mining  industry.

We will not support a protectionist policy that will rebound on Australian mining through trade  retaliation from overseas, or spark trade wars.

We will embrace the great opportunities for Australia’s mining sector and the many industries involved  at various stages of the supply chain.

I note that Rio Tinto’s Sam Walsh has described the claims that miners were not supporting local

manufacturers as a ‘myth’, citing local content at the Pilbara operations at as much as 86 per cent for  existing operations and 75 per cent for its expansion projects, including labour.

Reserve Bank Governor Glen Stevens recently highlighted the positive spill overs from the mining  industry to other parts of the Australian economy:

“Beyond the benefits being experienced by equipment hire, engineering, surveying and consulting  firms, businesses as diverse as those supplying modular housing, laboratory services and the training  of semi-skilled, trade and other workers are seeing effects of the expansion”.

The development of Asia’s great economies explains the level of investment we are currently  witnessing in this sector.

The strong growth in mining investment over the last decade has reached its highest level in history.

The huge demand for Australia’s mineral commodities in 2008-09 increased mining investment to  above 4 per cent of GDP - around eight times its share just 50 years ago.

Australia is currently enjoying the best terms of trade in 140 years on the back of high commodity  prices and strong levels of demand.

The strength of Asia’s economies, particularly China and India, will continue to drive Australia’s  economic growth, with Australia’s real GDP growth estimated to reach 4 per cent in 2011-12.

The Government likes to take credit for Australia’s enviable position in the world economy, but fails to  acknowledge that it is derived in large part from our reputation as a safe, reliable exporter of mineral  resources and energy.

In 2010 Australia was the world’s leading producer of bauxite, alumina, rutile and tantalum.

We led the world in the export of black coal, iron ore, alumina, lead and zinc and were the second  largest exporter of uranium.

In 2008-09, Australia’s minerals resources sector contributed close to $160 billion to export earnings.   This compared to around $36 billion for the rural sector and $38 billion for manufacturing.

During that period, the sector accounted for 8 per cent of Australia’s gross national product.

According to the Mineral Council of Australia, mining companies contributed more than $7 billion in  royalties as part of $21 billion paid in state and federal taxes in that year alone.

Mining companies have invested more than $125 billion in Australia over the last decade including in  new capital investment, exploration and research and development.

Today the mining sector is responsible for the direct employment of over 180,000 people.

Almost 600,000 people benefit through indirect employment in support industries.

Much of this wealth comes from my home state of Western Australia.

In 2010 WA produced nearly 70 per cent of Australia’s gold, major proportions of our bauxite and  mineral sands, and nearly all of our country’s iron ore, nickel, diamond, tantalum and lithium.

Western Australia is also home to Australia’s oil and gas industry.

In the next five years, approximately $170 billion of projects are expected to get under way.

Much of this investment will be in the state’s offshore natural gas sector.  According to the Australian  Bureau of Agricultural and Resource Economics (ABARE), 90 per cent of Australia’s recoverable  reserves of natural gas are located off the west and northwest coasts of Australia.



The massive Gorgon gas development on the North West Shelf alone is expected to deliver 8 per  cent of world’s LNG needs.

According to one of the companies involved in the project, the size of the Gorgon gas reserve will  yield enough energy to power a city of one million people for 800 years.

With an estimated capital expenditure of $43 billion, the 15 million tonnes LNG development is the  largest resource project ever undertaken in this country.

During a visit to the Pilbara in June, I inspected Woodside’s LNG on-shore hub under construction  near Karratha. Once complete, the Pluto gas field and processing hub will produce more than four  million tonnes of LNG per annum.

Western Australia accounts for 62 per cent of investment in the nation's mining sector.

At present, the state makes up well over one third of Australia’s exports.

By the end of the decade, this figure will be closer to 50 per cent.

Since 2007, many of the challenges facing Australia and the mining sector have come from the  Federal Government, first under Kevin Rudd and now under Julia Gillard.

The Super Profits Tax announced last year would have had a massive impact on Australia’s  international competitiveness and our reputation as a safe investment haven.

The way the tax was announced and the way it was allegedly sold to the public made it clear this  Government just doesn’t get mining.

From publicly deriding mining companies as foreign owned and ripping off tax payers, to claiming that  mining companies only paid minimal tax, relying on a student paper from an American university  rather than the actual tax paid according to the Australian Tax Office, this was evidence of a  government with no understanding of a vital element of the Australian economy.

In June last year, on 23 June actually, I referred in Question Time to the comments of the CEO of the  Mining Association of Canada who had called Kevin Rudd “the mining man of the year in Canada  because he’ll bring a lot of investment our way” and I asked Kevin Rudd if he intended picking up his  award when he was in Toronto the following week for the G20 meeting.

That was the very last question I ever got to ask Prime Minister Kevin Rudd, for that very night, the  forces of darkness moved against him.

However, having unceremoniously removed Kevin Rudd from office because of his failures over the  Super Profits Tax, amongst over things, Julia Gillard is yet to bring into law Mining Tax II, based on  the agreement she reached with the big three mining companies over 12 months ago.

This version of the tax is extraordinarily complex and introduces a new federal tax on top off the  existing state royalties.

There are serious questions as to how much tax will actually be raised and upon which companies the  burden will fall.

Due to the clumsy negotiations with the three mining companies, the federal budget is now hostage to  decisions by state governments regarding their royalty arrangements.

There are serious questions about the constitutional validity of the proposed tax.

After yesterday’s humiliating loss in the High Court over the legality of its Malaysia asylum seeker  swap deal, we have every reason to be sceptical in the face of the Government’s assurances that it  could win a High Court challenge to its mining tax laws.



Following recent mining profit announcements, the Prime Minister is under renewed pressure from  her coalition partner - The Greens - to claw back an even greater tax take from mining companies.

Senator Bob Brown has labelled the new arrangements ‘a perverse outcome’ and has called on the  Government to revive its original tax of 40 per cent tax on mining profits although Brown has often  mused that 50 per cent would be more like it.

I did not ever think I would see the day when “Australia” and “sovereign risk” would be uttered in the  same sentence, but reports of investor concern continue, as the Government continues its assault on  the sector.

A couple of months ago I attended an Australia-Central Africa Trade Forum here in Sydney.

Minister and representatives from the Central African Governments of Cameroon, Chad, the Congo  and Gabon were present.

I was somewhat taken aback when they announced that they were in Australia to promote investment  in their countries because as Australia was now a sovereign risk, Central Africa was a more attractive  option.

They knew the details of the mining tax debacle, chapter and verse.

Having introduced the mining tax measures to increase Government’s share of iron ore and coal  companies’ profits, the Gillard Government is now set to increase the cost of a company’s overheads  as well.

Despite having solemnly promised not to introduce a carbon tax at the last election, the Government  intends introducing legislation this year to implement a carbon tax - essentially a tax on energy.

The dangers posed to Australia’s economy by this policy, and the cascading effect of the tax  throughout the economy, are well-documented, with the Australian mining sector amongst the hardest  hit.

In a statement to the ASX in July, Rio Tinto expressed the widespread concern of the mining sector  and that the company was “deeply concerned the proposed carbon tax fails to shield Australia’s  export sector and leaves it at a disadvantage compared to international competitors”.

This sentiment has been echoed by others.

Marius Kloppers of BHP Billiton has described the Government’s carbon tax as an economic dead  weight cost and a tax on exports.

For small to medium sized companies, with lesser profit margins to absorb these additional costs, this  new tax will be hard felt.

This is likely to be the case with Australia’s gold mining industry.

Employing 7,500 people nationwide, the sector undertakes significant processing in Australia.

Earlier this year, the Department of Climate Change released data which showed that a typical mid-sized gold mining company will be hit hard by the carbon tax which will directly increase operating  costs by more than 13 per cent, putting pressure on contractors and their ability to employ people.

Other participants in the mining industry’s supply chain, such as transport companies, cleaning  companies and accommodation providers, will also be affected by increased operating costs.

And the last thing the manufacturing sector needs at this time is a carbon tax.

All this is taking place during a period of heightened volatility in the international financial system and

in major economies.

Debate is now focused on whether Australia is suffering the curse of other resource-rich economies,  referred to as Dutch disease - or as the IMF puts it, the effects of price increases of natural resources  that result in “real exchange rate appreciation, factor reallocation, and de-industrialization”.

In the case of developing countries, the issue of sovereign wealth funds is very much alive and as the  case study of Papua New Guinea demonstrates, there are valid reasons for that.

Papua New Guinea is in the early stages of an economic upheaval that has the potential to rewrite the  way its economy and society has functioned up to now.

The development of large-scale resource projects has catapulted Papua New Guinea into the global  economy.

The largest of these is the PNG LNG Project in the Southern Highlands which I visited a couple of  months ago.

Operated by Exxon Mobil, this $15 billion project is the largest private sector investment ever  undertaken in PNG.

The sheer size of this project is seen in the fact that PNG’s gross domestic product is expected to  double, rising in real terms from 8.65 billion Kina in 2006 to an average of 18.2 billion Kina.

While the PNG LNG project will bring huge benefits for Papua New Guinea, it also presents a unique  set of challenges that will test the institutional capacity of the Government.

Papua New Guinea’s reliance on export earnings from its energy and mineral resources leaves it  vulnerable to a potential downturn in the global economy or international commodity prices.

Promoting growth in other sectors of the economy is therefore crucial.

This means reinvesting earnings of its mining boom back into the economy, in the form of increased  recurrent and development expenditure.

The influx of capital into resource-rich regions of PNG has direct internal security implications, as  noted by Aaron Battens in the East Asia Forum, “those provinces which have recorded the largest  earnings from resource extraction have been plagued by the weakest governance, the poorest levels  of service delivery and many cases of violence.”

Strong fiscal management will be required to control the effects of the booming resource sector, as  further upward pressure is placed on already high inflation levels.

Reducing this pressure through the creation of sovereign wealth funds is a positive step for PNG.

The PNG Government has set up a joint Treasury-Bank of PNG working group to consider options for  the establishment of sovereign wealth funds to manage the expected large revenues generated by  the PNG LNG project.

While there is debate as to whether the sovereign wealth funds will be established onshore or  offshore, it is likely to include three integrated and coordinated funds - a stabilisation fund, an  infrastructure fund and a future generations (savings) fund.

During its last mineral boom during the 1990s, increased export earnings caused the exchange rate to  appreciate.

The large incomes earned by the workers, the landowners and the Government led to a consumption  boom and inflation spike.

Mismanagement, waste, corruption, excessive spending and a collapse in commodity prices all

combined to deny PNG the long term benefits that should have been derived from that boom.

In setting up sovereign wealth funds this time around PNG will have learned the lesson from the  1990s mineral boom.

There has also been discussion in Australia recently about the desirability of a sovereign wealth fund  to capture the benefits of our mining boom, however circumstances are vastly different.

It is a fact that the Howard Government established such a fund with the Future Fund, however  virtually no money has been added to the fund since Labor took office.

We also established a Higher Education Endowment Fund, which was designed to be a fund in  perpetuity, to receive surplus monies and with the income earned, to help make our higher education  sector world class.

That fund has been gutted by Labor.

The same has happened to the Health and Medical Research fund that we established.

The point is of course that we ran successive budget surpluses and paid down the $96b debt we  inherited from the last Labor Government.

While the rapid rise of China’s economy and its demand for commodities is one of the primary reason  behind our high Australian dollar, what is often overlooked is the Government’s massive debt bill,  which adds pressure to interest rates, and at the margin, puts pressure on the exchange rate.

It can only be hypothetical to talk of establishing a sovereign wealth fund any time soon, while the  Government is billions of dollars in debt.

The first priority must be to repay the Government’s debt which today stands at $120 billion.

The sooner we pay off that debt, the sooner we can recoup the billions in dead money being paid in  interest each year on that debt.

The Coalition’s priorities to get the budget back into surplus and pay down debt, are to ensure that  Australia is in the best possible position to withstand further external economic shocks.

This Government does not understand mining.

Whether it is imposing a $2 billion condensate tax on Woodside without notice, or announcing a super  profits tax, or an economy-wide carbon tax that no other country in the world is implementing, re-regulating the labour market or placing a blanket heritage listing the size of the state of Victoria over  the Kimberly in WA, this Gillard-Greens Government is no friend of mining.

We k now that manufacturing in this country is facing huge challenges and two of my colleagues  Sophie Mirabella and Ian Macfarlane will be advising our Shadow Cabinet of appropriate policy  responses.

Instead of blaming the mining sector for upheavals in other parts of the Australian economy, the  Coalition will work constructively with all sectors to ensure that we can meet the challenges of a 21st  century economy.

See you at next year's Diggers and Dealers.



