



SENATOR THE HON PENNY WONG

MINISTER FOR FINANCE AND DEREGULATION

TRANSCRIPT



Parliament House, Canberra ACT 2600 Australia      Tel: (02) 6277 7400 Fax: (02) 6273 4110

PW 269/11 5 December 2012



TRANSCRIPT OF INTERVIEW - ABC AM WITH SABRA LANE

SUBJECT:  NATIONAL CONFERENCE.

E & O E - PROOF ONLY



TONY EASTLEY:  Penny Wong, who is a same-sex relationship and expecting a child, is  speaking to our chief political correspondent, Sabra Lane.

WONG: I think Labor governments are reforming governments and we are also a party that  is a party of principle. We believe in equality. This has been an issue that has been around  for many years.

There are obviously pretty different views in different parts of the party and different parts of  the community but I think we took a historic step this weekend and one which is consistent  with the best traditions of Labor. As a matter of principle, most Australians would believe  that we ought to treat people equally and that's what we're doing.

That doesn't mean we don't have to go out there and explain to people what our views are.  It doesn't mean we don't have to campaign and it doesn't mean we don't have to advocate  for Labor whether it is on this or many other issues.

LANE: Was it a hollow victory? The platform will be changed to recognise same-sex  marriage but it is a conscience vote, it doesn't bind MPs which almost certainly means it  won't get up in Parliament on the current numbers.

WONG: It's an historic change to the platform and we should recognise that. We've never  had this equality enshrined in Labor's platform and we now do. It is the case that a  conscience vote has been granted and that reflects the very strongly held views of some  people in the party and some people in the federal party.

But in terms of getting it through Parliament, well that's the next step. The next step in the  campaign across the community for marriage equality is a private member's bill that we will  be moving, that Stephen Jones will be moving in the federal Parliament, and what we would  say to Liberal Members of Parliament and to the members of the, ordinary rank and file  members of the Coalition who support equality, it is time to get behind this.

2





LANE: Did you celebrate it, have you celebrated, will you celebrate?

WONG: I did go to a celebration for a period of time last night then I went out for a quiet  dinner and it was very nice.

LANE: On party reform, many delegates have said that the party absolutely squibbed it on  democratisation. Rank and file members will be elected to the next conference but a  committee will decide how many are sent. Is that a disappointment? Did the party squib it?

WONG: Well I am sure there is always more that can be done but equally, more was done  than could have been. That is always the case at national conferences. My view is that we  have to continue to look at ways in which we better engage our membership.

We have taken some important steps at this conference. Online membership, we've got the  President being elected for three-year term, we've got various organisations such as  Rainbow Labor and Labor for Refugees and the Labor Environment Network being  recognised and given more status within the party structures and that's a good thing.

We've got to work through how we ensure this rank and file delegate process to conference  works. I am a supporter of more participation by rank and file delegates and I look forward  to the committee doing good work on how we bring that forward for the next conference.

LANE: Lots of things are said in the debate and I'll just go back to same-sex marriage, your  colleagues Deb O'Neill and Helen Polley spoke very strongly on this issue. How can you  work alongside them knowing that they're the views that they put and you're in a same-sex  relationship yourself? Is it the case that you are able to shake hands with them afterwards  and say I understand it is not personal? How do you take it?

WONG: Of course I can. I mean I think, we are the Labor Party and we are a party of  government and that means there are a diversity of views in our party on many issues just  as there are a diversity of views in the community on these issues.

We don't in the Labor Party just preach to people who agree with us. That is not what  parties of government do. Minority parties can do that, they can just talk to people who  agree with them. We don't do that. We have to talk to Australians across the board and  convince them as to why what we are saying is the right policy for Australia.

I respect that people have different views, within the party and I actually thought it was a  very respectfully conducted debate. I don't agree with some of the views that were put but I  thought people did listen to the Prime Minister in her request for a respectful debate.

EASTLEY: The Finance Minister Penny Wong, speaking to Sabra Lane.

ENDS

