





MINISTER FOR DEFENCE  STEPHEN SMITH, MP

TRANSCRIPT: DOORSTOP INTERVIEW

TRANSCRIPTION: PROOF COPY E & OE  DATE: 4 JUNE 2011



TOPICS: Shangri La Dialogue 2011.



JOURNALIST:  So Minister, in your speech you mentioned that you wanted China to be a  responsible stakeholder.  Given some of the incidents we’ve seen over the past few weeks in  the South China Sea, do you think they are responsible now?

STEPHEN SMITH: Well, two things. Firstly China is a rising power. The rise of China,  together with the rise of India and the rise of the ASEAN economies, the rise of Japan and  Korea, the ongoing influence of the United States, all of these things see economic and

strategic and military influence move to our part of the world. Now as China rises, Australia  is very optimistic that China will emerge as what the Chinese describe as into a harmonious  environment; what we would describe as a responsible stakeholder.

In the area of maritime territorial claims or disputes, Australia does not take sides where these  disputes exist. This is not just maritime or territorial disputes with China, other countries are  involved as well. How Australia wants to see these disputes resolved is in accordance with  international legal norms and the Law of the Sea. We are the chair of the ASEAN Defence  Ministers Meeting Plus Maritime Security Group and that is the view that we express in the  relevant regional forum.

JOURNALIST:  Do you think though, that a country like Vietnam, there was an incident  where the cables they were laying were cut in the South China Sea? Do you think that a  country like that  has the right to feel a bit aggrieved at China’s behaviour at the moment?

STEPHEN SMITH: Well again as I say, Australia doesn’t take sides or form a public view  about a particular maritime or territorial dispute. We urge the parties concerned to resolve  that peacefully amicably, in accordance with international legal norms and Law of the Sea.

So,  it’s not for Australia to be taking sides or to be backing one country in against another.  There are a range of long standing maritime territorial disputes in the South China Sea, the  East China Sea and elsewhere throughout our region and the world. Australia respects  International Law and would like to see those disputes resolved amicably by the parties  concerned in accordance with International Law.

JOURNALIST:  Robert Gates spoke about the constraints on the US defence budget will that  increase the responsibility of counties like Australia to play a bigger security role in the Asia  Pacific?

STEPHEN SMITH: Well, we all have financial constraints on us. This is a part of the modern  defence world. The United States has defence spending and budget constraints, as the United  Kingdom does as New Zealand do. This is part of the modern era, which means that we need  to be more efficient we need to make sure we get value for money for the tax payer’s effort

that goes into our national security budget.

It also means that we each and all have to do our bit. That’s why, for example, Australia  makes a contribution not just in Afghanistan but a peace keeping contribution in East Timor  and the Solomon Islands. The United States is currently engaged in a Global Force Posture  Review to look at the efficacy and the efficiency of how its forces are positioned around the  world.

We have a bilateral joint working group with the United States to look at the implications of  that so far as Australia is concerned, but there’s a long way down the track before we come to  final conclusions. As a general proposition Australia wants the United States to be engaged in  our region, in the Asia Pacific, and to enhance that engagement. That brings with it financial  and fiscal challenges for the United States just as defence and national security issues bring  financial and fiscal challenges for all of us in the modern world.

JOURNALIST: On Afghanistan, do you share Mr Gates view that the Taliban could be  brought to negotiations by winter and what do you think should be the criteria for that?

STEPHEN SMITH: Well there is no doubt that we have been making progress on the  security front, on the military, or combat front and Australia has been saying for some time  that we can’t win Afghanistan by use of a military strategy alone.

We need not just a military strategy but also a political strategy. That is why we have strongly  supported the notions of political reconciliation, of reintegration, of rapprochement. Very  importantly, I share Secretary Gates’ view that the Taliban will only come to the table when  they come to the conclusion that their capacity to influence outcomes by use of the force of  arms will not prevail or be successful. We are not at that stage at this point in time.

But already we see and have seen for the last year or so at the local level, efforts in  reconciliation and reintegration. The starting point has to be that reconciliation or  reintegration, any political approach must be affected by the Afghanistan government. If done  with a people who lay down their arms and are happy to adhere to the provisions and  requirements of the Afghan constitution, that’s essentially the view of the international  community, and Secretary Gates has articulated that earlier today.

JOURNALIST: Liam Fox spoke about the invisible enemy and Robert Gates talked about  being under cyber attack every day. Is Australia facing these types of attacks and what is  Australia doing about it?

STEPHEN SMITH: Well cyber and cyber security is one of the modern new national security  challenges. This is not just a challenge for nations, states or a challenge presented only to

governments, this is a challenge for industry, for commerce. It’s also a challenge thrown up  to us not just by nations but by no state actors.

So this is an area of great priority reflected by the fact that yesterday on behalf of the  Australian government, the Attorney-General indicated that we would have a white paper on  cyber and cyber security issues.

In the recent past, at our AUKMIN meetings, our Ministerial meetings between Australia and  the United Kingdom in January of this year we agreed to work together on Cyber issues. We  did the same thing with our US counterparts at the AUSMIN meeting in November of last  year. We are working very closely with our friends and partners to do a couple of things. First  to draw the attention of the international community to the need for all of us to be focussed  on cyber and cyber security issues. Secondly, to start the work now for international legal  norms, to apply to cyber and cyber space.

JOURNALIST: Can you just indulge me in a question about domestic politics? Have your  state Labor colleagues in WA raised their concerns about the asylum seeker deal with  Malaysia with you and as they say, has Labor lost their moral compass on this?

STEPHEN SMITH: Well a couple of things. Firstly I haven’t had the opportunity of speaking  to my state colleagues about this matter. I know that Minister Bowen has made extensive  remarks about these matters today, so I won’t be drawn on the details.

But, my advice to my WA Labor colleagues is that they should read, listen and watch very  carefully the outcome of this matter and pay very careful attention to the detail of which  Minister Bowen has put on the table in the last couple of days.

The most important thing we have to do is to break the back of the people smugglers business  so that we put out of risk, people, women, children, on boats getting themselves into  dangerous positions like the terrible tragedy we saw at Christmas Island. That is the  Governments objective and that is Minister Bowen’s objective.

Media contact:  Defence Media Operations (02) 6127 1999 or 0408 498 664





