CHRIS BOWEN MP

MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP  *TRANSCRIPT*

INTERVIEW WITH ALEXANDRA KIRK, ABC AM

FRIDAY, 17 JUNE 2011

SUBJECTS: Malaysia transfer agreement, Cabinet.

CHRIS BOWEN: We have very considerably considered the legal position before we  entered into this arrangement with Malaysia and we believe the arrangements with  Malaysia are on very, very strong legal grounds indeed. I’m not going to comment on  any individual cases but of course there are several provisions under the Migration  Act which would allow for the arrangements that we’ve entered into with Malaysia.

ALEXANDRA KIRK: Did you consider the possibility that there were some people  who you were going to transfer to Malaysia whose other family members have been  already granted refugee status in Australia?

BOWEN: Well let me make a couple of points, and firstly again Alex, I’m not going to  comment on any individual cases. But I would make this point: firstly, as I said,  blanket exemptions would be unworkable and counterproductive and would provide  for a loophole for people smugglers which they would exploit and encourage people  to get on the boats and make a very dangerous journey.

I’ve also said consistently that in relation to vulnerable cases of minors, we would  take into account their personal circumstances in considering how to deal with that,  and there’d be a range of personal circumstances which would go into that  consideration.

KIRK: And does that include having another family member, a very close family  member in this case of the father, already granted refugee status in Australia?

BOWEN: It would include all the circumstances including the status of family  members, where they are, et cetera; and that would apply to minors of course. And  we’ve been working very closely with the UNHCR on this. We would have special  consideration on a case-by-case basis of minors and that would take into account the  personal circumstances, vulnerabilities, support networks and what was in place and  what would be the best situation to deal with each individual minor.

KIRK: But so far none of the group that you intend to send to Malaysia have been  given any special consideration as far as we know.

BOWEN: Well let’s be clear Alex: the group on Christmas Island, as I’ve said  repeatedly, are not necessarily going to be sent to Malaysia.

KIRK: So do you plan to make decisions about vulnerable people soon?

BOWEN: Well when we have an arrangement, a detailed arrangement in place in  terms of a transfer to a third country, then the arrangements that I’ve indicated  previously for minors, which would include consideration of their special  vulnerabilities and their need for support and where that support could be provided,  then that would be considered on a case-by-case basis.



KIRK: But you won’t do that until you have a deal in place, is that correct?

BOWEN: Well Alex, each individual case is different and of course we are not  proposing to transfer anybody out of Australia in the immediate future - in the  immediate coming days. So therefore, that consideration would be premature. There  are complexities to each individual case, including some of the individual cases  which are getting media attention at the moment and they would need to be  considered.

KIRK: Is it just minors, or is it close family members? For example, if there weren’t  any children involved, if it were a husband, a wife, a mother, father?

BOWEN: Well Alex, particularly in relation to minors I’m concerned to ensure that we  have appropriate arrangements in place and minors are the vulnerable people in the  vast majority of instances who would receive that consideration.

KIRK: On a wider front, how would you characterise the relationship between Kevin  Rudd and Julia Gillard?

BOWEN: Oh well look, certainly as a Cabinet member I work closely with both of  them and I see them working closely together, cooperatively on the matters of  national interest of the day and I’ve seen that first-hand, close up. I work closely with  Kevin Rudd, obviously as Immigration Minister and Foreign Affairs Minister we work  closely on many matters, in conjunction with the Prime Minister and I see a very  good, cordial and professional working relationship.

KIRK: According to one photo published in the newspaper today, he doesn’t seem  too happy?

BOWEN: Look, I just think people over-analyse one photo, I’ve seen this happen  time and time again, and you can take a hundred photos and everybody can over-analyse them.

KIRK: When you look at the polls, Kevin Rudd must feel some vindication  considering that the polls are worse now than when he was toppled?

BOWEN: Well Alex, certainly we’re focused on the job at hand; the polls go up and  down. Clearly governments, when they tackle difficult issues, whether they be asylum  seekers, whether they be climate change; are going to lose some bark along the  way.

KIRK: That doesn’t characterise the Rudd Government, and its approach?

BOWEN: Alex, I’m making this statement that this Government is dealing with lots of  difficult issues, as governments do. But we are focused on what’s in the national  interest and that means focusing on the long-term - what’s in the national interest in  the long-term and we’ll be making that case to the people.

COMPERE: The Federal Immigration Minister Chris Bowen speaking to Alexandra  Kirk in Canberra.

ENDS

