





JOINT PRESS RELEASE

THE HON. TONY ABBOTT MHR, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  MRS SOPHIE MIRABELLA,  SHADOW MINISTER FOR INNOVATION, INDUSTRY AND SCIENCE



THE COALITION’S PLAN TO STRENGTHEN   AUSTRALIA’S ANTI-DUMPING REGIME

Australian  industries  will  get  a  fairer  go  at  combating  international  dumping  under  the  Coalition’s  Anti-Dumping Policy released today.

Dumping  sees  Australian  businesses  subjected  to  goods  imported  into  the  domestic  market  at  below   production cost or through unlawful subsidies from other governments.

It is a tactic that provides the illusion of a short-term benefit to consumers.  In the longer term, international  dumping hollows out Australian industry, decreases competition, costs jobs and increases prices.

International dumping seeks to exploit Australia’s commitment to free trade.

Stronger  action  against  dumping  makes  the  playing  field  fairer  for  Australian  businesses  and  ensures  the   illegal activities of overseas businesses do not undermine Australia’s commitment to free trade.

The  current  anti-dumping  laws  are  cumbersome,  slow  and  prohibitively  expensive  for  many  Australian   businesses to utilise.

The Coalition will introduce a more effective anti-dumping regime ensuring that good Australian businesses  get a fair go.

The Coalition’s Plan to Strengthen Australia’s Anti-Dumping Regime will:

1. Transfer anti-dumping responsibilities from Customs to the Department of Industry;

2. Reverse the onus of proof in anti-dumping investigations;

3. Commit more funding for anti-dumping investigations;

4. Hire an additional 20 specialist anti-dumping investigators;

5. Introduce more stringent and rigorous enforcement of deadlines for submissions;

6. Crack down on those overseas producers who don’t cooperate with anti-dumping investigations, and

7.  Strengthen  enforcement  of  the  provisions  of  the  WTO  Agreement  on  subsidies  and  countervailing   measures.







Australian  industries  and  businesses  don’t  want  government  hand-outs  or  protectionist  quick  fixes  -  they   just  want  the  Australian  Government  to  understand  and  respond  to  the  challenges  facing  Australian   manufacturing.

A level playing field also means not burdening Australian businesses with a $9 billion a year carbon tax that  increases  the  costs  of  all  Australian  goods  and  at  the  same  time  makes  those  businesses  less  competitive   against all imports.

7 November 2011

1























THE COALITION’S PLAN TO STRENGTHEN  AUSTRALIA’S ANTI-DUMPING REGIME



























2



The Coalition’s Plan to Strengthen Australia’s Anti-Dumping Regime

Executive Summary

Australian industries and businesses don’t want government hand outs - they want a fair go  and a level playing field with their international competitors.

The Coalition will set about ensuring a level playing field for Australian industry by repealing  job destroying taxes, providing competent government and giving industry policy certainty.

Our  first  order  of  business  will  be  to  rescind  Labor’s  carbon  tax.  This  will  ensure  our   industries  will  not  pay  an  additional  cost  that  no  other  country  imposes  on  all  of  its  own   industries.

We  will  reform  Australia’s  anti-dumping  regime  to  ensure  our  industries  are  not  unfairly   disadvantaged by foreign competitors either dumping imports at below production cost or  using unlawful subsidies from other governments.

The  current  anti-dumping  regime  is  flawed  and  disadvantages  Australian  industries  and   businesses.

It is too cumbersome, slow and prohibitively expensive for many of our businesses to utilise.  When  rulings  are  made  they  are  often  too  late  and  do  nothing  to  address  damage  to  a   business or industry.

The Coalition will introduce a more effective anti-dumping regime - a regime that ensures  good Australian businesses get a fair go.

The  Coalition’s  Plan  to  Strengthen  Australia’s  Anti-Dumping  Regime  involves  the  following   initiatives:

1. Transfer anti-dumping responsibilities from Customs to the Department of Industry

We will make the Department of Industry responsible for Australia’s anti-dumping regime.

2. Reverse the onus of proof in anti-dumping investigations

Provided the Department of Industry has sufficient evidence to show dumping is reasonably  likely to have occurred, we will require foreign businesses subject to an anti-dumping action  that  has  lasted  for  at  least  60  days  to  demonstrate  that  they  are  not  dumping  goods  into   Australia.

3



3. Commit more funding for anti-dumping investigations

We  will  provide  an  additional  $2½  million  per  year  to  the  Department  of  Industry  so  that   more  resources  are  available  to  improve  the  number,  quality  and  speed  of  anti-dumping   investigations.

4. Hire an additional 20 specialist anti-dumping investigators

We  will  provide  at  least  an  additional  20  specialist  personnel  within  the  Department  of   Industry  over  and  above  the  number  of  personnel  currently  working  in  Customs  so  that   more anti-dumping investigations are pursued.

5. Introduce more stringent and rigorous enforcement of deadlines for submissions

We will make anti-dumping investigations faster and more effective by mandating a 40 day  time limit for parties to lodge submissions with the Department of Industry.

6.  Crack  down  on  overseas  producers  who  don’t  cooperate  with  anti-dumping   investigations

We  will  apply  stricter  sanctions  against  producers  who  fail  to  adequately  cooperate  with   requests  to  provide  information  about  their  export  of  goods  under  anti-dumping   investigation.

7.  Strengthen  enforcement  of  the  provisions  of  the  WTO  Agreement  on  subsidies  and   countervailing measures

We will enhance enforcement of the provisions under the WTO Agreement on Subsidies and  Countervailing Measures.



4



Labor’s Record

The  Labor-Greens  Government  wants  to  make  our  industries  less  competitive  by  imposing  an economy wide carbon tax that no other country has introduced.

This toxic job-destroying tax will punish successful and hard-working Australian businesses,  particularly trade exposed businesses.

A  carbon  tax  will  only  cause  jobs  and  emissions  to  be  exported  overseas.  The  carbon  tax   means:

a $9 billion a year new tax;    a 10 per cent hike in electricity bills in the first year alone;    a 9 per cent percent hike in gas bills in the first year alone;    higher marginal tax rates for millions of low and middle income earners; and    a $4.3 billion hit on the budget bottom line.

On top of its carbon tax hit, the Labor-Greens Government has failed to ensure an effective  anti-dumping regime to give Australian industries and business a level playing field.

Labor  indicated  in  2008  that  it  wanted  revisions  to  the  anti-dumping  system.  But  it  then   embarked on a long period of inaction - first by commissioning a Productivity Commission  review of Australia’s anti-dumping regime in 2009, then taking 18 months to respond.

When  it  finally  made  some  changes  in  June  2011,  it  again  failed  to  show  the  political  will   necessary to deliver the more meaningful reforms that are required.

For  every  year  in  office,  Labor  has  not  only  cut  funding  to  Customs  (the  agency  that   administers Australia’s anti-dumping system), but done so at a time when the organisation  has been under ever-increasing pressure in the area of border protection.

The impact on manufacturing has been devastating:

136,000 manufacturing jobs have been lost during the past three-and-a-half years (at  an astonishing average of nearly 750 jobs per week);   manufacturing activity has contracted for each of 28 separate months; and   a string of iconic manufacturing companies have either closed or scaled back their

Australian operations (such as BlueScope Steel, Mitsubishi, Pacific Brands, Heinz,  Bosch, Golden Circle and Bridgestone).



5



Our Plan

The Coalition wants Australian industries and businesses to have a fair go and compete on a  level playing field with their international competitors.

We  will  reform  Australia’s  anti-dumping  regime  to  ensure  our  industries  are  not  unfairly   disadvantaged by foreign competitors either dumping imports at below production cost or  using unlawful subsidies from other governments.

The current anti-dumping regime  is too cumbersome, slow and prohibitively expensive for  many of our businesses to utilise. When rulings are made they are often too late, after the  harm has already been done, not just to the firms directly affected but also down through  their  supply  chains.  Often,  they  then  do  little  to  address  the  damage  to  a  business  or   industry.

Unlike  in  many  developed  countries,  the  current  anti-dumping  regime  also  disadvantages   Australian  industries  by  placing  the  onus  of  proof  on  domestic  businesses  rather  than  on   their competitors.

The Coalition will introduce a more effective anti-dumping regime - a regime that ensures  good Australian businesses get a fair go.

1. Transfer anti-dumping responsibilities from Customs to the Department of Industry

The Coalition will make the Department of Industry responsible for Australia’s anti-dumping  regime.

Anti-dumping  is  currently  administered  by  Customs.  This  agency  is  already  under  pressure  dealing  with  large  numbers  of  illegal  boat  arrivals  -  pressures  that  have  only  been   exacerbated thanks to cuts to Customs’ budget by the Labor-Greens Government.

Industry  possesses  the  superior  economic  and  industry  knowledge  and  experience  that  is   often needed to successfully investigate and pursue anti-dumping actions.

This move is similar to the decision in the United States three decades ago to transfer anti-dumping responsibilities from Treasury and the Tariff Commission to the International Trade  Commission and the Department of Commerce.

By  transferring  anti-dumping  responsibilities  to  the  Department  of  Industry,  Customs  can   better focus on border protection while the Department of Industry can bring its expertise  and resources to enforcing a more effective anti-dumping regime.

6



2. Reverse the onus of proof in anti-dumping investigations

Provided the Department of Industry has sufficient evidence to show dumping is reasonably  likely to have occurred, we will require foreign businesses subject to an anti-dumping action  that  has  lasted  for  at  least  60  days  to  demonstrate  that  they  are  not  dumping  goods  into   Australia.

The  Department  of  Industry  will  make  ‘preliminary  affirmative  determinations’  where   appropriate in anti-dumping cases that have lasted beyond 60 days. Preliminary affirmative  determinations are expressly allowed under Article 7 of the WTO Anti-Dumping Agreement  and do not breach Australia’s free trade obligations.

Under  the  current  system,  it  is  incumbent  on  Australian  businesses  to  prove  that  rival   imported products are being sent to Australia at below cost price. This disadvantages local  firms  by  forcing  them  to  mount  often  complex,  onerous,  expensive  and  time-consuming

actions if they want to demonstrate that they have been adversely impacted by dumping.

There is a significant imbalance in the obligations faced by local businesses. Cases can last  for years and cost hundreds of thousands of dollars.

Our competitors have better and more effective anti-dumping regimes.

The  USA  and  European  Union,  for  example,  adopt  a  more  active  and  literal  interpretation   than Australia of some of the discretionary provisions of the WTO Anti-Dumping Agreement.  These include Articles 7.1, 7.3 and 12.2, which allow countries to impose duties on foreign  producers as soon as 60 days after the commencement of the case, where there is a threat  to local industry

Under  these  Articles,  our  competitors  typically  react  quickly  to  instances  of  dumping  and   potential injury by resorting to making so-called ‘preliminary affirmative determinations.’

By  reversing  the  onus  of  proof,  the  Coalition  will  make  Australia’s  anti-dumping  regime   more  effective,  more  responsive  to  the  interests  of  Australian  businesses  and  jobs,  and   better aligned with anti-dumping systems adopted by other nations.

3. Commit more funding for anti-dumping investigations

The Coalition will provide an additional $2½ million per year to the Department of Industry  so  that  more  resources  are  available  to  improve  the  number,  quality  and  speed  of  anti-dumping investigations.



7



Since coming to office, Labor has weakened Australia’s anti-dumping regime by relentlessly  cutting  funding  to  Customs,  the  agency  currently  responsible  for  administering  the  anti-dumping regime.

In the 2011-12 Budget, for example,  Labor axed a further 90 staff from Customs on top of  the 250 cut in the 2010-11 Budget.

The Coalition’s additional funding will make Australia’s anti-dumping regime more effective.

It  will  provide  Australian  businesses  and  their  workers  with  greater  assurance  that  their   products will not be unfairly undercut by subsidised imported goods.

4. Hire an additional 20 specialist anti-dumping investigators

The  Coalition  will  provide  an  additional  20  specialist  personnel  within  the  Department  of   Industry  over  and  above  the  number  of  personnel  currently  working  in  Customs  so  that   more  anti-dumping  investigations  are  pursued.  These  will  be  new  personnel  devoted  to   anti-dumping enforcement.

Our  commitment  will  increase  the  number  of  personnel  investigating  anti-dumping  cases   and provide more capability in gathering and interpreting evidence.

5. Introduce more stringent and rigorous enforcement of deadlines for submissions

The Coalition will make anti-dumping investigations faster and more effective by mandating  a 40 day limit on party submissions to Industry.

Under the current system, submissions by all parties are due within 40 days of the start of  an anti-dumping investigation. However, Customs currently offers a wide range of potential  grounds for extensions to that deadline. This means Australian businesses can face lengthy  and damaging delays resolving anti-dumping cases.

Our  major  competitors  apply  more  stringent  and  rigorous  standards  on  the  deadlines  for   submissions.

In  most  European  Union  cases,  for  example,  there  are  no  exceptions  to  the  rule  that   submissions must be lodged within 40 days or less.

The  Coalition  will  tighten  submission  rules  and  grant  extensions  only  in  those  situations   where there is a compelling case for them to be allowed.

8



In a comparatively small economy such as ours, failure to take early action can  potentially  lead  to  extremely  damaging  consequences  -  not  only  for  the  domestic  industries  directly   affected, but also for their wider supply chains.

Our  commitment  to  mandate  a  40  day  limit  on  party  submissions  to  the  Department  of   Industry  will  make  anti-dumping  investigations  faster  -  which  means  a  more  effective  and   responsive anti-dumping regime for Australian industries and business.



6.  Crack  down  on  overseas  producers  who  don’t  cooperate  with  anti-dumping   investigations

The  Coalition  will  more  actively  apply  penalties  against  parties  who  fail  or  refuse  to  co-operate with investigations.

Our major competitors rarely tolerate non-compliance with investigations.

In the European Union, for example, strict sanctions are enforced against producers who fail  to  adequately  cooperate  with  requests  to  provide  information  about  their  export  of  the   goods under anti-dumping investigation.

The  Coalition  will  more  strongly  enforce  the  provisions  of  Article  6.8  and  Annex  2  of  the   WTO Anti-Dumping Agreement. Article 6.8 states that:

“In  cases  in  which  any  interested  party  refuses  access  to,  or  otherwise  does  not  provide,  necessary   information  within  a  reasonable  period  or  significantly  impedes  the  investigation,  preliminary  and   final determinations, affirmative or negative, may be made on the basis of the facts available.”



The  Coalition  will  ensure  that  in  cases  where  parties  fail  or  refuse  to  co-operate  with   investigations, this authority is used to make preliminary and final determinations quickly.

We will also ensure that the sanctions imposed on non-cooperating parties are substantially  higher than those applied to other parties.

This  will  strengthen  Australia’s  anti-dumping  regime,  more  closely  align  it  with  those  of   other  countries,  and  ensure  our  industries  and  businesses  are  not  disadvantaged  by   recalcitrant foreign parties.

7.  Strengthen  enforcement  of  the  provisions  of  the  WTO  Agreement  on  subsidies  and   countervailing measures

The  Coalition  will  enhance  enforcement  of  the  provisions  of  the  WTO  Agreement  on   Subsidies and Countervailing Measures (SCM).

9





This Agreement allows countries to seek various remedies through the WTO against the use  of subsidies in foreign nations.

One of the greatest concerns among Australian businesses adversely affected by dumping is  that their foreign competitors are receiving local subsidies from their governments. This has,  however,  traditionally  proved  extremely  difficult  for  Australian  authorities  to  pursue  (let   alone prove) with the relatively limited investigative resources at their disposal.

We  do  not  want  foreign  goods  to  be  sold  at  below  production  cost  into  Australia  on  the   back  of  unlawful  government  subsidies  as  this  unfairly  harms  Australian  businesses  and   costs local jobs.

Where appropriate, we will seek to make greater use of SCM provisions and the associated  dispute settlement procedures.







10



Costs



2012-13

$ million

2013-14  $ million

2014-15  $ million

2015-16  $ million

TOTAL  $ million

Anti-Dumping Policy 2½ 2½ 2½ 2½ 10















































Authorised by Brian Loughnane, Cnr Blackall & Macquarie Streets, Barton ACT 2600

