Search this site   Go

Home

Biographical details

Media Centre

Contact details

Department

Parliamentary  Secretary

Links



Indonesian boat tragedy, Malaysia  Arrangement Wednesday, 02 November 2011

David Oldfield: Chris, thank you for your time.

Chris Bowen: Good morning David.

Oldfield: Good morning to you. Look, first up, is this your  fault?

Bowen: Look, we've consistently warned—firstly David, of  course this is a tragedy and we're all concerned about it,  every Australian would be concerned about this. I've  consistently warned, the government has consistently  warned, that unless we had offshore processing in place  this would happen. I've said in writing, in interviews that you  need offshore processing—an effective deterrent—to stop  people getting on boats and risking their lives.

So if you don't have offshore processing or effective  deterrence in place you'll see people making these sorts of  journeys and you will see people dying and that is a tragedy  and that is exactly what we were trying to avoid by  implementing the Malaysia Arrangement. Those people  who celebrated the demise of the Malaysia Arrangement,  we warned that more people would die on the journey to  Australia and tragically that hasbeen proven to be correct.

Oldfield: Now it is said that you argued for Nauru, it was  one of those terrible leaks that happen in government. Is  there any truth to the suggestion that you argued going with

the Opposition and going to Nauru if Malaysia was going to  fail?

Bowen: No, I don't talk about Cabinet meetings but let me  make this clear—

Oldfield: In other words you can't tell us.

Chris Bowen MP Minister for Immigration and Citizenship

Page 1 of 6 Indonesian boat tragedy, Malaysia Arrangement

30/01/2012 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2011/cb180031.htm

Bowen: Well no, but I am going to say this David: in every  meeting I've ever been in, in every conversation I've ever  had, publicly and privately, I have said that Nauru by itself  will not work and should not be done. That you just have a  detention centre at Nauru, it is not going to provide the  deterrent. You saw the Secretary of the Department of  Immigration give exactly that same advice, very fearlessly,  to the Senate just the other week.

Now I've said consistently that you can have offshore  processing, you know, you can have a detention centre in  another country, and that can be a complement to the type  of arrangement that you have in Malaysia, but by itself it  won't provide the deterrent. What you need is the type of  thing we've done with Malaysia, which is to say, ‘You can  get on a boat and come to Australia if you want to, you can  pay your $15,000 if you want to, but guess what? You're  going to be taken back to where you started the boat  journey, you'll be taken back to Malaysia, you won't get  anything out of the boat journey'.

If you get sent to Nauru it's a completely different story—if  you're a refugee chances are you'll eventually be resettled  in Australia.

Oldfield: Well we will have to differ on whether that's the  case, because—

Bowen: We've talked about that before.

Oldfield: My view of what I've seen, numbers-wise, with  what happened in Nauru is that 40 per cent of those that  went to Nauru finished up in Australia, 30 per cent finished  up in New Zealand and 30 per cent finished up elsewhere— largely returned. So we'll differ on what those figures  actually tell us Chris.

Look, is the Opposition to blame? Who—are you—who  would you allocate fault here to in the sense of people who  are now trying to reach Australia and die on the way?

Bowen: People smugglers.

Oldfield: People smugglers?

Bowen: People smugglers. It was put to me in another  interview this morning that these are good Samaritans, well

Page 2 of 6 Indonesian boat tragedy, Malaysia Arrangement

30/01/2012 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2011/cb180031.htm

I couldn't disagree more strongly or fundamentally. These  are guys who sit around risking other people's lives and  make money in the process, and that's why David, frankly,  I've worked, the government's worked with every bit of  energy we could muster to try and break this trade.

That's why the Malaysia Arrangement was criticised as  being too harsh and not enough respect for human rights  and all those things. It's about the right to life. It's about the  right not to think that you can get on a boat and come to  Australia to get resettled and risk your life in the process,  and not be subject to these people smugglers who sit  around in nightclubs in Jakarta making money off people  who are risking their lives and in desperate situations. So  the blame firmly lies with people smugglers.

Oldfield: Now, there's really the question, Minister. Is it a  desperate situation? Let's be realistic here. Now, if you for  once in your life were able to sort of take the politically  correct hat off—

Bowen: Yep.

Oldfield: And also be what some might consider harsh but  pragmatic, these people made a decision to leave the  relative safety of land and get on a boat. They paid a large  amount of money to be able to do that. Aren't we in many

respects—and I'm not saying people smugglers are nice by  any stretch—but aren't we in many respects looking for a  scapegoat without in any sense laying at least a proportion  of responsibility at the feet of those who make the decisions  themselves for themselves and for their families and for  their children to make a dangerous journey with people who  are unscrupulous?

Nobody puts a gun to their head, no one is pushing a  bayonet in their back and many of these people in  increasing numbers are being found to simply be country  shoppers coming to Australia because it's a good place to  live compared to where they're from. So shouldn't there at  least be reasonably an element of blame laid at the feet of  those who make the decision to get on the boats in the first  place?

Bowen: Well, look, David, I think that the situation is this:  that you can't overgeneralise and people are in different  circumstances. Yes, you're right, there are people who

Page 3 of 6 Indonesian boat tragedy, Malaysia Arrangement

30/01/2012 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2011/cb180031.htm

come to Australia by boat who are not genuine refugees  and yes, we have seen increasing numbers of those  rejected. And I've made that point up hill and down dale,  that not everybody who comes to Australia by boat is a  refugee; some are.

And I think one of the great dangers in this debate is you  can get overgeneralisation. People say to me, ‘Oh, look,  everybody who comes to Australia by boat's a refugee; how  could you be so harsh?'

Oldfield: They're idiots. People who say that, Chris, are  idiots.

Bowen: That is just not right. By the same token, of course  there are people who come to Australia by boat who are  genuine refugees and we have a process for dealing with  those.

Now, the point I'm making, David, is that I do believe that  the people smugglers are the ones who are criminally  culpable, but I do also believe that if you come to Australia  by boat you should not get any advantage out of it. You  should be taken back to whether you began the boat  journey, which in most cases is Malaysia, and told, ‘Look,  we understand you want to live in Australia. Of course,  there's millions of people who want to live in Australia; that's  perfectly fine and legitimate. But there's a way to go about  it. You apply through the UNHCR and you'll be processed  and we will take people out of Malaysia and other countries  and process them in an orderly way. You will not get  resettlement in Australia if you come by boat.'

That is what the Malaysia Arrangement delivered and I  think it is a massive missed opportunity if we are not given  the chance to implement that arrangement. Just give it a  go, give it a chance. Let it be implemented. It's a policy  which has never been given a chance to actually be  implemented.

Oldfield: There's some news in that for me, Minister. You  said that most people start from Malaysia.

Bowen: Yes.

Oldfield: Don't most people start from Indonesia?

Page 4 of 6 Indonesian boat tragedy, Malaysia Arrangement

30/01/2012 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2011/cb180031.htm

Bowen: No, actually. Most people actually begin the boat  journey in Malaysia, so they fly to Malaysia and then take a  boat from Malaysia to Indonesia and then another boat from  Indonesia to Australia.

Oldfield: Right, so it's a series of boat trips.

Bowen: Correct.

Oldfield: You know, then, that they fly to Malaysia. Can you  see how Australians who are realistic about this could find it  hard that a person fleeing their lives gets to actually board a  commercial airline anywhere to arrive anywhere?

Bowen: Well, look, I do, and this is as I say, David, we  need to be careful about oversimplification. Look, the point I  make is that there are people around the world who  wouldn't dream of having the money to pay for a) an airfare  or b) a people smuggler; people in camps in Africa and the  Middle East and Asia.

Now, just because you can afford an airfare doesn't mean  that you aren't a genuine refugee. You can sell everything  you own, you can get some money together and you can do  that. I'm not suggesting that just because you have that  money you are not a genuine refugee. But what I am  suggesting and arguing very strongly is that people who  don't have that money, who don't have that chance, they  deserve a chance to be remembered as well.

And frankly, you get people like the Greens party arguing  that the only people we should care about are those who  can afford a people smuggler. Well, I have a fundamentally  different point of view.

Oldfield: Minister, I think that the greatest danger to the  Labor Party is the Greens and I don't have to say this, but  I'm going to say it, I don't think that you are to blame for  these deaths and I don't think the Gillard Government is to  blame for these deaths. However, there may be those who  try and make political capital on that today. They will be  lying and using such statements for their own purposes and  to no good for any individual who is trying to come here or  stop people from coming. Thanks for your time.

Bowen: Thank you, David.

Page 5 of 6 Indonesian boat tragedy, Malaysia Arrangement

30/01/2012 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2011/cb180031.htm

See: Index of Speeches

URL:  http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2011/cb180031.htm  Last update: Monday, 14 November 2011 at 15:23 AEST

Home Copyright & Disclaimer Privacy Department of Immigration and Citizenship

Page 6 of 6 Indonesian boat tragedy, Malaysia Arrangement

30/01/2012 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2011/cb180031.htm

