

CHRIS BOWEN MP

MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP  *TRANSCRIPT*

INTERVIEW WITH MICHAEL ROWLAND, ABC NEWS 24  BREAKFAST

WEDNESDAY, 2 NOVEMBER 2011



SUBJECTS: Indonesian boat tragedy, Malaysia Arrangement, Nauru.

MICHAEL ROWLAND: We’re joined now by Chris Bowen from Canberra.  Minister, good morning, thanks for your time.

CHRIS BOWEN: Good morning Michael.

ROWLAND: What is the latest information the Government has on the search  for survivors?

BOWEN: Well the latest information - and of course we continue to talk to and  work with the Indonesian authorities - but it is clear we have tragically at least  six people dead, including at least one child. We have around 20 people still  missing. Of course, we believe there are around 70 people on the boat but it is  very difficult to pinpoint the exact number and the reality is that we are unlikely  to ever know the exact number of people on the boat, as we’ve found in these  instances before. But this is a great tragedy Michael and of course I think all

Australians will be thinking today of the victims and their families.

ROWLAND: They will indeed. So it’s fair to say this is now sadly more of a  recovery than a rescue effort?

BOWEN: Look, I think we can tragically assume that many, if not most, of those  around 20 people who are missing will be very, very difficult to recover alive.

ROWLAND: Are Australian authorities involved at all in that effort?

BOWEN: Well no, this is an effort very close to Indonesia so - and the

Indonesian authorities to my knowledge have not requested any assistance, they  are perfectly capable of handling situations such as this. Of course we talk to  them, because its very clear that this boat was heading towards Australia so we  do have a very real and keen interest, but in terms of the rescue it’s something  the Indonesian authorities have well under hand.

ROWLAND: Now as you know the Australian Government does work very  closely with the Indonesian Government to keep track of these boats. What  information do you have on whether that boat was being tracked?

BOWEN: Well this is a boat that was well inside Indonesian waters, that  although it was very clearly heading towards Australia, as I say Michael, was well  inside Indonesian waters and obviously I’m not going to comment about specifics  of tracking and what we do, but this was a boat that was close to Indonesia and  therefore you can work on the basis, of course, that this was not a boat that had  yet come close to Australia and that the normal arrangements had not yet come  into place.

ROWLAND: Would you have expected it to have been tracked by the  Indonesian Navy?

BOWEN: Well Michael, what the Indonesian Navy was doing was a matter for  them. It was a boat, as I say, well inside Indonesian waters and I’m not able to  comment. I have no knowledge about what level of knowledge the Indonesian  Navy had about this particular boat.

ROWLAND: What information, Minister, does the Government have about  further boats either heading to Australia or about to launch from other  Indonesian ports?

BOWEN: Well Michael, we’ve said for some time that we can expect to see an  increase in the number of boat arrivals: of course we had another one yesterday,  a substantial boat of around 90 people on it. I don’t comment on intelligence but  we can - or speculation about numbers of boats - but the situation remains that  we’ve said that we can expect more boat arrivals and that remains our position.

ROWLAND: And the way the current policy framework stands there’s nothing to  argue against a lot more boats coming very quickly, what is the Government  going to do about it?

BOWEN: Well tragically Michael we’ve said consistently, I’ve said and other  Government Ministers have said, that in the absence of the type of arrangements  for offshore processing as part of a proper regional framework like Malaysia -  the Malaysia arrangements - we would see more boats arriving and we

tragically, inevitably would see more deaths at sea and its tragically been proven

to be the case.

Now it is the case that offshore processing as part of a proper regional  framework is an effective deterrent. The type of arrangement with Malaysia is an  effective deterrent and until and unless we are able to implement that then we  will see more boats arriving. So we’ll continue to argue for that Michael.

The practical and legal reality after the High Court case and the failure of the  Opposition to pass our legislation, is that onshore processing is the practical and  legal reality - there is no alternative to that, but we will continue to say, ‘We  could pass legislation today to allow for offshore processing and implement the  sort of arrangement we had with Malaysia, which would allow future  governments to implement their arrangements if they wish to like Nauru, and  give the government-of-the-day the ability to implement offshore processing to  provide an effective deterrent’.

We didn’t negotiate and argue for and go through all the political pain of the  Malaysia arrangement for fun, we didn’t do it because we thought it was easy -  it was neither of those things. We did it because all the expert advice to us was  that this is the way to provide a deterrent for boat arrivals and to stop these  tragic deaths at sea.

ROWLAND: Now you make that argument knowing full well the Opposition  won’t support the ‘Malaysia swap deal’, the Opposition in turn argues your policy  approach is flawed. Australians are waking up this morning, watching this  program and seeing more pictures of people, including children, being dragged  from the water. How many more deaths is it going to take for both sides of  politics to come to some sort of regional compromise?

BOWEN: Well I think you’re right Michael, I think Australians look to their  leaders to sort this out, they - both political parties agree with offshore  processing, Labor and Liberal. Both political parties agree that, done properly, it  can provide a deterrent to getting on a boat to Australia and can avoid tragic  deaths at sea.

Now I think we’ve made good faith offers to the Opposition; the Prime Minister  made it very clear that she was happy to make me available to Mr Morrison for  example, to negotiate a mutually agreeable package. Unfortunately the  Opposition has said, ‘You can have any type of offshore processing you like,  providing it’s ours - providing it’s Nauru’, whereas we have said, ‘Well we believe  the Malaysia arrangement is the best opportunity, but we also believe that you  should have the power to implement an arrangement like Nauru if you’re in  power’.

Mr Abbott has said, ‘Even if the Government offered us Nauru, even if the

Government said that they’d open a detention centre at Nauru, we’d still vote  against this legislation if they proceeded with Malaysia’, despite all the expert  evidence to him that the Malaysia arrangement is the best possible arrangement  for stopping people getting on these dangerous boats, for people smugglers to  risk people’s lives and recklessly and criminally put people onto dangerous boats  in dangerous circumstances and that’s why we’ve been so committed to doing  this. And we remain open to talk to the Opposition and the Opposition could pass  this legislation today; if they told us they could pass the legislation we would do  that today and we could have offshore processing which is the policy of both  sides of politics, Labor and Liberal, we could have that implemented.

ROWLAND: At the same time Minister, you reportedly argued in that Cabinet  meeting that saw the ending of the ‘Malaysia swap deal’, for Nauru. You argued  for the Nauru option reportedly. Now given what’s happened, given all those

political points there you make about the Opposition and given what we are  going to tragically see play out in the days ahead as the search continues for  bodies in Indonesia, is the Government now prepared to look more seriously at  Nauru, knowing full well that Malaysia simply won’t work?

BOWEN: Well Michael, let me make a couple of points. Firstly I don’t comment  on Cabinet meetings but let me say this: I have argued consistently, publicly and  privately, that opening a Nauru detention centre by itself would provide no  deterrent to getting on boats. That’s all the expert advice to me and that’s what  I’ve argued in every single meeting or discussion I’ve ever had and that we  should not adopt a Nauru policy simply by itself.

And now Mr Abbott has come out and said, ‘Look, even if the Government  offered us to open a Nauru detention centre, we wouldn’t pass this legislation’.  Now that just shows a lack of regard for the national interest. Now we continue  to say that Nauru by itself would not provide a deterrent and therefore why  would we adopt a policy which simply would not work?

ROWLAND: Okay. Immigration Minister Chris Bowen, thank you very much for  joining us this morning.

ENDS



