CHRIS BOWEN MP

MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP  *TRANSCRIPT*

INTERVIEW WITH STEVE VIZARD, MTR MORNING SHOW

Thursday, 28 July 2011



SUBJECTS: Malaysia transfer arrangement, Papua New Guinea,  Kevin Rudd.

STEVE VIZARD: On the line, the man responsible for the Malaysian solution,  Immigration Minister Chris Bowen joins me. Good morning Chris.

CHRIS BOWEN: Good morning Steve.

VIZARD: Chris, I want to ask you about what happens to the 801st onward  asylum seeker? Where do they go?

BOWEN: Well a couple of points Steve. Firstly, let’s let this arrangement be  implemented, let’s see how it works and let’s see what affect it has. I think  it’s a very big call now for somebody to get on a boat and come to Australia,  in the hope of being resettled in Australia when clearly we’re saying, ‘Well,  you’ll be sent to Malaysia’. So let’s see how it operates and let’s give it the  chance.

The Malaysian Minister has said, ‘Well if it works we’ll extend it, you know,  let’s have a look at it’, and that’s my position too. Let’s see how it works and  then we’ll make other arrangements accordingly.

It’s also well-known that we’ve now got a regional framework, something  we’ve been working very hard on, and that allows countries to enter into  arrangements to try and deal with irregular migration and we continue to go  down that road and explore those options.

VIZARD: But seeing how it works takes care of the first 800. I ask the  question - you’re not going to wait to plan for the next? What philosophically,  what practically happens to those who don’t fall into that first 800?

BOWEN: Well look, as I say Steve, we’ve been focused on getting this  arrangement up and it’s an important arrangement, it makes a big difference.  Of course we’ll continue to take steps under our regional framework. It’s well  known we’re in discussions with Papua New Guinea for example, about  arrangements that we can enter into with them.

Because where I think all the history and evidence shows us that you do need

a regional solution to a regional problem. This is an international problem:  one country just unilaterally doing things has very little effect.

VIZARD: There’s a report today suggesting that Afghan refugees in Malaysia  are predicting that some of their country men will journey to Australia by  boat, simply to take advantage of the special privileges that are available to

the deported asylum seekers in the swap deal that’s been struck. They - even  on the worst-case scenario - if they get sent back to Malaysia, there’s a  suggestion that they’ll do better than if they hadn’t made the trip.

BOWEN: I think that’s a very big call Steve. You know, really, when you look  at the amount of money you have to pay a people smuggler to get to  Australia: you’d pay that, you’d risk your life just to go back to get the right to  work so that you could pay that money back - make that money back that  you paid to the people smuggler? I’m not sure that economic equation adds  up.

Some people will try it on no doubt, people smugglers will lie about it and  say, ‘Look, these are all the benefits you get, et cetera’. We’ve put into place  appropriate protections, but they’re basic protections, but they’re appropriate.  Malaysia is developing the way it deals with asylum seekers: they’ve flagged  they’re looking at work rights for all their asylum seekers for example, that’s a  process they’re going through. But we’ve codified that and guaranteed that  for the 800.

I think it’s a big call. I think people come to Australia because they want to  live in Australia. Suggesting that they’ll get on a boat for some other reason I  think is a brave call.

VIZARD: Just on the 800, let’s talk about who’s in that 800. Let’s start with  children: are all children in the 800? If not, how are they determined as to  being excluded or otherwise?

BOWEN: Look, this is a difficult issue Steve, but what we’ve said is no  blanket exemptions. So no ‘hard and fast’ people being excluded, because  otherwise, I know how this works, people smugglers will say, ‘Ah look, there’s  a loophole, let’s make the most of that’, and they’d say to people, ‘Look, put  your kids on a boat and we’ll get the kids to Australia and the Government  has said no kids will be sent to Malaysia, and then the child will be accepted  in Australia and then they can sponsor you in and we’ll get the whole family  in’. That’s exactly how people smugglers work, they will leave no stone  unturned in trying to make a dollar.

So what we’ve said is, okay, no blanket exemptions, we’ll have a case-by-case  approach to vulnerable people, particularly children. We’ll assess each child  on the basis of the information we have when they arrive here and make a  decision about how to deal with that child in their interests.

But what we can’t have, which is in nobody’s interest, for people smugglers to  be able to sell the product of putting children on boats. The last thing we  want is boatloads of children coming across and making that dangerous  journey. We all remember what it was like last December when we were told  that babies had drowned off Christmas Island, that children had died. We’ve  had children die on boats before them and we really need to put a stop to  people putting their children on boats and coming to Australia.

VIZARD: Okay, so the kids find their way back to Malaysia, they’re now in  Malaysia. Do you accept personal responsibility for the compliance by  Malaysia of its human rights obligations toward those children that have been  relocated by you there?

BOWEN: Yeah well we’ve put in a lot of safeguards here and we’re working  closely with the UNHCR and the International Organisation for Migration to  make sure that each person is dealt with appropriately. Malaysia’s made  certain commitments and of course those commitments are very important,  so we take that very seriously and also we take seriously our responsibility to  make sure that the decision for each individual is an appropriate one.

VIZARD: And how will you monitor and enforce those obligations that have  been agreed to by Malaysia?

BOWEN: Yeah well we’ve got a number of mechanisms in place. We’ve got  an implementation taskforce which consists of Australia, Malaysia, the UNHCR  and the IOM, so we’ll work together on monitoring and implementing this  arrangement. We’ll also have an advisory taskforce which is going to consist  of non-government organisations as well, so that they can play a role in  assisting us implement this.

VIZARD: Chris, the cost of this deal has been criticised as being too  expensive for what’s in play, around $300 million. I know it covers a wider  amount, but it’s been said that basically for 800 people to be relocated back  to Malaysia we’re effectively paying $300 million. Is that a fair analysis?

BOWEN: No it’s not, because of that cost the vast majority of that cost is the  cost of bringing the 4,000 people that we’re taking from Malaysia to Australia,  and that’s an appropriate thing to do. Some people would say we shouldn’t  take 4,000 people from Malaysia, that’s the Opposition’s point of view; I don’t

agree, I think it’s a good thing that we take 4,000 people and give them a  better life in Australia.

But it does have costs involved in it, it is expensive, but it’s a good thing. But  everything in the asylum seeker space is expensive. Detention here is  expensive, the Pacific Solution was very expensive: that cost vast amounts of  money; and I think the arrangement we have with Malaysia provides good  value for money.

If we provide the disincentive for people to get on boats, that has a couple of  good humanitarian outcomes. It means people aren’t risking their lives, it  means we’re resettling 4,000 more people, and it means, at the end of the  day, the dividend to the taxpayer, because we’re not having to deal with the

costs of detention and processing people in Australia.

VIZARD: In 12 months time when we look at this and judge whether this has  been successful, what are the criteria, the outcomes by which you will say  this has been successful?

BOWEN: Well I think the criteria is that we’ve seen a reduction in the  number of people making the trip to Australia by boat. We’ve already seen  some impact of that Steve; I wouldn’t overstate it, but since we announced  this on the 7th of May we’ve seen a reduction in the number of people  coming to Australia by boat, but you don’t do this overnight. I think until  people see the actual arrangement in operation and people smugglers aren’t  able to say, ‘Look, this is just an idea, its not going to work’; when people see  this working I think that will have a bigger impact.

VIZARD: And finally Chris, how do you sell the integrity of this? Even if it is  the right solution, having regard to the back-flips you’ve made: it was going  to be East Timor and then it was going to be Manus Island and then it wasn’t  going to be any - any country that wasn’t a signatory to the Refugee  Convention, and so it went on, the 567 asylum seekers were going to be part  of deal or not.

Even given the merits of the deal as you’ve now designed it, how do you sell  the integrity of it and not as a last course desperation, having regard to these  so-called back flips?

BOWEN: Well look, we’ve said all along that we think we need a regional  solution and that’s what we’ve delivered. It’s been hard work, I don’t deny  that, there’s a lot of countries in the region that take a different approach to it  to us. For example, Malaysia could have said, ‘Look, go away Australia, you

know, we’ve got 90,000 asylum seekers here, we’ve got our own problems,  we don’t want to help you with your problems’. But they didn’t say that,  because they get that we need to work together and so that’s what we’ve

been able to deliver.

We said we wanted a regional framework; a lot of people said it would be  impossible, that you wouldn’t be able to get countries like Indonesia and  Malaysia to cooperate. Well we have achieved that and I think that’s a  substantial step forward. It does take time but I think people will see it in  operation and see that the international solution we’ve been working on has  actually been delivered.

VIZARD: And when would you expect Manus Island to come online?

BOWEN: Well look, what’s happened there is that we’ve had a chat to Papua  New Guinea, that became public about what we might be able to do together.  Papua New Guinea then has had significant political difficulties, their Prime  Minister’s been very sick in hospital, we’ve had an acting Prime Minister.  There’s a few things that have happened: we’ve had a Cabinet reshuffle, the  Foreign and Immigration Minister’s have changed; so there’s been some  changes there.

They’ve said they’re interested but it does take a while. That’s why my focus  has been on Malaysia, but we continue to talk with Papua New Guinea about  what might be possible, but that’s a process that’s underway.



VIZARD: And finally Chris, Kevin Rudd’s about to go into hospital for an  operation. He says you’re getting too close to the Greens, you need to  differentiate yourself from them. Do you agree with Kevin?

BOWEN: Look, I do to make this point: I think that the Labor Party is the  party that’s in touch with mainstream values. I agree with the Greens on  some things, I disagree with them on others. I think in my policy space, for  example, of immigration I think we are - we have a more appropriate  approach. I think the Greens approach is quite unrealistic in many senses and  - but we need to continue to put our case.

We are different to the Greens, just like we’re different to the Liberal Party.  We agree with some things with the Greens, but we’re very different political  parties, otherwise the Greens would’ve joined the Labor Party and the Labor  Party would’ve joined the Greens: we have a different approach to many  things, and that’s politics and that’s what democracy and elections are all  about, to let people make those choices.

VIZARD: Good on you Chris, really appreciate your time. Look forward to  speaking with you again.

BOWEN: Nice talking with you Steve.

ENDS

