







THE HON DR CRAIG EMERSON MP  MINISTER FOR TRADE





Transcript

Sky News AM Agenda with Ashleigh Gillon



20 September 2011

E&OE

Subjects: polls, asylum-seekers, HSU, President Obama in Darwin.

ASHLEIGH GILLON: Let's go now to our panel of politicians: the Trade

Minister, Craig Emerson, and the Shadow Environment  Minister, Greg Hunt. Good morning to both of you.

CRAIG EMERSON: Morning.

GREG HUNT: Morning, Ashleigh.

GILLON: The primary vote down to 26 per cent, Craig Emerson.

That can't be good for morale. Do you think we'll see  leadership speculation stirred up today ahead of the  Caucus meeting this morning?

EMERSON: There's really good discipline in our Caucus, because

the Caucus knows that we are doing what we should  do as a government, and that is governing in the  national interest, not worrying about weekly or daily or  fortnightly polls. That's what governments are elected  to do. It's not a day-by-day popularity contest.





What we're doing through the carbon pricing

mechanism, through our economic management, and  through the issue of asylum seekers - which I suspect  we may get onto - is governing in the national interest.

Sometimes that, in the short term, is not popular. But

people understand that. They understand that  governments need to make decisions that,  notwithstanding their unpopularity in the short term, are  good for the nation in the long term.

GILLON: Greg Hunt, why isn't Tony Abbott doing better

personally? Fifty-four per cent of people are  dissatisfied with the way he's doing his job.

Considering the Coalition numbers - as we pointed out  there, a huge majority in support of the Coalition at the  moment - why isn't Tony Abbott personally doing a  whole lot better?

HUNT: Well, I think he's probably been the most effective

Opposition Leader Australia has seen in decades.

GILLON: But 54 per cent of people are dissatisfied.

HUNT: I think that, when you look at the situation for the

Government, these polls reflect massive public  disillusion and massive public concern about  incompetence. There is a sense that this is a  government that is in chaos.

Clearly, the Caucus is divided and is itself disillusioned.

But the public is saying, ‘we don't trust the Government  in terms of its competence, and we are disillusioned  that they ruled out a carbon tax and also ruled out  sending people to non-signatory countries to the  International Refugee Convention’. So there's no…





GILLON: And we are going to get to that.

HUNT: …honesty on those fundamental issues.

GILLON: [Interrupts] But don't you think voters are disillusioned

with both of the leaders? Isn't that what this poll is  telling us?

HUNT: Look, it's a tough profession, and what we're doing is

holding the Government to account and progressively  building this sense of the alternative government. That  is the next phase of what we're doing.

And so I think there's enormous upside for the

Coalition. And we are very proud, very proud of our  leader. And I think nobody has been a more effective  Opposition Leader in the last three, four, five decades  that Australia's had. And what that shows is an  incredible self-discipline, and capacity to run an  effective government.

EMERSON: Greg's right in a sense, and that is the Opposition

Leader is very good at saying ‘no’; he's very good at  opposing. That's all he does. And with this border  protection measure, through opposing this legislation,  Mr Abbott is handing over the control of Australia's  borders to people-smugglers.

HUNT: All right, let's take that on.

GILLON: But you're in government, you're in government, Craig

Emerson. It's your responsibility to get your policy up.  Why do you keep slamming the Opposition, slamming  Tony Abbott when this is your problem?





EMERSON: It needs - I think the statistics would bear this out - you

need a majority of votes in the House of

Representatives; you need a majority of votes in the  Senate…

GILLON: [Interrupts] But why put pressure on Tony Abbott?

EMERSON: …in order for legislation …

GALLON: You're in power with, you know, the Greens…

EMERSON: Because we seek…

GILLON: …are supporting you as being government.

EMERSON: … we seek a majority of votes in the House of

Representatives and a majority of votes in the Senate.  The Greens in the Senate have said that they will not  support anything other than onshore processing. But  Mr Abbott is terrified, terrified that the Malaysia  arrangement will work.

And what he says, his three-word slogan is ‘stop the

boats, stop the boats’. He doesn't want the boats to  stop, because he thinks he can profit politically by  boats continuing to arrive. And that's why he's taking  this position.

There is no new-found compassion on the part of Mr

Abbott. In fact, he confirmed last night that part of the  policy is to tow boats back to Indonesia. Indonesia is  not a signatory to the Refugee Convention.

GILLON: Right, okay. There are a few things out there. Let's first

deal with that last point that Craig Emerson raised. We





keep hearing about the hypocrisy of the Coalition when  it comes to the need under your changes to the  Migration Act to have a country sign up to the UN  Refugee Convention.

Firstly, is Indonesia [where], as Craig Emerson points

out, asylum seekers will end with … in, if you turn  boats around. And secondly, when John Howard was  Prime Minister, you didn't seem to mind that Nauru  hadn't signed up to the convention then.

HUNT: They broke it; we'll fix it. Under them, what we've seen

is 12,000 arrivals, 240 boats; the end of offshore  processing. We are offering Craig Emerson, Chris  Bowen and the Prime Minister today a return to  offshore processing - 148 countries. All they have to do  is accept their own pre-election policy of states which  are signatories to the UN Refugee Convention.

I think the Prime Minister said on 8 July last year, ‘I

would rule out anywhere that is not a signatory to the  convention’, the same language she used when she  ruled out a carbon tax.

We offer a solution: 148 countries - offshore

processing can recommence on Nauru or Manus  Island or … at any time if the Government wants to  take it. The only people standing in the way of offshore  processing are the Labor Party. And the only reason  they're doing that is out of a breathtaking arrogance  that they don't want to be seen to be accepting the  option that's been effective, proven and workable.

GILLON: But why … aren't you being hypocritical? That's my

question. How do you answer those claims of  hypocrisy when you consider that issue of turning  boats around and ending up with asylum-seekers back





in Indonesia, which hasn't signed up to the

convention?

HUNT: Look, we make no apologies for the fact that there are

three parts…

EMERSON: That's a complete contradiction.

HUNT: … three parts to our policy. First, there is a very tough,

up-front deterrent before people become part of the  Australian orbit. Secondly, we have offshore  processing: 148 countries available today. And thirdly,  temporary protection visas. It's proven; it's effective; it  works; it stopped the boats. Two hundred and forty  boats, 12,000 people: that's what happened when they  destroyed the solution.

GILLON: We do just have a little bit of the Prime Minister, Julia

Gillard, speaking about this very issue on ABC Radio  this morning. Have a listen to the latest from the Prime  Minister.

[Excerpt from ABC Radio]

JULIA GILLARD: I am not asking him, and I have never asked him, to

endorse the Government's plan for Malaysia. What I  am asking him to do is to put this government and  future governments in the same position that the  Howard Government was, with the same degree of  options and powers.

Now, why would Mr Abbott say no to that, other than

hypocrisy, opportunism, and a deep, deep fear that the  Malaysia arrangement will work?





[End of excerpt]

GILLON: Craig Emerson, isn't Labor saying, in rejecting the

Coalition's amendments to the Migration Act, that you  would rather no offshore processing than go to Nauru?

EMERSON: No, what we're saying is that the government of the

day should have the right to protect Australia's borders  and protect asylum-seekers who otherwise arrive by  boats and lose their lives at sea or at Christmas Island,  as we saw before Christmas.

We are not being prescriptive to Mr Abbott. Despite the

advice that he has received, that Nauru will not work -  and he has received that advice from the experts in the  field - he says he wants to go with Nauru. If he  becomes the Prime Minister, he can go with Nauru  under this legislation.

What we're saying is that the advice that we've

received - and it's very clear, unequivocal - and that is,  the Malaysia arrangement is the only one that would  successfully break the people-smugglers' model.

And Mr Abbott does not want the people smugglers'

model broken. He wants to hand over our border  security to people who trade in people-smuggling.  That's what he wants to do: to hand that over to  people-smugglers. What he's saying is, Mr Abbott is  saying to people-smugglers with the decision last night,  ‘start your engines; start your engines and bring the  boats’. Because why? He can profit politically from  that.

And Greg Hunt just twice refused to answer a very

simple question. And that is that you put to him: if he





says a country must be a signatory to the Refugee  Convention, how could he reaffirm last night that he  would turn boats back to Indonesia, which is not a  signatory to the Refugee Convention? There is no  logical answer to that.

The only answer to this from Mr Abbott's point of view

is a political one. And that is he wants to hand over  Australia's borders to people-smugglers, and he's  saying to them, ‘start your engines’.

GILLON: Politically, the Left faction of the Labor Party is

probably going to be very pleased if onshore  processing does eventuate as a result of this  stalemate. The Greens are also going to be very  pleased.

Politically, how do you think that will affect Labor's

standing: if you're seen to be going along with yet  another Green policy?

EMERSON: We want to do the right thing by Australia, by border

security, and by asylum-seekers who take these risky  journeys. Mr Abbott wants to do neither. And so we are  doing the right thing by the country and we are  showing plenty of flexibility. We're saying to Mr Abbott,  ‘even if you don't agree with this, we are not seeking  your endorsement for the Malaysia arrangement, even  though that is what the experts say we should  implement’. If he believes in Nauru, he can - as Prime  Minister if he were elected - can exercise that option.

There could not be a more reasonable proposition than

this. But it's been rejected because Mr Abbott wants  the boats to keep coming because he believes he will  profit politically.





GILLON: Okay.

HUNT: Honestly, Craig. Honestly, Craig, that is absolutely

ridiculous.

EMERSON: Absolutely true; absolutely true.

HUNT: What's the history here? We fixed it; they broke it; we'll

fix it again and…

EMERSON: How?

HUNT: …we could fix it today. We could have offshore

processing today.

EMERSON: In Iran.

HUNT: We're happy to bring the Parliament debate forward;

we're happy to debate this in the Parliament today;  we're happy to approve 148 countries for offshore  processing, all against the standard that the Prime  Minister set prior to the election.

On 8 July last year, she said she ruled out sending

people to non-signatory countries. That is a pre-election promise. It's the same as the promise that she  would rule out a carbon tax. So firstly there is a pattern  of deceit.

But, please, Craig and the ALP, don't blame us for

standing up for the right standards and standing up for  what the ALP pledged to the Australian people in the  lead-up to an election.





GILLON: Okay, we do need to take a break. Craig Emerson,

Greg Hunt, stay with us.

[Ad and news headlines break]

GILLON: Let's return now to Craig Emerson and Greg Hunt.

I want to bring up this story about the latest on the

HSU scandal, the Craig Thomson scandal. Today  we've learnt that Mr Thomson's former union  colleague, Michael Williamson, he stepped down from  his position as the ALP's national vice-president; also  his position as the New South Wales Labor senior vice-president.

Craig Emerson, why wasn't he stood aside by the party

when these allegations were first raised? He's accused  of ripping off the union, basically misusing funds.

EMERSON: Oh well, obviously there was a conversation with Mr

George Wright, who's the national secretary of the  Labor Party, and this decision has been taken.

But as soon as an allegation is raised against

someone, that doesn't mean that they should stand  aside. If that were the case, whether it be in the  Parliament or outside, there would be people standing  aside left, right and centre.

And I think that it's appropriate now that Mr Williamson

concentrate on the allegations that have been made,  which he needs to address. That's what's happening.  And they can argue it out within the Health Services  Union. They’ve disaffiliated from the Labor Party, and  Mr Williamson has stepped aside from the couple of  positions I think that he held in the Labor Party.





GILLON: Whatever happened to Craig Thomson saying he was

going to give a full statement?

EMERSON: Well, as you know, as you well know, there is a strike-

force or a taskforce that's been set up. I understand it's  looking into the activities of the union again. I imagine,  though I don't know this, that Craig Thomson would  have legal advice that would say let that now take its  course. He was indicating a disposition to make a  statement. Now, since indicating that disposition this  taskforce or strike-force has been set up: it's quite  possible - I don't know - but his legal advisers might  well have said, ‘well, you know, make any statement  after these processes take their course’.

GILLON: Is that fair enough, Greg Hunt: that Craig Thomson

shouldn't be forced or lobbied to give a statement to  the Parliament, considering that strike-force  investigation?

HUNT: Well, what we see out of this is firstly that - without

commenting on individuals, because I think we're now  at that stage - there's clearly a culture of looting the  poorest paid workers in this sector, those in the HSU.  Some of the poorest paid people in Australia have  effectively been looted, and there's a culture of silence  at the top of the ALP.

There are no statements being demanded by the

Prime Minister; there's no accountability being  demanded by the Prime Minister; there's no real  concern being shown by the Prime Minister. So if  somebody says they're going to make a statement,  perhaps they should go ahead and make that  statement under Parliamentary Privilege. There's  nothing stopping him.





EMERSON: Well, let's draw a comparison. Mr Abbott knew that a

member of his team, a parliamentarian, had actually  been charged - not just investigated but charged - and  he kept that information to himself for two months and  did not at any time demand that that particular Senator  make a statement. Nor have we; nor have we.

GILLON: Is that hypocritical, Greg Hunt?

HUNT: Well, I think it's the difference between $100 and

$100,000.

EMERSON: Oh, I see. So it's not serious?

HUNT: And more significantly…

EMERSON: Being charged is not serious?

HUNT: And more significantly, right now, there is a hearing

going on, and that will play itself out and the courts will  make their own decision.

GILLON: Okay, I do…

EMERSON: Well, that's what I'm saying, that…

GILLON: Okay.

EMERSON: … play themselves out.

GALLON: We are running out of time. Before we go, I want to

draw our viewers' attention to a front page story in the  NT News this morning. It says that President Obama -





we know he's coming to Australia - NT News has an  exclusive story today saying he's going to visit Darwin.

Craig Emerson, is that a bit of a surprise? Usually

Darwin's not on the itinerary for a visiting US President.

EMERSON: Well, it'd be one of the first places I'd visit. It's a very …

it's a lovely place, Darwin. It's the gateway to Kakadu.  We've got a great affection for Darwin. I love going to  Darwin, and obviously President Obama, by the sound  of this newspaper - and of course if the Northern  Territory News says it's true, well, it would be new, it  would be news …

HUNT: [Laughs]

EMERSON: …there's no doubt about that. And I don't know if he'll

come with a knife and say, ‘that's not a knife; that's a  knife’, and do the old Crocodile Dundee impersonation.  But he's very welcome in Australia; we're greatly  looking forward…

GILLON: Let's not offend our Northern Territory viewers.

HUNT: I have strong views on this: that if he can't visit the

Mornington Peninsula, I'd be delighted if he visits  Kakadu.











GILLON: [Laughs] Greg Hunt and Craig Emerson,

appreciate your time on the program, as  always. Thank you for that this morning.

EMERSON: Thank you.

HUNT: Thank you.







