CHRIS BOWEN MP

MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP  *TRANSCRIPT*

INTERVIEW WITH ZOE DANIEL, ABC AM PROGRAM

Tuesday, 26 July 2011



SUBJECTS: Malaysia transfer arrangement.

ZOE DANIEL: Minister, are you confident that this deal will stop the boats?

CHRIS BOWEN: I'm confident it will have a big impact on people's decision  to risk their lives, jump on a boat, pay the money to the people smugglers  just to face the prospect of being returned to Malaysia. So I think it will have  a very big impact, I think it will pull the rug from out of the people smuggler's  advertising model.

DANIEL: What's the bigger incentive to stopping the boats: the extra 4,000  places or the risk of being sent back?

BOWEN: I think it's a package. I think it's saying to people that Australia, we  will resettle more genuine refugees who've been waiting for resettlement; at  the same time you have to nothing to achieve by getting on a boat.

DANIEL: But in fact you do have something to achieve. I mean if you've  been here for 10 or 20 years with no work rights, you get on a boat, go to  Christmas Island, come back and then you can work.

BOWEN: Well people who get on boats to come to Australia get on boats to  come and live in Australia, they don't do it for any other reason. And by  taking that away, you really do smash the people smugglers' business model.

The Malaysian Government's made quite clear that they are improving the  situation for asylum seekers across the board, but we have codified and  guaranteed protections built into this arrangement, that's as appropriate.

DANIEL: Well it is complex though, because now you've got 800 people who  will have rights and 90,000 who don't: that creates a two tiered system.

BOWEN: Well the Malaysian Government have indicated that they are  perfectly comfortable with the way that they’ll manage that going forward.  We have -

DANIEL: Do you really have faith in that? I mean it's a country notorious for  human rights abuses of refugees.



BOWEN: Well, no, the Malaysian Government has appropriately agreed with  us, based on feedback from the UNHCR and others, that these protections are  the right thing to do.



DANIEL: Okay, so explain how it's going to work exactly in terms of those  people who are sent back, what will be the process?

BOWEN: Well people who are transferred from Australia to Malaysia will be  brought to Malaysia, they'll go into a transit centre for up to 45 days. That's  where they'll receive their first basic checks. Then, with the assistance of the  International Organisation for Migration, they'll move into the community.  They will have the right to self reliance, including work rights, they'll have the  right to - for children to attend schools and they'll have the right to basic  health care. And they'll receive Australia and Malaysia identification to  establish their legal right to be in Malaysia, as is very clear in the  arrangement.

DANIEL: Can you flesh that out a bit more, I mean who's going to protect  those rights? We know that many people who are already here who are  registered with the UNHCR still face extortion from the immigration police, for  example. Who's going to be running around after this 800 making sure that  doesn't happen to them?

BOWEN: Well a couple of points. Firstly as you heard Minister Hishammuddin  himself say, judge us by results. He's given directions to his authorities that  this is the appropriate arrangement and this is to be implemented. In addition  we'll have an implementation taskforce consisting of representatives of  Australia, Malaysia, the UNHCR and the IOM, and we'll have an advisory  group which is open for nominations from non-government organisation that  want to be involved to make sure this arrangement works.

ENDS



