





Minister’s Office: 02 6277 7500 or 0434 664 589                                       Department: 02 6261 1555



MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS

The Hon. Kevin Rudd MP

TRANSCRIPT OF INTERVIEW WITH ALI MOORE

LATELINE, ABC

4 JULY 2011



Subjects: Carbon tax; Thailand election; Live cattle trade; Asylum seekers;  and Australia Network



E & O E - PROOF ONLY

ALI MOORE: Tonight's guest is Foreign Minister Kevin Rudd.

Mr Rudd joined us a short time ago to discuss Sunday's carbon tax announcement, the  Malaysia asylum seeker swap deal, the Indonesian live cattle ban, the new prime minister of  Thailand, the Australia Network contract and the modern art of diplomacy.  Kevin Rudd,  welcome to Lateline.

KEVIN RUDD: Thanks for having me on the program.



ALI MOORE: We'll get to Thailand and other issues affecting your portfolio in a moment, but  first, the Prime Minister has announced details of the carbon tax will be released on Sunday.   Does that mean all the details of the tax have now been finalised, it's all locked in?

KEVIN RUDD: Well let's wait until Sunday. I mean, this is a matter for the Prime Minister, the  Minister for Climate Change, and I'm sure all will be made clear on Sunday.



Minister’s Office: 02 6277 7500 or 0434 664 589                                       Department: 02 6261 1555

2

But I've got to say the important thing for Australia is to have clarity on the question of a

carbon price; that is what the Labor Party has stood for since prior to the 2007 election.

That's what we stand for today, because it's essential that we bring down greenhouse gas  emissions and we do something concrete about global warming. Our national interests are  at stake here.

ALI MOORE: But are you aware whether all the issues have been revolved?

KEVIN RUDD: On the processes concerning the climate change deliberations, put those  points to the Climate Change Minister and the Prime Minister.



All I can say is Sunday is announcement day and I expect that you will see the totality of the  package, but I am not engaged in the detail of the internal deliberation process. That is for  my ministerial colleagues. I believe they're doing an excellent job.

ALI MOORE: Do you also believe that what will be made public will be as good as the CPRS in  your view that was put to Parliament when you were Prime Minister? As good, or a  compromise?

KEVIN RUDD:  The key question here is to put a price on carbon. I think it pays little dividend

to put one down one side of the page and one down the other and go tick, cross, tick, cross,  tick, tick, cross.

The commentators will do that. The key thing is a price on carbon and to make sure that  there are appropriate arrangements for families and including the assurances given by the  Prime Minister and the Climate Change Minister today on the exemption of petrol from the  scheme, which of course is what we did in the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme as well.

ALI MOORE: Of course the key difference is that under your scheme, petrol was only  exempted for three years. Under Julia Gillard's scheme, it will be exempted "for the future".

Is that a mistake? Never say never?

KEVIN RUDD: Well, the key thing here is to make sure that we get this carbon price through  this Parliament. And each Parliament is of a different composition.

Remember, in the period that I was Prime Minister, we spent the better part of a year, a  year and a half in consultation with the Australian community.



Minister’s Office: 02 6277 7500 or 0434 664 589                                       Department: 02 6261 1555

3

We put it to the Australian Parliament twice. It was voted down by the Liberals and the

Greens.  This Parliament is of a different composition. Let us see how they'll react on this  occasion. I think it's time for Tony Abbott to get real. But my core concern is this, and always  has been: it's time to put a price on carbon.

And if the Greens on this occasion choose to be "flexible", well, that's by the by. It's a  question of getting the necessary parliamentary support for us to act on climate change  nationally and internationally so that  together, with the rest of the world, we can make a  material difference and thereby preserve a future for our kids and grandkids. That's our  responsibility.

ALI MOORE: That would seem though a recognition that a different parliament in a different  time of course could in fact not exempt petrol; the rules could change.

KEVIN RUDD: Well, what I said back to the CPRS, was after the three years of the exemption  of petrol, that we would review it in terms of its overall impact within the scheme and its  overall impact on families.

That was the form of words we used on that occasion. As I said, each parliament is different.

But the Government's policy is absolutely clear, as articulated by the Prime Minister today,

and that is this decision in relation to petrol is for now and for the future.

And I think the key thing here is we've had Captain Negative, Tony Abbott, round and round  the place for the last three months on dozens of occasions saying the sky will fall in, petrol  will go up through the roof.

Well, just time for Mr Abbott to be held to account for once on something he said. This is  part of just an ongoing scare campaign without foundation.

ALI MOORE: Well let's look at international issues. What will the change of government in

Bangkok mean for Australia's relationship in Thailand?

KEVIN RUDD: Well the good thing of what has occurred in Thailand is that we have had  peacefully conducted elections.

We appear to be in the middle of a peaceful transition process from the government led by  prime minister Abhisit and the Democratic Party to the new government under the party  Pheu Thai, led by Ms Shinawatra.



Minister’s Office: 02 6277 7500 or 0434 664 589                                       Department: 02 6261 1555

4

Now under those circumstances, we expect to deal with the new government in the same

way in which we dealt with its predecessor. It's an important bilateral relationship for  Australia, huge trade interests we have in Thailand, we have a free trade agreement there,  huge security interests and we do a lot in the world together.

I'm confident our relationship with Thailand will continue to prosper under the new  government.

We congratulate them, but we also congratulate prime minister Abhisit for having taken the  bold decision to bring on an early election to resolve what many had come to conclude was  an absolute political impasse within the country.



ALI MOORE: You've described though as a complication the fate of the prime minister  elect's brother Thaksin Shinawatra, who of course was convicted of corruption and is in  exile. What do you see as the risks?

KEVIN RUDD: Well, obviously the prime minister's brother, Thaksin Shinawatra, has been  found guilty of corruption charges within Thailand itself, and obviously that is a matter of  rolling controversy within Thai politics.

If therefore in the future it was arranged by one means or another to bring Thaksin

Shinawatra back into the country, then I think it's possible that we will see instability  triggered.  But that's in the realm of the hypothetical. It's just acknowledging a reality for  what it is.

We in Australia intend to get on building a strong relationship with this government, as we  had with prime minister Abhisit's government, because it's important for the region, where  Australia has so many interests at stake.

ALI MOORE: If we can turn to Indonesia, another country where we have a lot of interests at  stake, and of course the key issue at the moment being the banning of the live cattle trade.

You're set to visit there at the end of the week. It'll be your first visit since that ban was put  in place. Why has it taken so long?

KEVIN RUDD: Oh, good grief, Ali!

I've been meeting the Indonesian Foreign Minister twice in the last several weeks at various  conferences around the world.

You don't just go to each other's capitals. Foreign ministers are on the move constantly.



Minister’s Office: 02 6277 7500 or 0434 664 589                                       Department: 02 6261 1555

5



I had a long set of conversations with Foreign Minister Marty Natalegawa at a conference  only four or five days ago, and prior to that I was at another conference with him in  Budapest in Hungary, and we're on the phone to one another all the time.

That's the way in which Foreign ministers doing business. The idea that it's always flags  flying, landing in capitals, frankly, is - doesn't reflect the ongoing reality.

So I've been into this up to my armpits together with the Agriculture Minister, Joe Ludwig,  and his counterpart in Indonesia and the Trade Minister of course Craig Emerson and his  counterpart in Indonesia.



ALI MOORE: That said, it's not always, I guess, on the ground, but in this instance you are  the heaviest hitter Australia has in terms of our foreign relations, you're the ex-prime  minister and the current Foreign Minister.

Don't you think that our cattle producers would've liked to have seen you on the ground  and not holding conversations around the periphery or the sidelines of other conferences?

KEVIN RUDD: I just think this is a completely false debate. If you sit down with the foreign  minister of another country and you have a full and formal bilateral with him, it's not just

over a cup of tea in the corner; it's you, in a room, working through the issues in great  systematic detail. That's the business of diplomacy.

ALI MOORE: So why go now?

KEVIN RUDD: The physical location of it is a different matter.

Why go now? Because in about two weeks' time we are convening a meeting of all East-Asian foreign ministers on the future of what will be an important summit for all of East Asia  later in the year.



It's the sort of thing I would normally do because of a vast agenda in preparation for a  meeting with our colleagues from around the region. At the same time, of course, I will be  reviewing progress on the live cattle export question.

For me, this is also a deep challenge of foreign policy, as it is of trade policy, as it is of  agriculture policy, and for two reasons.  No-one watching your program wants to see animal  welfare standards of the type which were seen on Four Corners recently.



Minister’s Office: 02 6277 7500 or 0434 664 589                                       Department: 02 6261 1555

6

At the same time, we are very mindful of the fact that this is a half-billion-dollar industry on

which so many families right across northern Australia, my own home state of Queensland,  are directly affected and the communities which are supported by the industry.

We've therefore got to get this right. That's why we've got three senior ministers at work on  this and we are working through it systematically in a set of very difficult challenges.

ALI MOORE: Of course, another big issue regarding our relations with other countries, the  asylum seeker processing deal with Malaysia.

You've not visited Malaysia since that deal was initiated. How heavily involved are you in

those negotiations?

KEVIN RUDD: I pick up a theme in your questions here, Ali.

The bottom line is this: the entire negotiation with other regional countries on assessment  centres hangs off one core fact, and that is that we, back in March, myself and the  Indonesian foreign minister, presided over a conference in Bali which for the first time in  this region and the first region in the world negotiated a regional framework agreement for  the processing of asylum seekers within our region.

I was into that again up to my armpits for the simple reason is it was chaired by myself,  Marty Natalegawa, with dozens of others at ministerial and vice ministerial rank from right  across Asia.

That's the cornerstone of what now occurs with bilateral negotiations with countries like  Malaysia or Papua New Guinea.

By the way, the conference that you've just sort of flicked to one side that I saw Marty  Natalegawa at, I also had a very good bilateral with the Malaysian Foreign Minister as well.

ALI MOORE: Indeed you did. There are photographs on your website.

But I guess it is a fair question to ask why Malaysia and Indonesia have not been on your  travel itinerary.

Because certainly since that deal with Malaysia, that preliminary deal was announced, you  have been to Burma, Kazakhstan, Equatorial Guinea, China, Hungary, Abu Dhabi, Thailand,  Finland, Sweden, Norway, the US and the UK. You couldn't fit Indonesia and Malaysia in  there for some on-the-ground discussions?



Minister’s Office: 02 6277 7500 or 0434 664 589                                       Department: 02 6261 1555

7



KEVIN RUDD: Well I think what you've done there, Ali, is a little bit unfair, and I think you  know that it's unfair. And the reason is I've already been to Indonesia twice in the nine  months that I've been Foreign Minister.

And in one of those occasions was to deal with the very issues that we are just speaking  about in terms of asylum seekers across the region.

As for the Malaysians, I've also been engaging with them in different forums, understanding  the fact that the primary negotiation of these arrangements with our Malaysian and  Indonesian counterparts on the question of asylum seekers lays with my colleague, the

Immigration Minister, Chris Bowen.

As for the rest of what you just referred to, let me tell you: foreign ministers around the  world are in the habit of travelling for the simple reason that we've all collectively  concluded that most foreigners live abroad. Therefore, you've actually got to travel to meet  them.

And the last thing I'd say to you is: when it comes to travel to Australia, it's a long way from  a lot of these countries and if you're going to engage with them on everything we've got  going in the global agenda, current state of the global economy, current state of security in

Southeast Asia, current state of our negotiations across the world, you've got to be out  there and in it - that's what foreign ministers do, for which I make zero apology.

ALI MOORE: Well let's turn to an issue slightly closer to home and that's the decision on the  new contract for Australia's overseas television service which is being delayed with changes  made to the tender after in particular the turmoil in the Middle East.

Can you just confirm whether reports that the independent committee had made a  recommendation that Sky should win that contract over the ABC?

KEVIN RUDD: Both the deliberations by what I think you're referring to as the tender  evaluation board and its recommendation to the Secretary of the Department of Foreign  Affairs and Trade are matters on which a.) I've never been briefed, and b.) nor was the  Cabinet.

Therefore, the decisions that you've just referred to in terms of the overall decision-making  processes of the Government were not mindful of that, they were mindful of the fact that  our circumstances over the last six months have changed.



Minister’s Office: 02 6277 7500 or 0434 664 589                                       Department: 02 6261 1555

8

One of those circumstances is this: back at the end of the last year when you saw the

eruption of the Arab Spring and what unfolded in January, February and March on our  television screens in Egypt, in Tunisia, in Jordan, in Bahrain, as well as now of course in the  civil war in Libya, we found ourselves with a whole range of our interests in this part of the  region - part of the world, I should say - seriously challenged.

We've got thousands of Australians living in that part of the world. Getting messages out to  them through the general media is now very important.  We have massive economic  interests there.

There are tens of thousands of Arab students in Australia. Therefore, this placed a whole

new focus and set of interests on the table which were not there as graphically as before.

So it's entirely appropriate for the Cabinet to decide at a strategic level that this should be  considered afresh and by Cabinet as a whole, looking at the totality of our international  interests, not just our foreign policy interests.

ALI MOORE: The one issue that I find a little confusing is that, yes, it's going to be a Cabinet  decision, but legally an individual minister has to actually be the final approver, and  according to the Minister for Communications, Senator Conroy, he is now the final approval,  and yet this entire process, as he explains, is being administered by your department.



Why aren't you the final approver?

KEVIN RUDD: Well, I'll draw your attention to what Senator Conroy said today in the Senate,  and it's a remark with which I completely concur. And that is: the decision-maker, in effect,  is the Cabinet itself.

The approver is, consistent with other contractual arrangements entered into by the  Government in a whole range of different areas, is then assigned to, by legal precedent  almost, to an individual minister to do the approving. That is why one shouldn't read too

much into that.

ALI MOORE: I understand that, but it was a view previously, was it not? It is your  department that's got carriage of the process?

KEVIN RUDD: Well, the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade has carriage of the process  because we have been anchoring the overall tender evaluation process for some  considerable period of time.  Therefore, why change the underpinning bureaucracy of it?  You don't bother about that. That's a waste of time and effort.



Minister’s Office: 02 6277 7500 or 0434 664 589                                       Department: 02 6261 1555

9



The key thing though is the decision-making process itself by the Cabinet, take into account  these new criteria, with the respective tenderers being offered new information to which  quite legitimately they must now respond.

It's an important contract for Australia. It's $223 million worth of public funds. It's to get our  image out to the rest of the region and the world beyond, including places like the Middle  East, and therefore we got to get the decision right. And therefore, the input of all Cabinet  ministers is entirely appropriate.

ALI MOORE: Given how you describe this contract as very important, getting Australia's

image out, would it be appropriate to give it to an organisation that will potentially be  largely foreign controlled?

If I explain that to you in the sense that Sky News is 33 per cent owned by BSkyB, where  News Corporation has announced plans to take 100 per cent of that organisation, and 33  per cent-owned by the Nine Network, which belongs to a private equity group.

KEVIN RUDD: Well, Ali, you wouldn't be talking up the book of the ABC there, would you?

ALI MOORE: I would naturally be accused of that, but of course I'm not. I think it's a fair

question.

KEVIN RUDD: Oh, no. Well let me just put it to you in exactly these terms: I am not going to  publicly canvass the virtues or vices, the strengths or weaknesses of any of those who are  tendering for this particular contract, and the reason being is that those deliberations go  through the process which you and I have just been discussing.

So for me to go out there and say one's got these strengths, the other's got the following  weaknesses, would be entirely wrong. I don't intend to do that. I haven't in the past and I  don't intend to start now.



ALI MOORE: Under whoever wins the contract, how much control will the Government have  and the Department have, your Department have, over programming?

KEVIN RUDD: We'll have a significant input into that. And one of the reasons this contract  was put out to tender was to ensure that we would have a maximisation of Australian  content in a program or a television network which is paid for by the Australian taxpayer.



Minister’s Office: 02 6277 7500 or 0434 664 589                                       Department: 02 6261 1555

10

It's no good running programs around the rest of the world which carry wonderfully

interesting BBC documentaries. You get that on the BBC.

ALI MOORE: But does it mean that if you don't like a story, if you're not happy with a  particular rundown, if you're uncomfortable with a particular piece of current affairs, you  can say it can't be run?

KEVIN RUDD: No, we're not running tacit Izvestia -style censorship arrangements. We're not  into that.

What we want is the maximisation of Australian content which deals with the reality of

modern Australia, not just a bunch of cute, furry marsupials, not just a whole bunch of holes  in the ground with lots of iron ore being shipped out on a truck. The world knows that stuff.

It's the new face of modern Australia, multicultural Australia. We have a brilliant financial  services sector, a brilliant technology sector, a great science sector, we're great at universal  primary and second education, our health services are world-leading.

These are the images of the new Australia we want to be projected in Australia's name to  the region and the world because we're proud of who we are as Australian, and we're not  Americans, we're not Brits, we're not Europeans, we're Australians, and therefore we got to

get our message right.

So will DFAT have an input into that? You betcha.

ALI MOORE:  So many issues to ask you, so little time. Foreign Minister, many thanks for  joining Lateline tonight.

ENDS



