

Page:  1









THE HON DR CRAIG EMERSON MP  MINISTER FOR TRADE





Transcript

Sky News AM Agenda with David Lipson



6 September 2011

E&OE

Subjects: Newspoll, asylum-seekers, NSW mining royalties.



DAVID LIPSON: On our panel this morning, the Shadow

Attorney-General Senator George Brandis is in  Brisbane. George thanks for joining us this  morning. And here in Canberra …

GEORGE BRANDIS: Good morning David.

LIPSON:  … the Trade Minister Craig Emerson.

Minister, first to you: the primary vote as we

heard there didn't actually move, but it's  historically low. Julia Gillard's personal ratings  have slumped even further. Is there any talk  whatsoever of replacing her before the next  election?



Page:  2





CRAIG EMERSON: No, there's not. And I listened intently to what  Martin [O’Shannessy, from Newspoll] was  saying, and that the position of the Coalition  now is comparable to that after 9-11. And let's  go back a few months before that to when the  Coalition, under John Howard's leadership, lost  the Ryan by-election. I think they were  expected to win the state election in Western  Australia and they didn't, and Kim Beazley was  preferred Prime Minister by a very large margin  over John Howard.

Why do I say that? The reason is that shifted

quite profoundly in a matter of a few months.  And then the Coalition did win the 2001  election, not as strongly as that 9-11 result  would indicate. And so …

LIPSON: Does that mean that only a Black Swan event

like 9-11 could save Labor?

EMERSON: Not it doesn't: it means that I think that polls

sort of tap into a mood at a particular time,  notwithstanding that the question is ‘if an  election was held next Saturday what would  you do?’ There isn't an election next Saturday,  people know that, and of course the High Court  decision, which I respect, on the asylum-seeker issue did invalidate the Malaysian  solution. But in the same stroke of the pens of  the judges, it also has invalidated - or gone as  close as possible as you can to invalidate -



Page:  3





John Howard's and Tony Abbott's Nauru  solution.

LIPSON: Stephen Smith - we spoke to him a little earlier

this hour about the leadership issue, among a  number of other issues. Let's just hear what he  said.

[Excerpt from previous interview with Defence

Minister Stephen Smith]

STEPHEN SMITH: There's no vacancy. These things are not in  contemplation. I strongly support the Prime  Minister and her very determined efforts to  work the Government and the country through  a series of difficult policy challenges that we  have.

The poll that we see today - and you're quite

right, I don't normally get into the detail of an  individual poll, because I hate using the clichÃÂ©   but there's only one poll that counts and that  will be a poll some time in September, October,  November of 2013. Of course today we’ll see  some reflection in an opinion poll about recent  events.

[End of excerpt]

LIPSON: Now, this morning on breakfast television,

Peter Beattie refused to deny that he's been  approached to be parachuted into the Federal



Page:  4





party. Stephen Smith there said he hasn't been  approached to lead Labor. Has anyone  sounded you out at all Craig Emerson?

EMERSON: [Laughs] No, no, no and there's no such

discussion. And, look, Peter's a great guy. He's  a friend of mine, Peter Beattie. But you know,  we often hear of people coming into Parliament  and taking on the mantle of a Messiah and so  on.

We've got a good a leader in Julia Gillard.

What defines her leadership is her assiduous  interest in the national interest; her only  interest is the national interest. And that means  making tough decisions today for the securing  of the future of Australia tomorrow. That's not  always popular.

But we've always resolved not to talk about

polls and there's been legitimate criticism of  previous Governments for being poll-driven  and rolling out of bed and all this sort of stuff.  But what Julia Gillard does each time is says  what is the decision that is in the national  interest and she makes it.

LIPSON: Senator Brandis, Tony Abbott is well ahead

now as preferred Prime Minister. It's the sixth  Newspoll in a row that he's been ahead of Julia  Gillard. But his net satisfaction rating is still in  negative territory, isn't it?



Page:  5





BRANDIS: Um, well look, I don't think that's right actually.

It's … when I … according to my cursory  reading of the poll this morning, but it's a…

LIPSON: Net satisfaction rating about negative 13 per

cent, according to the Newspoll.

BRANDIS: Look David, I … is that right? Well I think

people, you know, compare one leader with  another and there's no doubt who is preferred  by the Australian people and there's no doubt  which party is preferred by the Australian  people.

But can I just make this point David? This isn't -

and I, to an extent, I agree with Craig Emerson  actually - this isn't just about Julia Gillard. I  mean the problem here is not just that Julia  Gillard has led what is almost universally now  regarded as a failed government. The problem  is that the Government - the Prime Minister -  that she replaced a Kevin Rudd-led failed  government. That Labor governments in the  states, whether it was in New South Wales or  Western Australia  or here in Queensland have  been catastrophic failures.

The problem isn't - for the Labor Party - isn't

Julia Gillard. Julia Gillard alone didn't bring this  political doom upon herself. The problem is the  Labor Party and the way in which they govern.



Page:  6





LIPSON: Well, this latest slump has got to be attributed

largely to the asylum-seeker ruling by the High  Court last week. Yesterday George Brandis …

BRANDIS: Well I don't know that that's right.

LIPSON: Geor… well…

BRANDIS: I don't know that that's right David. Because if

you … if you look … if you look at the Labor -  the Labor primary vote, the Labor primary vote  fell off a cliff some months ago when the Prime  Minister broke her promise that there'd be no  carbon tax under the Government that she  leads.

LIPSON: Sure, but it's further slumped…

BRANDIS: And it's not recovered since.

LIPSON: … since last week.

BRANDIS: Oh sure.

LIPSON: The Newspoll was actually taken directly after

that High Court ruling. But what I wanted to ask  you, Senator, was that yesterday the Prime  Minister said that the Opposition has to come  to grips with the legal advice that's been  provided to the Government.



Page:  7





Do you accept that there is a legal risk to

processing asylum seekers in Nauru under the  current legislation before Parliament?

BRANDIS: Well, I suspect I'm one of the only people in

Parliament who has come to grips with the  legal advice, because I've actually read it and  studied it - which plainly the Prime Minister has  not.

This is the position David: the legal advice

affirms what the High Court said, that obviously  the Malaysia solution is out. In relation to  Nauru, what the Solicitor-General says is that  it's still possible, but he expresses himself in a  very qualified and very caveat-ed way, as one  would expect given that the Government and  its legal advisers were taken by surprise by the  High Court's decision last week.

So what he says is ‘I couldn't be confident that

the Nauru solution would pass muster’. And in  the end his advice is inconclusive. Now, in my  view - in my view - it follows as clear as can be  from the High Court's decision, which didn't  deal with Nauru and which didn't strike down  the provisions of the Migration Act …

LIPSON: So…

BRANDIS: … which were put in place to give effect to the

Pacific Solution.



Page:  8





LIPSON: So you don't think the legislation needs to be

changed?

BRANDIS: No, let … let me … let me put this in my own

words: that if Nauru were to make itself  compliant with all its obligations under Section  198 - sorry, under the UN Refugee Convention  and Section 198a of the Australian Migration  Act - then the Nauru solution would work. But I  do acknowledge that there is a sufficient area  of doubt that it would be prudent and desirable  to put the matter beyond doubt by legislative  change.

LIPSON: Well, yesterday the Immigration Minister Chris

Bowen made it pretty clear that Malaysia is still  the aim of the Government when it comes to  offshore processes. Let's hear what he told  David Speers yesterday.

[Excerpt of previous interview with Immigration

Minister Chris Bowen]

CHRIS BOWEN: What we were trying to achieve with the

Malaysian agreement and is still our aim, is to  have the impact of returning people to where  they started their boat journey, in an orderly  fashion, with the protections built in. So to say  to people ‘don't get on the boat because you're  not going to achieve anything...’

[End of interview]



Page:  9





LIPSON: Craig Emerson, you were part of the Cabinet

meeting: I don't expect you to tell us…

EMERSON: [Laughs] I'm relieved.

LIPSON: …what was said inside that … inside that

meeting. But does Malaysia have to be part of  any deal that is brokered with the Opposition  when it comes to amending legislation?

EMERSON: Well, as Chris summarised there, all the advice

to us - and it's also commonsense; it doesn't  have to be highfaluting legal advice - is that  Malaysia is a solution that does actually break  the people-smuggling model. That is that  people come from a source country to  Malaysia, to Indonesia, to Christmas Island. If  they go back from where they came, that is  Malaysia, that breaks the people-smuggling  model whereas Nauru doesn't.

LIPSON: Sure, but practically that's been sent back by

the High Court…

EMERSON: Well, you'd need legislation; you'd need

legislation, that's right.

LIPSON: So you need legislation. And under that

legislation would … if you're to make a deal  with the Opposition - as we believe you have  to, because the Greens have said they're going



Page:  10





to block it - would you only accept Malaysia as  part of any legislative changes.

EMERSON: We're open to all options, but the Coalition

needs to be as well. And that is to not play  politics and say the only amendment that they  would contemplate is one that enables Nauru  and Manus, but nowhere else. That's just  straight politics if they do that.

Yesterday there seemed to be indications from

Mr Abbott that he was prepared genuinely to  engage. Today - that doesn't mean that the  media reports are accurate - but they are  suggesting he's going to say ‘no, no,

Malaysia's out’ - it can only be what they did in  the past, which is Nauru and Manus. And the  advice that we have is that Nauru doesn't  break the people-smugglers model.

And I know George will say ‘but the boats

stopped, the boats stopped’. The point is that  75 per cent or more of those who were taken to  Nauru ended up back in Australia.

LIPSON: George Brandis, would you accept an

agreement, or would the Opposition accept an  agreement, with the Government that included,  for example, Nauru and Malaysia?

BRANDIS: Well look, this is the area for which I'm the

Opposition's spokesman; so I think that what



Page:  11





you should do David is take Mr Abbott's  statement yesterday at his press conference as  being the last word on the Opposition's  position.

LIPSON: Okay. The other matter, of course, Craig

Emerson, is the internal ructions when it comes  to this issue. Members of the Left have made it  very clear that they want to use this opportunity  to bring in onshore processing. How heated is  that debate and … or how robust is that debate  in the Party at the moment?

EMERSON: Well, people are entitled to their opinions. And

what I think is that the diversity of view within  the Caucus reflects the diversity of view that's  within the community. There are people within  the community who believe only an onshore  processing solution is acceptable. Now that's  just the truth of the matter - there are such  people. There are others who are worried  about the risk that that poses in terms of  encouraging people to come across the sea;  maybe lose their lives - a very large number, a  very large number of people arriving

unauthorised and, therefore, not through an  orderly immigration program - and the views of  the Australian people about that.

But there's absolutely no problem in people

having a diversity of views, particularly as a  parliament should reflect the diversity of  opinion within the general public.



Page:  12





LIPSON: Okay, we're going to…

BRANDIS: Well look, it's all…

LIPSON: … going … just … yep

BRANDIS: It's all very charming to hear Craig talk about a

diversity of view…

EMERSON: You've never called me charming before.

BRANDIS: That's a … that's a euphemism for a deep

policy split in this Government from the top to  the bottom - from the Cabinet to the Caucus.

EMERSON: Well, there's plenty of diversity of views about

Tony Abbott: like people saying ‘we think we  might have to pull the plug on him, because  he's being an economic vandal’.

LIPSON: Okay, well let's move on. We've got to take a

break, but we'll be back after this very short  commercial break.

[Unrelated item - commercial break]

LIPSON: Welcome back to the program.

Well, the New South Wales Government

releases its Budget today, and it contains a  nasty surprise for the Gillard Government. The



Page:  13





O'Farrell Government is planning on increasing  mining royalties to the tune of close to a billion  dollars over three years, and essentially that  will be passed on to Canberra to pick up the bill  under the agreement brokered in the mining  tax.

Joining me still on our panel, Craig Emerson

and George Brandis.

Craig Emerson, first to you. Would the

Government retaliate with GST funding, or  infrastructure funding for example?

EMERSON: Well, we do need to protect the Budget bottom

line - that's the truth of it and we're going to  return the Budget to surplus. It was George  Brandis who actually said the Budget should  never have gone into deficit; well, he should  apply the same principle to New South Wales  because the suggestions are that they're going  into deficit.

And the second point I'd make is that this is a

repudiation of Tony Abbot who, during the  debate about mining taxation, said the mining  industry already pays too much tax. Well, Barry  O'Farrell and Bruce Baird don't believe that.  They think that they should pay more. Tony  Abbott doesn't. We think that the mining  industry is capable of paying more but, of



Page:  14





course, we need to protect the

Commonwealth's finances.

LIPSON: So just to be clear, would you up or lower the…

EMERSON: Well, I'm not going into what we may or may

not do, but we just can't be in a position where  states do the exact opposite of what their  Federal Liberal leader says, and that is hike  taxes when he says that they're already paying  too much tax and then just expect the

Commonwealth to pick up the tab.

LIPSON: George Brandis, you're there in Brisbane. Do

you think Queensland will follow suit here?  WA's already done it.

BRANDIS: No, look … I've no idea what a Labor

Government will do in Queensland other than it  probably will be a bad idea whatever they do.

But can I respond to what Craig said, David,

with … by making two points.

First of all, within the last hour Mr Swan was on

AM and he was making very, very direct  threats to New South Wales taxpayers that I'm  sure they won't miss.

Secondly, this is entirely as a result of the

proposed carbon tax. As Mr O'Farrell said last  night, this $950 million increase over four years



Page:  15





is in order to recoup, for the state-owned  electricity assets in New South Wales, the cost  to which the Federal Labor Government is  exposing them by introducing the carbon tax.

Now we have this policy anomaly that in

Victoria, where there are privately-owned  power generators, the Commonwealth is  compensating those privately-owned power  generators under its carbon tax package, but in  New South Wales, where there are state-owned generators, the Commonwealth is not  proposing to compensate.

Now, whether they're privately-held or publicly-

owned, the fact is that New South Wales  taxpayers are being treated differently from  Victorian taxpayers by the Commonwealth  Government. So, the New South Wales  Government, protecting the interests of its  taxpayers - and as a direct result of this carbon  tax - is being forced to increase these royalties.

EMERSON: David, where else have you heard a politician

saying ‘look, we don't want to increase your  taxes but we have to because it's someone  else's fault’? This is straight out of the old copy  book.

BRANDIS: Those are direct costs…

EMERSON: This is just standard…



Page:  16





BRANDIS: … that you're imposing on the New South

Wales taxpayers.

EMERSON:  …standard operating procedures for a level of

government that wants to pass the

responsibility. ‘Oh no, oh no, we're for low  taxes - but we're going to increase them.’

The New South Wales bureaucracy, under the

leadership of Barry O'Farrell, has put out  completely shonky figures about the impact of  the carbon pricing mechanism. And this is just  an excuse to do what they want to do, and that  is increase taxes.

LIPSON: But if, as you said in your first answer a couple

of questions ago, that it's so important for the  Federal Government to return the Budget to  surplus, obviously New South Wales has got to  look after its surplus as well. If its…

EMERSON: Well, I don't think it's got one has it?

LIPSON: … if its dividend … oh, its… it's got to look after

its books.

LIPSON: My point is … my point is aren't they justified if,

you know, dividends from power generators  have gone down as a direct result of the  carbon tax? Aren't they entitled to try to seek  some money back, as you are talking about  doing to them?



Page:  17





EMERSON: Well, we, as I say, we consider their figures to

be completely shonky. And all they are is an  excuse to hike their taxes. I can't say they're  definitely in deficit, but that is what the  speculation is. George Brandis says a  government should never put budgets into  deficit. But it turns out what he means is that  it's okay for Liberal governments to put  budgets into deficit, but it's not okay for Labor  governments to put budgets in deficits to save  hundreds of thousands of jobs.

And while we're on the subject of deficits, how

do we find out how Mr Abbott is going to plug  his $70 billion black hole, as confirmed on  Sunday by Mr Robb? Mr Robb, who is the…

BRANDIS: I think you getting a bit desperate, Craig, with

all due respect…

EMERSON: …Mr Robb who's the Shadow Finance

Minister. Mr Abbott is saying this $70 billion is  just a myth of the Labor Party and the media.  Mr Robb stood him up; said ‘no, it's real’. It's  the problem that Joe Hockey and I agree that  we've got; that is, a $70 billion black hole.

LIPSON: George Brandis, I can hear you want to jump in

there.

BRANDIS: Look, I just think that it's more than absurd to

hear a Labor politician attacking the recently-



Page:  18





elected New South Wales Coalition

Government. I mean, we all know where the  fiscal problems of New South Wales came  from. They came from years of bad Labor  administration, and the people of New South  Wales passed their judgement on that  administration in emphatic terms earlier this  year.

Now, the fact is that Mr O'Farrell and Mr Baird

are being forced, apparently, to do this,  according to what Mr O'Farrell said last night.  Because the New South Wales Treasury has  done some modelling that indicates the cost of  the carbon tax to New South Wales taxpayers  over the next four years, purely through the  electricity generating assets by the way … not,  and for that … on that basis alone, will be  about $950 million.

Now, you know, get ready for this. If the carbon

tax eventually passes the Parliament, there will  not be a level of government, there will not be  an activity in which government - state or  municipal - engages, in which the cost to  taxpayers and ratepayers won't increase  directly in consequence of the carbon tax.

LIPSON: Okay. George Brandis, Craig Emerson,

unfortunately we're out of time. But thanks very  much for your thoughts this morning.



Page:  19





EMERSON: The old cupboard is bare story; the oldest trick

in the book!

LIPSON: [Laughs] Thanks for your company on AM

Agenda. We'll be back with Lunchtime Agenda  and PM Agenda later today and same time  tomorrow.

EMERSON: Thank you David.















