CHRIS BOWEN MP

MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP  *TRANSCRIPT*

INTERVIEW WITH BARRIE CASSIDY, ABC INSIDERS

SUNDAY, 4 SEPTEMBER 2011



SUBJECTS: High Court decision, Solicitor-General’s legal advice,  Nauru, leadership.

BARRIE CASSIDY: We'll go straight to our interview. And of course our  program guest this morning is the Immigration Minister Chris Bowen who  joins us from our Sydney studios. Minister, good morning and welcome.

CHRIS BOWEN: Good morning Barrie.

CASSIDY: Did you at any stage consider resigning over the High Court  judgment?

BOWEN: Well, Barrie I've got a job to do and I've got an obligation to the  Government and to the Prime Minister to see that job through and that's what  I'm going to do. We have negotiated an innovative arrangement with  Malaysia, one that I'm proud of, under the regional framework. Obviously we  suffered a big setback with the High Court judgment. But that, just because  times get tough doesn't mean you run away from your responsibilities.

CASSIDY: But did you at any stage though consider resigning?

BOWEN: Well, Barrie my position is as I say - I'm going to continue in the  job because I've got a job to do. And my job is to see this through, to  develop the Government's response to what is a very changed circumstance.

CASSIDY: But that doesn't answer the question. Did you consider resigning  and did you in fact offer your resignation to the Prime Minister?

BOWEN: Well, conversations between the Prime Minister and I are  conversations between the Prime Minister and I, and that's how they'll  remain. But my position and the Prime Minister's position is that I need to  continue in this job and see this through and that's what I'm going to do. I'm  not going to run away from my responsibilities just because the going gets a  bit tough. Being Immigration Minister has never been an easy job for  anybody. And just because it gets a bit tougher doesn't mean that I walk  away from it.

CASSIDY: Okay well the bottom line, you were badly advised, whatever, but  you lost a significant case. So who takes responsibility? Is it the Minister or is

it a whole team effort involving the solicitor general, the Government and the  department?

BOWEN: Well, let's be clear what's happened here Barrie. The Government  followed its legal advice. I followed my legal advice to the letter every step of  the way. And that legal advice was very soundly based in the existing  jurisprudence. There are many cases which we built our case on to support  the Government's position. And we believed our legal position was strong.  That's not to say the High Court is not entitled to change the jurisprudence.  Of course, they are the highest court in the land. But our position was based  on very strong legal advice and that legal advice was soundly based on the  existing law, common law and jurisprudence.

CASSIDY: But the chief justice made the point that this apparent legal  fragility, as he called it, was not drawn to your attention. Now whose  responsibility was that? Why wasn't it drawn to your attention?

BOWEN: Well Barrie, as I say, we got legal advice; there were many cases in  which arrangements had been for offshore processing had been challenged in  the courts and on those occasions the Government's position was upheld and  we had no basis to believe that that would change in this circumstance. We  had no basis to believe that the findings of various courts in relation to  declaring offshore places would be overturned under this High Court.

Now the High Court has the right to overturn previous decisions, of course  they do. But that's not to say that the Government's legal advisers or the  Government could have had a basis for expecting that to occur.

CASSIDY: So because the, as you say, the High Court did have every right  to do this, what then so frustrated the Government about the judgment?

BOWEN: Well, Barrie what we've done is, as I say, negotiate something  innovative, something different, something on a regional framework, which  many people said we wouldn't be able to do. People said we wouldn't be able  to negotiate a regional framework. We did, through the Bali process. Then

people said “Oh, they'll never get a deal with any particular country”. We did,  with Malaysia. It was hard work. People said you wouldn't be able to get a  deal that the UNHCR could live with. Well we did. We negotiated with the  UNHCR, with Malaysia.

It's a significant achievement. And of course when you make that  achievement, something which breaks the people smugglers' business model  but then allows you to increase the humanitarian intake, that's something you  can be proud of. And of course when you receive a setback and the law gets  changed of course that's frustrating to the Government, I don't walk away  from that. But that's not to say that we don't then work methodically through  what is the new situation and respond accordingly.

CASSIDY: And people also said you were never going to deal with East  Timor and you didn't.

BOWEN: Well, Barrie my job was to negotiate a regional framework with  Kevin Rudd through the Bali process. That's what we did. Then it was my job  to come up with innovative regional arrangements. That's what we did with  Malaysia and of course as well with PNG. And that's a good thing. That's what  we set out to do and that's what we achieved.

Now we will have to obviously go through in light of the new High Court  decision what our response will be and that's what I'm doing methodically, in  conjunction with the Prime Minister and Cabinet colleagues.

CASSIDY: Yeah, I want to come to that in a second. But just on the Prime  Minister's criticism of the High Court, she personalised it. She criticised in  particular the Chief Justice. The Judicial Conference, said of that that it was  extraordinary, unfair and curious.

BOWEN: Well, I don't agree with that characterisation Barrie. I think the  Prime Minister was defending the legal advice to the Government, pointing  out all the legal advice was based on existing jurisprudence, on existing case  law, that was a sound basis for the legal advice and that one of those cases  was a case previously heard by his honour Chief Justice French. That's not a  criticism. It's just a statement of fact. It was referred to in the minority  judgment of the High Court upholding the Government's position. It's referred  to by several commentators. And the Prime Minister was simply referring to  that.

That is not a criticism. If you compare what the Prime Minister said to what  several ministers in the previous government said when they lost High Court  cases, there's no comparison at all. The Prime Minister was making a

statement of fact. It was the previous government that had the habit of  attacking High Court judges when they didn't like the decision.

CASSIDY: Well, the key to it now is what happens next. The Greens say that  you can't process offshore. The Coalition says that you can. I guess the key to  this is what is Solicitor-General says. He's had a look at the judgment. When  will you hear from the Solicitor-General?

BOWEN: Well, we have received that advice Barrie and I will be releasing it  today. And what that advice tells us is that not only is the Government's  declaration of Malaysia invalid, obviously under the High Court decision; but  also Minister Ruddock's declarations of Nauru and PNG should also be held to  be invalid; and that the Solicitor-General and two other senior council can  have no confidence that an arrangement with PNG or Nauru is possible under  existing law, as a result of this judgment.

So obviously I'll be releasing that publicly. That will inform the Government's  decision making. And frankly it should also inform Mr Abbott's position,

because he has incorrectly stated that there's no implication for Nauru under  this judgment and that is simply untrue.

CASSIDY: But couldn't you interpret what the High Court is saying: that  provided Australia kept responsibility for the detention centres on Nauru and  that people were treated humanely, then there is no reason why Nauru could  not be used?

BOWEN: Well, the advice we have deals with that matter and comments on  that matter and makes it clear that there are a range of circumstances that  would be taken into account; that the new protections that have been built in  under this High Court ruling would make it difficult for offshore processing to  occur in PNG and Nauru; that there are certain steps that could be taken to

reduce the risk, of course there are, but it would be difficult and would be  contested in court.

And it's not just the advice we have from these three senior counsels. I've  seen advice from Ron Merkel QC to a similar effect and probably even  stronger. I've seen Professor Rothwell, I think you referred to it earlier in your  program, say New Zealand would be the only country that could comply with  these new tests set out by the High Court. And that's something that the  Government will need to work through and the Opposition will need to work  through as well.

CASSIDY: Okay, so what are the options now then? If that's the case and  you accept that interpretation, does that mean the only option is onshore  processing?

BOWEN: Well, I'm working through all the options Barrie with the Cabinet as  you would expect to do. This is a significant change in the law and we need  to take our time to respond to it accordingly. There are a range of options  which are obviously self-evident and we need to work those through. The law

has been changed during the week in terms of the common understanding of  the law. We need to consider those options. They range across the board. We  have options available to us and I'll make further statements about it when  we've had a chance to fully digest the Solicitor General's advice and the policy  ramifications of it.

CASSIDY: And one of those options would be to amend the Migration Act  wouldn't it?

BOWEN: Yes, yes. Clearly the High Court has interpreted the Migration Act in  this way and it will be open to the Parliament to change the Migration Act to  deal with how the High Court has interpreted it and that's one of the options  that would be available.

CASSIDY: And that might mean teaming up with the Coalition against the  Greens and coming to an arrangement with them. And perhaps what the

Coalition could bring to the table is they would say to you, if you're prepared  to consider Nauru they will support you in terms of amending the act.

BOWEN: Well, so far the Liberal Party has said, “Look we're prepared to talk  providing the result is Nauru, TPVs and turning the boats back”. Well that's  not talking. That's lecturing. If Mr Abbott says he wants to talk about

legislative change well let him say that. We're working through the options.

Quite clearly, quite clearly under all the legal advice, if Mr Abbott wanted to  go down the Nauru option he would need legislative change. He would need  it on several bases. And what is very clear from the High Court judgment is  you could not send unaccompanied minors in any workable way to Nauru or  anywhere else. That's a significant change.

The Liberal Party said very clearly, “No problem, we'll send unaccompanied  minors to Nauru”. Well they can't under this judgment. So then they would  have to deal with the issue of unaccompanied minors and the incentives to  put children on the dangerous boat journey to Australia. So this is a matter  that I think everybody needs to reflect on. This is a significant change in the  law. We'll be reflecting on it.

And Mr Abbott if he's fair dinkum needs to reflect on it as well. He can ignore  the legal advice. We know he ignores climate scientists and he ignores  economists and he'll probably try to ignore lawyers as well perhaps. But it's a  matter for him. We'll put the advice out there and he can reflect on it as well.

CASSIDY: Yeah and given that nothing else has worked surely a bit of  bipartisanship might be the way to go. If say, he was to put temporary  protection visas to one side and just talk to you about Nauru, would that be  the makings of a deal?

BOWEN: Well, Barrie our position remains. We think you need to break the  people smugglers' business model. Nauru in and of itself is just an offshore  processing centre. It just means that people get processed and the majority  get settled in Australia. So it doesn't break the model in and of itself. Our  criticism of Nauru on that basis stands.

Now what we've said is let's step back now. The High Court has made a  significant change. Everybody should reflect on that. I've said if, you like,  “time out” for a moment. Let's go back, have everything on the table and  consider the options. And I think that's the appropriate thing to do. But that  doesn't mean that Nauru, even with legislation, is some silver bullet because  it's not.

CASSIDY: You have said in the past that the Pacific solution does not by  itself break the people smugglers' efforts but you did say that it breaks the  spirit and the will of the asylum seekers.

BOWEN: And I stand by that. I stand by saying that if you simply have  offshore processing without a situation where you can break the people  smugglers' business model, which was what the Malaysian agreement did and

what the Malaysian agreement set out to do - which is to say there's no point  getting on the dangerous boat journey to Australia because you’ll be returned  to Malaysia. And yes, you’ll have your claims considered but you will have  them considered in line with the other 92,000 asylum seekers in Malaysia.  That was what we set out to do and that's what we did achieve. And that's  what I'm proud of the fact that we achieved.

Now Nauru, simply by itself, just like any other offshore processing centre,  does not achieve that. But it did, when it was in operation, have significant  negative effects on the mental health of those people who spent considerable  amounts of time in Nauru.

CASSIDY: Now given what the solicitor general had to say about the High  Court judgment, it follows then with unaccompanied minors, you're not in a  position to process them anywhere else but here in Australia.

BOWEN: Well, that's the situation under the law as it stands, under the  legislation as it stands, as it's interpreted by the High Court. That is, that  every decision to remove an unaccompanied minor from Australia will be  judicially reviewable. That would make the transfer of unaccompanied minors  to any place other than Australia unworkable. And that's something that  would need to be worked through as well. And as I've said many times then  you have the obvious problem, Barrie, of an incentive to put children on boats  to make that dangerous boat journey. And I don't think Australia ever wants  to go through again what we went through last December burying children  because they made that boat journey.

CASSIDY: But the boats now will come in bigger numbers won't they, as a  result of the High Court judgment?

BOWEN: Well look, as I've said I think the Malaysia arrangement had a  significant announcement effect, in and of itself. The number of boats that  arrived after we announced the Malaysia arrangement fell by half. The  number of people arriving by boat fell by half compared to last year, half the  number of people arriving, a very significant impact. And by the way a much

more significant impact than Nauru had when it was announced by the  previous government back in the early 2000s.

CASSIDY: But all that's changed now. All that's changed and therefore you  would think...

BOWEN: I'm just making the point Barrie that even the announcement of  Malaysia had some impact. There were a range of factors. And yes, I think  people smugglers will be capitalising on this, saying “Look, we've won. You  can go to Australia and everything's changed”. Well our message is this: our  determination to break the people smugglers' business model remains. Yes,

we've had to deal with the High Court judgment. But we're going to do that  and we're going to respond in a methodical way.

CASSIDY: And you talked about now the special status of New Zealand.  There's the South Pacific Forum on this week I think in Auckland. You will  discuss this, no doubt the Prime Minister will discuss this with the New  Zealanders?

BOWEN: Oh, well look New Zealand and we work closely on these matters.  New Zealand's had an issue to deal with in recent weeks and months of a  boat trying to get to New Zealand. I talk to my ministerial counterpart

Jonathan Coleman regularly, they're committed to working with us under the  regional framework. And of course we'll continue to talk to them.

CASSIDY: Do you honestly believe, given everything that's happened, that  you can still win the next election?

BOWEN: Oh look, I do Barrie. The next election is two years away. And two  years as they say, it might sound trite, is a very long time. It's easy to forget  what the situation in Australia was like two years ago from today. It was very,  very different and nobody would have predicted what was going to happen  over the two years following.

I think we can win the next election because I think we have the right plan  for Australia's future. And I think Mr Abbott is a huge risk and I think the  Australian people do understand that. We do have a job in front of us. We do  have an enormous task in front of us. But it's a task that I think we're up for.

CASSIDY: Is there any doubt in your mind that Julia Gillard will lead the  party into the next election?

BOWEN: No. Julia Gillard is very firmly the leader of the Labor Party and will  continue to be and she has the firm support of the caucus. She's got a big job  as Prime Minister of Australia and she has our full support as she goes about  doing that.

CASSIDY: So what are the prospects then of Kevin Rudd ever returning to  the leadership?

BOWEN: Well, I think I've answered the question Barrie. Julia will lead the  party to the next election. She's the Prime Minister. She's dealing with the  challenges of being Prime Minister very, very well. And she has the full  support of the Caucus in doing so. And I agree with, I think, the analysis of

some of the commentators on your show that this is more an issue in the  media than it is in the Caucus.

CASSIDY: Though there is some evidence to suggest that a lot of the  hostility towards the Government is personal animosity towards Julia Gillard.

BOWEN: Well, I think people respect the job that Julia's doing. It's a tough  job and everybody knows that prime ministers go through tough periods.  John Howard went through tough periods. Paul Keating and Bob Hawke went  through tough periods as prime minister, everybody goes through [it] if  you're a prime minister engaged in reform - and it's tough reform, whether it  be carbon pricing, whether it be asylum seeker issues, whether it be problem  gambling. There are tough reforms which lead to periods of unpopularity. Of  course they do. Every prime minister goes through that and this prime  minister is no different to the previous prime ministers who go through  difficult periods. But that doesn't mean she won't be leading the party to the  next election because I believe she will be.

CASSIDY: Chris Bowen, thanks for your time this morning. Appreciate it.

BOWEN: Thank you Barrie.

Ends



