









THE HON DR CRAIG EMERSON MP  MINISTER FOR TRADE





Transcript

ABC 612 Inside Canberra with Madonna King

27 April 2011



E&OE

Subjects: Justin Bieber, immigration, school funding, China, cost of living, welfare







MADONNA KING: Immigration, school funding, budget looming, Justin  Bieber - let's go Inside Canberra. Good morning  Senator George Brandis.

GEORGE BRANDIS: Good morning Madonna. Good morning Craig. Good to  see you back.

CRAIG EMERSON: Yes, you too George.









KING: Deputy Leader of the Opposition in the Senate and

Minister Dr Craig Emerson. Good morning. Happy  Easter. Is it too late to say that?

EMERSON: No it isn't. And here's your Easter egg.

KING: Oh, now I've got to put that in the ABC directory.

EMERSON: No, we won't tell the rest of the staff.

KING: No. Thank you.

BRANDIS: And Craig, here's a Liberal blue Easter egg for you.

EMERSON: Oh, now I've got a multi-coloured Easter eggs for you.

BRANDIS: And there are plenty of little Easter eggs for your staff

here Madonna.

EMERSON: All Australian-made.

KING: Thank you. Now we're all getting off on such a nice

footing. How long will this last do you think?

EMERSON: Oh, 10 to 20 seconds.

KING: Ten to 20 seconds. I've got to ask you about Justin

Bieber first. George Brandis, I suppose you weren't at  the concert?

BRANDIS: Well I wasn't. But I know all about Justin Bieber. Ten

minutes ago I knew nothing about him, but I was  listening to your broadcast before and I rang my  daughter. And I said ‘Phoebe, tell me about this Justin







Bieber’, and she said, ‘oh he's adorable’. And I said,  ‘really?’ And she said ‘yes, he's very cute’. So that's  what my daughter thinks.

KING: And she's 18?

BRANDIS: She's 18.

EMERSON: Eighteen?

BRANDIS: Yes.

EMERSON: I saw someone on television remarkably resembling

George out on the streets looking up into a hotel, into a  window to see if it might open and Justin would wave  to George.

BRANDIS: No, no. That …

EMERSON: That wasn't you?

BRANDIS: No, I don't think ...  that wouldn't have been me. No,

Craig.

EMERSON: It might have been that Rod McIvor, the President of

that Liberal National Party.

BRANDIS: I think it might be the Kevin Rudd hairstyle that gets

those little girls going.

EMERSON: Do you reckon Kevin would do a good Justin?

BRANDIS: Well, it's hard to see who's dominated the airwaves

more. Whether it's Kevin Rudd or Justin Bieber.







EMERSON: I think there's no contest once Justin gets going. The

screaming goes and it drowns out everything else.

KING: Yes, Justin Bieber's got nine million Twitter fans and I

think Kevin Rudd has 1.6 million.

EMERSON: Oh, really, and I've got none. Not a one.

KING: George Brandis, you'd be more a monarchist looking

forward to the royal wedding…

BRANDIS: I'm very much looking forward to the royal wedding. I

think it will be a great event.

KING: Before we get into the serious things, I actually have a

dilemma about the royal wedding. I am, I think, like  most chicks really keen to watch it.

BRANDIS: Well why wouldn't you want to watch it?

KING: Well my husband has decided to go away for the

weekend. Take me away without the children. And I'm  saying ‘can't we go Saturday?’. He said ‘well, what's  wrong with going Friday?’ ‘But, but, but, but, but the  kids have swimming.’

EMERSON: The wedding.

KING: ‘Oh, someone can take them to swimming. But…’, and

I'm just thinking I want to sit there with tissues.

EMERSON: Why don't I sit around with your husband and we'll

have a few beers.







KING: I thought you were going to suggest you sit around with

me for a while there … George would be keen, too,  wouldn't he?

EMERSON: Well, we could do that and we'd have several glasses

of wine.

BRANDIS: Well, I'll come and have a glass of champagne with

you Madonna and we'll watch the royal wedding.

KING: All right, I'm sick of being nice.

EMERSON: This can't last.

KING: It can't. I'll put my Easter egg aside and get into it.

Look, on immigration: I want to be brief really because  we've looked at it strongly in the last hour. But George  Brandis, is the Opposition considering supporting Chris  Bowen's Bill or is all this over nothing; it won't get  through and we're back to square one?

BRANDIS: Well, we have to have a Shadow Cabinet meeting to

consider what our position will be and that hasn't  happened yet. But what Tony Abbott has said, which I  wholeheartedly agree with, is that this is a weak and a  half-hearted response.

These people who come to Australia asking Australia

to take them in because they say they're fleeing  persecution and they reward our kindness by burning  down the very government buildings in which we are  giving them shelter have no place in this country.







KING: No, okay, but you're a lawyer. Don't you think it's fair

that they go to a general court of law and be tried and  found innocent or guilty before being put on a plane?

BRANDIS: Well, nothing I've said is inconsistent with that.

KING: But isn't the Opposition saying ‘no, put them on a plane

and send them home’?.

BRANDIS: They should be. If they are found to have committed

these crimes, they should be deported.

KING: But isn't that all Labor is saying? They will give them a

temporary visa until such time as a court finds them…

BRANDIS: No, they're not you see. This is the difference. We are

saying if they've done these crimes deport them. Labor  is saying if they've committed these crimes give them a  visa, a temporary protection visa.

Remember those temporary protection visas that Craig

has spent two years telling your listeners on this  program were such a bad idea? They've now been  adopted by the government as its policy.

KING: Craig Emerson…

EMERSON: There are already a number temporary visa classes

and this would give a temporary protection visa only to  those asylum seekers who were found to be genuine  refugees. But if they commit a crime, then they will be  deported. That's the arrangement. So what we're doing  is…







KING: But that could take two years. By the time they go

through our court system, are found to be guilty or  innocent  ...

EMERSON: Well, there is such a thing as a judicial system in this

country. And like everyone I think, or most people,  what we've seen on the top of these buildings, this  destruction of these facilities, is absolutely inexcusable  - it's outrageous. And certainly we don't in any way  condone it and they, if found guilty of a crime, would be  deported.

Now, for those who are not genuine refugees, they

don't get a temporary protection visa. It's only those  who are genuine refugees. If they're not then it's out-ski.

KING: Isn't that the humanitarian approach, George Brandis?

BRANDIS: Well, look, my view Madonna is this: if you're a

genuine refugee, a temporary protection visa is what  you should want. Because if you're a genuine refugee  it means you are leaving your homeland under  compulsion. Not because you want to; but because  you have to.

And under the temporary protection visa system you ...

that temporary protection visa allows you to stay in  Australia until it's safe for you to go home. If you're a  genuine refugee you should want to go home as soon  as it's safe to.

EMERSON: Under the Howard Government, the proportion of

genuine refugees who were given temporary protection  visas that stayed was very high.







KING: All right. Can I ask this question before we move on?

Liam, who is a listener, said ‘can either of you answer  whether genuine refugees must stop at the first safe  port of call?’.

BRANDIS: Well, it all depends. I'll tell you what the answer to that

question is. It all depends on whether the first safe port  of call will take them. And most of ... and your listeners  should be aware of this. These people you see coming  from boats, on boats across the Timor Sea: they have  transited through, in some cases, several countries on  their way to try and, to come to Australia unlawfully,  right? Now, they're not fleeing from Indonesia. They're  not fleeing from Malaysia. They are fleeing from west  Asia and they have been through a number of other  countries on the way.

KING: Okay. So the country has to accept them for them to

stop at a safe port of call. So that's …

BRANDIS: Well, I mean the country - the intermediate country -

each intermediate country will have its own system.

KING: Yes, okay. And I suppose Liam's question, then, is well

‘why aren't they applying at any of those six countries  along the way?’. Something that both of you would  probably agree with.

EMERSON: Well I think that's a reasonable point to raise.

KING: All right, I want to move on. So many other issues this

morning. It's 18 minutes to 10 and you're listening to  Senator George Brandis, Deputy Leader of the  Opposition in the Senate and Minister in the Gillard  Government, Dr Craig Emerson.







What's the big challenge facing Australia today? What

is it? What's the biggest thing?

BRANDIS: I think the biggest challenge facing Australians today is

that the cost of living is out of control. And, you know, I  unapologetically make a political point about this. We  elected a government three and a half years ago and  one of the big issues on which the Labor Party got  elected was they said ‘we'll do something about the  cost of living’.

And yet, almost everything this Government does

seems to be calculated to force the cost of living up.  Whether it's higher interest rates, whether it's the new  carbon tax, whether it's the new mining tax. Whether  it's ... almost every measure this government takes, it's  hard to see how it's taking the pressure off Australian  families.

KING: All right Dr Craig Emerson: can I ask you is it living

standards or is it North Korea, the global downturn,  where Australia fits in Asia? If we're looking at the big  challenge what would you say it was?

EMERSON: Firstly, I have to just respond quickly on the question…

KING: No I'll get ... come back to that in a tick.

EMERSON: All right, okay. Well I think the big issue is the fact that

we are here in the Asian region in the Asian century.  And we should be taking every opportunity to get the  benefits from that.

Now, we are to a very significant extent and you've

seen Prime Minister Gillard's visit to China and also to  Japan and Korea, which is designed exactly to do that.







But the more we can engage commercially with those

countries, the higher the quality of the jobs in Australia.  Because what the statistics show is that people who  are involved in our export industries tend to get  substantially higher pay than those who are involved in  the non-export industries.

KING: George Brandis, why don't you put that over cost of

living?

BRANDIS: Well, I think that cost of living is what ordinary

Australians feel. I mean Craig is ...  the observation  Craig makes about Australia's geo-strategic role in the  world and our trade and commercial relationships with  China and other East Asian countries is also very  important of course.

But I think the person in the supermarket today or the

mum taking the kids to school or the dad going to work  today, he is not thinking about these geo-political  issues. He's thinking about ‘why is it that everything  this Labor government does seems to make life harder  for me’.

KING: Craig Emerson?

EMERSON: And on the cost of living, obviously there are many,

many people who are finding it difficult to make ends  meet. But there have been some positive

developments, too. For example, we're seeing in the  supermarkets price wars between Coles and  Woolworths.

And when that happens, a whole lot of people come

out and condemn them for reducing their prices. They  also condemn them for increasing their prices. The







Consumer Price Index, which is the official measure of  inflation, I think is coming out this week.

In general, it's around 3 per cent, so some things are

going up by a lot more than 3 per cent. Just look at  fresh fruit and vegetables after the natural disasters  here in Queensland.

But obviously some things are going down or up by far

less than 3 per cent. I don't seek to diminish the  difficulty that people are finding in making ends meet.  But we're not talking about inflation of 10 or 12 per  cent; we're talking about inflation of around 3 per cent,  but some things are going up much higher than that.

BRANDIS: But there's a broader point though, Craig. I'm not

having a go at you personally. If I may so, frankly I  think you're one of the better ministers in the  government. But …

EMERSON: I'll put that on my CV: ‘Recommended by George

Brandis’.

BRANDIS: Almost every decision that this government makes -

whether the carbon tax, it's going to force electricity  prices up and without reducing the global temperature.  Whether it's the tax on the mining industry …

EMERSON: The tax on the mining industry has no impact on the

cost of living.

BRANDIS: … that is going to destroy jobs in Queensland and

Western Australia, in particular. Whether it's having a  go at people who want to play the pokies…







EMERSON: Completely disingenuous.

KING:                                                   Doesn't it depend on …

BRANDIS: Almost everything the government does seems to be to

have a go at every…

EMERSON: But George, you repeatedly say the mining tax will

increase the cost of living. It is rubbish. The mining tax  is on coal, it is on iron ore. These prices are set in the  world marketplace and you know that. You come on to  this program week after week and say, ‘look what the  mining tax will do to the cost of living’.

It is completely false.

BRANDIS: I must say, your friends in the AWU agree with me not

you.

EMERSON: On the mining tax?

BRANDIS: Yes, they do.

EMERSON: Sorry, you're wrong there.

KING: All right, I'm moving on. It's 14 minutes to 10 but I just

had a laugh and perhaps this is a bit unfair. Brett, on  Twitter, said, ‘look, Craig Emerson and George Brandis  have just given me Easter eggs - are they trying to  soften me up?’. Brett's quick response says ‘typical  political response, late and answering the wrong  questions, laughing online, re the Easter eggs’.

Let's come to the Budget. Craig Emerson, we keep

getting warned that it's going to be a tough Budget. Are







you trying to soften us up, so that it's not as bad as we  expect or do you believe that this Budget will - given  what George Brandis has said over the cost of living -  will really hurt?

EMERSON: Well, there will be cuts in expenditure and we know

that in any event because the government has put a  limit of 2 per cent growth in real terms on government  spending. George and I had quite a constructive  conversation not so long ago about this.

Given that most of the Budget spending is non-

discretionary, it's on the age pension that we're not  going to cut and it's on so many things that are  automatically provided, then obviously in those areas  of spending that are discretionary, the burden will fall  more heavily.

KING: Let's broaden this a little bit. This morning there is

news: The Australian reports that a special funding  deal for the nation's private schools will be scrapped.  Sky Television has said that you've launched a review  into school funding, but what's happening there?

EMERSON: There is a review and it hasn't reported yet. So we are

committed to funding government and non-government  schools. We've got a very good track record on that. I  think the ‘quadrennium’, they call it, it's a four-year  funding arrangement, is up for review.

KING: Is this part of the Budget or totally separate?

EMERSON: Look, I don't anticipate that it would have any short-

term impacts because it's reviewing the arrangements  to apply to the future.







BRANDIS: I think, Craig, that it's a bit more serious than that. The

report in The Australian newspaper this morning  quoted what Mr Garrett, the Minister for Schools, had  said in a ministerial council meeting last week. And it  appears that, in particular, the Catholic schools are by  this fu… in the gun for this funding review.

KING: All right, can I just go back then. Before we go on to

that, just for people listening, the government funds  Catholic schools, private schools, state schools, how?  What's the break-up?

EMERSON: Look, in terms of state schools, a lot of the funding

actually comes from the states and the Commonwealth  does provide funding according to a particular formula.  There's been a model that was actually introduced by  the Howard Government, called the SES funding  model, socio-economic status, and that actually applies  to non-government schools.

And essentially it's meant to be a needs-based funding

model.

KING: So poor private schools, is that what you're saying?

EMERSON: They would get very considerable funding. They'd get

very considerable funding under this model.

BRANDIS: Well, hang on a second, Craig. It's a bit more

complicated than that. In fact, under the school funding  model that the Howard Government introduced and  that we now learn that the Labor government is going  to get rid of …

EMERSON: No, no, no …







KING: No, there is a proposal.

BRANDIS: That is what Mr Garrett has reportedly told the minister

…

EMERSON: No, he did not. I read the report. I read the report in the

paper, George. You must come here ... I'll take the  Easter eggs back off you because you must come here  and be truthful. Peter Garrett did not …

KING: … decided or proposed - what's your point?

BRANDIS: My point is this: that the most needy schools in this

country are typically the poorer Catholic schools …

EMERSON: That's true.

BRANDIS: The government schools, in fact, on average enjoy a

better funding arrangement than the poorer Catholic  schools, and all this class war rhetoric that Labor  politicians engage in talking about elite private …

KING: I think Craig Emerson is agreeing …

BRANDIS: … but I've heard so many Labor politicians, from

Wayne Swan and Julia Gillard down go on about a l …

EMERSON: You've not heard that from Julia Gillard.

BRANDIS: Julia Gillard, Craig, was the Shadow Education

Minister at the time of the infamous private schools hit  list.

EMERSON: There was no hit list, as you well know.







KING: Just so people understand this, so you're saying that ...

do private schools get as much funding as state  schools? Irrespective of whether it comes from the  state or federal governments?

BRANDIS: Well, no, because the government provides 100 per

cent of the funding for government schools. The  government - the Commonwealth Government - under  a series of measures initiated by the Howard  Government, I might say, provides a share of the  funding to private schools and then those schools  provide the balance from their fees.

Now what the relativities are depends on the needs of

the school. But the point I really want to make -  emphasise -   is that the real beneficiaries of this  funding model are some of the poorest schools in the  country but particularly the Catholic systemic schools  in the outer suburbs.

KING: You don't disagree with that?

EMERSON: That's right, and the Labor Government continued the

Howard Government funding model, except with at  some point that funding model expires - every four  years, we're having a review. Let the review take its  course.

BRANDIS: No, no, no, that's wrong, Craig. The quadrennium

expires obviously at the end of four years, the fu…

EMERSON: That's what I mean.

BRANDIS: Well, okay, that's not what you said. You said the

funding model …







KING: No, but I understood.

BRANDIS: The funding model was a good funding model.

KING: Yes, I understood that …

BRANDIS: [Indistinct]

EMERSON: … still in, it would be reviewing every four years as …

BRANDIS: No, no, Craig, you're wrong. The funding model is a

good model and it should be left alone.

KING: But Craig is saying that Labor is renewing the funding

under that four-year …

EMERSON: … have done that and we're doing the review and it

is…

KING: I'm moving onto the next topic, which relates to the

dole, and I want to see if you can confirm this or not.  But both of you, or your parties, have warned of a  crackdown on welfare recipients not really trying.  Concerns this morning that unemployed people aged  over 55 would be treated the same as young people on  the dole, forcing them to look for full-time work in order  to receive their welfare benefits.

I'm just wondering how you strike a balance here on

welfare, both parties, protecting those who need it and  penalising those who essentially take us for a ride.  Craig Emerson?

EMERSON: It is important that we encourage into work all of those

who are able to work. There are jobs around and we've







seen quite startling statistics on the proportion of  people who don't turn up even for their first interview.

KING: Are they over 55, though?

EMERSON: I haven't seen an age breakdown, but it's a disturbingly

high proportion of people who just don't turn up for  their first interview. What we're saying is that if they  don't turn up for their first interview, then they will be  breached.

KING: You don't disagree with that, George, do you?

BRANDIS: Well, as always, I'll reserve my position on the detail

but the principle is a principle that not only I agree with  but which my side of politics pioneered in the teeth of  opposition from the Labor Party some years ago,  particularly when Tony Abbott was earlier in his career  the Minister for Workforce Participation.

KING: So is there - am I being unfair to you in saying - but is

there an argument sometimes to turn and say, ‘good  on you, you're doing this’ and vice-versa?

BRANDIS: Well, of course there is, and to the extent to which the

Labor Party is now adopting Coalition principles, which  they are …

KING: That Easter spirit has just gone.

BRANDIS: When we introduced work for the dole, one of the most

successful programs of the Howard Government, in the  early days of the Howard Government, the Labor Party  fought it tooth and nail.







EMERSON: There was only one reason for that: it provided no

training. It wasn't that we didn't believe in mutual  obligation; it was actually the Hawke Government that  introduced this. It was the Hawke Government.

KING: All right. But one charity this morning is concerned that

unemployed people over 55 will be treated the same  as young people on the dole, forcing them to look for  full-time work in order to receive their welfare.  Irrespective of whether that's on the drawing board or  not in the Budget, is it something you agree with, that  people over 55 should be treated the same as 18 year  olds when it comes to welfare?

EMERSON: Well, see, I'm in a difficult position of not being able to

speculate on these matters. But as a principle, if  people are able to work - that is, they do not suffer  from a disability and therefore are not on a disability  support pension - then you'd expect them to turn up for  job interviews.

KING: All right, two more brief questions before we go. Julia

Gillard:  China, Japan, how's she being received do  you think, George Brandis?

BRANDIS: Well, I'm sure she's being received politely. But I'm

sorry, you might think …

EMERSON: I am taking the Easter eggs back.

BRANDIS:                                       ... you might think I'm being remorselessly negative - I'm

actually helping here, Craig, I'm trying to find  something good to find ...

KING: I don't think he's in the mood to help.







EMERSON: Won't be any difficulty; I'll respond in a second.

BRANDIS: But the trip does seem to be a bit of a fiasco for this

reason that you've …

EMERSON: For goodness sake.

BRANDIS: No, I'll tell you why. Because you've got Julia Gillard

telling the Chinese leadership why it's a good idea for  Australia to have a carbon tax, while the senior  business leaders - including Mr Walsh, the head of Rio  Tinto and Mr Kloppers, the head of BHP Billiton, who  are accompanying the Prime Minister on this trip - are  telling the senior Chinese leadership and the heads of  the Chinese trading concerns why it's such a bad idea  for Australia to have a carbon tax.

So heaven alone knows what the Chinese think about

what's going on in Australia, except complete  confusion about the carbon tax.

KING: I was wondering - and let me change tack here, Craig

Emerson - just about the treatment of Julia Gillard as a  female Prime Minister. This morning's stories about her  partner and how he waves, for example. We've got a  book out from a politician looking at the colour of her  hair. We've got horse trainer, Gai Waterhouse, this  morning attacking her fashion sense.

These are things that would not be directed at a male

Prime Minister, am I wrong?

EMERSON: I think you're right. But I'm not going to have a whinge

about it. I mean, that's just the world as it is, or at least  some parts of the world as it is. The trip, I think, by any  measure has been very, very successful. The Prime







Minister has been very well received in Japan, in Korea  and in China.

They are enormously important trading partners for this

country. They are the source of many jobs that have  been created and will be created in the future, not only  in minerals and energy, but in services where a  memorandum of understanding was signed.

I might say, because in part I was there just before the

Prime Minister and we arranged that with the Trade  Minister. But also increasingly in agriculture because  they will need high-protein beef sources, meat sources  more generally, so it's a very bright future for Australia  in its engagement with Asia.

KING: And just before you go, the royal wedding on Friday

night, George Brandis and I are watching it together. I  think you're taking my husband to the football or  something, Craig Emerson?

EMERSON: Yeah, the Bulldogs are playing the Broncos.

KING: I don't care, as long as I can watch the royal wedding

in silence. But are people closet monarchists? Are  people going to be watching this in Australia? What  kind of percentage of our population and we'll see how  close…

BRANDIS: Well I reckon that given that every news ...  every main

TV channel except SBS is broadcasting it live, that  gives you a pretty good indication about the level of  public.

EMERSON: I'll have to agree with that. We'll end up in agreement

because I notice the commercial TVs have been there







all week talking to each other and just ... and

wandering around London and trying to find a glimpse  of the dress.

KING: We're ending on the same Easter spirit - enjoy your

Easter eggs and thank you for that, Craig Emerson.

EMERSON: My pleasure, Happy Easter, in retrospect.

KING: Did you bring me an Easter egg, George Brandis?

BRANDIS: Yes. That was a joint Easter egg.

EMERSON: It was a joint Easter egg. Can you believe it?

KING: Who paid for it?

BRANDIS: We've both contributed to the cost.

KING: Possession is nine-tenths of the law. George Brandis,

thank you.

BRANDIS: Thank you, Madonna.

EMERSON: Thanks, Madonna. Thanks, George.

KING: Craig Emerson, thank you.

BRANDIS: Happy Easter, Craig, belatedly.

EMERSON: You too.







MADONNA KING: Back on Wednesday, next Wednesday, with Inside

Canberra.





















END

