SHADOW IMMIGRATION MINISTER

SCOTT MORRISON

Interview with Barrie Cassidy

ABC Insiders

07/08/2011

Opposition spokesman for immigration Scott Morrison says the Coalition sent asylum  seekers to Nauru because they could provide facilities but the Government has painted  itself into a corner.

BARRIE CASSIDY, PRESENTER: We'll go to our program guest now, the Shadow  Minister for Immigration Scott Morrison who joins us this morning from our Sydney  studios.

And to take us there here's the WA Liberal Premier Colin Barnett on the hot issue of  deporting unaccompanied kids to Malaysia.

COLIN BARNETT, WA LIBERAL PREMIER (to press): My personal view? I won't  probably win many friends in the Liberal Party. I think it is absolutely indefensible for  Australia, a prosperous country, to send children by themselves to another country. I  think we are failing in humanity in doing that.

BARRIE CASSIDY: Scott Morrison, good morning, welcome.

SCOTT MORRISON, SHADOW IMMIGRATION MINISTER: Good morning  Barrie.

BARRIE CASSIDY: How do you feel about that? Do you think we're failing in  humanity by sending kids to Malaysia?

SCOTT MORRISON: Well this is the problem the Government has with this policy.  The Government has basically created its own catch-22 here for itself.

I mean our policy was that everyone goes to Nauru and there are no exceptions  because we can provide the facilities.

Now the Government has found itself in a position if they make one exception then  that will become the rule.

And they should have asked themselves this question before they signed up to this  agreement. If they couldn't send everyone there they should have walked away from  this deal because they are presented with this exact choice.

And that's why this is an ill-thought-through policy. And they've led themselves in  their own cul-de-sac here and whichever way they go I think the position is worse off.

BARRIE CASSIDY: Okay but it is a reality. It's happening. What would you now do  faced with this policy?

SCOTT MORRISON: Well this wouldn't be our policy Barrie. And I'm sure this  policy will be exhausted by the time there's an election.

So this really is a matter for the Government. It's not a matter for the Opposition.  They've driven themselves into this cul-de-sac. It's for them to make a choice.

Now any exception will be an exception. And that's the problem they now face. And  that will actually encourage kids to get on boats. So the Government has this choice.

BARRIE CASSIDY: You say it's a matter for the Government not the Opposition but  Joe Hockey has strong views on this, Colin Barnett has strong views. They both say  that these children should not be sent to Malaysia. What's your view?

SCOTT MORRISON: Well again, well my view is that we would send people to  Nauru, Barrie, and that's what our alternative policy is.

And I think if the Government makes any exceptions here then they undermine their  own policy. And they can say it's not a blanket exemption.

But the people, what they think the public smugglers are going to go, oh well it's  okay, Chris Bowen says it's only going to be this one time?

So they have a serious problem with the credibility of this policy, with its design. And  it's a policy problem of their own creation because of their anything-but-Nauru  approach.

So it's their Hobson's choice. They've created it for themselves. And their only real  option I think is to walk away from what is a diabolical, failed policy.

BARRIE CASSIDY: But are you saying that they should make exceptions? If they  were to make an exception then clearly this would send the wrong signal though to  the parents who have already done this and put their kids on boats, but only encourage  them to do it further wouldn't it?

SCOTT MORRISON: But that's the point I'm making Barrie. They have created this  problem for themselves.

If Chris Bowen didn't think he could send every child to Malaysia then he should have  never signed up to this agreement.

And this is why it's an agreement we've never been enthusiastic about from the start,  because it presents these sorts of challenges.

That's why, I mean if you're going to have a policy in this area it has to be simple, it  has to be implementable and it has to be consistent. And that's what our policy has  always been.

I can say that everyone who would come would go to Nauru because we can provide  the facilities in Nauru for everyone who would come.

Now Chris Bowen can't say that. And he finds himself now in this situation where  you know he may well send children, unaccompanied minors to Malaysia which is not  something that you know I'm wildly excited about.

BARRIE CASSIDY: Yeah but then you would be sending unaccompanied kids to  Nauru if the parents treated the children in this way.

Surely the answer is not ...

SCOTT MORRISON: Well yeah but let me pick you up on that Barrie.

Yes I would where they would go to public schools, where they would have access to  healthcare, where they would be accommodated every night and I would know where  they are every single hour of every single day. Now Chris Bowen can't say that...

BARRIE CASSIDY: And that's broadly the arrangement in Malaysia is it not?

SCOTT MORRISON: No. That, Chris Bowen will have no idea where these people  are. He'll have no idea.

They won't go to public schools. They won't get access to the healthcare they'd get  access to on Nauru. He can offer none of that.

And if Chris Bowen didn't think he could send children to Malaysia he should have  never signed up to this deal.

BARRIE CASSIDY: Wouldn't the answer be to reunite these children with their  parents and find out where they came from and send them back?

SCOTT MORRISON: Well I don't know how you would actually achieve that Barrie.  I mean who knows where their parents are and in what country they are and what  arrangements you could have to send them back there? I mean that is an even more  difficult policy challenge.

That's why I think these things have to be simple. And the Government keeps getting  themselves in trouble.

I mean they've recognised through this agreement their policies over the last three  years have been the reasons the boats come. Despite all that talk of push factors for  three years this is an open admissions that they are the reasons the boats came.

Now to respond to that you've got to be clear, you've got to be consistent, you've got  to think it through. And I don't think they've done that with this arrangement. And this  dilemma proves it.

BARRIE CASSIDY: What do you make of their idea to film the deportation and then  put it on YouTube? Do you think that will work, that'll send a message throughout the  region?

SCOTT MORRISON: Well I don't think honestly a YouTube video is going to solve  their credibility problems of the last three years.

I mean they can use whatever method they want to try and get the message out but the  problem is a bit with the message. I mean this is a Government that flips and flops.

I mean after the 7th of May they said everyone who was coming to Australia would  be transferred to another country.

Then they had to backtrack. And every time they backtrack, every time they make an  exception, every time they roll over on their own policy, well they send the wrong  message to people smugglers.

And you know I want to stop the boats because it actually denies the sort of people  you're talking about on the front page of the Age today and the point Annabel made.  That's why I'm so focussed on this issue.

But to do it you've got to be consistent. And the Government keeps tripping over itself  in this area.

BARRIE CASSIDY: I want to ask you now as you're shadow minister for  productivity about the retail figures, which are as bad as they've been for 50 years.

How much of that is the fault of the retailers themselves?

SCOTT MORRISON: Well this is a very difficult environment I think for all business  and with the two track economy.

I mean there's a lot of talk about issues in the mining sector and jobs there but the real  issue I think for jobs going forward will be in the retail sector.

And why on Earth you'd be putting on a carbon tax in the middle of these difficulties  just is beyond belief. And I think that's the question people are asking.

And particularly what we've seen in the United States in recent times, in the more  global uncertainty that's there, to go and create further difficulty is just madness.

BARRIE CASSIDY: But the Productivity Commission is saying that inflexibility in  the industrial relations laws is part of the problem. They're talking there of course  about wages in part.

Does that give you then the green light to re-examine this issue?

SCOTT MORRISON: Well I think on productivity across a whole range of areas  there is a need for actual policy rather than the rhetoric we've seen from the  Government for the last few years.

I mean labour productivity has halved. I mean it is half what it was just a few years  ago.

And what we've said about the retail inquiry is they should bring forward the review  of the Fair Work Act. I mean that's what the commission has recommended.

Now that will produce whatever result it may produce Barrie and we're not going to  second guess that outcome.

But they should be bringing forward that review as a matter of urgency to address the  issues of inflexibility that the commission has highlighted.

BARRIE CASSIDY: There was a time when the Coalition's response to these sorts of  problems would not be asking the Government for a review. You would have views  of your own.

SCOTT MORRISON: Well we do have views of our own Barrie. And we'll be  outlining our practical views about IR before the next election. But they will be  practical views to address the needs that are there in the workplace.

But at the moment, I mean you've asked me about the retail Productivity Commission  report. They've said there should be a review of the Fair Work Act and I think the  Government should act on that. I think it's a sensible recommendation and they should  do it now.

BARRIE CASSIDY: And should there be more flexibility in wages?

SCOTT MORRISON: Well I think addressing labour productivity is a critical issue.

I mean we can't have, what I want to see is real wage increases based on productivity  improvements. And we're not seeing that at the moment. Basically we've got wages  driven by Dutch auctions and a strike first, talk later approach that is really becoming  embedded in the workplace.

We want to see I think an agenda driven by productivity in the workplace. And I don't  think the Government's arrangements are providing that environment. And I think that  may be what the review of the Fair Work Act to date may produce.

BARRIE CASSIDY: There's going to be another test of productivity too with the  aged care report coming out tomorrow.

On this issue would you be prepared to cut the Government some slack and if they  really want to move to ensure that those who can afford it should pay more for aged  care that you would at least support them on that?

SCOTT MORRISON: Well look I'll leave detailed comments about that to Peter  Dutton.

But I'd say this about the ageing sector. The ageing sector and aged care in particular  has some real issues in terms of their labour force. And the difficulty of actually

getting 457 workers into the labour force, particularly for aged care homes, I think is a  real pressure point.

And that's something I've been having a good look at and talking to the industry  about. And I'm very receptive to try and address their labour needs to make sure we  can get the people into these aged care facilities who can do the job and provide the  care that we all want them to provide.

BARRIE CASSIDY: But the Government needs to look at who pays just the same.

The growth forecasts have been adjusted downwards. The budgetary pressures are  going to be on in that area as well.

SCOTT MORRISON: Well Glenn Stevens has knocked a point off the economic  growth forecast for this year which takes us back to a trend growth.

Now I think this is going to put real pressure on the Government's forecast for a  surplus. And I think it's incumbent on the Treasurer to come out and say whether he  still believes on these revised figures whether they're going to hit that mark.

Now I note that in the outer years there is a different amendment that the bank has  made. But nonetheless I think what we're seeing globally and what we're seeing with  the two track economy in Australia, I think the pressure is really starting to hot up on  the Treasurer's forecast for a surplus and whether he'll be able to achieve that with  what we're seeing now.

BARRIE CASSIDY: And for that very reason then shouldn't the Government be  looking at issues like user pays in aged care?

SCOTT MORRISON: What I think they should be looking at Barrie is abolishing  their mad idea for a carbon tax. I mean that is the thing that is undermining I think  community confidence at the moment, that with the uncertainty of the way this  Government manages.

And frankly I don't think Julia Gillard's comment, that oh trust us, we've got it all  under control and you can trust our management, I don't think the Australian people  share that confidence.

And I think if she was to abolish this mad plan for carbon tax then I think people  would be feeling a lot better about the future.

BARRIE CASSIDY: Your party seems to be having an internal argument about  Malcolm Turnbull and his role. Did anything that he said at the Press Club on  Wednesday particularly offend you?

SCOTT MORRISON: No.

BARRIE CASSIDY: Then why was Nick Minchin admonishing him in the way that  he did?

SCOTT MORRISON: Well I think you'd have to talk to Nick about that. But I really  think the media are a little more excited about this than we are within the  parliamentary Liberal Party.

I mean Nick can write letters to the editor like any other Australian.

But what I do know is that I think Malcolm's speech this week highlighted you know  the issues with the Government's NBN, which is his primary task. And I think  Malcolm really set it straight.

BARRIE CASSIDY: Nick Minchin says that Malcolm Turnbull is as obsessed about  the conservatives in the Liberal Party. Is the truth of the matter that Nick Minchin is  obsessed about Malcolm Turnbull?

SCOTT MORRISON: Well I'll let Nick explain his own comments.

I don't think Malcolm is obsessed about conservatives in the Liberal Party. I think  Malcolm understands the events of late 2009 as well as anyone else.

It was fundamentally a matter about policy. And that policy position now in the  Coalition I think is crystal clear. We, including Malcolm, are 100 per cent opposed to  the Government's ridiculous carbon tax.

BARRIE CASSIDY: He does talk freely across all portfolios, as do a lot of shadow  ministers and certainly a lot of ministers.

SCOTT MORRISON: Sure.

BARRIE CASSIDY: That seems to have been a significant change in the way politics  works in this country over the last few years.

Do you think that that's a good thing or perhaps ministers and shadows should be a  little more disciplined?

SCOTT MORRISON: Well look I think it's, as members of a shadow cabinet and  wanting to be members of a cabinet, you consider a broad range of measures which  are outside your portfolio and you have views about these things.

I think Malcolm has contributions to make importantly in a lot of areas, as we all do.

Now we all exercise different levels of discipline in how we engage in those debates.  But I thought Malcolm gave an excellent address to the Press Club this week and I  really welcome it. And I particularly welcome that strong focus he put on the NBN.

BARRIE CASSIDY: Scott Morrison, thanks for your time this morning.

SCOTT MORRISON: Thanks a lot Barrie.



