1





MINISTER FOR DEFENCE

STEPHEN SMITH, MP



TRANSCRIPT: INTERVIEW WITH GILLIAN BRADFORD, ABC 24

TRANSCRIPTION: PROOF COPY E & OE

DATE: 22 FEBRUARY 2011



TOPICS: Release of the HMAS Success Commission of Inquiry Report



GILLIAN BRADFORD: Mr Smith, good morning.

STEPHEN SMITH: Good morning.

GILLIAN BRADFORD: How damning is this Report and what is the worst of it in your eyes?

STEPHEN  SMITH:  Well,  it's  a  very  disturbing  Report.  I  will  table  an  edited  or  redacted   version  of  the  Report  in  Parliament  later  this  afternoon,  and  following  that  the  Chief  of  the   Defence Force and the Chief of the Navy will outline Defence and Navy's response to it.

But it is very concerning. I've said earlier, it's a very bad read, it is confronting. It goes through  a breakdown of discipline, a breakdown of command, inappropriate behaviour in conduct both  onshore and offshore, inappropriate attitude to women sailors, suggestions of predatory sexual  conduct.  So  a  tribal  culture  which  is  inappropriate  in  the  modern  day,  inappropriate  in  the   modern Navy.

One  of  the  reasons  that  I'm making  it  public  is  that  we  want  to  be  as  transparent  as  possible   about  the  problems  on  this  ship  but  also  it  sends  a  message  that  we  regard  such  conduct  as

2

inappropriate  generally,  below  community  standards,  bringing  the  Navy  into  disrepute.  And   such conduct won't be tolerated by Navy or by Defence or by the Government.

GILLIAN  BRADFORD:  Now  you  are  releasing  the  bulk  of  the  Report,  what  assurances   though can you give about what you are keeping private?

STEPHEN  SMITH:  Because  there  are  serious  allegations  about  inappropriate  individual   conduct, we do have to respect individual rights. And so the editing of the names of individuals  has been done on legal advice. I have provided complete copies of the Report to the Chairs and  Deputy Chairs of the relevant Senate Committees and to the Shadow Minister for Defence.

So  essentially  what  is  removed  is  matters  or  materials  which  would  identify  individuals   because they may well be the subject of disciplinary  or  administrative  action. So  it's  done  to   respect their rights. But effectively other than that the full story is there in all its confronting

nature. It's a sorry read. Most important is the response from Navy and the response from the  Defence Force which is to very clearly send the signal that such conduct, such attitude is not  just inappropriate, it won't be tolerated.

GILLIAN  BRADFORD:  And  of  course  this  Report  deals  with  events  that  took  place  now   nearly  two  years  ago  on  a  Navy  tour.  What  has  happened  to  individuals  involved  in  that   misconduct? What will be happening?

STEPHEN SMITH: In general terms we're dealing with events from March to May 2009 when  HMAS Success, one of our supply ships, was on an Asian mission.

Currently  the  Success  is  in  Singapore,  it's  having  some  refurbishing  and  maintenance  work   done. About 10 per cent of the crew who were on the ship at the time remain with the ship so  there's  been  a  substantial  turnover  and  I'm  not  proposing  to  identify  some  individuals  or  be   more particular or more specific than that.

It  has  taken  a  lot  of  time  and  one  of  the  reasons  for  that  is  because  a  small  number  of  crew   members were sent off the ship or landed and Commissioner Gyles effectively finds that that  wasn't  according  them  fair  process.  He  will  give  the  Chief  of  Navy  and  the  Chief  of  the   Defence Force a subsequent Report dealing with the way in which Defence and Navy deal with

enquiries of this nature. That will occur in the course of the middle or the second half of this  year.  That  will  also  be  a  most  helpful  Report  because  it's  quite  clear  that  there  are  some   weaknesses in the enquiry system and I think we can do better on that front as well.

GILLIAN BRADFORD: So have any of these people left the Navy? Have any of the alleged  victims of this misconduct...

3

STEPHEN SMITH: Again I'm not proposing to go into that.  People may well be subject to  disciplinary charges under the Defence Force Discipline Act. That is a process which the Chief  of the Defence Force and the Chief of Navy will outline later today. That’s as well as the action  that the Chief of Navy will take in addition to a program called New Generation Navy which  he introduced in 2009. That will very clearly make the point that leadership is required on these  issues, that inappropriate behaviour and conduct by Navy or community standards will not be  tolerated, particularly when it comes to not treating fellow crewmen and crewwomen with the  appropriate respect that they're entitled to, both in the work place and outside the work place.

GILLIAN BRADFORD: And how far up the chain of command does this go? Where does the  buck officially stop?

STEPHEN  SMITH:  I'll  leave  that  for  the  publication  of  the  Report  and  subsequent   consideration but it's quite clear there was a breakdown on the ship of discipline, effectively a  breakdown of some of the lines of command.

It's not entirely a bad story. One of the good features of the Report is that people who believe  that there was inappropriate conduct drew attention to it in circumstances which showed that  they were made of pretty stern stuff.

More  generally  I  know  that  Navy's  going  through  a  tough  time  with  this  Report,  with   difficulties on heavy amphibious lift, but despite some difficulties we still see Navy doing great  work  -  in  the  response  to  the  floods  and  the  cyclone; in the response from crew members of  HMAS Pirie  and  the  Christmas  Island  tragedy  just  before  Christmas;  and  over  the  weekend   crew  members  from  HMAS  Bathurst  acting  in  a  very  heroic  way  in  rough  seas  to  bring  an   asylum seeker boat to shore on Christmas Island. So it's not all a bad story but we can't tolerate  conduct of this nature.

GILLIAN  BRADFORD:  And  just  briefly  on  that  Mr  Smith,  this  reflects  on  a  series  of   incidents on one ship. What do you say about what's happening in the rest of the Navy?

STEPHEN  SMITH:  It's  clear  that  we  have  had  particular  problems  on  HMAS  Success.   But   there are lessons here more generally for Navy and the Defence Force generally which we have  to be conscious of.  We are, for example, making the point that abuse and misuse of alcohol is  inappropriate across the Force and that's one of the issues which becomes clear in the reading  of this Report, the need for sensible use of alcohol, the need for alcohol and drug testing to be  of the highest order.  These things apply across the board and they're treated across the board.

GILLIAN BRADFORD: Mr Smith thank you very much for joining us.

STEPHEN SMITH: Thank you, thanks very much.

