CHRIS BOWEN MP

MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP  *TRANSCRIPT*

INTERVIEW WITH IAN HENSCHKE, ABC ADELAIDE  MORNINGS

THURSDAY, 7 JULY 2011



SUBJECTS: Malaysia transfer agreement, Inverbrackie, children in  community-based arrangements, security checks.

IAN HENSCHKE: Let’s cross to Chris Bowen now, the Minister for  Immigration and Citizenship. Good morning, Chris Bowen.

CHRIS BOWEN: Good morning, Ian.

HENSCHKE: Yes, thank you for your time. I’m glad you’re able to join us on  the program; there was a bit of doubt there.

BOWEN: Yeah, I had to go and do a vote in the Parliament.

HENSCHKE: Yes, I appreciate you coming on to talk to us. This documentary  tonight, Leaky Boat, is clearly going to make people think again about the  way we handle refugees in this country. What is the latest plan that’s being  put forward and will it eventuate? I understand it involves a swap with  Malaysia, but this is going to be blocked, I understand, by the Greens. So  what will happen?

BOWEN: Well, no, the Greens oppose it, but we’re determined to proceed  with it. I think the benefit of the arrangement with Malaysia is that we  provide a very strong disincentive for people to get on the boat. It’s a very  dangerous journey: many people have lost their lives on that journey.

And I don’t think Australia can go through again what we went through last  December with that terrible accident off the coast of Christmas Island, and  there have been other boats lost that we know about and there have  inevitably been other boats lost that we simply just don’t know about  between Indonesia and Australia. And we’ve really got to put a stop to that.

The second benefit is that we’re able to increase our refugee intake, take  more refugees, but take them in an orderly process and work with the UNHCR  on the most compelling cases. Look, I listened to most of [inaudible]  interview and look, people who take that decision, from their point of view,  are acting perfectly legitimately, but I think Australia is entitled to say, ‘Look,  we need to take the most compelling cases, the ones that have been through

the UNHCR process, and to resettle people as orderly as possible’. So we’ll do  this with Malaysia, we’ll take 4000 extra refugees from Malaysia, people  who’ve been waiting for some time for resettlement. We’ve also worked with  Malaysia and the United Nations to improve and ensure protections for those

people we transfer to Malaysia, and that’s a very significant step forward in  terms of the way we deal with refugees as a region.

HENSCHKE: Now, we had an email from someone pointing out what they  consider to be a flaw in this policy. They say that anyone who arrives here,  gets asylum and then is treated under our law, but in fact if you bring about

this policy you’re sending them to Malaysia where they say that people will  not be safe, we can’t guarantee the safety of these people.

BOWEN: Well, no, as I say, we’ve negotiated with Malaysia and in  consultation with the UNHCR significant protections for the people we send to  Malaysia. It’s important that we -



HENSCHKE: You say significant, but these people are going to be operating  under Malaysian law, not under Australian law. So can you really guarantee  that people who will be held in Malaysia will be treated as well as they would  be if they were treated under Australian law?

BOWEN: Well, they’ll be treated in accordance with human rights standards  and by the International Organisation for Migration, and we’ve consulted with  the United Nations High Commissioner. Look, is life difficult in Malaysia for  asylum seekers? It can be, yes. Now, it’s important to note that the people  we transfer to Malaysia will not be illegal migrants. Malaysia has laws dealing  with illegal migrants but the people we transfer will not be illegal migrants to  Malaysia. They’ll be dealt with under a different regime.



But we do want to provide that disincentive. Now, the reason why Malaysia:  because most people who take their boat journey to Australia begin it in  Malaysia. They get on a boat, catch a plane to Malaysia, then get on a boat to  Indonesia and then a separate boat to Australia. So if we say to people,  ‘Look, if you take that dangerous boat journey to Australia and you pay the  $15,000 or $20,000 for that, you will end up where you started that journey’.  I think that provides a very significant disincentive. But it also means that the  92,000 registered asylum seekers in Malaysia, the 18,000 of those that are  children, we get a chance to resettle more of those people.

I think most Australians would say, ‘Look, we want to take refugees, we’re a  developed, compassionate country, but we want an orderly process; we don’t  want people arriving by boat effectively self-selecting’. We want to have a  process of determining, in consultation with the UNHCR, the compelling cases  that we want to resettle.

HENSCHKE: Give us a call: 1300 222 891 if you’ve got a question for the  Minister about the Government’s plan for immigration in this country. The

Minister’s ready to take your calls.

Now, just on the Inverbrackie centre, which is up in the Adelaide Hills, which  caused a fair bit of controversy when it was announced: what’s the plan for  that?

BOWEN: Well, look, that’s open and I think it’s working, by and large, well.  We have a capacity there of 400 people and I know there’s been some  rumours in the community, which I think might have been on your radio  program, that that would be expanded. That’s not the case. It will not be  expanded. I said at the time 400 would be the maximum and in fact there at  the moment we have 248 people, so way under capacity, and that’s as a  result of a number of things.

We’ve been moving families and children into the broader community, across  the country. We now have 62 per cent of children in the community, not in  detention facilities, and that’s a good thing. Also, we’ve seen a significant  reduction in arrivals this year, and particularly since the announcement of the

Malaysia arrangement we’ve seen arrivals fall quite dramatically, which has  meant that we’ve got no desire or need to expand any of our detention  centres. In fact, I closed two detention centres just last week, two detention  facilities. So I can reassure people: absolutely no need or plans to expand the  Inverbrackie detention facility.

HENSCHKE: Just on this issue of people being put into the community, if  someone has got children are you saying that now it’ll only be single men and  single women that will be held in detention centres, that it won’t be in the  community?

BOWEN: Well, largely we are moving children into the community because  regardless -

HENSCHKE: But they come with their parents, don’t they?

BOWEN: Yeah, that’s right. We move the whole family where they come with  their parents.

HENSCHKE: So that would mean that these detention centres, the ones that  remain, the ones behind the razor wire, will be single men and women?

BOWEN: That’s correct.

HENSCHKE: Will they be separated?

BOWEN: Well, they are, as currently. We don’t have single men and women  together.

HENSCHKE: Is this why we’re seeing - I mean, we know that we have

problems in prisons. These are a form of prison or, you know, a camp,  detention camp - is this why we’re seeing more problems, because you’ve got  a whole lot of single men?

BOWEN: No, well, it’s true to say that the detention centres we’ve seen  protests and riots in have been ones with single adult men in, that’s correct. I  think largely what we’re seeing now is we’ve had an increase in the number  of people who we’ve said to, ‘Look, actually we don’t regard you as a refugee.  We’ve assessed your claim; we don’t think you’re a genuine refugee and  therefore we need to talk to you about returning to the country that you’ve  come from’.

Now, that leads to a lot of frustrations and tensions. In some of our detention  centres, we’ve got 80 per cent of people in that situation, where we’ve said,  ‘Look, you’re not a refugee’, and they’re at various stages of appealing that.

But that does lead to difficulties. Now, we manage that, but it does lead to  difficulties. So you do see various causes of protests in detention centres, but  I think one of the underlying factors, quite frankly, is that we do have people  who are being told, ‘You’re not a genuine refugee and we need to talk to you  about how we’re going to resolve that’.



HENSCHKE: Matt from Craigmore has called in. Good morning, Matt.

CALLER: Yeah, good morning, Minister. Just very quickly, we had Nauru  where we processed about 95 per cent of the people who got there and were  actually resettled. You failed East Timor. You failed in PNG. Now you’re about  to send all these poor souls to what must be rated one of the worst countries  in the world for their treatment of, you know, migrants and illegal people, and  you’re saying that if you take 4000 they have 800. This place is where they’ll  head to and that’s where all the boats are coming from. If they can’t stop it  now, what makes you think they’re going to stop it after we’ve sent all these  people and taken all the others?

HENSCHKE: Minister?

BOWEN: Thanks for the question. But if you’re in Malaysia or Indonesia and  you’re thinking about getting on a boat and you know there’s a very good  chance you’ll be taken back to Malaysia, you’d have to question why would  you do it. Since the announcement of the Malaysia arrangement, we’ve had  341 people arrive by boat. If you look at the same period last year, exactly  the same number of days after that announcement, the same time of year,  you had 1200 people arriving.

I’m not saying the announcement of the Malaysia arrangement is the only  reason we’ve seen that reduction; there’s always a range of factors. But I do  think we’re seeing people reconsider their decision. As I said before, the  number of people getting on boats and risking their lives, I think, has to stop.  Yes, that makes some tough decisions. Yes, that means you need to do some

controversial things. But if you do it in such a way that it’s a regional solution,  which it is: we had the Bali Meeting; the region agreed on a way forward,  that was a substantial step forward, and then arising out of that we’ve got  different agreements across the region, of which Malaysia is the key one from  our point of view -

HENSCHKE: Chris Bowen, we’ve got another caller coming in: George from  Burnside has called in this morning. Today on Mornings we’re talking to Chris  Bowen, Minister for Immigration. Your question, George?

CALLER: Yes, I believe of these illegal immigrants, a high proportion would  be either criminals or people who wouldn’t be allowed in for medical reasons.  Then if compassion overrules sense, it wouldn’t be hard to see at least a  billion people around the world would be better off here. Now -

HENSCHKE: Okay, George, look, we haven’t got a lot of time. Chris Bowen,  do you have any statistics on how many of these people are criminals or have  medical problems? Because I imagine you’d have that at your fingertips.

BOWEN: Yeah, George, we do all those checks. So we do a range of checks:  the first one is to assess whether somebody’s a refugee.

HENSCHKE: What is the proportion, though?

BOWEN: We also do health and identity and security checks. And we do find  some people fail those security checks and they’re not released into the  community. We have -

HENSCHKE: What’s the ratio, though? Because we often hear that around, I  think, out of the people on the Tampa, the vast majority of them were all  found to be -

BOWEN: Well, it varies from time to time. If you look at the first quarter of  this year, we had a 48 per cent approval rating of refugee claims. Sorry, 48  per cent rejection rating. So 52 per cent were regarded as genuine refugees;

48 per cent were not.

HENSCHKE: So more than half the people that are coming at this stage are  genuine refugees?

BOWEN: Yeah, by boat in the first quarter. But as I say, you’ll see those  figures move around quite a bit, because it depends on the people being  assessed at the time. I think George’s other point is a valid one, which is that  there are a lot of people around the world in difficult circumstances: 42  million displaced people around the world.

That’s why I think we need an orderly process to deal with that, yes. All of  those people would be better off if they were resettled in Australia; no

question. And all of those people, almost all of them, I’m sure, would jump at  the opportunity if they had it. But not everybody has that opportunity. Not  everybody has the money to pay for a boat. Not everybody has the inclination  to risk their life or take their family on a boat. And I think we need a system  which deals with that, and that’s what the policy of the Government,  particularly in relation to the Malaysia arrangement, achieves.

HENSCHKE: Thank you very much for your time, Chris Bowen, Minister for  Immigration and Citizenship.

BOWEN: Nice talking to you, Ian.

HENSCHKE: Thanks again.

Ends



