CHRIS BOWEN MP

MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP  *TRANSCRIPT*

INTERVIEW WITH JOHN LAWS, 2SM MORNING SHOW

WEDNESDAY, 5 OCTOBER 2011

E&OE PROOF ONLY

SUBJECTS: Incidents in detention, changes to the character test  under the Migration Act, Malaysia Arrangement, legislative  amendments to Migration Act, Nauru, Papua New Guinea.

JOHN LAWS: Chris Bowen, good morning and welcome to the program.

CHRIS BOWEN: Good morning, John, thanks.

LAWS: You want to swap jobs?

BOWEN: Oh, it’s not the easiest job I’ve ever done, John, you’re quite right,  but nevertheless, I didn’t get into politics to do the easy jobs. That’s the  challenge there and it’s a challenge I’m committed to seeing through.

LAWS: Yeah. In addition to being difficult, it’s got to be depressing, hasn’t it?

BOWEN: Oh, I wouldn’t say depressing, John, no. It’s certainly a challenge  and these are emotional issues. These are real people we’re talking about,  real human beings, and it’s important, of course, that we have a very orderly  immigration system, but we are talking about real human beings and the  issues get very emotional and emotive. Often people have strong views both  ways: some people are very, very pro-refugee and get very emotional about  it; other people are very strong on protecting our borders and are equally as  strong willed about that. Being Immigration Minister is not a ticket to being  popular, you’re quite right about that, John, because most people will have  strong views either way.

LAWS: Yeah. Statistics out today that I presume would be accurate, they  allege a sexual assault every 10 days.

BOWEN: Well, John, they are allegations of assault and what we find is that,  of course, the number of incidents, whether they be assaults or other sorts of  incidents, are pretty reflective of the number of people in detention at any  particular time. So you see those figures go up and down, broadly reflecting  the number of people we have. When you have several thousand people in  detention, you’re going to get some incidents, and they’re all investigated, all  taken very seriously.

Of course, we’ve strengthened the law to make it very clear that any  conviction while in immigration detention can lead to people failing the  character test and being denied a permanent visa - that’s an important  message to send as well.

LAWS: Okay. Are males and females in the same detention centre?

BOWEN: Only when there’s a family situation. So we have two different  types of facility: we have facilities for what we call single adult men and that’s  the majority of people who arrive in Australia by boat are single adult men  and they’re housed separately in separate detention centres; and then we  have facilities for families and most families are held in the community, and  as they transition into the community and those arrangements are made  they’re held in separate facilities away from single adult men.

LAWS: Okay. So where do these sexual assaults take place?

BOWEN: Well, as I say, John, we need to be careful, they’re allegations and  they’re allegations made across our detention facilities. Sometimes it’s an  allegation of sexual assault, sometimes it’s an allegation of assault. Often,  without downplaying the seriousness, obviously there’s a range of allegations  and a range of seriousness. An allegation can range, you know, from an  allegation of domestic violence between a husband and a wife to an allegation  against Serco staff or an allegation by Serco staff, by staff against detainees  that somebody assaulted them. You know, really we see all sorts of  allegations made and they are regularly referred to the police for  investigation.

LAWS: Okay, but when you look at 372 reports of alleged assault, even if  some of them are mythical there’s a hell of a lot there.

BOWEN: Sure, absolutely, John, it’s a serious issue. But as I say, it largely  reflects the number of people we have in detention. Now, we’ve significantly  reduced the number of people in detention over recent months. It’s now  considerably lower than it was, even, say, last April, and that’s a result of a  number of things. It’s a result of the changes we’ve made for faster  processing, it’s a result of moving families and children into the community,  and it’s a result of lower boat arrivals. We’ve seen a big reduction in boat  arrivals, particularly after the announcement of the Malaysia arrangement and  that reflects in fewer people in detention.

LAWS: Yeah. Speaking of the Malaysia arrangement, what’s the future of  that? I would have thought it was off the table.

BOWEN: Well, we need legislation, it’s true, John, and we need the Liberal  Party to vote for that legislation. Now, Mr Abbott says he supports offshore  processing, but he won’t vote for legislation to allow it. He won’t vote for  legislation to allow the Malaysia arrangement to be implemented. He’s come

up with this idea of saying it should only be Refugee Convention signatory  countries, at the same time as he says that he would send boats back to  Indonesia, that is not a Refugee Convention signatory, which just shows to  me he’s playing politics.

LAWS: Can’t blame him though, can you?

BOWEN: Well, look, the Leader of the Opposition has an important role to  play and sometimes that’s to oppose, but sometimes it’s to act in the national  interest. I mean, if he really wants to be taken seriously on this issue, if he

really wants people to believe that he supports offshore processing, there’s an  easy way to show it and that’s to vote for it.

LAWS: What about Nauru, why is that not an option? And Manus Island?

BOWEN: Well, on Manus Island, we do have an agreement with the Papua  New Guinea Government to do Manus Island.

LAWS: Yeah, but when will that be up and running?

BOWEN: We can’t do that without the legislation either, John. The High  Court decision was such that not only was Malaysia ruled out, but their  reasoning would rule out Papua New Guinea and almost certainly Nauru as  well. So if any government wants to do offshore processing, this legislation  really needs to pass.

Now, in answer to your question, we think an offshore processing centre in  conjunction with the Malaysia arrangement can have a role to play. An  offshore processing centre just by itself, whether it be in Nauru or Papua New  Guinea or anywhere else, is frankly just another Christmas Island. It just  means that people get processed and if they’re genuine refugees they get  resettled in Australia, and the people smugglers and the asylum seekers know  that. All the expert advice we have is that you really need to, as you say,  break the people smugglers’ business model and to do that you’ve got to take  people back to where they started their boat journey and say, ‘Well, look,  sorry, you’re going to be processed with everybody else, almost 100,000  asylum seekers [inaudible].’ You send them to Nauru, if you’re a refugee you

still come to Australia, you haven’t broken the people smugglers’ business  model at all.

LAWS: Tell me this, what would be your ideal scenario? I mean, if there were  no lawyers, no Tony Abbott, no caucus. Your own personal idea, if it could be  approved and ready to go, what would you do?

BOWEN: Well, it’s the Malaysia arrangement, primarily, and what that does is  enable Australia to take more genuine refugees, more people who’ve been  awaiting resettlement, people in very difficult circumstances, people who’ve  fled genuine persecution. The majority of asylum seekers in Malaysia, for

example, are Burmese; they’ve fled what we all know is a pretty terrible  regime in Burma.

LAWS: Yeah.

BOWEN: And, you know, they deserve a chance as well. Now, I think  Australia should take more refugees. I want Australia to take more refugees.  But I don’t want the people smugglers making the decisions about who comes  and who doesn’t.

LAWS: Tell me, how do we rank in the world per capita when it comes to  taking refugees? I mean, do we take per capita more than they take, for  example, in the United States?

BOWEN: Yes, we do. We take more refugees per capita than any other  country in the world and we’re third in total. So the first is the United States,  second is Canada, third is us [inaudible]. Between the three of us, we take  the vast majority of the world’s refugees. Some countries take smaller  numbers, but per capita we take the most.

LAWS: Why?

BOWEN: Well, because it’s been a long standing government policy that we  can resettle refugees. We’re in a position to, we’re a country that can help  people out in a very difficult situation. That’s been, in fairness, the policy  position of both sides of politics, and that we do have a role to play but I do  think, very clearly, that the Australian people rightly expect that there be a  very orderly process and that we not see boats [inaudible] in the way that  they have done and that’s what the Malaysia arrangement achieves,  [inaudible] we’re going to take you to Malaysia and you’ll be processed just  like everybody else in Malaysia.

LAWS: Yeah, but you still haven’t answered why not Nauru or Papua New  Guinea.

BOWEN: Well, because they by themselves won’t do that, John. They, by  themselves, aren’t an answer. They by themselves just mean that they get  processed on Nauru or Papua New Guinea and then the genuine refugees get  brought to Australia. So you do get special treatment if you arrive in Australia  by boat. If you have one of those, particularly Papua New Guinea in  conjunction with Malaysia, well, then [inaudible] if you come to Australia by  boat, you’ll be taken to Malaysia or PNG, but you’re not going to have any  [inaudible] resettlement in Australia. That’s a very strong message. But if  your message is, look, we’re going to take you to Papua New Guinea or  Nauru and if you’re a refugee, which the majority clearly think they are, then  you’ll be settled in Australia, they’re going to say, ‘Oh, well, okay, if I’ve got  to go to Nauru or Papua New Guinea, compared to what I’m getting away  from, that’s no hassle. I’ll do it.’ It’s not going to break the business model,

John.

LAWS: No, that’s true, I accept that. Okay, I appreciate your time again,  Chris Bowen. Thank you very much.

BOWEN: And you, John.

Ends





