1





MINISTER FOR DEFENCE

STEPHEN SMITH, MP



TRANSCRIPT: INTERVIEW WITH ASHLEIGH GILLON, SKY NEWS

TRANSCRIPTION: PROOF COPY E & OE

DATE: 22 FEBRUARY 2011



TOPICS: Libya; Release of the HMAS Success Commission of Inquiry Report



ASHLEIGH GILLON: Minister, good morning. Firstly, what's your reaction to the escalating  crisis in Libya?

STEPHEN SMITH: It's very difficult to make a clear judgement from afar, particularly given  the  inability  of  international  media  to  broadcast  what's  actually  occurring.   But  there  are  a   number of important points. Firstly, as is always the case, we want these matters to be resolved  peacefully.  So we obviously want people's rights of protest to be respected.

We are indicating to Australian nationals who are there that they should leave safely if they're  able to do so by commercial travel.  We changed the travel advice in the last 24 hours to do not  travel.  So any Australians who are there, and we have about 75 registered Australians, should  leave.  But we want this issue resolved in a peaceful way, respecting the rights of the Libyan  people.

ASHLEIGH GILLON: Back home today, you're tabling the findings of an inquiry into sexual  misconduct by crew members on the HMAS Success in 2009.  Can you paint us a picture of the  sort of culture that existed on board that ship?

2

STEPHEN SMITH: Yes. I'll table in the Parliament later this afternoon an edited or redacted  version of Commissioner Gyles's Report dealing with matters on HMAS Success, one of our   supply ships, in March to May of 2009.

It's a very disturbing Report.  It's not a good read.  It's confronting.  It deals with inappropriate  conduct, both onshore and offshore, a tribal culture, a breakdown of discipline, effectively, a  breakdown of command and conduct bringing Navy into disrepute, particularly in the area of  inappropriate  conduct,  so  far  as  women  are  concerned,  and  inappropriate  conduct,  so  far  as   sexual approaches and sexual attitudes to women is concerned.

So Commissioner Gyles deals with all of these matters.  I'll release the Report and later today  the  Chief  of  the  Defence  Force  and the  Chief  of  Navy  will  outline  the  response,  because  it's   very  important  that  we're  transparent  on  this  issue  and  let  the  public  know  of  the  problems.    But also it’s important that we outline to the Australian public what we're doing to make sure  that  these  bad  attitudes,  bad  approaches  and  bad  cultures  are  broken  down.  It's  inappropriate   and unacceptable conduct, and behaviour and attitude in the modern Navy and in the modern  day.

ASHLEIGH GILLON: Well, how convinced are you that since 2009 the Department has been  able to do that, has been able to reverse this culture?

STEPHEN SMITH: Well, a couple of things.  Firstly, it's clearly the case that there were these  very disturbing problems on the Success itself.  But the Chief of Navy in 2009 initiated a new  program, a program called New Generation Navy, which seeks to bring Navy, at every level,  effectively, into the modern day.  And it's a good program and he's to be complimented for it.

ASHLEIGH GILLON: Is there still a way to go though?

STEPHEN  SMITH:  Oh,  absolutely.  I  mean,  there's  no  doubt  about  that.   And  one  of  the   reasons that I want to be public and transparent about this Report, I do need to be careful about  the detail, because there are accusations or suggestions of inappropriate conduct by individuals  and their rights need to be respected.

But  publishing  the  Report  will  of  itself,  we  think,  be  a  positive  contribution,  just  drawing   attention  to  people  that  one  has  to  conduct  oneself  appropriately,  that  your  conduct  offshore   can  bring  the  Navy  into  disrepute,  and  you  have  to  treat  your  fellow  sailors  with  respect,   dignity and civility.

ASHLEIGH  GILLON:  What  is  your  assessment  of  how  women  are  treated  in  the  Defence   Force?

3

STEPHEN  SMITH:  When  you  read  this  Report,  you  will  be  disturbed.   It  shows  an   inappropriate attitude, inappropriate conduct.  Indeed, Commissioner Gyles refers to predatory  sexual practices, and that is completely unacceptable.

Now,  more  generally,  we  are  pleased  with  the  progress  that  we  are  making  in  the  Defence   Force.  So we need to keep it into perspective.  Very much of this Report is almost exclusively  about  HMAS  Success.   We  need  to  be  careful  to  make  sure  we  don't  have  such  attitudes  or

tribal culture throughout Defence.  But the Chief of the Defence Force, the Chief of Navy, the  Service Chiefs generally are working very hard to make sure that our Defence Force personnel  have the correct approach, the correct professionalism, the correct leadership skills.

It's  also  important,  I  think,  to  make  this  point.   Whilst  Navy  is  going  through  some  difficult   times, both with amphibious heavy lift ships and with the HMAS Success, it's not the case that  we  only  ever  see  bad  news.   We  saw,  for  example,  in  Christmas  Island  the  tragedy  there,   terrific heroism by the crew of HMAS Pirie.  On the weekend, not known by many people, the  crew on HMAS Bathurst, when they brought to Christmas Island an asylum seeker boat, did so  in seas that were category six or category seven.  A terrific act of heroism.  And we saw the  great work that Navy do or did during the floods, in the response to the floods.

So  it's  not  all  a  bad  news  story.   Yes,  we  do  focus  on  our  difficulties  and  we  put  in  place   policies and arrangements to make sure that these sorts of activities don't occur again.  And, of  course, one of the consequences will be individual disciplinary proceedings, and the potential  for  individual  disciplinary  proceedings  against  people  who  are  viewed  to  have  conducted   themselves inappropriately.

[ENDS]

