1





MINISTER FOR DEFENCE

STEPHEN SMITH, MP



TRANSCRIPT: INTERVIEW WITH JIM MIDDLETON, NEWSLINE,  AUSTRALIA NETWORK

TRANSCRIPTION: PROOF COPY E & OE

DATE: 5 MAY 2011

TOPICS: Pakistan Defence Chief General Khalid Shameem Wynne visit to  Australia; Death of Osama bin Laden; ADF Afghanistan commitment; PNG  processing centre.



JIM MIDDLETON: Minister, thanks very much for your time.

STEPHEN SMITH: My pleasure Jim.

JIM MIDDLETON: Your meeting with the chairman of Pakistan's Joint Chiefs of Staff,  that must have been some discussion, very interesting discussion given the increasingly  tense row that there is now between the US and Pakistan over Osama bin Laden.

STEPHEN SMITH: Well Wynne was here as part of the regular dialogue that takes  place between Australia's military and Defence Force and Pakistan's military and  Defence Force and he and I had a courtesy call arranged. We met in the aftermath of  President Obama's address to the nation so we were both aware of, firstly what President  Obama had said but also importantly what the President relayed so far as his  conversation with President Zardari was concerned.

2

General Wynne, like President Zardari, was pleased that bin Laden had been captured  and killed and made the point, as President Zardari has and Prime Minister Gilani has,  that bin Laden had declared himself [indistinct]. His comments to me were consistent  with the comments reported to the world's media by President Obama so far as President  Zardari was concerned.

JIM MIDDLETON: Did you or any of the Defence people - Australia's top brass Angus  Houston - raise the possibility or the concern that the United States has and others as well  that some of Pakistan's military may be in contact and actually helping the Taliban?

STEPHEN SMITH: Well the conversation that I had with General Wynne was one in  which I indicated that I was pleased that President Obama had indicate that part of the  reason that bin Laden was tracked down and killed was a result of assistance the general

counter-terrorism cooperation between the United States and Pakistan. That's a good  thing.

I also indicated to General Wynne as I have previously to Pakistan officials and also  publicly that Australia very much supports Pakistan in its counter-terrorism and counter-extremism efforts and that's reflected by the good cooperation that we have and the  enhanced counter-terrorism assistance that we've given to Pakistan in recent years.

We know it's complex, we know it's complicated; we know it's tough and we also know  that Pakistan needs to do more to counter extremism and terrorism, particularly on the  Afghanistan/Pakistan border front.

So, I made that point to General Wynne. He had discussions with Angus Houston, the  Chief of the Defence Force and other Australian Defence Force personnel. He also had a  round table with one of our think tanks where these issues were also canvassed. So that's  a good thing.

More generally I think we have to be careful not to leap to conclusions about state  sponsorship or the efforts made in Pakistan to trace down bin Laden. I think that's best  left for the exhaustive assessment which is underway, not just in the United States but  also an investigation in Pakistan. It's also clearly the case that the United States wants to  have an intense dialogue with Pakistan on this front and that's a good thing.

JIM MIDDLETON: Defence Force Chief Angus Houston is quoted as saying after his  talks with General Shameem that he had quote; ‘underlined the importance of Pakistan  playing a productive and responsible role in achieving a political settlement in  Afghanistan,’ quote-unquote. That sounds like Australia thinks Pakistan needs to be  clearly reminded of its responsibilities in this matter.

3

STEPHEN SMITH: Well I made the point to General Wynne myself and I'll use my  own expression that we need to see in Afghanistan an enduring settlement. That requires  very intense combat and military efforts in Afghanistan which are ongoing. It also  requires a political outcome and a political settlement which has regional support and  that is true particularly of Pakistan but it's also true of the region in which Afghanistan  finds itself and the central Asian states and also Iran.

So, regional support for an enduring settlement in Afghanistan, particularly from  Pakistan, is absolutely crucial and I welcome the fact that very recently we saw the high-level delegation from Pakistan go to Kabul and meet with President Karzai.

The significance of that delegation was that it wasn't just Prime Minister Gilani, it was  also the Chief of Army Kayani and also the Director of the Intelligence Service General  Pasha. The fact that such a high-level delegation went as one to Kabul to start discussions  with President Karzai and to establish a joint commission in the aftermath of that is  something that I welcome.

But Pakistan's support of an enduring settlement in Afghanistan is absolutely crucial and  I've made that point to Pakistan officials before and I made it to General Wynne and I've  also made the point publicly, which I'm happy to do again tonight.

JIM MIDDLETON: Well, as you say, you are saying that Pakistan still needs to do  more on the counter-terrorism front. Australia's second only to the United States in the  provision of military - or provision of training to Pakistan's military. What's the point of  spending all that money when there's the suspicion - or it seems - that some of these  people are likely to be going back and giving comfort to the enemy?

STEPHEN SMITH: Well, there's certainly no point in walking away from Pakistan  when Pakistan faces very considerable security and economic challenges and difficulties.  Our support and assistance to Pakistan is not just on the counter-terrorism front - which  we regard as being very important, indeed essential - it's also on the economic front.

Pakistan is not going to overcome its extremism and terrorism and security problems  without also making progress on its economic front. And that's why, for example, we  have in addition to effectively doubling the number of Pakistan military officers that we  train in counter-terrorism, we've also effectively doubled our development assistance and  we were one of the strongest contributors in the aftermath of the terrible floods in  Pakistan at the end of last year.

So there's no point in walking away. That, in my view, would be firstly wrong; secondly,  it wouldn't assist Pakistan.

4

I've made the point and you've used the form that I have used in the past - we believe that  Pakistan has improved its efforts on the counter-terrorism and extremism front, but it  does need to do more and I have - I made that point again to General Wynne.

But if we want Pakistan to do more on that front, there's no point in Australia, there's no  point in the United States, there's no point in the international community walking away.  Pakistan needs to have all the assistance that it can be provided with by the international  community.

Now, no-one is saying that the task is not difficult. No-one's saying that it's not complex  and complicated, no-one is saying that there's not a history there which presents great  challenges to Pakistan and the international community; but there's no point walking

away.

JIM MIDDLETON: Turning to Afghanistan specifically, how much of a setback in the  struggle to win over the hearts and minds of ordinary Afghans is the finding of that  Human Rights Commission that a man killed by Australian Special Forces was a civilian,  not an insurgent, as the Australian military insist?

STEPHEN SMITH: Well, two things. Firstly, we take any such - or any suggestion that  our forces have engaged in activity which has had adverse consequences for civilians  very seriously, and we've - we investigate each and every one of them.

On this particular incident, when it became clear that the deaths on the day and as a result  of Australian Defence Force personnel actions had also seen the death of a young child -  now, let me just make this point absolutely clear; we don't know at this stage whether the  death of the child was caused by ADF action or by Taliban or insurgent action; but as  soon as we became aware that the death of a child had occurred, we instituted  immediately a formal investigation which we always do.

We will forensically and diligently continue that investigation and we won't be coming to  any judgements or make any response to the Afghan Human Rights Commission in  advance of doing our own rigorous and forensic due diligence, which is what we always  do whenever suggestions like this are made. That's the first point.

Secondly, we are held very, very much in high regard for the way in which our personnel  on the ground interact with the Afghan community, with the Afghan people. And from  time to time, there are serious allegations or suggestions made and we respond in the  manner in which I have outlined because it's absolutely essential to our reputation.

5

JIM MIDDLETON: Another matter, Minister; Defence has significant responsibility  for protecting Australia's borders. When did Cabinet decide to enter discussions with  Papua New Guinea and about establishing a processing centre for asylum seekers in  PNG?

STEPHEN SMITH: Well, firstly, you know me well enough, Jim, to know that I would  never comment on Cabinet discussions, real or asserted; that's the first point. Secondly,  I'm certainly not going to become involved or engage in commenting on speculation in  an area outside of my own portfolio.

Whilst it is the case, of course, that some Defence assets are used for surveillance and  other activity on the border protection front, those matters are the matters for the Minister  for Immigration; so I wouldn't be proposed to be drawn either on any suggested Cabinet  conversation or any speculation in my colleague’s area of portfolio responsibility.

JIM MIDDLETON: Isn't this another example though of your government mirroring  John Howard's Pacific Solution for managing asylum seekers, a policy your party  condemned during the 2007 election?

STEPHEN SMITH: You're making a series of assumptions which I'm not proposing to  be drawn on. If you want to get a response to that, then the appropriate person from  whom to get a response is my colleague, the Minister for Immigration. I certainly won't  be drawn on suggestions or conclusions made on the basis of alleged Cabinet decisions  or speculation. So I'll leave that to my colleague, the Minister for Immigration.

JIM MIDDLETON: Minister, thank you very much.

STEPHEN SMITH: Thanks, Jim; thanks very much.

