CHRIS BOWEN MP

MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP  *TRANSCRIPT*

INTERVIEW WITH JOHN LAWS, 2SM MORNING SHOW

THURSDAY, 1 DECEMBER 2011





SUBJECTS: Asylum seekers, ALP National Conference proposal to  increase the humanitarian intake, Remuneration Tribunal.

JOHN LAWS: Chris Bowen, good morning and welcome to the program.

CHRIS BOWEN: Good morning to you, John. Nice to talk to you.

LAWS: Good to talk to you. Tell me, Chris, do you ever think that the figures  would be had the Malaysian deal gone ahead? What would they have been?

BOWEN: Well, they’d be a lot lower than we’re seeing now, frankly. It’s  interesting, John, in the last month we’ve had the highest number of arrivals for  a long time, well over 600. In the month after we announced the Malaysia  agreement, it was under 200. So that’s the comparison right there. A month

after we announced that we can’t proceed with Malaysia because we can’t get it  through the Parliament, we had the highest number of arrivals for a long time. In  the month after we announced Malaysia, we had very low arrivals.

And it stands to reason, John, if you’re sitting in Indonesia thinking about making  the boat journey, why would you make it if you know when you get to Australia  you’re going to be put on a plane back to Malaysia? It just doesn’t make any  sense. And that was the whole idea behind the Malaysia arrangement.

LAWS: Okay. So it’s worked?

BOWEN: Well, it was certainly having an impact. Certainly we were still getting  boat arrivals -

LAWS: Yeah.

BOWEN: Because of course it hadn’t yet been fully implemented and I think we  were only going to see its full impact when we actually had planes going back to  Malaysia and people actually seeing it being implemented in Malaysia and  Indonesia and actually seeing it working.



But I think it did have an announcement impact. We’ve had half the number of  boat arrivals this year than we had last year. A whole lot of factors have gone  into that, but I do think now that Parliament hasn’t passed our legislation - the  Liberal Party says they’ll oppose it - we’re going to see more boat arrivals and  that’s very sad because we’re going to see more people risking their lives -

LAWS: Yeah.

BOWEN: Some people losing their lives.

LAWS: Is there really any hope for any offshore processing or detention centres  at all? I mean, it goes against the core values of the Left faction of your party. It  goes against many people in the Australian community. Is there any hope of it  happening?

BOWEN: Well, look, I think so. But look, it is a controversial issue and there are  people in my party who disagree with me, that’s true. I think offshore  processing, if it’s part of a proper agreement, part of working with countries in  our region, I think it is an important part. And what I’m saying is, look,

Australians don’t have a problem with refugees by and large. Most Australians  would say, ‘Yeah, look, we should take refugees, they’re good people’.

But they do have a problem, and I think rightly, with people arriving by boat. It’s  very dangerous. There are other people in camps missing out and we need to  have a much more orderly system. And if you do that, then you can have the  conversation with the Australian people about taking some more refugees. That’s  the point I’m making today and I’ll be making to the party conference on the  weekend.

LAWS: Okay. What are the sort of increases in the numbers of people we will  accept as refugees if the party agrees to offshore processing?

BOWEN: Well, look, what I’ve said is at the moment we take 13,750 a year. I’ve  said over time our target should be 20,000. Now, I’m not saying next year and  I’m not saying any particular timeframe; it depends on the Budget and, you  know, a whole lot of other factors. But I think as a party - and the party  conference is all about laying out in broad principles where we stand on things -  we should say 20,000 is the figure that we should be aiming for. But it should be  part of, accompanied by proper regional arrangements to stop people coming to  Australia by boat.

LAWS: What’s happening in our onshore detention centres? I mean, most of  them have exceeded their limits on inmates anyway, haven’t they?

BOWEN: No, not really. We’ve seen a big reduction in the number of people in  detention over the last few months. We had over 6,000 in March, now we’ve got  about 4,000, and we have opened some new centres as well to relieve some of  the pressure. And that’s been as a result of a number of things, John. It’s  primarily as a result of a reduction in arrivals that we’ve seen this year. We’ve  also been processing people more quickly and speeding up some of our  processes. There are still some strains in detention centres but we have relieved  a lot of the pressure since March.

LAWS: Okay, a lot have gone into community housing. How are the detainees  selected for community housing?

BOWEN: Well, it’s what’s called community detention, you’re right. Last October  I said we’d move families and children into the community. I don’t think  detention centres or facilities are a good place for children to be in and I think  it’s much more appropriate to have them in communities. So we’ve targeted  children and families, and we’ve released over 2,000 people under that program.  Many of them have gone on now to be regarded as genuine refugees and have  got their visas.

They don’t have public housing as such. We work with the Red Cross to find  appropriate accommodation for them. I’ve also said we’ll have bridging visas as  part of the mix of things we use to process people. We’ll look at things such as  the amount of time have been in detention, their behaviour in detention and  whether they’ve got any [inaudible] in determining who gets those visas.

LAWS: The number of asylum seekers being intercepted off our coast has well  and truly passed the 600 a month threshold that was originally set. I think in  November it peaked at about 900 people.

BOWEN: Ah no, it was closer to 680, and we’ve seen of course more arrivals  today. But it has gone up very dramatically John, that’s right.

LAWS: You’re estimate for the entire year was 750 from memory wasn’t it?

BOWEN: Yeah, and that was factoring in the Malaysia announcement. That was  factoring in that if look we had this agreement with Malaysia then less people are  going to come. I’ve said for a long time, if the Parliament doesn’t pass this  legislation and we can’t get the Malaysia Arrangement operating, we’re going to  see an increase in arrivals and unfortunately John, that’s proved right.

LAWS: Yeah well, unfortunately, yeah. Back to politics: how are you going to  convince your left faction colleagues at the weekend? I mean I trust you won’t  be using any of the incentives we’ve been hearing about in the ICAC hearings.

BOWEN: No nothing that seedy John, not at all. Look, they will be a debate  about this at National Conference. I’ve been to going to the National Conference  of the Labor Party for a long time now and every conference I’ve been to has  had a debate about asylum seekers - this one will be no different.

There will be a lot of things we agree on, there will be things we disagree on. I  think - I would hope and expect the conference would support my position, but  there will be robust debate about it. There are, as you say, people in the Left of  my party who disagree with offshore processing. There are people in the Left  who strongly agree with it by the way. It’s not -

LAWS: Oh yes, yeah -

BOWEN: It’s not as clear cut as that. There’s people in the Caucus who strongly  argued for offshore processing who are members of the Left. We’ll see again that  debate on the floor of the conference on Saturday. That’s a healthy thing. I think  political parties should have those sorts of debates and then we all get behind  the position that’s agreed.

LAWS: There’s a bit of anger around this morning about the politicians’ pay  rises. I know you don’t have any control over that, but I’m sure there are times  when you feel you earn every single solitary cent of your salary.

BOWEN: I do get people coming up to me in the street, John, suggesting they  wouldn’t want my job for quids or you couldn’t possibly pay somebody enough to  be Immigration Minister -

LAWS: No exactly -

BOWEN: [Laughs] But you don’t do it for the money. I read the story in the  paper today, it was the first I’d heard of it so I can’t really comment. As I  understand it the Remuneration Tribunal is going to issue a report, I’ve not seen  that report, I cant tell you whether what’s in the paper is right or wrong. The  Remuneration Tribunal looks at our salaries and make decisions about our  conditions and they’ll no doubt say that we should lose some and others should  be increased. That’s really not something I can confirm or deny.

LAWS: No, I know you have no control over it. Okay, well I hope everything  goes okay over the weekend and I’m sure it will, I’m sure the majority of people  are going to agree with your suggestions, which seem to me to be very valid  ones. And thank you very much for your time Chris, it was good to talk to you  again.

BOWEN: And you John, always nice to talk to you.

Ends

