

The Hon Richard Marles MP   Parliamentary Secretary for Pacific Island Affairs



Interview with Joanna McCarthy on Pacific  Beat, Radio Australia  Transcript, E&OE

28 June 2011

COMPERE: Australia's Parliamentary Secretary for Pacific Island Affairs, Richard Marles,  says the RAMSI mission has in many ways been an unambiguous success.

Mr Marles is in Solomon Islands for a four day visit where he'll attend the annual meeting of  the Pacific Island Forum Ministerial Standing Committee on the Regional Assistance  Mission.

He'll meet Solomon Islands Prime Minister Danny Philip, the foreign affairs minister, the  treasury and finance minister and other members of the government.

His trip comes just weeks after New Zealand's foreign minster Murray McCully visited  Solomon Islands, where he said it was time for RAMSI to shift from a security role to a  development role.

RICHARD MARLES: I think RAMSI's always had a development focus and there's no  question that RAMSI needs to continue its development work. But I also think its right to  look at where the security future is in relation to the Solomons.

RAMSI's been, in many ways, an unambiguous success. If you look at the Solomons during  the tensions back in 2003 and compare that security situation to where we are now in 2011  they are simply worlds apart. So I think it is right to look at the way forward in relation to the  issue of security given that we are experiencing a better situation now than we did in 2003.

It's also very important to make clear that RAMSI was never intended to be in the Solomons  permanently. We do need to be looking at ways in which we transition to a more normal  bilateral relationship. That's a very important message, not just for the Solomon Islands but  for all the participating countries within RAMSI.

JOANNA MCCARTHY: And what's the latest status on your discussions with the  Government about when that withdrawal might be able to take place?

RICHARD MARLES: We're not putting timing on any of this. It's important we do this in a  very sober and measured way to make sure the gains that have been achieved through the  RAMSI process, the security gains that have been achieved, are not lost. Having said that, it  is also very important we do have a clear path forward which does see capacity and  development occurring within the Solomon Islands commensurate with the more favourable  security situation that exists in the Solomons.

JOANNA MCCARTHY: Now we understand the Solomons has made repeated offers about  hosting an asylum seeker processing centre on behalf of Australia. Will you be having any  further discussions with the Government about that offer?

RICHARD MARLES: No, we won't. The processing centre negotiations have been  occurring, as you know, with Papua New Guinea. That's where our focus is and, of course,  there's discussions going on with Malaysia. The Government is focused on discussions in  those two countries and there won't be any with the Solomon Islands this week.

JOANNA MCCARTHY: As Kevin Rudd told parliament last week, PNG politics is in a  very fragile state at the moment with a new Cabinet and uncertainty over the future of Sir  Michael Somare continuing as Prime Minister. Is the deal with PNG likely to fall over at any  minute because of this instability?

RICHARD MARLES: No, I don't think that's the case. I think it is right to say that with the  health situation of Sir Michael Somare, the political situation in Papua New Guinea is  understandably difficult for PNG.

I think if we were experiencing a similar situation in Australia there'd be a difficult political  situation there, or indeed in any country.

Sir Michael Somare is the great figure of PNG politics, he's the founding Prime Minister. To  have a situation now where he is not well, where there is speculation about the future, is  obviously very difficult for PNG. Now, having said that, we've continued our negotiations  with them about a regional processing centre in PNG. I think it's important to give PNG the  space it needs at the moment to deal with its own situation, but we're happy with the way in  which those talks are progressing and when there's something substantial to say in relation to  that we will.

JOANNA MCCARTHY: And we do understand a number of Pacific nations have been  putting forward offers to host asylum seeker processing centres. Which nations have made  these offers?

RICHARD MARLES: I'm not going to go into which nations have put forward proposals to  us. Certainly in a general sense we welcome the fact that there is a desire to help out  Australia in relation to this issue. But our focus is very much in relation to PNG and that's  where our negotiations on that matter are confined. I'm not going to go into details about  what has or hasn't been raised by other countries with us.

JOANNA MCCARTHY: Do you think it does damage to Australia's reputation in the  Pacific for the status of these negotiations to be so uncertain and for Australia to be seen to be  almost offloading its international obligations to small Pacific islands?

RICHARD MARLES: No, and firstly can I say that's not what we're doing. I'm happy with  the status of the negotiations with PNG. These are complex negotiations and they are going to  take time, and I think people understand that within the Pacific.

But the more significant point in relation to the question you've asked is that this is a regional  problem, it's not a problem that's confined to Australia, and it's one which does require a  regional solution. What we've been doing is progressing discussions with parties to the Bali  process to try and have an outcome which provides a regional solution to what is a regional  problem. And I don't think for a moment that anyone sees this is as a peculiarly Australian  issue we're somehow trying to offload to others. We're dealing with a regional problem and  we're working with our partners in the region to come up with a regional solution.

JOANNA MCCARTHY: But it's not particularly a problem that affects small Pacific island  nations, they are really being drafted into this on Australia's behalf.

RICHARD MARLES: No-one's drafting anyone. Indeed, I've mentioned before there has  been interest shown by countries raising the issue with us, so we're not drafting anybody into  any solutions. We're working with PNG at the moment to see whether there is the possibility  for a mutually agreeable solution for both PNG and Australia in the context of what is a  regional problem.

Media inquiries

• Parliamentary Secretary's Office: (02) 6277 4330  • Departmental Media Liaison: (02) 6261 1555



