



THE HON GREG COMBET AM MP  Minister for Climate Change and Energy Efficiency

TRANSCRIPT

GC 229/11

24 July 2011

TRANSCRIPT OF INTERVIEW WITH HUGH RIMINTON - MEET THE PRESS - CHANNEL  TEN

SUBJECT: CLEAN ENERGY PLAN; CARBON PRICING

E & O E - PROOF ONLY

10:30AM

RIMINTON: Welcome back to the program, joining us from Newcastle, the Climate  Change Minister, Greg Combet. Now…

COMBET: How are you, Hugh?

RIMINTON: I’m well, indeed, Greg. Cadel Evans, overnight. Magnificent effort. It  looks like he'll win the Tour de France. Everyone wrote him off, of course. They  thought years ago was his big chance. Is there a political lesson there for you?

COMBET: You have to stick to your guns. I like watching the Tour de France when I  have the opportunity in July each year. He struggled really hard over it. Over a  number of years, to get there and finished second a couple of times. It's fantastic to  see him in this position. A great thing for Australia.

RIMINTON: So the Labor Government, despite the appalling polling might yet come  through and triumph in the end. Is that the parable?

COMBET: I think we are in the Alps at the moment, climbing hard. We are stayers.  We'll get there.

RIMINTON: You have been two weeks into selling the carbon tax, since it was  announced on a Sunday two weeks ago. The polls are indicating you have made  absolutely no headway at all. If that doesn't change, will you at least amend in some  degree the carbon pricing scheme?

COMBET: Well, no, this is a - Yes, it's a difficult political environment at the moment.  But this is a critical reform for the future of the country, and for future generations.  The Government has listened to what the scientists are telling us. You have a public  policy responsibility then to deal with climate change on the basis of science. That  means cutting pollution, and doing it at least cost to your economy. That is exactly  what our carbon pricing plan with all the other measures that we have put foward

too, does. It will tackle climate change, it will be good for the economy, it will  improve our competitiveness over the long run, and it will do that while we still have  jobs growth and economic growth but at the same time cutting pollution, and driving  innovation in the economy.

RIMINTON: The problem is we've heard all these arguments and people are not  buying it. So the argument is you have listened to the Independents, you have  listened to the Greens. Are you now going to listen to the public and amend it to  answer the very real concerns that are out there about your policy?

COMBET: Well, to be frank, you can't run public policy and Government on the basis  of an opinion poll that is out every two or three days - they are frequent these days.  You have to do what is right by the long-term interest of the country, and that is  what the Government is doing.

We have to play our part internationally in tackling climate change. Australia's  always shared the responsibility at an international level to meet challenges of this  nature. That is what the Government is doing. What is more, it's in our national  interest to do so. Australia has a lot to lose from climate change, damage to our  environment and our economy. It would be at great cost. We need to tackle this  problem and drive innovation in the economy.

What we are up against is, I suppose, a pretty effective negative campaigner in Tony  Abbott and he’s poisoned the environment to a significant degree with what is a  completely deceitful and misrepresented campaign. He said, for example, that prices  are going to go through the roof. They'll be unimaginable. And he's wrong. It's  merely a 0.7% increase in the Consumer Price Index. He said the coal industry would  be wiped out. In fact, it's not. It’s going to grow and grow strongly. There is tens of  billions of dollars of investment. Jobs will grow. He said the steel industry will be  destroyed. And the two...

RIMINTON: We have heard these arguments again and again over the last two  weeks, exactly that frame of words. What I'm hearing, and I don't mean to be  disrespectful, but out constantly people say a variation of "I just can't listen to her  any more." Do you have a problem with the head of your sales team?

COMBET: No, we don't, and the Prime Minister is doing the right thing. I've been out  talking to a lot of people too. I've been crisscrossing the country in workplaces,  different industries, speaking at large meetings, and once people understand the  issues, and we get past some of the fear-mongering that Tony Abbott's engaged in,  people recognise that the price increases are modest, but that the Government will  provide assistance through tax cuts and pension and benefit increases so that nine  out of the 10 households receive some assistance and, that the economy is going to  continue to grow and jobs will continue to grow.

People start to realise that Tony Abbott has been endeavouring to deceive them,  and they have become more comfortable with the policy, they are then concerned  about whether the policy will be environmentally effective.

RIMINTON: Sure.

COMBET: It will…

RIMINTON: If I can interrupt again. There is something else going on here, Tony  Abbott says there will be a referendum on the carbon tax. He is also saying that his  Direct Action Plan will achieve the same effective results of a 5% reduction by 2020  and he tried to explain the process this week. Have a quick listen to this.

ABBOTT (TUESDAY): We are going to use the kind of tender process which is used all  the time for the delivery of better services for the production of better outcomes,  but we'll go to the market, we’re going to harvest the creativity and the intelligence  of Australian businesses and we are going to go with the best possible results.

RIMINTON: Now, with all respect to Mr Abbott, it sounds like a bunch of waffle.  Given this is a referendum at the next election, why are you not more aggressive in  attacking his theoretical alternative plan?

COMBET: Well, you just cut me off when I was about to get into it a minute ago,  Hugh. I'll have another go. His Direct Action Plan is rubbish. It's a subsidies plan for  polluters. It actually takes from taxpayers, from households and pays money to the  polluters without confidence about the environmental outcome.

I actually think the plan is a joke and Mr Abbott knows it's a joke. It's a fig leaf for his  scare campaign. He feels he has to have a policy, but the policy changes with every  press conference that he does. It's not serious. When you look at it seriously, what it  means, and these are some figures that the Treasury has analysed, what it means is  by the year 2020 his proposition to achieve a 5% cut in our pollution that year costs  $13 billion to taxpayers that year, at a cost of $1300 on average to households. He's  taking off taxpayers and giving it to the large polluters with no confidence at all  about the environmental outcome.

On the other hand, the Government's position is that the largest polluters in the  economy have to purchase a permit for each ton of pollution they produce,  generating the incentive to cut pollution, drive investment in cleaner energy sources  and we provide assistance to households through tax cuts and increases in pensions  and other benefits. When you look objectively at the two policies, it's a pretty big  difference.

RIMINTON: We'll take a break. I want to come back and be joined by the panel. Our  mandatory 'Budgie Smuggling Reference of the Week', everyone loves it, the  Opposition Leader found himself in the 9 degree waters of Port Phillip Bay.

ABBOTT (WEDNESDAY): “Could you do me a favour”, she said. I said "Sure", she said  "Get some smaller ones". Well, I have to say coming out of that water, I have smaller  ones. I really do.

RIMINTON: Welcome back, you are on Meet The Press. Our guest is the Climate  Change Minister Greg Combet. Welcome to the panel, Eleanor Hall, from ABCs  World Today and Stefanie Balogh, from 'The Australian'. Good morning to both of  you.

BALOGH: Minister, on Friday senior business leaders said relationships with the  Government were at an all-time low. The Government was difficult to deal with,  short-sighted, heavy-handed and possibly illegitimate. Do you agree?

COMBET: It won't surprise you to learn that I’d say no. I don't agree. I noticed one of  the businessmen quoted in the papers yesterday saying that the Government has no  longer term policies looking to the future of the country, and then started talking  directly about carbon pricing and the NBN. I don't think you could highlight two  policies that focus on the long term future of this country and in particular  competitiveness and productivity than those two policies. So I thought the  comments were rather silly actually.

BALOGH: But given those two policies particularly, Hawke and Keating both took  business along with them. At the moment you have a problem with business. They  are not - there are sections that are not on board with the reform process. How do  you overcome those hurdles?

COMBET: You have to be careful not to generalise just because one or two business  people say something and it's splashed across the front pages that that represents  the entire business community. It does not. In fact, when you consider that two  weeks ago we released the entire carbon price packing, and quite a lot of business  people and businesses, of course, have come out and said "Yes, that's workable",  they are concerned about international conditions and the high value of the  Australian dollar for example, but generally I think the carbon pricing package has  been pretty well received in the business community.

Yes, there's this advertising campaign that's supposed to start tonight. But these are  fundamentally Liberal Party ads. The ACCI, which is the leading organisation behind  those ads has historically had a close association with the Liberal Party and it's not  surprising to see Mr Evans out, you know, spruiking these things.

Those ads are completely factually incorrect by the way, suggesting that jobs will,  you know, fall, in fact, when jobs grow by 1.6 million to 2020, that the most deceitful  thing in the ads is the alleged cost of the European scheme versus the Australian  scheme. Both schemes, in fact, provide free permits to business, and what the ads  have conveniently excluded the free permits from the calculation of revenue in the  European number, but included them in the Australian number. So it's completely  misrepresentative.

HALL: Mr Combet, you have got a key union leader on your case. Paul Howes is  saying that it's a terrible policy and very frustrating to have the release of a policy  before the details are out, leaving, for months, you know, the Opposition there to go  and fill in the details. What is the strategy behind that way that the Government is  releasing policy at the moment?

COMBET: Well, let me set the record straight. Mr Howes came out last Monday, the  National Secretary of the Australian Workers' Union and supported the policy  wholeheartedly.

HALL: He doesn't support the way you have released it. That's what he is talking  about.

COMBET: That’s his opinion. However, when we formed Government in September  last year we entered into an arrangement with the Independents and the Greens to  form a Multi-Party Climate Change Committee to formulate the policy. And I guess in  a sense the policy development process was a bit different too on previous occasions

in that the Government developed a policy in a way to ensure the Government  would ensure it would secure its passage through the House of Representatives and  the Senate, rather than an alternative process of the Government producing a  detailed policy and then discussing it. It was in reverse to what the circumstances  might be.

That's why there was a good degree of debate before some months before we  produced a detailed policy a couple of weeks ago. It's out now. It’s there for  everyone to consider and have a good look at. We are determined to get it through. I  will be releasing the draft exposure legislation in the near future, and I intend  bringing the legislation into the House of Representatives some time during  September. We are going to get on with doing this because it's an important reform  for the future of this country.

HALL: This is a pattern that the Government has of the way it releases its policy, we  see it with the asylum seeker issue. You say it's forced upon you to an extent by  political circumstances. Do you agree with Paul Howes that it's a terrible strategy?

COMBET: No, I don't agree at all. It's all very convenient outside parliament to throw  some of these comments around, but the fact of the matter is that we have done a  huge amount of work. We consulted with all key stakeholders for a number of  months, business environment groups, non-Government organisations and unions.  At the end of the day, what is Mr Howes view as announced last Monday? He  strongly supports this package and in particular respects the fact that the  Government came up with a Steel Transformation Plan which will help the steel  industry meet many of the challenges that it has got at the moment. The steel  industry will remain under pressure from the high value of the Australian dollar, and  high iron ore and coking coal prices. There's no doubt there is a lot of pressure there,  but the carbon price issue on the word of both OneSteel and BlueScope has been  satisfactorily dealt with.

BALOGH: Mr Combet, as Hugh raised earlier, there's been problems with selling the  package and winning over the public. Is Malcolm Turnbull the best salesman of  putting a price on carbon?

COMBET: I think he's a pretty good salesman. What he highlighted during the week  is, of course, that there are deep divisions on the Coalition side of politics, and it  shouldn't surprise anyone.

Tony Abbott is a totally unprincipled opportunist on this issue. He's run around trying  to terrify people, he’s tried to deceive them about the price impacts and job security,  something I have total distaste for and disrespect. Australian people should be  treated with more respect than Mr Abbott has accorded them. Malcolm Turnbull  essentially said "Let's get back-to-basics here". The science should be respected too.  That should be the basis for policy. He’s highlighted the fact - Liberal Party policy is  of that nature, and Mr Abbott is out of step with that policy.

HALL: It's interesting the Prime Minister said once the details are out, the public will  begin to support Labor. The detail is there, the public is not behind you. Do you have  an alternative strategy?

COMBET: Give us a break, will you? This is such rubbish. The detail has been out for  two weeks. There's been months of deceitful misrepresentative campaigning by  Tony Abbott, supported by some others.

The Government is going to stick to its guns here. I don't agree with your analysis.  We'll continue to explain it to people, in particular that the price impacts are  modest. To meet that there are tax cuts, and increases in pensions and other  benefits that will mean that nine out of the 10 households receive assistance, and in  addition there is very strong support for jobs. Coal industry will grow. Some of the  pressures of the steel industry, manufacturing will receive significant assistance  under this arrangement, trade exposed industry, $9.2 billion in assistance over the  first three years of this scheme. We'll methodically go around explaining this to  people. I'm doing a lot of that and have done so over the last couple of weeks and  I'm finding when we have the opportunity to go through the facts with people, the  fear starts to drops away very quickly indeed.

Mr Abbott will be found out for the 'Chicken Little' that he is, running around  terrifying people, trying to deceive them. Ultimately, that will catch up with him.

RIMINTON: Greg Combet, thank you for joining us this morning.

COMBET: Thanks a lot.

ENDS

