Search this site   Go

Home

Biographical details

Media Centre

Contact details

Department

Parliamentary  Secretary

Links



High Court injunction, Nauru,  Papua New Guinea Tuesday, 09 August 2011

Interview with Kieran Gilbert, Sky News

Kieran Gilbert: Chris Bowen, thanks for your time.

Chris Bowen: Pleasure.

Gilbert: You've said that you want to push for an earlier  hearing. What's the likelihood of that?

Bowen: Well, look, that's up to the court. It is likely that we  will call for an early hearing. This is important and urgent.  It's important that we make it very clear to people  smugglers and asylum seekers and everybody else that  Australia is a closed destination for boat travel for asylum  seekers.

We believe we're on very strong ground in the legal case.  We believe that the law is clear and that the government  has followed the Migration Act to the letter, so we would like

to see that resolved as soon as possible.

Gilbert: But there are no guarantees, are there, that you  can get the earlier hearing, and as you said yesterday there  is the danger that this whole legal limbo will play in the  hands of the people smugglers.

Bowen: Well, that'll be one of our arguments to the court  and the Solicitor-General will make those arguments in the  appropriate way with respect to the court. And so it's  appropriate we let him make those arguments to the court.

But we will be arguing and requesting that the uncertainty  created is in nobody's best interests and that we would like  the case to be resolved as soon as possible.

Chris Bowen MP Minister for Immigration and Citizenship

Page 1 of 4 High Court injunction, Nauru, Papua New Guinea

30/09/2011 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2011/cb170019.htm

Gilbert: Why is the government so confident of success in  this? What's the advice that suggests that you will win?

Bowen: Well, of course we went through this, Kieran, when  we were considering whether to do this and we got legal  advice, and we've had legal advice at every step of the way  and that legal advice hasn't changed. The law is clear: the  law provides for the government to designate a third  country, the law vests that authority in the minister and that  has been carried out to the letter.

Gilbert: Okay, but there are elements of that clause in the  Act which suggests the third country that you send the  asylum seekers to need to process their claims and have  appropriate safeguards for that processing. That's not part  of the Malaysian law; that's not enshrined in their law.

Bowen: Well, the important part is this, Kieran: that  Malaysia does allow people to have their claims assessed  by the UNHCR; that has occurred. And further to that,  Malaysia has given firm commitments as part of this  arrangement with Australia.

I'm not going to argue the case; that'll be argued in the High  Court. That would be inappropriate for me to go through the  detail and to comment on, you know, the various detailed  aspects of the case, other than to say our legal advice is  consistent and is that the Commonwealth is on very strong  ground indeed.

Gilbert: Were you disappointed yesterday when Judge  Hayne described the Commonwealth case as half-baked in  one instance?

Bowen: Well, look, again, it's difficult for me to comment on  his Honour's statements through the case; that would be  inappropriate. There was an administrative issue in getting  the affidavit yesterday. The affidavits, as I understand it,  were all well prepared and all in place, but there was an  administrative issue in providing those to the court.

Gilbert: Were you disappointed with that?

Bowen: Oh, look, we have full confidence in the Solicitor-General and in the Australian Government Solicitor, who  are running the case on behalf of the Commonwealth, and I  think it's important we -

Page 2 of 4 High Court injunction, Nauru, Papua New Guinea

30/09/2011 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2011/cb170019.htm

Gilbert: So this was just human error, was it?

Bowen: Well, I think we focus on the big issues and the big  issue, for me, is that this is an important case and we  believe we're on very strong legal ground.

Gilbert: But it seems like it, you know, it might not be a big  issue but it was a big issue to the judge and he wanted to  delay it two weeks because of that [inaudible].

Bowen: And the Solicitor-General dealt with that yesterday  with his Honour and we will be making the case that we  would like to see this case resolved as soon as possible.

Gilbert: There was another boat that arrived a few days  ago in Flying Fish Cove on Christmas Island. There's now  100, so one-eighth of the quota's already filled. What's your  intelligence saying to you? What's the government  intelligence on, you know, the boat movements? Does it  look like things have slowed or, you know, two boats since  the deal's been finalised -

Bowen: Obviously, I don't comment on intelligence. But I'd  make these points: we've had - over the period since we  announced the Malaysia arrangement - we've had about  1000 less people arrive in Australia by boat than the same  time last year, 1000 less people arrive. We are already  seeing a reduction in the number of boat arrivals this year  and we've seen that reduction continue. And indeed, we've  seen a marked reduction since the announcement of the  Malaysia arrangement.

Why? I think a number of factors, but clearly one of them is  that people have noticed the Malaysia arrangement and  have thought twice and three times about whether to come  to Australia by boat. And that is the message that we are  sending to people: that we want to process more refugees,  but we want to do it in a way which is orderly, where people  who have been waiting for resettlement have a fair chance,  a better chance at resettlement in Australia.

But in terms of boat arrivals, very clearly there will be  people smugglers trying this on and testing, and there will  be people smugglers out there spinning this court case and  trying to sell the uncertainty, which is one of the reasons we  want this resolved as soon as possible.

Page 3 of 4 High Court injunction, Nauru, Papua New Guinea

30/09/2011 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2011/cb170019.htm

But you do find, historically, that you need the arrangement  to take full effect, to be implemented in a very public  manner - which some people have criticised, but I think it's  appropriate - so we're very fairly telling people that this  arrangement is up and running and being implemented.  You know, after Malaysia was announced, the Liberal Party  says, 'Oh, this deal's terrible because two boats have  arrived'. Well, 1789 people arrived by boat after they  announced Nauru. So let's not have this hypocrisy from the  Opposition. We are breaking the people smugglers'  business model, we are pulling a rug out from under the  people smugglers' business model, and as the arrangement  is fully implemented I believe it will make a big difference, a  huge difference to people's decision to travel to Australia.

Gilbert: Well, Nauru eventually did work. Just one final  question on that - it did eventually work - is there any  circumstance under which you, as Immigration Minister,  would look at reopening Nauru as part of a broader  arrangement, if you had PNG and Malaysia? Why not  Nauru as well?

Bowen: Well, look, we're certainly not contemplating that,  because the situation in Nauru - the Opposition says Nauru  is the answer to everything - the majority of refugees who  were processed in Nauru ended up in Australia; it didn't  break the people smugglers' business model.

We've been in discussion with PNG because we think that's  a useful complement to the Malaysia arrangement under  the regional framework if you have both of those in place,  and we think that's a suitable regional arrangement and  we're going to continue to proceed.

Gilbert: Okay, minister. Thanks for your time.

Bowen: Nice talking to you, Kieran.

See: Index of Speeches

URL:  http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2011/cb170019.htm  Last update: Wednesday, 10 August 2011 at 08:57 AEST

Home Copyright & Disclaimer Privacy Department of Immigration and Citizenship

Page 4 of 4 High Court injunction, Nauru, Papua New Guinea

30/09/2011 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2011/cb170019.htm

