Thursday, 1 December 2011

AUSTRALIAN GREENS MEDIA RELEASE



Increase humanitarian intake but not  by expelling people off-shore: Greens

The Australian Greens say the Immigration Minister’s proposal to raise Australia’s overall  humanitarian intake is long-overdue, but it should not be at the expense of sending asylum  seekers off-shore.

“Increasing the humanitarian intake is the right thing to do, it is practical and humane, but  making it contingent on punishing others who are desperate and helpless is unprincipled,  nasty and will cost taxpayers more,” Greens’ immigration spokesperson, Sen. Sarah Hanson-Young, said today.

“Australia should not trade in people who are risking their lives to reach our shores to have  their claims for protection assessed. The government should abandon any attempt to resurrect  the Malaysian people swap deal which was ruled unlawful by the High Court.

“Minister Bowen has actually cut the annual humanitarian intake by 1,000 as confirmed in  this week’s mid-year budget statement. That was a mistake and should be restored  immediately.

“Australia should lift its humanitarian intake to 20,000-25,000 people. This was the policy the  Greens took to the 2010 federal election and it remains so.

“Australia can reduce the immediate need for people to board leaky boats by spending more  on regional protection efforts such as funding the UNHCR’s offices in southeast Asia, and  taking more people directly from camps in Malaysia and Indonesia.

“Australia is ranked 46th in the world for hosting refugees and received 2.2 percent of the  asylum seeker applications in industrialised countries in 2010.

“The UNHCR regional representative, Richard Towle, put Australia’s intake in perspective  when he said in October more people crossed the Mediterranean to Italy in one weekend in  August than arrived by boat in Australia in six months.

“The arrival of two more boats last night shows neither mandatory detention nor off-shore  assessments deter desperate people seeking protection. Harsh policies only punish the most  fragile of people who are fleeing persecution.

“Australians want their government to show leadership, not return to off-shore assessments  which have been proven to be expensive warehouses which breach our international  obligations and cause preventable long-term damage to people.”

MEDIA CONTACT: PARIS LORD 0427 604 760



