CHRIS BOWEN MP

MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP  *TRANSCRIPT*

INTERVIEW WITH MARIUS BENSON, ABC NEWSRADIO

Friday, 5 August 2011



SUBJECTS: Malaysia transfer arrangement.

MARIUS BENSON: Chris Bowen, have you decided whether the children on  this boat will stay or go to Malaysia?

CHRIS BOWEN: Well we’ve been very clear Marius, no blanket exemptions.  People who come to Australia or put their minor children on boats, should  work on the basis that they will be taken to Malaysia. No blanket exemptions.  I will not have the situation where we provide a reward for people who put  their children on a boat, and undertake that dangerous journey.

We have said we’ve had pre-transfer checking to make sure of anybody’s  vulnerabilities, especially children, and that transfer would be appropriate, or  that all the appropriate care and support be in place, for whatever  arrangements are put in place. But people who come to Australia by boat  should work on the assumption that they will be taken back to Malaysia.

BENSON: But there is deliberate ambiguity in what you’re saying there  Minister. You’re saying no blanket exemptions. Are you saying there may be  some exemptions? Can you say there will be no exemptions?

BOWEN: Well Marius, our position is the same as it was all the way through  and my position has not changed one little bit, and that is no blanket  exemptions. We would have a case-by-case approach to any particular  vulnerabilities, but I know, sure as night follows day, that if you have blanket  exemptions people smugglers would exploit that loophole and put children on  boats and we’d be dealing with the dangerous situation of boatloads of  children.

BENSON: But if you have any exemptions the same logic applies though,  they will exploit that in representing the case to would-be arrivals.

BOWEN: I think, Marius, the situation will be clear, the Governments resolve  will be clear to people considering that boat journey. But this arrangement is  now in place and is being implemented, and I think that would be very clear  to people in Indonesia, Malaysia, Afghanistan, Pakistan, Iraq, Iran, Sri Lanka,  contemplating that boat journey.

BENSON: The people, including the children, have been here for some time.  Have you made any assessments of any of the 19 children involved?

BOWEN: We have 19 minors, or people who claim to be minors. Some of  those are clearly children, others are people who say they’re 17 and there’d  be further assessment done on that.

Of course the pre-transfer process has begun. I’m not going to comment on  individuals of course, but that has begun. That would go through a range of  matters: their fitness to fly, the appropriateness of the transfer to Malaysia,  even Malaysia’s checking on their security watch list, and any particular  vulnerabilities. If there’s any results of that, then of course I’d say something  about that at the appropriate time, but I’m not going to comment on  individual cases as that process is underway.

BENSON: Without going to individuals, can you say if any decision has been  made to allow any of the children who are clearly children to stay? Any  decision yet?

BOWEN: No, the situation is that people who come by boat can work on the  basis they’re being returned to Malaysia and that is the current situation as  we stand. If there are particular issues that arise during that process, then of  course we’d have more to say about that at an appropriate time.

BENSON: How soon will those who are going to Malaysia leave? It’s been  reported that two flights have been booked for Tuesday.

BOWEN: We’re well advanced in those preparations with the Malaysian  Government. What I’ve said, and the arrangement - the agreement itself is  very clear - that we are working towards a 72 hour turnaround.



I’ve said right from the beginning, right from when we signed this  arrangement, that it would take some time to ramp-up to that and not  everybody would be returned within the 72 hours, certainly to start with, it  would take some time. But we’re working towards a transfer as soon as  possible, again, when Malaysia and Australia have finalised those  arrangements and we’d make those public statements

BENSON: And just to underline that central point: the door is still open on  some children staying on a case-by-case basis?

BOWEN: Well Marius, our position has not changed. I’ve been consistent,  and all I can do is repeat it. As I’ve said earlier in this interview: absolutely no  blanket exemptions. People can work on the basis that they are being

returned to Malaysia. If you come to Australia by boat, the default position is  that you’ll be taken to Malaysia. I’ve said that, of course, we would have  appropriate pre-transfer checking of any particular issues, but people should  not take that as any sign that they can come on to Australia and try their

luck.

BENSON: UNICEF, the United Nations Children Fund, says its pleading with  you to allow children to stay. Does that carry weight?

BOWEN: Well look, we’ve developed the appropriate arrangements in  consultation with the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. I  understand these are complex issues.



It is not morally acceptable to me to have the situation in which you would  encourage people to put their children on a boat. I never want to take  another phone call like I did on the 15th of December to tell me that a two  month old child, and other children, had drowned off Christmas Island. That  would not be an acceptable thing to the Australian people.

I understand these are complex issues, I understand they’re tough decisions  to be taken. But this is a decision the Government has taken and it’s an  appropriate decision. Of course, nobody more than me wants to make sure  that children are treated appropriately. I want to make sure the 18,000  asylum seeker children in Malaysia are treated appropriately, and some of  those have a better chance of life in Australia, those who don’t have the  money to pay a people smuggler. I want to make sure that those children  who’ve come to Australia are treated appropriately, but I also want to make  sure that there is no incentive for people to put their children on those  dangerous boats that come to Australia.

BENSON: Chris Bowen, thank you very much.

BOWEN: Nice talking to you Marius.

Ends







