





FEDERAL MINISTER FOR  INFRASTRUCTURE & TRANSPORT   PRESS CONFERENCE - CANBERRA  6 SEPTEMBER 2011  E & O E - PROOF ONLY  Subjects:    Car emissions, Parliament, Tony Abbott, leadership  ANTHONY ALBANESE: Thanks for joining us. Today I'll be talking about light vehicle CO2 emission standards but also making some comments about the Parliament and the dealing with the carbon pricing legislation.  At the last election, the Gillard Government committed to cutting our emissions on our roads by introducing new mandatory carbon dioxide emission standards for all light vehicles, including cars, from 2015. This is an important part of the Gillard Government's plan to make positive change to how we live, work and travel. Importantly, motorists could see considerable savings at the petrol station. Modelling suggests that Australia could be saving around 1.1 billion litres of fuel worth $1.8 billion every year by 2024. A typical motorist could save around $600 a year on fuel costs. To reduce the cost impact on families and small business, the Government decided to exclude fuel used in light vehicles from the carbon price. However, as light passenger vehicles account for almost half of Australia's transport emissions, we recognised that we need to find other effective measures to address the growing emissions from the transport sector. Mandatory standards limiting CO2 emissions from vehicles are internationally recognised as one of the most cost effective means to reducing carbon emissions from the transport sector and are complementary to a carbon price.  The Government has committed to these mandatory standards from 2015, but we're also committed to consulting key stakeholders and the Australian community on what emissions reductions are appropriate for Australia. We don't have a predetermined view on what emissions reduction targets should apply here. The discussion paper that I'm releasing today provides industry, motoring groups, environment groups, and indeed the broader community, with a genuine opportunity to give the Government their views and assist us in formulating the new standards. I'm releasing this discussion paper today. Submissions will close on 1 December 2011.              This very much complements the whole-of-government response that we need to climate change. It's something I've spoken about in terms of as Transport Minister for a long period of time and it's something that, in opposition, I spoke about as Infrastructure Shadow Minister and also of

course as the responsible person for the environment and climate change  some years ago. So I'm very pleased that it's reached this stage of  development. This is a real opportunity for input. There's no doubt that there  are real benefits to be gained from going down this road.

The Government will be introducing our Clean Energy Future package of bills  into the house next week. Parliament will start at 12 noon next Tuesday in  order for the bills to be introduced. I have consulted the Opposition on the  change of time for the introduction, as there are a large number of bills. As  people would be aware, there were 13 released in terms of exposure draft. It  will take a lengthy time in terms of the introduction. It is the Government's  intention to then commence debate on these bills on Wednesday of next  week. We will allow debate on the bills for the remainder of next week for all  of the remaining week, and there might be some other legislation dealt with at  the same time. But I've certainly indicated to the Opposition that we don't  intend to have votes on this legislation until the October sitting. Therefore,  there can be no argument about proper process with this legislation and  allowing for proper scrutiny of this legislation. Of course, the Government has  indicated, as have other cross-bench members, that clearly there is a majority  in the House of Representatives and in the Senate to pass this legislation.  However, we're not allowing that position to override the fact that there will be  proper parliamentary scrutiny. I should indicate, because I'm a fair person,  that the Opposition have indicated their support to start at 12 o'clock on  Tuesday. However, they have indicated to me that it will be their intention to  delay discussion on the legislation by referring it off to a committee after the  selection process and to not have any debate on the legislation until then.

QUESTION:  Would you prefer if that was a joint house and Senate  committee so that…

ANTHONY ALBANESE:   That's a matter for the Government and the cross-benchers to consider. There are discussions taking place as to that. But the  announcement of that detail will come down the track. What I would say is  that there is absolutely no reason whatsoever to delay debate on this  legislation, and we will commence the debate on the Wednesday. That is  appropriate that we have that debate, and any attempt to delay debate on the  legislation should be seen for what it is - just an attempt to once again block  and be negative from the Opposition.

QUESTION: Mr Albanese, on the second week of the September sittings, you  could potentially have Nicola Roxon and Kevin Rudd missing. The Opposition  have already said that they would give a pairing. Is that one of the reasons  why you're looking to October to have the final vote? And on that question,  have you looked at every minister's diary to ensure that they'll be in town?

ANTHONY ALBANESE: Look, it was always the Government's intention to  have the timetable that we've established. Of course, we know that there are  a number of significant meetings taking place, including of course AUSMIN.  The idea that during a period in which we're engaged in Afghanistan we would  not have allowed the Defence Minister and the Foreign Minister of Australia to

go to a meeting of AUSMIN I think would be quite extraordinary, and I think  you would find, hopefully, the Opposition develop some common sense over  those issues.

QUESTION:  What about October though? Are you sure that the diaries are  free for the Parliament?

ANTHONY ALBANESE: I'm very confident that we will have a majority on the  floor of the House. I do note that the last time the CPRS bills were voted on,  Tony Abbott didn't bother to vote on a lot of the bills that were before the  house. And I think that the sort of behaviour with regard to pairing reached a  low when Simon Crean and Malcolm Turnbull were prevented from going to  Margaret Olley's funeral. I would hope that the Opposition have a  commonsense approach. We are clearly outlining for the benefit of everybody  an approach to this legislation in terms of to allow proper scrutiny. We're  telling people when the votes will be. I would expect that there is a bit of return  in terms of goodwill and common sense.

The Government doesn't seek to exploit the position that we're in as a  government. There are a range of procedural measures that are only  available to the Government. I haven't sought at any stage to exploit that. But  the Opposition has got to have a bit of common sense and a bit of maturity  when it comes to these issues, and I think that Tony Abbott will be judged  very harshly were he not to engage in a mature way.

QUESTION:  What are those options that only you have?

ANTHONY ALBANESE:   Have a look at the Standing Orders.

QUESTION:  I'm not asking you…

ANTHONY ALBANESE:   There are a range of things that only ministers can  do, for example. There are a range of - motions can be moved only by  ministers. As the Leader of the House, I set the parliamentary schedule. I  consult with the Manager of Opposition Business every day when  Parliament's sitting. He would confirm that. They are consulted, there are not  ambushes. That was the case in the previous government from 2007 as well  and that compares with myself as Manager of Opposition Business who had  one discussion on a Saturday, once, with Tony Abbott who was Leader of the  House. The Opposition was never consulted about what was happening in the  program, about timetables, about motions before the House. There was no  consultation whatsoever. I haven't taken that attitude and I think you can  check with Joe Hockey, who was Manager of Opposition Business, first and  then Christopher Pyne and they would confirm that.

QUESTION:  A question on infrastructure. The New South Wales budget  decision today to gouge out of the mining tax revenue by raising royalties. The  Treasurer said this morning, you know, you'd make up the money by  withholding infrastructure funding. Are you, once the quantum is known, are  you prepared to withhold infrastructure funding beyond that that would have

been allocated to New South Wales in the Regional Infrastructure Fund, if  necessary, or would you go sort of the more general roads and rail?

ANTHONY ALBANESE:    I do note that in March of this year Premier  O'Farrell, who was then the Opposition leader, made some pretty clear  statements. He said, on 7 March, “New South Wales Liberals and Nationals  have no plans to change mining royalties, we understand the importance of  mining to the New South Wales economy” and, again, he said, quoted in that  august journal, The Sydney Morning Herald, indeed, on 7 March, he said “we  have no plans, we're ruling it out.” I don't know what's more unequivocal than  that. I do notice the reports that they're going to do that. At the end of the day,  New South Wales will not be advantaged by doing so. They will not be  advantaged by doing so. I think this sort of engagement is unfortunate. We've  said we will establish the Regional Infrastructure Fund, indeed, out of the  minerals resource rent tax. Indeed, we have funded projects in terms of  feasibility studies, already foreshadowed, including the project at Scone,  arising out of - out of that revenue. But, you know, New South Wales makes  its decision. For every decision there's a counter-decision. I think it's really  counter-productive of New South Wales to go down this track.

QUESTION:  So that's a yes to Phil's question?

ANTHONY ALBANESE:   No. No, that's a non-answer to Phil's question, I  think you might have identified there, Matthew. That's a matter for the  government, I'm not the Treasurer.

QUESTION:  The Treasurer said the infrastructure funding would be withheld  but the RIF's only going to raise, well, only - is worth six billion, four of which is  going to go to Western Australia and Queensland, leaves two for elsewhere  and that's over eight years so if O'Farrell increased royalties by a billion over  four, you would have to withdraw more than just the RIF allocation, wouldn't  you, to get your dough back.

ANTHONY ALBANESE:   I think it's a matter for the Government to consider.  We haven't seen - Mr O'Farrell hasn't even had his budget yet but the idea  that a state government can take money off the federal government is an  interesting - an interesting way in which to proceed. I think it certainly is  counter-productive and the Government will protect our revenue base.

QUESTION:  Isn't this the folly of the MRRT legislation? The RSPT legislation  said it was only royalties that were planned or in place by March 2 last year,  yet the deal with Julia Gillard did allow - it was open-ended. That was sheer

folly, wasn't it?

ANTHONY ALBANESE:   No. If you look at the outcome - the outcome will  be the same. We've made that clear so in terms of - in terms of a reduction in  - if the Commonwealth's revenue is reduced, the Commonwealth of course  will reserve our right to respond. We'll wait and see what's in the budget but,  of course, the Treasurer's made the position clear and New South Wales  know that.



QUESTION:  Are any of the promises made, infrastructure promises made to  the New South Wales cross-benchers at risk?

ANTHONY ALBANESE:   No.

QUESTION:  Isn't the actual size of the package still going to be six billion or  not?

ANTHONY ALBANESE:   Well, that's a matter for the Government to  consider. We have not yet had the New South Wales budget. We'll - we'll wait.  We'll wait. It's appropriate for the budget to actually be announced and then  for there to be a response to the details that were in the budget. It's probably  not very wise for us to respond and make policy on the basis of Daily  Telegraph headlines.

QUESTION:  On the very broad question of vehicle standards, have the  wheels fallen off the government?

ANTHONY ALBANESE:    No, not at all.

QUESTION:  You don't take any sign from the Newspoll that you're - the  primary vote for the Labor Party seems to be stuck at 27 per cent, that there's  a problem that the public simply don't - aren't listening to you, don't have any  confidence in you?

ANTHONY ALBANESE:   Look, there is no doubt that the Government is  going through a tough time but there's no doubt either that this is a  government that has resolved to pursue the agenda that we have and it is a  future agenda for the nation. We are progressing today, once again, rolling  out the policy agenda that we have to deal with - to deal with the challenge of  climate change, to deal with how we have a clean energy future. We'll be  doing that with the legislation that we introduce into the Parliament next week.  We'll be doing that with the MRRT legislation. We're doing that with national  health reform, we're doing it with the national disability insurance scheme,  we're doing it across the board. We have a very comprehensive plan, we'll  continue to pursue it, we're confident that over a period of time that will be  reflected in terms of support and good government and good policy leads to  good politics.

QUESTION:  Do you think the key problem that Labor's facing is in fact its  leader?

ANTHONY ALBANESE:   No, not at all. This is an issue in which we have to  have collective responsibility. I certainly do that, not just as a minister but as  Leader of the House of Representatives. We're more than two years out from  an election. We've just passed the one year mark into a three-year term.  Think about where we were two years ago. Two years ago politics was very  different and `certainly in two years a lot can change. One of the things that  hasn't changed over the last year is that Tony Abbott has just been

relentlessly negative. Now, that's easy over a period of time and I've said - I've  used the walking vuvuzela line a number of times. I'll keep using it for the next  two years until your ears bleed, just like you would if you were standing next

to a vuvuzela. This noise, this negative noise over and over again, the one  sound, Australians will increasingly be annoyed by it. I think Abbott, in terms  of what we're seeing from his own backbench, indeed, is some dissent and  calls for the Opposition to start standing for something. What we have is an  unusual circumstance. We have, because of the minority Parliament, you  have Tony Abbott being given a grab on TV every night such as what  happens during an election campaign, to the Opposition leader, without any of  the comparable scrutiny that comes during an election campaign to an  Opposition leader about the alternatives.

QUESTION:  So it's the media's fault, is it?

ANTHONY ALBANESE:   I'm not suggesting that at all. I think I've made it  very clear that - that I accept my share of responsibility. I am saying that  because of difficulty in adjusting to what is a new parliamentary situation. We  have a minority government. I just state that as fact. The fact is that on TV  every night, Tony Abbott can get a grab up, unlike previous Opposition  leaders would not normally just get a grab up all the time without having the  scrutiny of where his policies are going and what his alternative is. I think the  soon - the closer we come to an election, the more that position will be  untenable and the more that this Government's positive policy agenda is  coming through. We're seeing that with the announcement today.

QUESTION:  You spoke about dissent in the Coalition ranks. Aren't you facing  the prospect of dissent in your own ranks because your own faction wants, on  the question of asylum-seekers, a return to the Labor Party platform of  onshore processing only and limited mandatory detention?

ANTHONY ALBANESE:    Well, that's a matter for the party to consider. The  Cabinet has had a discussion I read about. You know that I don't talk about  Cabinet either here or one on one. I have no intention to comment on those  discussions.

QUESTION:  How did you feel when you saw those poll figures this morning  and at what point do you say we've got to arrest the slide here, we need to do  something drastic?

ANTHONY ALBANESE:   I think we need good government. We need to  continue to pursue what we're doing. You know, I'm getting on with the job. I  wake up every morning and I do my job. My job today is the release of this  discussion paper. I’ve had meetings with people in the shipping sector this  morning. I have other meetings this afternoon, and I go about my job. And  certainly we have a big agenda this week. I'm going to Queensland to talk to  the regional aviation sector. I'm doing Cooroy to Curra tomorrow near Gympie  where it's reached the next stage of construction. My job is to do what I set  out to do, fulfil all my promises that we made and more. And I'm getting about  doing that as Infrastructure and Transport Minister. And I must say, getting

some real gains there in terms of the national transport regulators that were  approved here. Didn't get a huge run apart from The Australian that gave us a  good run. Important reform - $30 billion over 20 years to the national  economy; very significant reform. At the end of the day the feedback I get  from industry and leaders, whether it be the people engaged in that sector,  the European Chamber of Commerce I spoke to last week is that they're very  supportive of those measures that the government's doing in my portfolio, and  very concerned about the relentless negativity of Mr Abbott.

QUESTION:  Minister, you talked about Mr Abbott before, and the fact that  because of these unusual circumstances he'd get grab up on the media  without the level of scrutiny that you might like. But isn't the real problem that  Julia Gillard is just not communicating, you think, with the community? She  gets far more media exposure than he does.

ANTHONY ALBANESE:   That's not right. I think what you tend to get on the  TV news every night is a grab of Julia if she's doing something and a grab of  the Opposition leader. You do have circumstances whereby - and you would

be aware of this, this isn't rocket science. I'm not trying to make any big point  here other than to say that it is very unusual that in the first year of a term that  you have the daily media cycle as if it is an election campaign. That is a fact.  And you know it as an experienced journalist, and so does everyone else  around here. So those circumstances are different from what would normally  be the case in the political cycle one year in. That has changed the dynamic  so that you have, you know, a grab as opposed to - and the grab from - the  difference is the grab from Tony Abbott is usually just negative. The grab from

the prime minister is going about doing her job. Yesterday we had a very  serious meeting in the Cabinet room with the head of the European  Commission - President Barroso. That was a really important discussion. It  was an important discussion for our future. Europe is of course a critical  trading partner. We had discussions about carbon pricing.

QUESTION:  Back on the issue of…

ANTHONY ALBANESE:   We had a discussion about a range of issues.

QUESTION:  Back on the issue of cut through, put aside what Tony Abbott's  media profile is. Do you think that Julia Gillard is cutting through in her  communication with the electorate about her policies?

ANTHONY ALBANESE:   Julia Gillard is putting forward policies I think that  she is articulate; I think she has a vision. She's smart and she's tough. And  she's not about to - whatever the difficulties that are there, she's not about  going over into a corner and saying; oh well, this is too hard. She's going to  fight this out. And I can't think of anyone better to tough out a difficult position  than Julia Gillard. I've known her for a long period of time. And I'll say this,  that you know - I had a bit of an interesting dialogue with the community last  week, some people might have seen. Now some of my colleagues said; you  know, what was that about? Well what it's about from my perspective is that at  each and every opportunity, what the government has to do is not just

advance our position; we have to also take on - head on, face to face - our  critics. Be prepared to argue our case. I did that last week. I thought the  behaviour of some of the people there spoke for itself, really. So I don't wish  to comment on it. But I think a fair assessment would be that amongst some

fairly difficult circumstances, I continued to put the government's position. Now  that's my view - that's what I'll be doing, and that's I think everyone in the  government should be doing.

QUESTION:  You talk about the government getting on with the job, but  Labor's on its second version of the mining; on its third version of an  emissions trading scheme. You're about to come up with your third version of  regional processing…

ANTHONY ALBANESE:   Well, where'd you get that? No, well now you're  just making it up. Now you're just making it up. We had a CPRS and then…

QUESITON:  You mean the one negotiated with the Opposition which  changed things?

ANTHONY ALBANESE:   No, come on.

QUESTION:  But isn't the point that the chopping and changing - or you  keep…

ANTHONY ALBANESE:   Well that's not true. We had an emissions trading  scheme with a fixed price on carbon with support to industries, with  assistance to low and middle income earners. And guess what we've got  now? An emissions trading scheme with a fixed price period, with assistance  for industries, with support for low and middle income earners. I mean, people  need to actually analyse things as they are rather than as is convenient. The  truth is that this scheme which is coming up is very close to - certainly in  terms of its design with the fixed price period. Something that's been forgotten  about the CPRS was it had a fixed price period in the initial stages - so does  this. In terms of our determination to put a price on carbon, what you can say  is that 2007, we were elected on a platform of doing something on climate  change. Due to the state of the parliament, that hasn't been as easy as us just  putting up an idea and getting it adopted. But we've fought for it. And this is  something that, as I said to my visitors to Grayndler last week, this is  something that I've campaigned on, fought on, and believed in since - well,  since before I was elected to parliament and have been speaking on in the  parliament since 1996. I think there is consistency there.

QUESTION:  How confident are you that you can get those bills through in the  five weeks?

ANTHONY ALBANESE:   The Labor Party will be voting for it, and we have  at least four additional votes have publicly committed that they're voting for it.

QUESTION:  If the Opposition tries to delay it to, you know, use procedures to  stop the debate happening, are you prepared to guillotine the debate?



ANTHONY ALBANESE: I'll wait and not foreshadow what the government's  responses will be. We're determined to get this legislation through. I think that  quite clearly we are outlining a process whereby no-one can argue that in  introducing bills next Tuesday, in having this press conference a week in  advance to tell you that it would occur - take for example, I was asked before  about process. We can change the time of parliamentary sitting by simply the  Prime Minister writing to the speaker. We haven't done that. There's no  ambush. We're letting people know. I rang the Opposition and gave them the  courtesy of letting them know. And I'm letting you know, now, that the  Parliament will sit at 12 o'clock next Tuesday. I think that you have a complete  transparency in the way that the House of Representatives operates,  something that maybe we haven't been given as much credit as I would like to  have seen given to us.   But it is a fact that it's occurred. And it's also a fact that it never occurred  under 12 years of the previous government.

QUESTION:  The Greens are getting impatient about their bid for a media  inquiry. I mean given some of the comments you made today about coverage  and such, do you…

ANTHONY ALBANESE:   That wasn't a criticism of the media at all.

QUESTION:  When is the government going to decide on this issue, and do  you think there is a need for one?

ANTHONY ALBANESE:    When the government decides we'll let you know.  But that wasn't even a comment on the media, actually. It was a comment on  the political cycle and what's happened because of the minority government.

It's perfectly explainable, it's not a conspiracy theory. It's - the dynamics are  different. The dynamics of a minority government mean that you have the sort  of, in the first year of a cycle, frankly, if an Opposition Leader was going out to  every butcher shop, jewellers, and, you know, scaring small business around  Queanbeyan, so that they're thinking of putting out, up a road block to stop  him going out there, frankly, you lot would get bored with going out there. And  it's the same story every day. And you just wouldn't cover it any more. The  dynamic is different - it's not a criticism of you, it's a response to the dynamic  of a minority government which is unusual here in Australia. Of course it's not  unusual everywhere else. And it's a response also to that - I mean, I am  critical not of people in the federal press gallery, some of the shock jocks  particularly use the fact that it's a minority government to say that somehow  that is not democratic. Of course it's democratic. And we - it is perfectly in line  with our constitution and in line with our democratic system. That was one of  the things that I said to people last week when they sought to understand my  criticism of their demo. My criticism was not of their right to demonstrate.  Indeed, I affirmed in this room - on that day - their right to demonstrate. What I  criticise is their view that 200 people can have a rally and say we'll have a  new election and somehow that should just happen - that the Governor-General should be petitioned. That frankly is absurd. We would have an  election every Saturday if that were the case. And you know, in terms of

minority governments, that's the way that most governments - in advanced  democracies - actually operate, most governments, including the UK,  including France, Germany, they're all coalitions of different political parties.  And indeed one could argue - given some of the strains that are often there  between the Liberal and the National Party is that, indeed, you've had a  minority government for most of the time if not all of the time when John  Howard was Prime Minister.

QUESTION:  Bob Brown says he wants to have a quick inquiry. Would it be  your preference to send the legislation to an inquiry at the Senate, or are you -  do you want the debate in the house first?

ANTHONY ALBANESE:    I think we'll be making further announcements as  to processes, but we'll have proper parliamentary scrutiny we'll ensure.

QUESTION:  Can I just ask you a question - as… coming from someone  who's been out of the country for three years, when I left Australia, you know,  Labor was on such a high in '08. How did it get to this point and do you  guys…do you ever, do you guys regret the decision to install Julia Gillard as  Prime Minister over Kevin Rudd?

ANTHONY ALBANESE:   Oh look, we move on. My position on that was  clear. I made no - you weren't here, but I don't think I made any secret about  that, I wasn't public about it, I just did what I did. I'm loyal to the Prime  Minister. I was loyal to Kevin Rudd. I am equally loyal to Julia Gillard as the  Prime Minister. And I think my actions have shown that. I think what we need  to do is to ensure that we get on with the job of good government. I'm  interested in - I've been engaged from time to time in some internal issues.  What I'm interested in is arguing our case for good government and I'll  continue to do so.

QUESTION:  Since you raised though that issue of loyalty, you were asked  earlier whether you thought that leadership was a problem and, you know,  you seemed to be suggesting that there wouldn't be, you didn't expect there to  be any change.

ANTHONY ALBANESE:    Correct.

QUESTION:  Well - but you said that last time too. Are you worried that there  may be the same people who turned on Kevin Rudd might now turn on Julia  Gillard?

ANTHONY ALBANESE:   No. I think in terms of the Prime Minister I think I  made a throwaway grab last week about you know, sources, and what that  meant, that it was, you know, someone's cousin who used to work for a staffer

somewhere in the past to talk to someone once at a bus stop. You know,  frankly, I would be aware if there were any talk - there is no talk.

People are united and determined to get on with the job and to tough out what  is a difficult time. And in the Prime Minister we have the right person who is  tough - who is determined - who has a big agenda for the nation, and is  determined to implement that agenda. Thanks very much.





