











MINISTER FOR DEFENCE

STEPHEN SMITH, MP

TRANSCRIPT: INTERVIEW WITH NAOMI WOODLEY ON RADIO  AUSTRALIA

TRANSCRIPTION: PROOF COPY E & OE

DATE: 15 APRIL 2011



TOPICS: ADF role in East Timor.



NAOMI WOODLEY: Stephen Smith, this is your first visit to East Timor as Defence  Minister. Australian troops there are due to start withdrawing by 2012. What role do  you see for the Australian Defence Force in East Timor beyond that?

STEPHEN SMITH: Firstly, we need to take it step by step. It's unquestionably the  case that the good work that Australia and New Zealand have done through the  International Stabilisation Force and the good work that the United Nations has done  through its policing effort, we have seen stability and security return to East Timor.

But we need to wait until we see the outcome of the elections in 2012 next year, but  everyone I've spoken to, from the President down, is optimistic that if the current  circumstances prevail then after the election we will be in a position to transition  away from an International Stabilisation Force and a UN mission to East Timor  taking responsibility for all of its security arrangements.

So, I think that's the starting point. After that Australia would want to have with East  Timor a fully fledged modern defence, military and security cooperation arrangement,  as we do with other friends in the region and do that on the basis of two independent  sovereign nations working closely together.

NAOMI WOODLEY:  The Australian Strategic Policy Institute report released earlier  this week recommends a small team of ADF personnel staying on for training and









those sorts of purposes. Is that something that you'd consider?

STEPHEN SMITH: Well, not necessarily in that particular form but certainly I've  made it clear to the President and to the Secretary of State for Defence and to the  Chief of the East Timorese Defence Force that if we move through and transition to  security arrangements being conducted by East Timorese military and security forces

then, as part of a modern, mature defence relationship or arrangements between  Australia and East Timor, we would continue to want to do things like train and  mentor and provide every assistance.

We've also had discussions about Australia and East Timor and Indonesia working  more closely together on the defence and security front in a trilateral format.  Currently there are already trilateral discussions between Australia, Indonesia and  East Timor on the general front.

So we would want to continue to train, to mentor, to have a very close relationship  with a country that is a very firm friend in our region and a country for whom  Australia has a great deal of warmth for the country and its people given that our

modern relationship goes back to the people of East Timor helping Australians during  World War Two.

NAOMI WOODLEY:  Do you think East Timor's defence forces are ready or will be  ready by next year to take responsibility for their own security? Is part of this trip  satisfying yourself on that question?

STEPHEN SMITH: Well, certainly we've seen substantial progress in recent times  and on the police front, for example, that's been reflected by the fact that last month  the United Nations essentially transferred lead responsibility for policing matters to  East Timorese police on the ground.

The relationship between Australia and East Timor on the military or defence  cooperation front has been going for 10 years, indeed, the formal reason I'm here is to  mark the 10th anniversary of the establishment of the East Timorese military and  defence force and the 10th anniversary of that defence relationship between Australia  and East Timor.

NAOMI WOODLEY:  Will you be having any discussions about the Government's  proposal for a regional processing centre for asylum-seekers there during this trip?

STEPHEN SMITH: I've finished my round of meetings. In addition to the President  and the Vice Prime Minister and the Secretary of State for Defence I also met with  Opposition Leader Alkatiri and that matter wasn't raised in any of my discussions and  I wouldn't expect it to. It wasn't either a purpose or object of my visit and the Minister  for Immigration as well as President Ramos-Horta has recently made it clear that  those discussions are ongoing but they're ongoing between relevant officials and  relevant ministers.

