Julie Bishop

ABC NewsRadio, Breakfast with Marius Benson

Monday, 12 September 2011

Subjects: Border protection; carbon tax; polls

E&OE…

GLEN BARTHOLOMEW    Here at home federal parliament resumes today with the first battle set to  be over the Government’s plan for new legislation on asylum seekers to overcome the High Court  ruling which blocked the Malaysia deal.

Julia Gillard will first have to win party backing for her plans and then she’ll face the Opposition in  parliament.

The latest troubles are being compounded today by another bad opinion poll suggest the only way  back for the Government is to reinstate Kevin Rudd as leader.

For an Opposition perspective, Marius Benson spoke to the Deputy Liberal Leader Julie Bishop.

MARI US BENSON    Julie Bishop, the Government is this morning settling on legislation to allow the  return of asylum seekers to Malaysia. What is the Opposition’s thinking on that issue now?

JULIE BISHOP    Well Labor’s Malaysia deal is no solution. It is a one-off arrangement that expires  after 800 asylum seekers arrive over four years. And after Julia Gillard announced the Malaysia deal  1,000 people arrived. After it was signed 400 people arrived. So at this rate the Malaysia deal with be  exhausted very quickly then Labor is back where they started with no policy on border protection.

MARIUS BENSON    So if that is not the solution what is the solution because the Opposition has  been advocating Nauru? We heard Immigration officials last week saying Nauru won’t work any more  because people watched what happened last time, saw the vast bulk of people ended up in Australia.  It is a very saleable item for people smugglers.

JULIE BISHOP    We don’t accept that. Our policy has been in place for 10 years, it has been proven  to work which includes offshore processing on Nauru.

MARIUS BENSON    Well the Immigration officials say your policies won’t work. Has the public  service, the experts in the area, just got it wrong?

JULIE BISHOP    Well the public servants are employed to implement Government policy. We should  never forget this whole mess began with Julia Gillard when in Opposition. She designed Labor’s  policy to dismantle the Howard Government border protection policies that were working. We had  effectively stopped the boats, that is the evidence, through offshore processing on Nauru, temporary  protection visas and working with Indonesia to turn back the boats.

MARIUS BENSON    Let me turn to the other big item on the legislative program this week which is  the carbon tax. Are you resigned to the knowledge that the Government has the numbers to get the  carbon tax proposal it wants through both Houses?

JULIE BISHOP    Well there is no lessening of the anger of the sense of betrayal in the community  over Julia Gillard’s promise not to introduce a carbon tax, and the introducing of the legislation is just  the legislative stage of Julia Gillard’s betrayal to the Australian people. She promised 22 million  Australians there would be no carbon tax under her government. The more people understand the  carbon tax the less likely they are to support it.

MARIUS BENSON    There is a new opinion poll out this morning and it shows you remain miles  ahead of the Government in public estimation, but it shows that were Kevin Rudd to be leader Labor  might regain the lead. Do you take that seriously?

JULIE BISHOP    Well the polls reflect what I am hearing as I travel around Australia. There is a  sense that this Government has no coherent plan for the country, that it makes it up as it goes along,  that everything Julia Gillard touches ends up in a mess and she doesn’t command any authority or  any respect.

In relation to Kevin Rudd I think it shows people believe that Julia Gillard’s experiment as leader has  failed. They can’t understand why she took the job off Kevin Rudd in the first place and I think there is  a deep sense of unease in the way she removed Kevin Rudd from the job.

GLEN BARTHOLOMEW    Julie Bishop, the Deputy Liberal Leader with Marius Benson.



