Search this site   Go

Home

Biographical details

Media Centre

Contact details

Department

Parliamentary  Secretary

Links



High Court decision, legislation to  restore Migration Act powers,  Nauru, Craig Thomson, clean  energy legislation Tuesday, 13 September 2011

Interview with Waleed Aly, ABC Melbourne  Breakfast

Waleed Aly: Chris Bowen is the Immigration Minister and  he joins me now. Chris Bowen, good morning.

Chris Bowen: Good morning, Waleed.

Aly: Should we be reading this attempt to come up with  legislation to circumvent the High Court's decision as  another chapter in the government's continuing stoush with  that court?

Bowen: Well, no, I think what you can read it as, is the  government saying that we believe the law should return to  its pre-High Court understanding - nothing more, nothing  less than that. And in 2001 the legislation was passed by  the Parliament, both sides of Parliament voted for it. It was  very clearly understood by both sides of the Parliament to  give the minister of the day discretion to nominate a country  for third party processing, offshore processing, where the  minister was satisfied with the protections and  arrangements in place. Now, the High Court -

Aly: Can I go to that High Court decision, because it  obviously took a different position. The High Court took  issue with your plan because it said that Malaysia isn't

legally bound to give asylum seekers certain rights and  protections, it isn't a signatory to the Refugee Convention, it  doesn't even recognise the legal category of a refugee in its  domestic law, and it isn't bound by anything that's in your  arrangement with Malaysia. So these sound like pretty good

Chris Bowen MP Minister for Immigration and Citizenship

Page 1 of 9 High Court decision, legislation to restore Migration Act powers, Nauru,...

30/09/2011 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2011/cb171743.htm

reasons to anyone who's concerned about the rights of  asylum seekers; not everybody is, but if you are they sound  like pretty strong reasons. You clearly are going to have to

redraft the law so that those things don't matter anymore. Is  that what you're going to be doing?

Bowen: Well, no. As I say, Waleed, we had a clear  understanding of the law previous to the High Court  decision, and that was if the minister of the day was  satisfied with the protections. Now, in relation to Malaysia,  we negotiated, I negotiated with the Malaysian  Government, in consultation with the UNHCR protections,  which went to the guarantee from the Malaysian  Government not to refoule people, to respect the principle  of non-refoulement, to give them work rights, to treat them  with dignity and respect and in accordance with human  rights standards. Now they -

Aly: - None of which are legally binding, which is the point  that the court made.

Bowen: Well, but the point is that, I think pretty clearly, the  understanding of the legislation was that if a political  commitment is given by a sovereign government to another  sovereign government, that is something that governments  deal with all the time. Now, not only did the High Court  ruling mean that Malaysia couldn't proceed without  legislation, but very clearly Minister Ruddock's declarations  of Nauru and Papua New Guinea from his time as minister,  which had been thought to be valid and in force until the  Wednesday of the High Court ruling, are now invalid, to be  held invalid and shouldn't be acted upon.

So this was a significant change and we've stepped back,  we've worked through the issues and we do think the 2001  legislation as it was commonly understood is an appropriate  thing, because we think the government of the day has got  to have the ability to run its policy and to have the discretion  to do this where appropriate -

Aly: But the whole point of the separation of powers is that  the government doesn't have the discretion to do just  anything.

Bowen: Well, no, but the Parliament has the right to make  laws as well, Waleed, and that's a pretty fundamental  principle.

Page 2 of 9 High Court decision, legislation to restore Migration Act powers, Nauru,...

30/09/2011 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2011/cb171743.htm

Aly: I understand that, but I guess what I'm going to is what  these laws are ultimately going to do, and it sounds to me  what you're saying is that they're going to lower the  standard that the High Court set for the protection of the  rights of asylum seekers, because the court was requiring  not an agreement that's not legally enforceable - it isn't  even an agreement, it's actually called an arrangement -  it's requiring more than that, it's saying that what we want to  see is that there's some kind of legal protection for these  people. Now, it sounds like, from what you've said and  would be necessary anyway, that you're going to lower that  standard. Is that right?

Bowen: Well, the High Court interpreted that law in a  certain way, and they interpreted the law to say, as you say,  that there should be legally binding commitments founded  in either signatures to conventions or domestic law, but also  that the standards that should apply should be highly  comparable to those in Australia, with the result as such  that eminent commentators have said that the only country  in our region that would qualify for offshore processing is  New Zealand. Now, clearly -

Aly: And Nauru's a signatory to the Convention now?

Bowen: They have signed, they're in the process of  ratifying -

Aly: Okay, so that improves the situation, doesn't it?

Bowen: Well, it's one factor, but very clearly, we've got five  Senior Counsel or Queen's Counsel, independent, who  have said that they do not believe that it would be feasible  to pursue the Nauru option without legislation, and they are  not only the Government's solicitors, but solicitors for the  other side in that court case and other barristers who've  been asked to give advice on that.

Aly: And I guess we'll see if that legal advice stands up,  because we've seen in the past it doesn't always. You've  more or less conceded that the High Court decision means  you can't send unaccompanied minors to another country  for offshore processing. Doesn't that effectively mean you're  forced to create an exception to your Malaysia deal, which  means that it doesn't break what you call the people  smugglers' model?

Page 3 of 9 High Court decision, legislation to restore Migration Act powers, Nauru,...

30/09/2011 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2011/cb171743.htm

Bowen: No, and again, the High Court did change the law  on this issue. It had been commonly understood that the  Minister for Immigration had the power to remove people,  including unaccompanied minors. Now, the High Court  ruled that that could only happen when the minister had  effectively agreed that it was in the unaccompanied minors'  best interest and that was reviewable by the courts.

So effectively, it's unworkable, and interestingly and  accordingly, that applies not only to asylum seekers but to  all unaccompanied minors: so people who may claim  asylum and then have that claim rejected and not be  regarded as a genuine refugee, after all the appeal  mechanisms, so not only the department -

Aly: Sure, but the point is that now it's created a necessary  exception to your rule.

Bowen: No, and as I've announced yesterday, Waleed,  we'll be returning the law to its pre-High Court  understanding, so that the government of the day has the  discretion to deal with these matters appropriately. Because  what we cannot have is a situation where people know they  can send their children on boats, if they're regarded as a  refugee they'll be granted a visa and then they can sponsor  the rest of the family in, and even if they're not regarded as  a refugee, they can stay in Australia, and this is a -

Aly: More broadly, sorry, can I just broaden -

Bowen: But I want to make this point, Waleed, it's a very  important one: it's very dangerous and anything which  encourages children onto those boats is something that I  don't think is acceptable.

Aly: I want to, more broadly, though, there was a poll that  was published in Fairfax yesterday, there were other polls  before it, that found a majority of those, and in this case 54  per cent, think we should move to onshore processing. Only  25 per cent favour offshore processing. Why will you not  just embrace that, given that it's ultimately more humane  and that's what the public actually want? Why this  obsession with trying to do things offshore when it's really  expensive as well?

Bowen: Well, Waleed, sometimes commentators might  accuse politicians of being poll-driven; this is one example

Page 4 of 9 High Court decision, legislation to restore Migration Act powers, Nauru,...

30/09/2011 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2011/cb171743.htm

where, clearly, we are being driven by what we believe is  the right policy. The right policy is a regional framework.

I don't think that offshore processing by itself - if it's not part  of a regional agreement, not part of Australia playing an  increased role in resettling refugees from our region, taking

more refugees, helping countries like Indonesia and  Malaysia and Thailand deal with the very complex issues of  asylum seekers - I don't think that it plays a role, but I think  if it's part of that broader framework, then it can and it  should. I think that that's appropriate. You know, opinion  polls in the immigration space will always move around, but  the bottom line is you've got to stick to what you believe is  the right policy.

Aly: Can I come to the other story that's around today and  this is the deepening of the Craig Thomson affair. Kathy  Jackson, who has been investigating or has referred this  investigation into the Health Services Union, had something  to say on this. This is what she had to say.

Kathy Jackson: [grab] There may be corrupt activities  occurring in the Health Services Union and I've promised to  our members as my fiduciary duty that we get to the bottom  of this.

Aly: Now, this concerns the fact that Craig Thomson and  others as well, which I'll come to in a moment, but Craig  Thomson has been alleged now to have received  commissions while being on the board of the Health  Services Union, so there's a corruption allegation in addition  to everything that we've had before. Now, what I guess this  comes to is ultimately what are you, the government of  which he is a Member of Parliament, doing about this given  that the allegations of corruption keep coming?

Bowen: Well, what we're doing about it is letting the police  investigate, and that's the appropriate thing. There's one  place and one group of people who should investigate this,  and that's the police force, and -

Aly: It seems extraordinarily passive, though, doesn't it,  because -

Bowen: Well, no, it's not, because, look, this is an  important point, Waleed, and I think there's been some  extraordinary comments made by the Opposition about this.

Page 5 of 9 High Court decision, legislation to restore Migration Act powers, Nauru,...

30/09/2011 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2011/cb171743.htm

I mean, frankly, if there's allegations of criminal behaviour, it  is entirely inappropriate, and you talked about the  separation of powers before; well, here is a very clear  example of how the separation of powers should work and  that is politicians do not investigate allegations of criminal  behaviour, the police do. Now, if George Brandis wanted to  be a policeman -

Aly: I'm not asking you to investigate an allegation of  criminal behaviour, though. That's not -

Bowen: With respect, you are, Waleed.

Aly: No, I'm not. I'm asking you to exercise a judgement  that's not a legal judgement about whether or not it's  appropriate when there is this much suspicion surrounding  a member of your government that you show some  leadership about it.

Bowen: Well, but Waleed, what you're effectively saying  there is that we should circumvent a police investigation,  that's what you're suggesting. You're suggesting, with

respect, that we shouldn't let the police get on with the job,  that we should take some other form of action.

Aly: No, police can get on with the job and they will make a  judgement whether to prosecute. I'm not asking you to  prosecute him, I'm asking you to make a decision about  whether or not -

Bowen: Well, Mr Thomson has denied the allegations very  strenuously.

Aly: Have you looked into those denials to see whether or  not they stand up?

Bowen: Well, he's entitled to the presumption of innocence  and he's entitled to have the police investigate those claims.  He's entitled for that to occur without people second  guessing what's going on and he's entitled for the police to  be able to get on with their job. Now, George Brandis has  criticised the NSW Police; he made allegations, the NSW  police looked and them and said there's no case for them to  pursue it. Now, that's up to the police. It's not a matter for  the Liberal Party, the Labor Party or anybody else. If the  police investigate allegations and then say, ‘There's nothing  further for us to investigate', that's to be respected.

Page 6 of 9 High Court decision, legislation to restore Migration Act powers, Nauru,...

30/09/2011 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2011/cb171743.htm

Aly: So is the principle -

Bowen: There've been other allegations being made here;  Mr Thomson has strenuously denied them, and it's  appropriate they be referred to the police and that the police  be able to get on with the job. This is a very important  principle, Waleed.

Aly: So is the principle here then that there is no inquiry, no  questions need to be asked by a political party about the  conduct of its members, unless the police ultimately  conclude that there's been criminal behaviour?

Bowen: Well, where you've got the allegation of criminal  behaviour and it's a matter of whether that criminal  behaviour occurred or didn't occur, the police not only have  the resources and the ability and the skills to investigate it,  it's their role in our society. It's not the role -

Aly: But they're running a different investigation. I'm not  asking you to run a criminal investigation, I'm just asking -

Bowen: Well, what are you asking us to investigate? There  are allegations that have been made that have been  referred to the police and they should be allowed to occur.  We're not running some sort of kangaroo court here.

Aly: No, but I'm asking you to do a little bit more than  nothing.

Bowen: And the police should investigate.

Aly: [inaudible] given that you've got to make a decision  about this, that's not legal but is one of, well, partly politics  but also just to do with the principles of how your party is  going to run.

Bowen: Well, Mr Thomson's an elected Member of  Parliament. He was elected by the people of Dobell, he held  office as Chair of the Economics Committee, which he's  relinquished, and apart from that as a Member of  Parliament he's entitled to get on with his job. If there's  allegations to be made about him, people are entitled to  make those allegations to the NSW Police, which is what  they've done.

Page 7 of 9 High Court decision, legislation to restore Migration Act powers, Nauru,...

30/09/2011 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2011/cb171743.htm

Aly: What about the fact this goes deeper, because also  implicated is the union boss, Michael Williamson, who's a  member of the NSW Right faction, which we know is a  powerful faction and was involved in the toppling of Kevin  Rudd, and meanwhile his daughter is the Prime Minister's

media officer. So how long can you put up with these sorts  of connections floating around in the public space and  being investigated?

Bowen: Well, the point's the same, Waleed. I mean, you're  repeating allegations; that's fine. I don't know if those  allegations are true or not, because it's up to the police to  investigate them.

Aly: And you don't want to find out until the police tell you?

Bowen: Well, no, because I'm not a policeman, Waleed. If I  wanted to be a policeman, I had the opportunity, I could  have joined the police force. I chose a different career path.  The police investigate these things and it's up to the police  to investigate them.

Aly: Just finally, the carbon tax legislation enters  Parliament today, I understand.

Bowen: Yes, I understand so.

Aly: Is this ultimately going to be legislation that, perhaps  with other issues, kills off the government?

Bowen: No, it's a difficult and complex reform in a  controversial policy area, but it's what we believe in. We  believe that climate change is real and we believe we've got  to do something about it. Now, I understand that can be  unpopular. I understand that there's elements of the media  who strongly disagree and that's going to cause us some  political grief. But it doesn't mean you walk away from it and  we will argue the case for action on climate change, for a  price on carbon because we believe and have believed for  a long time that climate change is real and is caused by  human activity, and there's an obligation to do something  about it.

Aly: Thanks very much for your time this morning. I  appreciate it.

Bowen: Thanks, Waleed. Good on you.

Page 8 of 9 High Court decision, legislation to restore Migration Act powers, Nauru,...

30/09/2011 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2011/cb171743.htm

See: Index of Speeches

URL:  http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2011/cb171743.htm  Last update: Tuesday, 13 September 2011 at 13:05 AEST

Home Copyright & Disclaimer Privacy Department of Immigration and Citizenship

Page 9 of 9 High Court decision, legislation to restore Migration Act powers, Nauru,...

30/09/2011 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2011/cb171743.htm

