





Insiders with Barrie Cassidy  Gonski Reforms; Conduct in Question Time; Cubbie Station; Nauru

Posted on dSeptember 9, 2012  c0 comments

SUBJECTS: Gonski Reforms; Conduct in Question Time; Cubbie Station; Nauru

E&OE………………

CASSIDY: Now the shadow minister for education, Christopher Pyne, who joins us from  Adelaide. Good morning, welcome.

PYNE: Good morning, Barrie.

CASSIDY: Let’s start with education, is the education system broken, does it need fixing?

PYNE: Well certainly our student outcomes have gone backwards there the last 10 years. At  the same time we've increased spending by 44 per cent. So money is not the answer to better  student outcomes, and that's why the Coalition's policy is about teacher quality, a robust  curriculum, principal autonomy and ending the discrimination against children with  disabilities in schools.

CASSIDY: But if money is not the answer then why are you committed to spending $4.2  billion in extra money?

PYNE: Our commitment is for the current indexation rate for spending on education, which  is 6 per cent. So our view is that schools need certainty, both government and non-government schools. They've been used to 6 per cent over the last 10 to 12 years and the  Coalition's commitment is that we’ll continue to support government and non-government  schools with a 6 per cent indexation, which means that they will gain between 4.2 and $5  billion over the next four years. And that's what they should be able to look forward to. But  we're not going to make outlandish promises that we know the money isn't there to fulfil, and  in fact has been grossly under estimated. The Prime Minister on Monday talked about a $6.5  billion extra spend every year. Of course it's much closer to $8 billion unless 3,254 schools  are going to be left worse off. And she's yet to clear this up.

CASSIDY: Yes, but in your case an extra $4.2 billion on top of the $70 billion that you  already have to find. Where will the money come from?

PYNE: The $4.2 billion is already in the budget forecasts. It's just that we've committed to it.  The Labor Party isn't committed to that. The Labor Party is committed to some blancmange  of a policy. In a speech the Prime Minister gave on Monday, that she could have given five  years ago Barrie, there was nothing in that speech that satisfied the education sector. In fact  they're very disappointed in the speech.

CASSIDY: What if next year the Government strikes a deal with the states and with other  key stakeholders, would you honour that if you were to be elected?

PYNE: Well if we're lucky to be elected, Barrie, we'll look at exactly what the Government's  done in education, the agreements that they've made with the education sector and with the  States. If it fits within our policy of teacher quality, a robust curriculum, principal autonomy  and ending the discrimination against children with disabilities, then we will honour it. If on  the other hand it rips money away from government and non-government schools as the  Gonski report suggests, then we won't be doing that. We're not in favour of reducing  spending to any school. We want all schools to be able to go forward into the future with the  certainty of knowing they have their current quantum of funding plus 6 per cent indexation.

CASSIDY: So it's possible then if she can do a deal with the States and they put in place a  framework that takes us through to at least 2020 then an Abbott Coalition government could  adopt it?

PYNE: Well if it works for us, if it works within our policy. We're not in the business of  simply repealing legislation or models for the sake of it. If it works for us we will keep it.  But, you know, the Government has to come up with $8 billion a year for their model to  actually work. $8 billion is $32 billion over four years. If anybody seriously believes that this  Government has that then they will also believe in the Magic Pudding.

CASSIDY: They found $33 billion in cuts in the last budget?

PYNE: Well $17 billion of that Barrie, was tax increases. The Government's got to the point  where they now take a tax increase and claim it's a saving. They have actually have $16  billion of savings and $17 billion of tax increases. Now, what that suggests to me, if that's the  measure, then they're going to increase taxes. Now, voters, aspirational voters, as our South  African friend talked about before, and voters across Australia, are really feeling the cost of  living pressure, of a bad government that's introduced taxes like the carbon tax and the  mining tax, and if the Government wants to go to the next election with another new tax good  luck to them.

CASSIDY: Why is education a lower order priority for the Coalition?

PYNE: It isn't a lower order priority, that's why our policy focuses on what parents know is  important. And the most important thing in education is teacher quality. If it was money, then  you'd think if we increased spending by 44 per cent over the last 10 years then our student  outcomes would have improved. But they've declined, not just relatively but in real terms. So  in fact money isn't just the answer. A good teacher is the most important thing for young

people. And so the Coalition's policy is relentlessly focused on teacher quality, a robust  curriculum and of course principal autonomy.

CASSIDY: Yes but when I say …

PYNE: Which plays into teacher quality.

CASSIDY: … When I say it’s lower order, certainly not top order because Tony Abbott says  he intends to focus on two things: the two most important failures of the Government: border  protection and carbon tax. You said this week the election should be a referendum on border  protection and carbon tax.

PYNE: Sure.

CASSIDY: Both those issues you put ahead of education.

PYNE: Well it's the Opposition's job, Barrie, to hold the Government to account. And the  Prime Minister said before the 2010 election there will be no carbon tax under the  government I lead, and then five weeks later she broke that promise and introduced a carbon  tax. Now we have to hold her to account for that.

CASSIDY: Sure.

PYNE: Otherwise we wouldn't be doing our job as the Opposition.

CASSIDY: Absolutely. But can you explain why asylum seekers is a more important issue  than education?

PYNE: Because the border - well it's not a more important issue, all issues are important.

CASSIDY: Well you've said it is …

PYNE: Of course they are.

CASSIDY: … they're the two you will focus on.

PYNE: No, I’ve said that I think the next election will be fought on the carbon tax and border  protection and I'm sure that's the case. That doesn't mean that health and education and  disabilities and all the other issues aren't very important. But the next election, in my view,  will be a referendum on the carbon tax and it will be a referendum on the Government rolling  back the Howard government's position on border protection which has led to about 18,000  boat arrivals, or people arrivals, since they rolled it back. And in fact since they announced  Nauru, as you pointed out in the introduction, there's been 1,700 more people arrive. The  Government could have got the legislation through the Parliament to deal with Nauru two  weeks ago, they still haven't done it. John Howard got Nauru up and running in 19 days and  this mob, at 27 days later they're still fiddling about. They haven't even got the legislation  into the Parliament that allows Nauru go ahead.

CASSIDY: OK, well we've heard those arguments before. But Malcolm Turnbull for one has  said there's too much focus on those two issues in Question Time, and he said surely there are  other important issues?

PYNE: Well I think Malcolm's expressing the same frustration that we all feel about  Question Time, and that is that the Prime Minister and her ministers simply don't answer the  questions. And it is frustration.

CASSIDY: But you choose the questions, you decide what questions are going to be asked.

PYNE: And we wouldn't have to ask so many questions about the carbon tax if they'd simply  answer one of them. We've asked as many as we have. And I'm glad we've asked as many as  we have because the public out there are concerned about cost of living, which is the carbon  tax, they're concerned about border protection, they're concerned about the Government's  $120 billion black hole, which they simply keep adding to all the time. And they're concerned  about the Prime Minister's integrity. So of course we should be asking those questions. And if  the Prime Minister and the ministers answered them then we might be able to move on to a  whole range of other issues. And let me just add, if the Deputy Speaker, Anna Burke, would  hold the Government, the Prime Minister and her ministers to account to be relative, then the  frustration would be a lot less than it is at the moment.

CASSIDY: Maybe Malcolm Turnbull's frustration is that he never gets to ask a question.  Why don't you put him on the roster sometimes?

PYNE: Well, the National Broadband Network Minister, Stephen Conroy, is in the Senate.  Now we didn't choose to put Stephen Conroy in the Senate nor did we choose for him to be  the minister. In fact I'm sure we wouldn't choose him to be the minister if we had our chance.  So it's no fault of Malcolm's that his opposite number is not in the parliament in which he sits.  But the National Broadband Network, of course, it's very important and the waste that's going  on there is a vital part of our attack on the Labor Party, and Malcolm has been prosecuting  that case very successfully. But …

CASSIDY: You could ask questions of the Prime Minister and the …

PYNE: …. we only get nine questions a day ….

CASSIDY: But you could ask questions of the Prime Minister and the Treasurer on it.

PYNE: We only get nine questions a day, Barrie. I mean there are 32 shadow ministers. I'm  sure every shadow minister wishes we could ask a question about their portfolio every day  but we only get nine. Now if the Government wanted to give us a great deal more we would  take them with gratitude. And the Deputy Speaker…

CASSIDY: How many shadow ministers have got the record of one question since October  2010?

PYNE: Well, I'm sure if you went through the list and you’d find that many of them do, many  of them do because it's very difficult for everybody to get a turn in Question Time. It's not  like pass the parcel, Barrie. The question people ask in Question Time are the ones which the  Government needs to be most held to account. And on the cost of living, the carbon tax, the

Prime Minister's integrity, border protection, these are the key issues. The $120 billion black  hole, the budget that's falling apart around the Government's ears, these unfortunately for  other shadow ministers, take priority. If the Government wanted to have an open-ended  Question Time every shadow minister would get questions every day.

CASSIDY: Well in the middle of all that, what did you say about Anna Burke, the Deputy  Speaker?

PYNE: Well I do think that Anna Burke, the Deputy Speaker, does need to make the Prime  Minister and her ministers be relevant to the questions that they're being asked. I think Harry  Jenkins and Peter Slipper did more to make sure that relevance was maintained by the front  bench. In fact they sat down the Prime Minister and ministers on very regular occasions. And  once you've been sat down a couple of times I think you'd try and be more relevant. I do think  Anna Burke needs to be much more on the job of making sure that the Government actually  answer the questions, and if they don't answer them sit down. And I think that frustration that  Malcolm feels, that I feel, that Tony Abbott feels, about Question Time would be a great deal  less. That all needs to be led by example from the Prime Minister, but she doesn't lead by  example, she's the worst offender.

CASSIDY: So are you saying of the Deputy Speaker that she should be replaced or just lift  her game?

PYNE: I don't blame Anna Burke for that. The problem is that the whole speakership issue  has been rather an unfortunate series of events in the last 12 months since the Prime Minister  and her Government replaced Harry Jenkins, who was doing a very good job, because they  thought they'd get an extra vote out of it on the floor of the Parliament. This is the whole  problem with this Parliament. The Parliament is bringing the political discourse into  disrepute. Because we have this hung parliament where there isn't a clear winner. In fact there  are conservative independents supporting a Labor Government, and the whole thing doesn't  have a legitimacy about it. But I think Anna Burke in her performance she could be holding  the Prime Minister and her cabinet ministers much more to the standing orders of relevance.

CASSIDY: If she's failing in her duty the Government would probably entertain a nomination  from the Coalition?

PYNE: Well in fact we nominated Anna Burke, Barrie, for the speakership when Harry  Jenkins stood down. The Coalition …

CASSIDY: Clearly you got that wrong.

PYNE: … I think I nominated 11 people from the Labor Party to be speaker. None of them  felt that they were worthy to be the Speaker and yet of course Anna Burke has ended up in  the chair. If the Government had taken our advice they would have appointed one of their  own to the job.

CASSIDY: OK on Barnaby Joyce and his comments on Cubbie Station, is he freelancing as  Joe Hockey puts it?

PYNE: I think Barnaby is perfectly reasonably raising the issue of why Wayne Swan, if he's  so proud of Cubbie Station being purchased by foreign investors, released it at 5:00 late on a

Friday afternoon in order to try and get as little media scrutiny as possible. I think that created  immediate suspicion. And Wayne Swan could have handled that much better if he had been  more transparent about the decision that he and the Government and the foreign investment  review board had made. I think that got the hackles up of many Australians, and Barnaby has  been representing their view.

CASSIDY: But he is a front bencher and he spoke out against, earlier in the week at least,  spoke out against the sale. Now that is against Coalition policy. Are frontbenchers free to go  out into the market place and argue against Coalition policy?

PYNE: What Barnaby has argued about is the process by which Wayne Swan went through  the announcement…

CASSIDY: He opposed the sale.

PYNE: … and he expressed doubts about the sale and he's entitled to do so.

CASSIDY: He is.

PYNE: We're not a Stalinist party Barrie. One of the strengths of our party, unlike the Labor  Party, is that we actually welcome a diversity of views from the front bench and the  backbench, because that's democracy, that's what it should be like. Now if Barnaby Joyce has  expressed his views in his usual straight-forward style well good luck to him, he hasn't done  any harm to anyone. We aren't in the least bit frightened of people going out and expressing  their frustration about a very, very bad Government.

CASSIDY: OK you say you're not a Stalinist party and you're not executing your enemies but  surely some in your party are looking for a bit more discipline?

PYNE: I think we've been a remarkably disciplined team. I think since Tony Abbott has been  leader since December 2009 one of the hallmarks of the Opposition has been its discipline,  right through the shadow cabinet and the backbench. Because the most important thing we  want to do in Australia and from the Opposition is replace a very bad government that is  introducing taxes that people can't afford, that has opened our borders to people smugglers  and has broken its promises that it made before the 2010 election. So we're putting the people  first, not our own personal interests first, and we're going to keep doing that.

CASSIDY: And just finally with the publication of The Quarterly essay on Tony Abbott, and  the question again seems to be does Tony Abbott have a problem with women?

PYNE: Look, I just find this story quite remarkable. It's not like Tony Abbott suddenly  appeared on the scene today and is a person of interest. If this story was true why wasn't it  raised when he ran for pre-selection for Warringah 20 years ago or when he was the chairman  of the Australians for a Constitutional Monarchy, or when he became a cabinet minister? I  mean there's been so many opportunities along the path of Tony Abbott's very public career  where this could have been raised, and yet for some reason David Marr's chosen to raise it in  the last couple of days. And Tony Abbott has denied it absolutely, there is no documentary  evidence for it, there were no statements made at the time. It didn't even appear, Barrie, in  Honi Soit, the Sydney University newspaper. And you would think if everyone was talking  about it, it would have at least appeared in the student rag.

CASSIDY: Christopher Pyne, thanks for your time this morning.

PYNE: It's a pleasure Barrie, thank you.



