





Sky News Showdown  Election timing; recent attacks on Julia Gillard and Tony Abbot; Education reform; Kevin Rudd; the Next Federal Budget

Posted on dSeptember 25, 2012  c0 comments

SUBJECTS: Election timing; recent attacks on Julia Gillard and Tony Abbot;  Education reform; Kevin Rudd; the Next Federal Budget

E&OE………………………………………………………………………………….

Michael Kroger: To hear what he’s got to say about this we are joined in Adelaide by the  Leader of the Opposition in the House of Representatives, the Member for Sturt, Shadow  spokesman for Education, the great man himself Christopher Pyne is in Adelaide, welcome  Christopher.

Christopher Pyne: Hello Michael, hello Mark.

Kroger: Thank you very much for your time tonight, Chris.  Well you have heard Mark’s  view that the government cannot go to an election next year if they’re not going to deliver a  budget surplus.  Your thoughts?

Pyne: Well Wayne Swann and Julia Gillard are a bit like Batman and Robin in one of those  old sixties versions of the television show where the walls are closing in around them and  they are trying to keep them at bay, because the truth is they are in a race against time to May  next year.  They can’t go to the Budget without a surplus.  Julia Gillard already doesn’t have  any integrity.  She has no integrity because she said she would never challenge Kevin Rudd,  then she challenged him.  She said she wouldn’t introduce a carbon tax and she introduced  one, and she said the surplus is basically written in stone and will be delivered.  Now, we  know they haven’t got a surplus, everybody knows across Australia that you can’t be getting  less income and spending more and somehow end up with more money after that.  Now it  would be great if we could run our households like that, if we could earn less money, spend  more and still have more money left over at the end.  Nobody believes that to be the case so  they’ll have an election in February, March at the latest in order to get out of the way of a  budget in May.

Kroger: Do you think that’s feasible?  Aren’t the Australian electorate going to say “You’re  holding an election now because you are not going to be able to deliver a budget surplus; you  have broken another promise etcetera, etcetera, the kind of thing Mark was talking about.  Is  it feasible politically for the government to call an election and have it in March?

Pyne: Well of course that’s what the public will say now the press gallery in Canberra will  find some reason to cheer that the government has come up with some clever strategy to have  an election in February, March, because they want a contest, but the public, the great  Australian public will know that they are avoiding the May budget because if they have the  May budget, their lies about the surplus will be exposed.  Now they projected a $22 billion  deficit. This year they have delivered a $44 billion deficit. That’s twice as bad as they  expected it to be.  Wayne Swann’s never delivered a surplus budget. In fact the last time  Labor delivered a surplus budget was in 1990, so nobody believes they’ll deliver a  surplus.  They have to get out of the way of that exposing of their great Labor lie about the  surplus and that’s why even though they don’t want to, they’ll have an election in February  March. That’s why they’re rushing out all these spending promises whether its the National  Disability Insurance Scheme, or new, more money for schools, or the submarine project, the  blow out of the Nauru and Manus Island extra refugees which costs $1.3 billion a  year.  They’re putting all these promises out there to try and change the national conversation  so they can have an election.

Mark Latham:  So Chris, what’s the alternative approach?  Are you worried by the political  fallout from the large public sector spending cuts in NSW and Qld and in particular in your  area of education.  Do you endorse the school funding cuts that have been announced in  NSW?

Pyne: Well Mark, nobody likes tightening the belt.  Nobody likes it.  I have four children and  a wife and you have children and a wife and Michael has as well, and having to tighten the  family budget is never popular.  Nobody wants somebody coming home and saying we  haven’t got enough money so we are going to have to cut our spending, we can’t go on the  holiday this year or whatever.  Now, Campbell Newman and Barry O’Farrell took over states  with massive financial problems.  Queensland alone had a $65 billion debt. Everybody in  New South Wales knows that Barry O’Farrell took over an economic basket case, so the  public, even though they don’t like cuts, the public also knows it was an absolute political  necessity, in Queensland and New South Wales.  Of course I don’t like them but they’re  decisions the New South Wales and Queensland governments have made and the Queensland  and New South Wales voter will get their chance to decide whether it was the right thing or  the wrong thing to do when an election is held in either of those states.

Kroger: Chris it’s very hard for this government quite frankly to have an election in March  and say “Look, the Budget is going to be in deficit for the year.”  I mean Wayne Swann has  said a thousand times, Julia Gillard has said five thousand times there’s going to be a Budget  surplus in the year 2012/2013. I mean we know Swan has delivered four deficits totalling  $173 billion or thereabouts, more than $40 billion a year.  To go to an election and not deliver  on that promise would be electoral suicide, would it not?  Surely the only thing they can do is  make massive spending cuts, massive increases in tax in superannuation and perhaps in  property, etcetera, etcetera and try and fathom a surplus and go to an election after May.  To  go before May with a deficit would destroy the Government, would it not?

Pyne: Well they have wedged themselves Michael, They’ve wedged themselves as they have  done so many times in the last five years. They’ve tried to be clever and they have wedged  themselves.  So, what they’ve done is they have attacked the spending cuts in New South  Wales and Queensland as the worst thing that’s ever happened since the Battle of Isandlwana  and now they’re in this terrible bind if they actually make any cuts to the Budget, people will  turn around and say “Hey, you said we could have it all.  You said we could have more  spending, we could have income tax cuts, we could have a fabulous quality of standard of  Government services increasing every year, no public service cuts, you criticise Campbell  Newman and Barry O’Farrell and then you’ve gone and done it all yourselves.”   They’ve got  themselves in a terrible bind.  They can’t go to the Budget because they’ll be exposed as the  liars they are and if they go to the budget, if they go to an election before the budget, people  like yourself and the coalition and Mark will say the only reason you are not going to the  Budget is you know that you are going to be exposed for making promises you couldn’t keep  and I think the public are thoroughly a wake up to them

Latham: Well let’s have a look at Opposition policy making.  Chris are you worried about  the shift in political momentum in recent weeks where I think a number of people are worried  that Tony Abbott is very much a one trick pony, that he’s very good on the negative side of  politics but the Opposition is not really presenting itself as an alternative government with  constructive, positive policies, putting them forward to the Australian people.  You’ve done a  lot of good work in schools but there doesn’t seem to be a lot of other policy work being  released on the Opposition side.  So do you think we’re getting to the part of the political  cycle now where the Opposition needs to be much more positive and position itself as an  alternative instead of a negative carping outfit?

Pyne: Well there’s no doubt, Mark, that Tony Abbott has been a very effective Leader of the  Opposition and he has highlighted a very bad Government’s failings more successfully than  anybody I can remember.  So he’s done that job very well and of course, unfortunately  there’s a lot of failings to highlight.  We have got a lot of policy out there but as you would  remember from your own period as Leader of the Opposition, the press gallery sort of move  from one issue to the other very quickly.  You can announce a policy like bringing back the  Australian Building and Construction Commission one day and the media aren’t interested  the next day.  We have said we will abolish the carbon tax, we have said we will abolish the  mining tax.  We’ve obviously got the most generous maternity leave scheme on the table but  this next few months that are coming up will be an opportunity for Tony Abbott to talk more  about the kind of government he would lead. In fact today he obviously announced a policy  in terms of defence spending where we would be quarantining Defence from cuts and trying  to rebuild the defence infrastructure that we had planned for the future because a serious  country has a serious defence force.  He will keep outlining those kinds of polices over the  coming months but tragically, there is so much for the media to write about that’s a failing of  the Government that they are a bit obsessed by that and if they’re not writing about how  terrible the Government is they’re writing about Kevin Rudd’s comeback.  So it’s hard to  compete with the front page for positive news when there is so much that’s negative about  this Government and the latest of course will be this UN Security Council bid.  We spent $40  million on the bid itself.  We spent untold tens of millions of dollars in aid to countries and  continents that we hadn’t previously regarded as priorities.  If we win it, it will have cost us a  tremendous amount of money and if we lose it will go down in the same league as the failed  world cup soccer bid.

Kroger: Christopher, you broke a golden rule of these special editions of Showdown, I have  to tell you, mentioned the words “Kevin Rudd” and this is a Kevin Rudd free show.

Pyne:  It’s a Kevin Rudd free zone

Kroger: You will start my colleague right off. You’ll send him right off if you mention  Kevin Rudd and when he’s had a go, then he’ll send me off.

Pyne: He permeates every aspect of our life, Kevin.  Even when he’s talking about how he’s  not running for leader, he’s talking about himself and how he’s going to take the fight to  Tony Abbott and stop him from getting elected.  You’ve got to admire him.  He works  himself into every single conversation.

Kroger: I love his interviews where they say to him the polls have turned around, the  Government is doing well and you can just see him choking on his words saying he’s  delighted as to how well the government is going.

Pyne: My favourite Kevin Rudd interviews are the ones where he interviews himself where  he gets asked a question then he asks himself another question so he can interview himself.

Kroger: Well it would be cheaper for SKY to put him on this show, there’d just be one  compare, interviewing himself.

Pyne: Exactly.

Kroger: We wouldn’t need people like you. Christopher we’re going to ask you in a few  minutes about David Marr and the Tony Abbott you know.  What do you think about  him?  You’ve probably see him more than anybody else. But the question of funding.  What  is… there’s views out there the Coalition will lop $70 billion of the Budget on an annual  basis. Where is that at? What is the truth of those numbers? We can’t seem to get clarity on  that, or I can’t.  So what is the current position of the Opposition in relation to this mysterious  Budget cut number.  Where is that at?

Pyne: Well there have been several budgets since the Labor Party  started talking about this  so called black hole and of course the Financial Review has already highlighted that they  have a $120 billion black hole, but putting that aside, it has been several budgets since  then.  We will know the numbers upon which we can rely, when an election is called and the  Pre-election Financial Forecasts are published - The PEFO as it is called.  We get a better  idea from the end of this year from MYEFO - the Mid Year Economic Forecasts - and of  course the Budget is the best means of knowing the actual numbers in the budget but we can’t  really say exactly what our budget position will look like, our fiscal policy until the election  is called until we get the final numbers from Treasury then we can announce in good time  before Election Day exactly what we will be doing on a fiscal basis.  But we know we will be  abolishing the carbon tax, we know we will be abolishing the mining tax. They’re two things  that are already in the vault.

Kroger: Christopher we are going to take a break for a moment and we’ll be back with a  special edition of showdown in just a moment.

[Advertisement]

Kroger: And welcome back to this special edition of Showdown, I’m here with my colleague  former Labor leader Mark Latham, and we’re joined in Adelaide by the opposition  spokesman on education, Christopher Pyne, who no doubt read the David Marr article on  Tony Abbott. Christopher, what were your thoughts?

Pyne: Well it was actually a much longer piece than it was given due credit for. I mean, I  noticed David Marr’s comments this week, where he said that the stories that got most  attention were really basically a paragraph in a 33,000 word essay, and when you read the  whole essay you get a very different picture of what David Marr was conveying, which was a  very determined, energetic, hard working Leader of the Opposition. So as usual, of course,  the media focussed on one small aspect of it and made that the whole story. I think David  Marr is probably a bit disappointed with the treatment of the piece.

Latham: I would have thought one of the recurring themes in the essay is Tony Abbott as a  man of exaggeration…

Pyne: [laughs]

Latham:… If you look at his career at university, at his time as a backbencher in the federal  parliament, there’s a whole catalogue in the essay of experiences where Abbott has made a  statement one day and had to pull back thirty of forty per cent the next day. In recent times,  of course, the exaggerated claims about the impact of the carbon tax are notorious, and just  yesterday he was overreaching in his comments about Julia Gillard and meeting with the  Indonesian president. So Christopher, isn’t this a major worry, that Abbott has got a long  standing pattern of exaggeration and his credibility is really going to come under pressure in  coming times as this pattern continues?

Pyne: Well Mark, I think Tony Abbott is a bit like John Howard. I think there’s not much  about Tony Abbott that the public doesn’t know already. He’s a great one for putting himself  out there in terms of his own background and past, and I think the public have a fair idea of  Tony Abbott and what he stands for, and if he was to be elected, if he was fortunate enough  to be elected prime minister, they wouldn’t be getting a clean slate about which they knew  nothing. I think one of the things about Kevin Rudd that failed him was that the public didn’t  really have a full picture of Kevin Rudd until the Labor Party filled it in for us - filled it in by  leaking, filled it in by writing stories, filled it in in February by launching a jihad against  Kevin Rudd, a political jihad. I think with Tony Abbott, what you see is what you get. I think  the public are fully aware of the kind of person Tony Abbott is and judging by the polls they  seem to be prepared to elect him as Prime Minister of our great country.

Latham: Is that borne out, though, by the reaction to this essay? Because, whether the punch  incident is true or not, There was certainly enormous public focus on it, perhaps enormous  public surprise that Abbott had this type of matter in his past, and there is a feeling that if the  punch thing is true, maybe there are other things people don’t know about Tony Abbott, so I  would have thought the punch incident, the way it was raised in David Marr’s essay and the  media reaction to it demonstrates that perhaps people don’t really know the true Tony Abbott,  and the fact that he has this pattern of exaggeration makes that even harder for the electorate  to come to grips with  what does this man actually stand for, what is the truth about his past,  and what are his plans for the country’s future?

Pyne: I think Tony Abbott is not an exaggerator, I think he’s a humble person. I mean, he  spent the weekend that he was being smeared by the Labor party about the David Marr  column, he spent the Saturday firefighting with the volunteer rural fire service in his local  area and the Sunday, he was running a marathon with a blind man, leading him for the first  marathon this blind man had finished, but he didn’t want anyone to know that. The truth is  that for the Labor Party, the last thing left in the locker is the oily, sticky paint to throw at  Tony Abbott. They want to smear him as they tried Campbell Newmann in Queensland. It’s  what people try to do when they’ve got nothing to say about policy, nothing to say about the  future. They’ve tried the announcement of big policies that are very expensive. Everyone  knows they haven’t got the money for them. As much as they’d like them to have the money  for them, they know that they don’t have it, and that’s just been confirmed this week by  announcing a $44 Billion defecit this year. So Labor’s turning to smear and the dirt unit, and  I’m sure they’ll do that right through to election day. I think the Australian public don’t really  like that. The Australian public are into giving people a fair go, and they judge people by  their policies, and not by the smear campaign their opponents run against them.

Latham: But isn’t one of the problems that the attacks against Abbot are somewhat  legitimised by the campaign that was run against the Prime Minister by the Australian  newspaper, going back on her history twenty years ago, the trade union dispute and a former  boyfriend. Does the Liberal Party now regret the fact that it allowed that campaign to run,  saying that the prime minister had questions to answer? That was the Liberal mantra -  consistently saying the Prime Minister had questions to answer. It seems to me that was very  much an own goal, that Tony Abbott, yourself and others say what the Prime Minister did as  a matter of relative trivia twenty years ago is not relevant and if you’d said that at that time  you would have protected Abbott from examination of his past and the sort of thing that’s  come out in the David Marr essay.

Pyne: The Liberal Party didn’t raise the Australian Workers Union…

Latham: No but you let them run you were very happy day after day for Liberal people to  say the Prime  Minister has questions to answer, questions to answer. If you cut it off at that  point then I think you would have protected Abbott and would have ended (whether it’s  Labor or Liberal) the smear politics in Australia and protected Abbott much more effectively.

Pyne: But I think you have to remember that Robert McClelland raised the issue of the  Australian Workers Union in Parliament and that story was being run by the Labor Party for  all it was worth. Julia Gillard’s opponents from within the Labor Party Caucus, so the  supporters of change in the Labor Party were pushing that around and of course the people  that were involved in the case itself in the Australian Workers Union were pushing that  around and story was given great credibility by the Slater and Gordon Partners who came out  and confirmed that she left Slater and Gordon under a cloud and they of course that they  released the transcripts of the interview with Julia Gillard so I don’t think you can blame the  Liberal Party for any of that. The response from the Labor Party’s dirt unit was a non-scandal  from more than 30 years ago from which there were no witnesses, no documentation, nothing  to substantiate it and I think basically it fell rather flat, especially when you read in the  Weekend Australian other stories that Barabara Ramjan raised at University against the far-left against what they called the “Spartanistas” or something.

Latham: So you’ve got no regrets about the Liberal Party response to that Gillard matter?

Pyne: We don’t have a response…

Kroger: Hang on a minute, why would they. You’re comparing two things. First of all  Abbott’s allegedly punched the wall. That’s his great crime. What’s she done? She’s admitted  that she set up a slush fund at Slater and Gordon…

Latham: She didn’t set it up that wrong, that’s factually incorrect. She didn’t set it up.

Kroger: She did set it up. She wrote the rules for it.

Latham: She gave them legal advice. It’s factually incorrect to say that she established it. It’s  a mistake that other outlets have made and wrong to say it here…

Kroger: They incorporated it, she set it up, into which…

Latham: No, no, no she…

Kroger: Between $400,000 and $1,000,000 was put into that fund and no one was ever  charged. Now why isn’t that a matter of public interest? Why isn’t that a matter of legitimate  public interest? $400,000-$1,000,000 has gone into this fund for the AWU and no one was  ever charged.

Latham: She’s not responsible for that and whether he was charged or wasn’t charged, take  that up with the Western Australia Police, and no one can pretend that the Julia Gillards is  responsible for the Western Australian Police or the Victorian Police Force in the 1990s.  Take it up with them.

Kroger: Christopher, just one final point is this, about Tony Abbott and we know Abbott  extremely well, but in my forty years in the Liberal Party, I have never come across anyone  who has fewer enemies than Tony Abbott, its very hard to find anyone who is an enemy of  Abbott. I mean John Howard had enemies, Andrew Peacock had enemies, dare I say it  Christopher even people as good as you and I have the occasional enemy, very occasionally,  not very many…

Pyne: No, no you’re wrong about that, I can’t think of any.

Latham: What about the backbencher, Bernardi?

Pyne: No, I never take anything personally so I don’t have any enemies. Mr Kroger’s got  enemies to burn; couldn’t list them.

Kroger: I couldn’t list who any of Abbott’s enemies are and for people who don’t know  Tony Abbott that tells you something extraordinary about a bloke who has as many wars as  we do, that there’s no one that dislikes Tony Abbott. Compare that to Kevin Rudd, the reason  that he’s so popular in the polls is that people haven’t met him yet; as soon as they meet him  they take an instant dislike to him.

Latham: He’s got plenty of enemies in this book and one of your old mates Peter Costello  was quoted as saying that Abbott used to tell the Cabinet that he learned all his economics at  the feet of Bob Santamaria. Costello says “I was horrified”. If they’re his friends who needs

enemies. If they’re his Liberal Party friends  - Peter Costello - Tony Abbott doesn’t need  enemies.

Pyne: Well Tony Abbott - between you two I can’t even get a word in. Tony Abbott doesn’t  have enemies in politics because he’s a healer and he’s a leader and he tries to bring people  together and point them in the direction of making Australia a better country and defeating  our opponents, rather than fighting amongst themselves. I think one of his great achievements  since September, 2009 has been healing the Liberal Party which was strife torn having lost in  2007 then going through Brendan Nelson and Malcolm Turnbull’s leadership, you have to  say he has welded together a disparate group of people into a very united and harmonious  team.

Kroger: Christopher I want to thank you for being with us tonight. We know you were at a  dinner tonight and you’ve broken from that dinner to be with us on showdown and no doubt  we’ll see you sometime in the future.

Pyne: It’s a great pleasure.

ENDS



