Michael Keenan MP - Federal Member for  Stirling BOWEN MUST ANSWER QUESTIONS OVER  ALLEGED INVERBRACKIE PEOPLE  SMUGGLING KINGPIN June 20, 2012

The arrest of an alleged people smuggling kingpin at the Inverbrackie detention centre just weeks after the Captain Emad debacle, demands an explanation from Minister Bowen on how many alleged people smugglers have arrived to Australia by boat as asylum seekers and how many have been issued with permanent visas, Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Scott Morrison. Shadow Minister for Justice, Customs and  Border Protection, Michael Keenan and Federal Member for Mayo, Jamie Briggs said today.

“Fresh from his Captain Emad farce, Minister Bowen must today explain just how many alleged people smugglers are in immigration detention, how many have been released into the community on bridging visas and, just like Captain Emad, how many he has granted a permanent visa to,” Mr Morrison said.

“Given that Minister Bowen has used the Sergeant Schultz defence of ‘knowing nuffink’ on Captain Emad’s sail in, fly out  operation, only putting him on his Department’s Movement Alert List after he had fled the country, the Australian people can have no confidence that Minister Bowen has any idea about alleged people smugglers now operating here under his watch.

“This is a Minister who has given up on border protection. The Australian people know it and the people smugglers know it. The people smugglers have endorsed the government’s soft border protection policies to the point where they are now moving here to set up shop.

“Australians  don’t  have  any  confidence  in  this  government’s  ability  to  manage  our  borders  and  refuse  spurious  asylum claims by those arriving by boat including from suspected people smugglers.

“This latest case highlights why the Coalition will implement policies to ensure integrity in refugee processing including the appointment  of  an  integrity  commissioner  to  review  decisions,  enable  the  Minister  to  review  positive  refugee determinations and presume against the refugee status of someone reasonably believed to have discarded their identity documentation.”

Mr Keenan said: “Hot on the heals of revelations that alleged people smugglers are welcome to reside in Australia on  protection visas under Labor, they are now apparently welcome to conduct their evil trade from within our detention  network.

“You really couldn't make this stuff up - is there no limit to Labor's incompetence?

“The Australian Federal Police do a great job pursuing people smugglers despite the Labor Government continuing to strip  funding and personnel from this vital agency.

“If the AFP had the resources they needed to conduct comprehensive people smuggling investigations then more of these  criminals could be brought to justice and not allowed to flee the country - as we witnessed with the Captain Emad saga.

“This Government needs to start taking responsibility for its failures that have led to the people smugglers running  Australia’s borders.

Page 1 of 2 BOWEN MUST ANSWER QUESTIONS OVER ALLEGED INVERBRACKIE PEO...

20/09/2013 http://www.keenan.net.au/DesktopModules/DnnForge%20-%20NewsArticles/Print.as...

"It is within this Government’s power to reinstate the policies they destroyed upon coming to office - this is the only way to  stop people smuggling," said Mr Keenan.

Mr Briggs said: “The local Adelaide Hills community was told by the Government that Inverbrackie would be a low-risk,  family-only facility.

“The fact that an alleged people smuggler has found his way to what is supposed to be a ‘low risk’ detention facility makes  a mockery of Labor’s failed border protection policies. This represents a whole new level of failure for the Gillard Labor  Government.

“This incident also raises questions as to whether any single males are in the Inverbrackie facility, which Minister Bowen  promised the community wouldn’t happen,” he said.

Â© Authorised by Michael Keenan MP, 203 Wanneroo Road, Tuart Hill WA 6060

www.keenan.net.au

Page 2 of 2 BOWEN MUST ANSWER QUESTIONS OVER ALLEGED INVERBRACKIE PEO...

20/09/2013 http://www.keenan.net.au/DesktopModules/DnnForge%20-%20NewsArticles/Print.as...

