

Deputy Leader of the Opposition and Shadow Minister  for Foreign Affairs and Trade  Julie Bishop

Joint interview Julie Bishop and Richard Colbeck

17 December 2012

DEVONPORT, TASMANIA

Subjects: Tasmanian manufacturing industry, Carbon Tax, red tape, unemployment rate, Tony Abbott,  asylum seekers, Bob Carr Sri Lanka plan

E&OE…

JOURNALIST Julie, what’s going on here in Tasmania? What brings you to this State?

JULIE BISHOP I am visiting Devonport with Richard Colbeck as part of the Liberal Party’s plan for  Tasmania - we are going to put together a Growth Plan for Tasmania. So we’ll be visiting advanced  manufacturing businesses in Wynyard. We believe that there should be more export opportunities for  Tasmania, particularly here on the North West Coast. That’s why we’ll be repealing the carbon tax  because the added cost of electricity under the Carbon Tax makes our exports less competitive.

We’re also concerned about jobs in Tasmania. The unemployment rate here is higher than the  national rate at 6.7 per cent and on the North West coast it’s even higher, over nine per cent. The  added burden of the carbon tax and the added burden of red tape and regulation means that jobs are  at risk and we want to make our export businesses more competitive. So we’ll repeal the carbon tax,  we’ll repeal unnecessary taxes, we will get rid of unnecessary red tape to help make Tasmania’s  economy competitive again.

And under our Growth Plan for Tasmania we intend to boost Tasmania’s strengths, increase  productivity, generate more jobs and ensure that Tasmania’s exports are more competitive.

JOURNALIST And what’s the feeling inside the Coalition about Tony Abbott’s high disapproval rating  in the latest poll?

JULIE BISHOP Tony Abbott is leading a united and focussed team. Next year we will be revealing  more details of our plans for Australia’s future, and a strong and productive economy. And all of his  team are working hard on putting together policies. We’ve been working on them for the last two  years and we’ll be releasing positive plans for the future in 2013.

JOURNALIST And just on to asylum seekers, Paris Aristotle has told the parliamentary committee  that both sides have retreated to their trenches on the issue and unless we take a bipartisan approach  more people will die at sea. What’s your response there?

JULIE BISHOP We have had a plan to stop the people smuggling trade and stop people taking that  dangerous journey to Australia by boat for a decade now and it worked. Labor unpicked the policies  that had dismantled the people smuggling trade. This debacle, this crisis in our border protection is all  Labor’s own doing and until Labor embraces the policies that the Howard Government introduced and  that worked we’ll continue to see boats arrive as Mr Aristotle indicated.

JOURNALIST What’s your response to Bob Carr’s new four-point plan over in Sri Lanka about people  smuggling?

JULIE BISHOP Bob Carr has a reputation for being all announcement and no delivery. Bob Carr has

done this when he was Premier of New South Wales, when he would announce grandiose schemes  but nothing ever came of them.

We welcome his visit to Sri Lanka, in fact we’ve been calling on Bob Carr to get in touch with the Sri  Lankan Government for the last seven months, when the number of Sri Lankans increased in boat  arrivals to Australia. So we’ve been calling on the Government to do what Bob Carr is now doing for  the last seven months.

There needs to be a commitment by this Government to embrace policies that work. Their half-hearted approach means that border protection policies are continuing to fail, we’re continuing to see  people arrive by boat and take that dangerous journey. This is a battle of wills between the people  smugglers and Julia Gillard’s Government and the people smugglers are winning.

JOURNALIST So do you think he’s all talk in this latest announcement?

JULIE BISHOP That’s Bob Carr’s reputation. He makes these announcements and then there’s no  follow through. So we’ll be looking to see if Bob Carr follows through on this announcement. Scott  Morrison, Michael Keenan and I announced some time ago that we would be visiting Sri Lanka in  January, that’s what we intend to do and we’ll follow up on Bob Carr’s announcements to see if he’s  actually capable of implementing them.

RICHARD COLBECK Well it’s really great to have Julie here in Tassie particularly on the West Coast  as Julie said our growth plan for Tasmania is an important part of our agenda for the next election.  Today we’re taking Julie to leading manufacturing business and rather than paying to close  manufacturing businesses down, which is what the Labor Party and the Greens are combined doing  at a State and a Federal level, we want to open businesses up and start to grow the economy instead  of spending taxpayers money to shut them down.

JOURNALIST And you are visiting two businesses today. Are they doing the right things to promote  employment?

RICHARD COLBECK Well we’ve got two quite innovative businesses and businesses that are  actually putting their own capital on the line to develop and grow here in Tasmania. Haulmax in  particular has taken some significant risks in developing a business building vehicles for the mining  industry and so that’s been quite a difficult process for them and we want to see that business flourish  and also move into export. Which as Julie said, we need to take away the red tape, the cost of  government to business with things like the Carbon Tax has to be removed.

And Southern Prospectors, again a business that’s built off emerging industry and has real  opportunities but we can’t be shackling industry and business with costs imposed by government that  make them uncompetitive and that’s one of the really important things that I’d like Julie to have a look  at today.

JOURNALIST And how hard is it for Tasmanians to be exporting given the freight situation at the  moment?

RICHARD COLBECK Well I think that you’ve hit the nail on the head with that particular issue. The  cost of shipping out of Tasmania has been impacted by the Carbon Tax. We saw a 16 per cent  increase in the cost of freight across Bass Straight at the start of July and further cost increases have  flowed since then. All of those additional impacts are really causing difficulty for Tasmanian business,  whether it be agriculture, whether it be manufacturing business or whether it be the forest industry, all  those things are adding up to make them less competitive on a global scale.

And we need to be reversing that, we need to be putting our businesses in a situation where they can  have access to market and opening up that access is very very important which makes Julie’s role as  Shadow Minister for Foreign Affairs and Trade very very important and understanding the issues here  locally. And so we need to be reversing those access issues and making that more possible but also  removing the costs that are being applied to business by poor government policy.

- Ends -



