





Interview with Paul Bongiorno - Meet the Press

24 June 2012



Topics: Asylum Seeker Boat Tragedy; Williams High Court Case; MRRT legal challenge; High Court  appointments; Julian Assange; James Ashby Federal Court case



PAUL BONGIORNO: Thanks Emma and it's welcome back to the program Attorney General Nicola  Roxon. Good morning Attorney.



NICOLA ROXON: Good morning.



PAUL BONGIORNO: Well who do you blame for the latest boat tragedy, the Opposition or the High  Court?



NICOLA ROXON: Well I don't think it's a matter of blame actually, I think it really underscores why  people should not set off on this incredibly dangerous passage. I blame, if anyone, the people  smugglers who are quite happy to take people's money with absolutely no guarantee of their  safety, quite apart from any outcome they might be seeking here in Australia.



But I do think it is time that Mr Abbott was prepared to talk to us about a compromise. I don't  think that we can keep seeing these sorts of human tragedies occurring and really the finger  pointing and point scoring is well past its use-by-date and I don't think anybody wants to see it  continue. We've put a compromise on the table. We've offered to work with the Opposition. It will  require them to move from their preferred position, it requires us to move from our preferred  position. But now it is time to do it. We do not want more of these tragedies.



PAUL BONGIORNO: Well has it got to the stage where maybe you have to go all the way with Mr  Abbott in terms of accepting a Nauru solution, accepting TPVs, see how that goes in the sense that  if that then fails, then maybe he would have to come to your preferred position.



NICOLA ROXON: Well I don't think that's called a compromise. We are the Government. We have  negotiated a proposal with Malaysia which we believe would work. We understand that Mr  Abbott, if he was the government, would prefer a solution for Nauru. We think we should come to  an arrangement that looks at offshore processing in either or both of those arrangements. So we  don't need to I think have a discussion that says we'll go the whole way that Mr Abbott is looking  for and it's time for him to actually take seriously that there is a human element which  unfortunately is resulting in serious tragedy...



PAUL BONGIORNO: [Interrupts] Well do you believe...



NICOLA ROXON: ...that we should deal with.



PAUL BONGIORNO: ...that maybe one of the first things the Prime Minister should do when she  gets back today is call Mr Abbott and invite him around to her office for a discussion?



NICOLA ROXON: Well we've been inviting the Liberal party to have a discussion on this for many  months, I think since just before Christmas. It's been done with the Immigration Minister and the  shadow. It's been done involving their Deputy Leader. Of course the offers have been made to Mr  Abbott. At no point have they indicated any preparedness to do that and I think that it's a bit rich -  I'd noticed Mr Abbott in a clip earlier on another issue saying, oh for once the Government should  be prepared to work in a bipartisan way. We've actually proposed that on many different issues  and at every time they have taken a sort of cheap political and negative approach and just  dismissed it out of hand. We can't afford to do that.



PAUL BONGIORNO: Well he is offering to cooperate with you on fixing up the school chaplaincies  program. Will you be discussing with him?



NICOLA ROXON: We will need to, yes. We - obviously I want to make this point clear - support the  program and support its funding and we are determined to find a way for it to continue. I think  that that will require the support of the Parliament and of course we will talk with the opposition  about that.



PAUL BONGIORNO: You might have more luck there because he too supports the program. But  there's been a question mark put over the GP Super Clinics. Are you confident about the funding of  those?



NICOLA ROXON: Well this decision only of course dealt with one program. The only program that  has had a direct impact on is the chaplains. But of course we need to be sensible and read through

what it is that the majority of the judges have decided and do a proper audit of all other programs  to see if any might need action to be taken. That's extensive and there are, as I've already  commented, a range of programs both those that have been introduced by the Howard  Government and even those that have been introduced long before that, that have been paid  without a legislative base.



So we will need to work through whether there are other programs and I think that we really need  to be careful. The Commonwealth, whether it's a Labor Government or a Liberal Government, has  always asserted a broad reach of ability and power. I think it would be a very dangerous step for  Mr Abbott or his team to want to pick apart, individual parts of that rather than see this is an  important decision for a Commonwealth parliament and a Commonwealth government to assert  the reach of their spending ability.



PAUL BONGIORNO: Well let's just briefly go to the mining tax. You had good advice from the  Solicitor-General on the Malaysian deal, you had good advice or the Howard Government would  have had good advice, as would you on the school chaplains. Have you got the same advice on the  mining tax?



NICOLA ROXON: Look, I think everybody wants to be able to sort of read the tea leaves about  decisions that the High Court might make. Because the High Court is the highest court in the  country, they are not bound by precedent. They can change their minds.



PAUL BONGIORNO: But are you worried that for example, Robert French, the Chief Justice, comes  from Western Australia - could that be a factor here?



NICOLA ROXON: I'm not worried about that. I have the utmost respect for the Chief Justice and for  the High Court. The point I was trying to make is even with good and strong legal advice,  Commonwealth Governments don't always win in the High Court. In fact, ironically on the day  after-



PAUL BONGIORNO: But are you more confident this time than you were with the other two?



NICOLA ROXON: Yes, look, we have taken very strong advice about this. We don't believe that  there is any reason to think that this challenge from Mr Forrest will be successful. We live in a  democracy where people can make challenges.



PAUL BONGIORNO: Are you going to think very hard about the next two appointments that you’ll  be making to the High Court?



NICOLA ROXON: Well we always would think very, very hard about it.



PAUL BONGIORNO: Does diversity mean you don't want a ‘black-letter’ lawyer?



NICOLA ROXON: No, diversity means actually that we want to consider and make sure that every  person with outstanding legal ability can be considered, and that people do not rule out “Oh, we  have got enough women now”, or “We’ve got enough people from a particular state", we just  want to make sure we’re considering the best of the best, and we'll look at that very carefully.



PAUL BONGIORNO: Time for a break. When we return with the panel, Australia accused of  abandoning Julian Assange.



Segment 2

PAUL BONGIORNO: You're on Meet the Press with Attorney General Nicola Roxon and it's  welcome to the panel Malcom Farr, news.com.au and Alison Carabine from ABC Radio National  Breakfast. Good morning to you both.



ALISON CARABINE: Good morning.



PAUL BONGIORNO: Well it seems Julian Assange is a hero to many but a villain as far as the  Government's concerned. The WikiLeaks founder broke his bail conditions and fled to the  sanctuary of the Embassy of Ecuador. Fairfax papers reported it was a letter from Nicola Roxon  that triggered the flight. His lawyer claimed it confirmed that the Government had abandoned her  client.



[Excerpt of interview]



ADAM BANDT: It is shameful that it's got to the stage that an Australian citizen feels that they have  to seek the protection of Ecuador because the Australian Government is not doing enough to  ensure their safety.



[End of excerpt]



ALISON CARABINE: Well Nicola Roxon, Julian Assange has sought refuge because he doesn't  believe Government assurances that the Americans are not preparing extradition. He says you're  playing word games. Do you understand his mistrust and anxiety?



NICOLA ROXON: Well I don't believe that Mr Assange is either a hero or a villain. I think that  there's a legitimate debate about WikiLeaks and the role of the media in being able to hold  governments to account and we, of course, when this all happened, did ask our Federal police to  look at whether any Australian law had been breached and we've now had that confirmed that  they think that that is unlikely.



But what Mr Assange and his supporters and I think Mr Bandt in that quote, seem to  misunderstand is that there is nothing that the Australian Government can currently do that it has  not been doing. He is not in Australia. He is not charged with an Australian offence. He is not  charged by the US. He is at the moment subject to a complaint in Sweden, which is a criminal  matter and we believe that Australians need to adhere to the criminal laws of other countries and  of course, our job is then to ensure that a proper and fair process is used.



No-one can allege that for the last two years when Mr Assange has been in the UK that a proper  legal process has not been undertaken. And that's what I find a little bit frustrating. That's not  abandoning an Australian. That's actually just saying people have to comply with other countries'  laws.



ALISON CARABINE: And Julian Assange obviously fears extradition to the United States. The  Americans were never going to telegraph their intentions. But if they do launch proceedings,  would the Australian Government intervene, especially since some American states still have the  death penalty?



NICOLA ROXON: Well Australia's had a very strong view of opposing the death penalty in all  circumstances. But I note, so does the UK and so does Sweden. I don't know the position of  Ecuador on the range of issues that might interact with the US. So I think that this is asking for us  to be ready to act if a whole range of other things happen in the future, which at this point in time,  the US is saying that they are not undertaking...



ALISON CARABINE: [Interrupts] But would you be ready to act if indeed they did try to extradite  him from Sweden or wherever.



NICOLA ROXON: Absolutely, I mean - and of course the normal situation is an Australian would be  in Australia, the extradition request would be made to the Government, a legal process is

undertaken and ultimately a decision is made by Government. So Australia has a lot of control and  ability to protect their citizens if they are being pursued for a political offence.



But he's not in Australia and that means that we have limited powers if an extradition request is  made between other countries. But we have certainly made representations to all countries that  might be involved, only recently have we known that Ecuador would be one that needs to be  considered in that discussion.



MALCOLM FARR: I don't know why I didn't pick that up earlier. [Laughter]



But look, Julian Assange has a quite substantial coterie of high-level legal and political advice  behind him. Has anybody from that coterie come to you or the Government and said this in detail -  not in general terms - in detail, is what we want you to do and you haven't done enough. Have  they put that in writing to you?



NICOLA ROXON: Well, Jennifer Robinson, who's been in the media, did meet with me when she  was last in Australia. I met with Geoffrey Robertson because we did a media event together for Q  & A and they've all made their views known. They also accept that there are limits to what an  Australian government can currently do - this was before the Ecuador development - but when a  UK process was under way and a dispute about a Swedish criminal offence was something that no-one asserts we have any ability to interfere with.



So I do think that people are mixing up a whole range of things, including what they fear might  happen and ultimately that's legitimate if people want to have those fears. But we have to act in a  reality and respond to what action is currently under way.



PAUL BONGIORNO: Well Attorney, the opposition on, going to another matter, is crying foul on  what it sees is your attack on James Ashby, the man accusing Peter Slipper of sexual harassment.  Here's Tony Abbott.



[Excerpt of interview]



TONY ABBOTT: This is just a desperate distraction from a desperate Government. The only issue  that counts here is did or did not Mr Slipper sexually harass a staff member.



[End of excerpt]



MALCOLM FARR: And just to continue the Tony Abbott line, he also said "I think it's remarkable to  have the Attorney General, the first law officer of the Commonwealth, out there effectively pre-judging a case."



You have pre-judged this, haven't you?



NICOLA ROXON: No, we haven't and I think what people misunderstand is that when matters are  before the courts, it's up to the courts to decide. It doesn't mean that the Attorney General is  neutered from having any discussion about what is alleged in Court.



I think to be honest, it's just completely outrageous for Mr Abbott, who organised a press  conference at quarter past nine on a Saturday morning for claims that no-one else had even been  told about, hadn't been filed in the Court until you know 4:30 - 5:00 PM or something the day  before. He was ready, he was commenting, he was calling for Mr Slipper to resign, no sign then  that the Court should be able to let - that the Court should be allowed to make a decision.



The comments I've made have all been about the position that the Commonwealth is taking. I've  always made clear that it is now up to the Court to decide. We allege this is an abusive process, we  allege the claim's being brought for different reasons but we also have always made clear that  sexual harassment is serious. It's the Labor Governments that have introduced these laws  everywhere around the country. So the Court will decide but it doesn't mean that I, as the  Attorney General, can't explain to the public what it is what we will be arguing in Court so that  people at least have both sides of what's being put to the Court and what they're going to be able  to decide upon.



ALISON CARABINE: Well James Ashby is now being accused of leaking his boss' diary to the Former  Coalition Minister, Mal Brough. Is that a sackable offense? He is a Commonwealth employee. Is it  time the Commonwealth sacked him?



NICOLA ROXON: Well I think that that is a question that ultimately has to be asked. One of the  things we did request in the Court is that material that's been provided to us just for dealing with  the harassment allegations should be able to be used by the Commonwealth for us to make a  decision, get advice and make a decision whether there is any breach of employment that has  occurred. The Commonwealth shouldn't just continue to pay tax-payers' money for people if they  don't comply with their employment contracts.



But again, we're not yet at that point. We have to make sure we have proper information available  to us and we will tread very carefully here because of course it is highly political and we actually

assert that Mr Ashby has been very political about this. So we want to be careful that we are  behaving appropriately in handling that complaint.



PAUL BONGIORNO: So, just very briefly, are you saying there that if it can be established that this  has happened, that he has leaked the diary of his employer, that that would lead to immediate  dismissal.



NICOLA ROXON: No I'm not saying that but certainly we would give consideration to his ongoing  employment.



PAUL BONGIORNO: Thank you very much for being with us today, Attorney General Nicola Roxon.



Media contact: Attorney-General’s office (02) 6277 7300

