Minister for Trade and Competitiveness  Minister Assisting the Prime Minister on Asian Century Policy  Minister for Tertiary Education, Skills, Science and Research

The Hon Dr Craig Emerson MP

ABC News Radio Subjects: Labor in Queensland, attacks on Tony Abbott

Transcript, E&OE (Errors and Ommissions Excepted)

6 August 2012

MARIUS BENSON: Let's go to federal politics now on ABC News Radio, before we go to the  100 metres event in the Olympics in four minutes or so, because federal politics is being  played out in the shadow of the Olympics this week as it was last week. But the Prime  Minister back from holidays today, and federal Parliament it's only a week away from  resumption in Canberra. And for the Government, with just a year to go until the election its  main problems of selling the carbon tax and stopping asylum-seekers arriving by boat remain  unresolved.

To look at those issues, I'm joined by the Trade Minister Craig Emerson. Craig Emerson,  good morning.

CRAIG EMERSON: Good morning to you too, Marius.

BENSON: Now, the Prime Minister was holidaying in your home state of Queensland, at Port  Douglas, over the past week. And there was an internal Labor Party poll leaked last week to  Mark Riley on the Seven Network which shows that you are hugely unpopular in Queensland  — no secret of that. Why so unpopular in your own state?

EMERSON: I wouldn't put any credibility on that particular poll, but I'll answer the broader  question. We're still dealing with the effects of putting a price on carbon — there's no doubt  about that. But you'll have seen from another poll that attitudes are changing; that people  have realised that the sky hasn't fallen to the earth — Tony Abbott's credibility has but the  sky's still up there at the same height. But we'll just keep working away, Marius, on the right  policies: the National Disability Insurance Scheme, which is opposed here in Queensland — at least the launch is by the Newman Government. And it's hard to describe the slash and  burn policies up here in Queensland that the Newman Government has embarked upon. So  that itself will have some effect on the electoral bearing of both political parties at the next  federal election, because it gives an insight into the sorts of policies that Tony Abbott would  implement after he, too, conducts an audit commission if he were to become Prime Minister.  And that's the basis of the current slash and burn policy here in Queensland.

BENSON: Let me ask you another question, Mr Emerson, but with the caveat that I may have  to interrupt you because …

EMERSON: Sure.

Page 1 of 2 ABC News Radio, transcript, 6 August 2012, Australian Minister for Trade and Comp...

26/06/2013 http://www.trademinister.gov.au/transcripts/2012/ce_tr_120806.html

BENSON: … we're preparing to cross to the Olympics.

EMERSON: I understand that.

BENSON: Just quickly, Steve Bracks, the former Tasmanian Premier, issued his  autobiography last week and some advice to Labor. He said 'spend a little less time attacking  Tony Abbott'. Do you think that's good advice?

EMERSON: Well, he's the former Victorian Premier — but, look, Tony Abbott is a danger to  Australian society and to the Australian economy. It is his colleagues who have described him  as innumerate and economically illiterate — that's Hewson and Costello — and we do have a  responsibility to inform people of what they might be getting into with an Abbott-led  government.

But on the positive side — and we are the positive party; we're not the party of no, no, no, no  and no — we have the National Disability Insurance Scheme, we're working through needs-based school funding models — again, opposed by the Coalition. And we are entitled to point  out that the Coalition opposes needs-based school funding, that they've got a $70 billion  black hole — whereas we've brought the budget back to surplus ahead of every major  advanced country.

So we've got a very positive agenda, but it is our obligation, and we accept it seriously, to  expose the dangers of Mr Abbott coming into an election later next year.

BENSON: Okay, I'll have to leave it there Craig Emerson because we have to go to the  Olympics to find out who's the fastest man in the world. But many thanks.

EMERSON: Okay. Thank you Marius. Bye now.

Media enquiries

Minister Emerson's Office: (02) 6277 7420

DFAT (Department of Foreign Affiars and Trade) Media Liaison: (02) 6261 1555

Page 2 of 2 ABC News Radio, transcript, 6 August 2012, Australian Minister for Trade and Comp...

26/06/2013 http://www.trademinister.gov.au/transcripts/2012/ce_tr_120806.html

