

Sky News, PM Agenda with Ashleigh Gillon

Wednesday, 28 March 2012

Subjects: US military presence in Australia; reports of a 12 year old suicide bomber in Afghanistan;

appointment of Ambassador to the Holy See; asylum seekers; Huawei

E&OE…

ASHLEIGH GILLON    Julie Bishop, thank you for your time. Should Australia be encouraging the

United States to increase its military presence here?

JULIE BISHOP    What is troubling about this recent announcement about increased US military

positioning in Australia is that the Australian public and the Australian Parliament learn about these

potential changes to our defence arrangements through the pages of The Washington Post. I read

about this proposal on a US intelligence website yesterday and so it’s simply not good enough for the

Government to let the Australian public know about potential defence changes through The

Washington Post. I have not had a briefing on this and I would like to have a full briefing on what the

Government is proposing and what is the strategic purpose of this increased US military engagement

in our region.

ASHLEIGH GILLON    Is your hometown of Perth and HMAS Stirling the ideal location for the

Americans to have an increase presence if we go down that path?

JULIE BISHOP    Well first we need to understand how this will be in Australia’s national interest,

what is its purpose, what is the strategic objective. And I would like a briefing to understand how this

will be in Australia’s national interest and how it fits in overall with Australia’s defence, strategic and

foreign policy objectives.

ASHLEIGH GILLON    Broadly though you would be supportive of closer US-Australia miliary ties?

JULIE BISHOP    Of course, the Coalition is a strong supporter of the US Alliance. We are supporters

of stronger and closer US military engagement in our region. But in relation to this particular

announcement that we learned about through the pages of The Washington Post we would like to

understand how this would fit in with Australia’s national interest and our strategic and foreign policy

objectives overall.

ASHLEIGH GILLON    Would you be comfortable with having a US nuclear powered attack

submarine in Perth?

JULIE BISHOP    Well these are the sorts of issues that I would seek a briefing on. I would need to

understand the full implications of that.

ASHLEIGH GILLON    Does it ring alarm bells for you though?

JULIE BISHOP    Well I am concerned that we learn about these kind of changes through The

Washington Post. The Government hasn’t been upfront with the Australian people as to what it is

proposing and what it has planned. Bring the Australian public and the Australian Parliament into its

confidence and let us understand what it is that the US is proposing and what the Australian

Government has agreed to.

ASHLEIGH GILLON    You have no doubt discussed the rotation of US Marines through the Northern

Territory with some of our regional neighbours, what has been the reaction to that move? Is it in your

sense viewed as a threat by China and perhaps Indonesia in particular?

JULIE BISHOP    I don’t believe that that particular engagement has caused the level of concern that

some have suggested. Yes I have been asked about it and I have explained the Australian-US

Alliance. It goes back some 60 years, and it is apparent that if the US was going to engage more in

the region it would want closer engagement with Australia. And so from that point of view we

supported the deployment of troops, it’s quite small in number, through Darwin and we see that as an

obvious extension of our alliance with the United States. But I would not want it to be seen as a

containment policy against China. We want to see China grow and expand as strong power in our

region and be a responsible stakeholder for peace and security in our region.

ASHLEIGH GILLON    We have all been shocked to hear about the attack in Afghanistan that left and

AusAID adviser in hospital, what does it say about progress being made in Afghanistan when we see

- and these are reports at this stage - but a 12 year old boy blowing himself up in a suicide attack?

JULIE BISHOP    Well first, our sympathies to our AusAID worker and we hope that he has a full

recovery, but secondly, if the reports are true that the Taliban has recruited a 12 year old as a suicide

bomber it is depraved beyond belief. What would go through the mind of a person to engage a 12

year old to act as a suicide bomber?

And if this report is true it indicates why the Taliban should not exert any influence over any

government anywhere in the world, and it should be condemned in the strongest possible terms.

ASHLEIGH GILLON    Would you like to see the Government come up with a more specific timeline

for withdrawing troops from Afghanistan? Right now it is this vague commitment for it to happen in or

before the year 2014?

JULIE BISHOP    We would need to take advice on this. Clearly Australia is there with a job to do and

we would want to ensure that Australia has completed its task. But we would also review very closely

the actions of our allies. If the United States were to withdraw then clearly Australia would need to

review its position. We have a job to do, we should complete that job and not stay there for a moment

longer than is needed.

ASHLEIGH GILLON   On another matter, Bob Carr is reportedly planning to appoint a close friend of

his, John McCarthy QC, he also has solid connections to the Labor Party, as Australians next

Ambassador to the Vatican. Is that an appointment you would support?

JULIE BISHOP    I am not criticising Mr McCarthy, I don’t know him, I understand he has close links

with the Catholic Church and I understand that he is a Labor Party stalwart, but he is a close friend of

Senator Carr and in those circumstances Senator Carr should explain why it is he has chosen Mr

McCarthy over and above other candidates.

So to ensure there is integrity in this process I would invite Senator Carr to say how many other

candidates were considered and what it was about Mr McCarthy’s skills and experience in

international diplomacy that made him a better choice than any other candidate. And I think for the

integrity of the process it is important that we do have that kind of transparency.

ASHLEIGH GILLON    Why does Australia even need an Ambassador to the Vatican? Couldn’t our

Ambassador to Italy encompass that role?

JULIE BISHOP    Should we be elected to government, I would undertake a review of all of our

diplomatic postings overseas to ensure that they represent Australia’s contemporary national interest.

Some of these positions have been in place for decades and can be seen through the prism of War

World Two or the Cold War. I think we should reassess where our diplomats should be working to

align it with Australia’s national interests in the 21st century.

ASHLEIGH GILLON    So do you think it would be likely you would pull the Ambassador, the specific

Ambassador to the Vatican, and what other countries might you be looking at closely?

JULIE BISHOP    We’ll look at all of our postings overseas. We have about 90, we have to make sure

they are in the countries and the places where they can be serving Australia’s national interest. And

so we will review them all.

ASHLEIGH GILLON    Just on asylum seeker policy, we did see comments recently from the

Indonesian Foreign Minister, he described the Coalition’s plans to turn asylum seeker boats around if

it is deemed safe to do so as impossible and not advisable. Can you go forward with that policy

without cooperation from the Indonesians?

JULIE BISHOP    We want to work closely with the Indonesian Government to help them dismantle

the people smuggling system that has been revitalised under the Labor Government in Australia.

When Labor changed and weakened the border protection laws that had been in place it sent a

message to the people smugglers that they could be back in business and we have seen the results

of that. Now we want to work closely, as we have done in the past, with the Indonesian Government

to help them dismantle the people smuggling trade. I understand they have concerns, we have

concerns, and we will work together with them quietly, behind the scenes as we have done in the

past.

ASHLEIGH GILLON    But can this policy actually work if the Indonesians don’t cooperate? And I

should point out that senior figures in the Navy have also expressed concerns that it won’t be safe for

Navy personnel to even carry out that duty?

JULIE BISHOP    We have made it quite clear that our policy is to turn back boats where it is safe to

do so and in cooperation with the Indonesian Government. These are in the main, Indonesian boats

crewed by Indonesians, under Indonesian flags. So we would work closely with Indonesia to ensure

that we can dismantle the people smuggling trade because it is so dangerous for the asylum seekers

who get aboard these boats, for the crew and also for the Australian defence personnel who have to

deal with it. So the idea is to stop it at its source and that is what we will be working with the

Indonesian Government to achieve.

ASHLEIGH GILLON    Where else could you send boats back to though if you don’t come up with

some agreement with the Indonesian Government? And it seems pretty unlikely considering the

Foreign Minister described it as impossible.

JULIE BISHOP    No well I disagree. I would expect the Foreign Minister to say that. But we will be

working behind the scenes, as we did in the past, and reach a level of cooperation as we did under

the Howard Government. We are not into megaphone diplomacy that seems to be the trademark of

the current Foreign Minister and the Gillard Government. We will work behind the scenes, quietly,

cooperatively, to ensure that we can help Indonesia dismantle the people smuggling trade.

ASHLEIGH GILLON    Was it the right decision by the Government to block out the Chinese

technology company Huawei from the NBN?

JULIE BISHOP    I haven’t been privy to any ASIO briefing but I must say that I have absolutely no

faith in Stephen Conroy’s ability to manage a tender. He has bungled or manipulated every tender he

has touched and so I have great concerns about the process.

Today the waters have been muddied even further with Senator Carr coming out and encouraging

Huawei to be an active participant in the building of commercial networks in Australia. So on the one

hand the Government has banned Huawei from building the National Broadband Network and on the

other hand Senator Carr is encouraging the company to become more active in Australia.

I think the Government is sending extremely mixed messages, and no wonder our friends and allies

and strategic partners and trading partners overseas are confused by the Government’s messages.

For example, the live cattle ban on Indonesia has resonated throughout the region. Now the

Government has banned a company from being considered to construct the NBN and yet the Foreign

Minister comes out today and says they are welcome in Australia and should be more active.

ASHLEIGH GILLON    Process concerns aside though, more broadly, do you have a problem with

that sort of company being involved in the NBN?

JULIE BISHOP    I am not privy to the ASIO briefings, so if the Government had national security

concerns then the Government is entitled to take them into account.

ASHLEIGH GILLON    You must have an opinion though on the security of those sort of Chinese

companies?

JULIE BISHOP    Well I don’t have any evidence or any information to suggest the Huawei is

anything other than a privately owned Chinese company that is becoming a global leader in

technology. I know that it is building National Broadband Network equivalents in many countries

overseas including the United Kingdom and I would imagine that it would have been through the

security checks and processes of those other countries.

The Australian Government is entitled to take a position, take advice, from ASIO. I don’t know what

that advice is but clearly it is sending a very confusing message if the Foreign Minister now says they

are welcome in Australia and should be encouraged to be more active in Australia.

So what are the facts? Is it a security risk or should it be encouraged to be more active in Australia?

ASHLEIGH GILLON    Julie Bishop, thank you for your time.

JULIE BISHOP    My pleasure.





