Australian Minister for Trade and Competitiveness The Hon Dr Craig Emerson MP

Sky Australian Agenda Subjects: illegal logging, competitiveness, investment in agriculture, FTA negotiations, asylum-seekers, live cattle trade.

Transcript, E&OE (Errors and Ommissions Excepted)

18 March 2012

PETER VAN ONSELEN: Dr Emerson, thanks for your company.

CRAIG EMERSON: Thanks Peter. G'day Paul.

VAN ONSELEN: Can I just come straight to issues of trade, and just ask you about a particular issue that we've got here. Now, Alan  Oxley, former WTO Ambassador, has written a pretty scathing commentary in relation to the Illegal Logging Prohibition Bill. He says  it's an example of green protectionism. Now, you've extensively canvassed the fact that you believe in freer trade. This is an example  of protection. Have you been lobbying against this internally in the Government?

EMERSON: No, you can be in favour of free trade but be against the importation of illegally logged products. You can be against the  importation of ivory, harvested by killing elephants; crocodile skins. That doesn't mean that you're not in favour of free trade, for  goodness' sake.

VAN ONSELEN: But it goes wider than that, doesn't it? I mean the WTO have made some soundings that they've got concerns  about this in relation to the rules that we have to follow, and then even some of our trading partners have also been pretty scathing.

EMERSON: No, that's not right. In fact this sort of legislation is already in place in the United States and the European Union. We  will make sure that it is consistent with our obligations under the World Trade Organization. So I don't see a problem there. I don't  think that the Australian community would support logging from illegal sources. Nor does, by the way, Indonesia or Malaysia or any  of the other countries in the region. And what we've said, Peter, is that we will work collaboratively with those countries to crack  down on illegal logging. They are doing the very best job that they can, but we will support them in those endeavours.

PAUL KELLY: Minister, you've now got an expanded portfolio brief, very much focused on Australian productivity. I'd like to ask you,  in terms of this expanded brief, what do you think the number one priority is to make Australia a more competitive and productive  nation.

EMERSON: It's really to work in those areas of the economy that don't enjoy the benefits of the mining boom, Paul. We are  competitive due to our location in mining and gas development, but less so with the very high dollar in some of the other parts of the  economy that are traded; obviously in manufacturing. I think agriculture's going to be a great opportunity for us in the 21st Century,  just so long as we can push away the xenophobia of Barnaby Joyce and others.

But the number one priority would be to remove impediments to businesses being competitive. I'm a great supporter of the  endeavour of a seamless national economy. In my previous portfolio responsibilities, I was in charge of doing that through the  Council of Australian Governments. And 16 of the 27 areas of regulatory reform have already been addressed, so we're pressing  ahead with that. And the Prime Minister has just announced recently a business reference group where she will meet with them just  before COAG meets to ensure that we not only complete those 27, but we identify and address other areas of business regulation  which, of course, can stifle productivity.

KELLY: Well I'd like to go straight to your vision for agriculture, which you've had quite a bit to say about. I'd like you to sketch this  out for us, but in particular I'd like to start by asking you to what extent do you think we can draw upon foreign capital from China and  from India in terms of establishing these new trade links with the agricultural sector?

EMERSON: Well these emerging economies, China, India, and other countries of the region, are going to be net lenders by probably  2025, so it'll be the emerging countries who are net lenders and the rich countries who are net borrowers. But Australia, Paul, as you  know, has always been a net borrower. We've used the savings of other countries to grow our economy. We should not stop doing  that. We should continue to do that. We can do it in a sensible way. It doesn't mean buying up the farm, but it sure does mean doing  what we can to reduce the vulnerability of Australian agriculture to drought. There may be opportunities to improve our transport and  distribution systems as well.

That's what I'm talking about. We've got seven billion people on earth - another two billion joining them by 2035 - and already one  billion people go to bed hungry every night. So there's this enormous food production task. And in addition, Paul, it's not just the  increased numbers, but the fact that we're seeing a big increase in middle classes in China, India and other parts of our Asian  region, and they will increasingly demand high protein foods like beef, like dairy, sheep meat - right up our alley.

KELLY: So do you see this as basically opening up a new vision for agricultural exports?

EMERSON: Well, I think we can look at it this way. Over the last quarter century we have established ourselves as a very reliable  supplier in meeting the Asian region's minerals and energy security needs. We can do the same thing with food, but that doesn't  mean diverting Australian food to those countries. It means contributing to the global food production task. Already 60 per cent of our

Page 1 of 4 Sky Australian Agenda, transcript, 18 March 2012, Australian Minister for Trade and ...

14/08/2012 http://www.trademinister.gov.au/transcripts/2012/ce_tr_120318.html

food production is exported, and the Australian Bureau of Agricultural Resource Economics and Sciences has said that we can enjoy  a 140 per cent increase in agricultural production over the next few decades, if we get this right. And that's what I'm interested in  doing: having an open mind to ideas rather than a closed mind, which is what the Coalition is saying. And Barnaby…

KELLY: But if you're talking here about the politics … I mean the politics are tricky aren't they? The idea of more …

EMERSON: They are, indeed.

KELLY:… Asian investment.

EMERSON: They are, indeed. And one thing I'll say about John Howard is that when there were big reforms during the '80s and  early 1990s, John Howard essentially lent bipartisan support to them. Whenever we start talking about a big reform - in this case for  our farmers - you can absolutely count on the Nationals to say 'this is terrible - the Chinese are going to come to get us; they're  going to own everything'. And we never get any support on this.

Now what is happening is that Senator Joyce and the Nationals are saying that they will drop the threshold for foreign investment  screening of private - private - investments, to $10 million to $20 million. Not only would that tear up three trade agreements that the  Howard Government negotiated, including with the United States of America, it would scuttle the trade deal that we are seeking to  finalise with Korea. That is a prime market for Australian beef producers and agricultural producers more generally.

And what does the Coalition think about that? They don't worry about that all. Because they see that they can harvest a few votes  out of this, not by educating or communicating to the Australian people - including farmers - the facts of the matter, but by creating  myths that there is an exponential increase in foreign ownership of agricultural land. Completely untrue. The change since two  thous…, sorry in 1984, has been a 0.2 percentage point increase.

VAN ONSELEN: Dr Emerson, I wanted to ask you about what progress had been made in relation to free trade with both China and  South Korea in the five or so years that the Labor Party have been in power. There's been a lot of talk about looking to achieve free  trade arrangements, but you've got a situation where the US have now got preferential beef treatment for their products going into  South Korea. Similarly, New Zealand have got preferential treatment in relation to dairy exports. Has Australia made any progress or  is that likely to come soon?

EMERSON: We are working hard on the last couple of remaining issues with Korea. They're quite tricky issues. They centre around  investor-state dispute settlement provisions, which we do not include in trade agreements any more, and also on the issue of beef:  that's with Korea. But we are not resting for one day. I deal with that on a daily basis.

With China it's probably more complex because the Chinese attitude to Australia is this: that New Zealand's a little farm and  Australia's a big farm, and the Agricultural Ministry is quite anxious about the prospect of Australian agricultural products entering  China. Well I think that over time, regardless of the pace of progress on a free trade agreement, countries like China, for the very  reasons we've already covered, will be saying 'well, we need more of your products'. And one thought I've had is that we encourage  our investors to set up processing facilities in China with Chinese partners so that they, the partners, are also advocates for lowering  trade barriers on imports of Australian agricultural products.

VAN ONSELEN: Dr Emerson, in terms of progress, though, it sounds like as a middle power we sort of fall into a difficult position.  The US can flex their muscle and get their way in relation to their beef exports and, as you mentioned, New Zealand in a sense are  much smaller and therefore can get some assistance in terms of their dairy. But Australia is a middle power: we neither have the  clout of the US nor the loss of concern as a competing interest that a smaller nation like New Zealand has.

EMERSON: Well we've got a lot of credibility as a free trading nation and the US started their negotiations with Korea in around  2005. We started our negotiations many years after that. The US agreement comes into force - came into force - on 15 March. With  New Zealand we've got a good relationship with them. The New Zealand minister has said that they're going like the clappers there,  and I'm not sure just how much extra they can produce over the next few years.

But I don't accept that we don't have clout. We were very instrumental in negotiating the ASEAN-Australian New Zealand Free Trade  Agreement, and I'm working hard again on the Malaysia free trade agreement. And hopefully that will come to fruition in the not-too-distant future. And, as you know Peter, we worked away in the World Trade Organization where Australia's taking a leading role.

Julia Gillard came up, with me, with the new pathways proposal which was endorsed unanimously at the Meeting of Ministers in  December last year and is now progressing, at least in respect of services trade liberalisation.

So we're always at the table. We're always taking the lead. But it's true, it's true that at the moment there is a very strong  protectionist sentiment around the world. So … but we're not going to relent. We're just going to keep seeking to open up other  countries' markets.

KELLY: Minister, your job is to make Australia competitive. We've got all the major business groups at the moment complaining  about a carbon price of $23 a tonne, which is way above the European price. Do you intend to do anything about this or will you just  sit on your hands as this new price comes into action?

EMERSON: We will press ahead with the $23 per tonne carbon price. And the business groups would know that for the most  emissions-intensive, trade-exposed industries there are very large offerings of free permits. In fact, almost 95 per cent of those  permits are free, which means for those most emissions-intensive trade-exposed industries the average carbon price is $1.30 per  tonne - not $23 per tonne, but $1.30 per tonne.

Now, what we need to do is put in place a sensible carbon pricing mechanism that will actually achieve behavioural change. And  calls to put it in at $5 or $10 would not achieve the stated objectives of reducing global … our emissions. Now, we're supposed to  have a bipartisan position on this with the Coalition, but of course we know the Coalition's not fair dinkum about it and talk about  costs - average households would pay $1,300 each extra as a result of the Coalition's ineffective system. We've got a market-based  system; the Coalition's has a centrally-planned system.

Page 2 of 4 Sky Australian Agenda, transcript, 18 March 2012, Australian Minister for Trade and ...

14/08/2012 http://www.trademinister.gov.au/transcripts/2012/ce_tr_120318.html

VAN ONSELEN: Dr Craig Emerson can I ask you: you're leading a delegation to Indonesia in the coming days. I know this isn't  exactly in your policy space, but there's the whole issue of asylum-seekers and the fact that there's a stand-off between the  Government and the Opposition. Look, it's probably not something in the context of your trip that you'll be raising with them, but what  are your thoughts on this stand-off that we're at?

EMERSON: Well, Mr Abbott said even after Marty Natalegawa, the Foreign Minister from Indonesia, said it's impossible for them to  accept that Mr Abbott, if he were the Prime Minister, could just tow boats back into Indonesian waters. Mr Abbott and others have  been saying it's important to have a good relationship with Indonesia; well that's a terrible way of striking up a relationship with  another country. We need to work with our neighbours in Indonesia for a regional solution - and that's exactly what - exactly what - the Indonesians have been saying.

So we support that approach. But I'm just appalled, to be honest Peter, with the position of the Coalition on this. We have legislation  in the Parliament which would allow the Government of the day to choose a place where it believes offshore processing should  occur. And I don't know how Coalition members can live with themselves when they think that it's smart politics to see little kids dying  at sea.

VAN ONSELEN: What about …

EMERSON: And that's what's happening.

VAN ONSELEN: What about just the argument that they would say that Nauru worked last time? Why won't the Government just  embrace Nauru?

EMERSON: They know the answer to that, and I think you do: and that is the advice that we've got from the Immigration  Department, which knows a few things about this, is that Nauru is no solution any more. But what we're saying is that through this  legislation they can pick Nauru - they can pick it. What we're saying is that we want the right as a sovereign government to work out  the offshore processing location - in our case Malaysia, with whom we have an agreement - and the Coalition says, 'oh no, there's  human rights issues in Malaysia, but it's all right to have offshore processing in Somalia because they've signed the UN Refugee  Convention'.

So let's not have this crap from the Coalition that they care about the welfare of asylum-seekers and are worried about Malaysia but  not worried about Somalia. The truth is they are in a morally repugnant situation where the Coalition is saying that they will tolerate  the death at sea of asylum-seekers, including little children, because they think it's smart politics. I think it's disgraceful; I think it's  absolutely disgraceful and I don't know how they can look at themselves in the mirror and live with themselves.

VAN ONSELEN: Okay Dr Craig Emerson, just one final question before we let you go. It's a little bit of a red herring but I've wanted  to ask you this for a while. Back when Senator Ludwig was copping a fair bit of criticism over his handling of the live exports ban to  Indonesia: when it was put in place after that ABC story on Four Corners, you're the Trade Minister - you know how important trade  is - did you speak up in Cabinet or internally in the Labor Party to express your concern about the fact that this ban was put in place  and what it would do to the trade industry in that sector?

EMERSON: I'm going to grievously disappoint you and not reveal what I discussed in the Cabinet room. I did speak with my  counterpart - Mari Pangestu was the Trade Minister at the time. We were in dialogue on that. We did make a decision to suspend  the live cattle trade. I'll say this to you: I supported that decision. Now, I'm not saying that as a leak out of Cabinet; I'm saying that I'm  a member of the Cabinet that supported the suspension. And within a couple of months we had that whole trade on a sustainable  basis, where animal welfare considerations are properly taken into account.

It's now stable and we work very closely with our counterparts. I'm a good friend with Gita Wirjawan, who is the Trade Minister in  Indonesia, and we've pledged to work together not only on this issue but on boosting our trade relationship with each other's country.  We do believe, we do believe it's underdone. This is a country of 240 million-plus people growing at 5 per cent per annum and we're  going to invest a hell of a lot more, not only into diplomacy but in the economic relationship between Australia and Indonesia.

KELLY: Well just on that point Minister, seeing you've raised it, did you follow departmental advice on the live cattle trade issue or  did you ignore it or defy it?

EMERSON: Again, I'm not going to tell you what happened in the Cabinet room. I said that I supported the suspension and that's the  truth of it …

VAN ONSELEN: But was that in line with departmental advice?

EMERSON: I'm just not at liberty to say that. I mean I'd love to tell you the answer to it but I'm not going to divulge Cabinet  confidentiality - or break cabinet confidentiality - on your program. Suffice to say that we restored that to a sustainable basis, a  sustainable basis, and we have therefore the basis of an ongoing productive and rewarding trade in live cattle, but one which  protects the welfare of those cattle. I think that that's basically what Australians would want to see achieved, and that's what we are  achieving.

VAN ONSELEN: All right Dr Craig Emerson. Whilst I'm disappointed you wouldn't violate Cabinet confidentiality, I guess I'm not  surprised. We appreciate you joining us on Australian Agenda. Thanks for your company.

EMERSON: Rightio. Thanks.

Media enquiries

Minister Emerson's Office: (02) 6277 7420

DFAT (Department of Foreign Affiars and Trade) Media Liaison: (02) 6261 1555

Page 3 of 4 Sky Australian Agenda, transcript, 18 March 2012, Australian Minister for Trade and ...

14/08/2012 http://www.trademinister.gov.au/transcripts/2012/ce_tr_120318.html

Page 4 of 4 Sky Australian Agenda, transcript, 18 March 2012, Australian Minister for Trade and ...

14/08/2012 http://www.trademinister.gov.au/transcripts/2012/ce_tr_120318.html

