Minister for Trade and Competitiveness  Minister Assisting the Prime Minister on Asian Century Policy  Minister for Tertiary Education, Skills, Science and Research

The Hon Dr Craig Emerson MP

2CC Breakfast Subjects: foreign aid, budget surplus.

Transcript, E&OE (Errors and Ommissions Excepted)

19 December 2012

MARK PARTON: For the final time of the year we can take you to the Federal Trade Minister,  Dr Craig Emerson, who joins us right now. G’day.

CRAIG EMERSON: G’day, Parto.

PARTON: It was a big effort from you to come on in this last week. Most of my regulars have  fallen by the wayside, they’ve packed up and gone away, but you’re still there.

EMERSON: Only the strong, as Peter Garrett used to sing.

PARTON: Now we’ve got to talk about this electoral deception that’s gone on with foreign aid  because, I’m sorry, you can’t actually donate money to yourself. I just think it would have  been better if the government could have been honest and said ‘look, for a number of  reasons, border security’s been stuffed up a bit. We’ve got asylum seekers arriving left, right  and centre; we’ve got to pay for it somehow; we’ve decided to make cuts to foreign aid and  pay for it.’ Wouldn’t it have been better to just be honest?

EMERSON: Well, that’d be a good case if it was right, Parto, but my understanding is that we  revealed this. It’s something that needed to be done because it’s no revelation at Christmas  for me to say that taxpayers’ dollars are not without limit. We hear arguments from refugee  advocates, which I respect, which say that these are poor, wretched people; they come to  Australia because they are fleeing persecution. So if people from poor countries come to  Australia they’re not eligible for assistance, but if they still in their own countries they are  eligible for assistance? This is totally consistent with OECD guidelines; it’s the practice in  many developed countries; and it’s not a secret.

PARTON: Is it? I’d love to go through the fine… I mean, obviously if Bob Carr says it is, I’m  sure it is, otherwise it would have been picked up on, but it must be sort of not quite in the  spirit of those rules.

EMERSON: Well, these are poor people and they are getting assistance. The assistance  goes to the people. If there are people in refugee camps in Southern Sudan or on either side  of Burma and they get assistance, they’re eligible too. And bear in mind this is not out of a  declining aid budget: the aid budget now is more than $5 billion. I think that’s up something  like $2 billion since this government came to office. So I see Alexander Downer is on  television saying ‘more foreign aid, more foreign aid’. I wonder why he didn’t think of that

Page 1 of 3 2CC Breakfast, transcript, 19 December 2012, Australian Minister for Trade and Com...

25/06/2013 http://www.trademinister.gov.au/transcripts/2012/ce_tr_121219_2cc.html

when the Coalition was in government. They’re actually very good at demanding extra  spending when they’re not in government and then if they ever get into government, they cut  it.

PARTON: I note though that we’re the third-largest recipient now of our own foreign aid, so  we’re donating the money to ourselves.

EMERSON: I reckon that’s a cheap line. We are not the recipients of our own foreign aid,  Parto, I’ve gotta break it to you: you’re not going to be eligible for this assistance. The people  who are eligible for the assistance are those people who are described by aid programs and  refugee advocates as poor, wretched people fleeing persecution. If they are poor and they  are from overseas, that is they are foreigners and they’re from poor countries, why would that  not qualify them for assistance?

PARTON: Do you reckon deep inside his fiscal soul, do you think that Wayne Swan is  wishing that he’d never promised that we’d get a surplus?

EMERSON: No, not at all. It’s no coincidence that the Reserve Bank has cut its cash rate  since this government came to office from 6¾ per cent to 3 per cent, which saves a  household with a mortgage of $300,000, $5,000 a year. I think people would think that’s a  pretty good thing and that is not unrelated to the commitment of the government to return the  budget to surplus because it allows the Reserve Bank to do its work through monetary policy,  cut interest rates. And a good part — not all, unfortunately — but a good part of that then  flows on to households. It also means good news for retailers and at Christmas, I think that’s  going to be quite important that we get a lift in consumption because we know retail is very  labour intensive, lots of jobs there; and the other area Parto, and I know Canberrans will be  interested in this, is housing. If you cut mortgage interest rates, you get extra demand for  housing. Again, lots of jobs wrapped up in housing.

PARTON: Emmo, of all the regular guests that come on this program, you’re the one that I  receive the most emails and messages for, so they love you out there. I want you to finish up  with a Christmas message to Canberrans.

EMERSON: My Christmas message to Canberrans is about the kids. Christmas is just a  marvellous, magic time for children. They look forward to it with such excitement and for those  who are of a religious bent; to celebrate the birth of Jesus is just a wonderful thing. So I wish  all Canberrans a very happy Christmas, cuddle your kids and have a joyous new year.

PARTON: Thank you for being a regular guest on this program, I hope we can do more of it  next year.

EMERSON: We will. Thanks, Parto.

Media enquiries

Minister Emerson's Office: (02) 6277 7420

DFAT (Department of Foreign Affiars and Trade) Media Liaison: (02) 6261 1555

Page 2 of 3 2CC Breakfast, transcript, 19 December 2012, Australian Minister for Trade and Com...

25/06/2013 http://www.trademinister.gov.au/transcripts/2012/ce_tr_121219_2cc.html

Page 3 of 3 2CC Breakfast, transcript, 19 December 2012, Australian Minister for Trade and Com...

25/06/2013 http://www.trademinister.gov.au/transcripts/2012/ce_tr_121219_2cc.html

