



CHRIS BOWEN MP

MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP

*TRANSCRIPT*

INTERVIEW WITH KIERAN GILBERT, SKY NEWS PM AGENDA

TUESDAY, 30 OCTOBER 2012



SUBJECTS: Changes to the Migration Act, Nauru.

KIERAN GILBERT: Immigration Minister, Chris Bowen, thank you very much for your time.

CHRIS BOWEN: Thank you, Kieran.

GILBERT: The move to excise the entire Australian mainland was put to caucus today; it  passed caucus. When will that be put to the Parliament?

BOWEN: Tomorrow I’ll introduce the legislation and what this does is remove what would  be a very perverse incentive for people to continue on boats to try and miss Christmas  Island or Ashmore Reef to try and make the mainland to stop them being processed in  another country.

Now, we’re trying to save people’s lives here so it has no logical basis to say, ‘Look, if you  make it to Christmas Island or Ashmore Reef, you run the risk of being transferred to Nauru  or PNG, but if you make it to the Australian mainland you’ll be okay, you can’t be processed  offshore.’

It would be a perverse incentive in place and so that’s why we’re introducing this legislation  which is of course a recommendation of the Houston Panel.

GILBERT: But how many boats have arrived on the Australian mainland? It’s only barely a  handful, isn’t it? How many over the last decade?

BOWEN: Well, of course until recently there’s been little incentive to try and make it to the  mainland because the arrangements have been broadly similar. There have been some  differences, but not the prospect of being transferred to a different country. We have seen  around 1,500 people either get close to the mainland or make the mainland over the past  four or so years. About 200 have actually not been regarded as what’s called ‘offshore entry  people’ under the Immigration Act.



But what you can’t have is a situation where people smugglers would say, ‘Well, before it  didn’t really matter, all we needed to do was get you to Christmas Island. We’re going to  stay on the boat another couple of days and we’ll get you to the Australian mainland.’ You  know, that’s three more days of risk, of tragedy, of people drowning at sea and we’re just  not prepared to take that risk.

GILBERT: But you would concede, though, that this is a very small percentage of the  overall problem at the moment, isn’t it? What do you say to suggestions that this is just  posturing by the Government to look tough?

BOWEN: Well, that’s just ridiculous. I mean, we are implementing the recommendation of  an expert panel and we are removing any opportunity for people smugglers to go out there  and spin and say, ‘It’s okay, I can get you to the mainland so you won’t be sent to Nauru or  PNG.’ And we know -

GILBERT: But when you look at the vast majority of arrivals, this is only a small  percentage.

BOWEN: Absolutely it is and I’ve never said otherwise, Kieran, never suggested otherwise.  But we do need to close down any opportunity for people smugglers to spin and tell their  lies as I know they do.

GILBERT: So this isn’t just more symbolic than the reality, a symbolic message to the  would-be asylum seekers that, ‘Don’t try Australia because we’re even excising the  mainland’?

BOWEN: Absolutely not. No, no, it’s a very substantial message to say it doesn’t matter  what part of Australia you get to, you’ll be subject to processing overseas. It’s a significant  message, yes. Nobody’s pretending that the majority of asylum seekers have made it to the  Australian mainland; of course they haven’t.

But we saw under the Howard Government people attempting to get to the mainland and I  would be concerned if we didn’t close down this potential difference of approach, you would  see people smugglers trying to change their behaviour, keeping people on boats for longer  to try and get to the mainland. This is the only responsible thing to do to save lives.

GILBERT: But there are concerns - there are concerns in your Caucus, we’ve been advised  today by the Caucus spokesman that there were two questions to you: individual MPs with  concerns as to whether or not this move is within international guidelines. It might have  been proposed by Angus Houston, but what was your message to them? Is it within  international guidelines?

BOWEN: Yes, yes it is. This is completely consistent with our international obligations,  particularly our signatory - signature to the Refugee Convention; completely consistent. Our  advice is very clear on that.



Now, of course, people have questions, but, I’ve got to say Kieran, I’ve been involved in a  few robust Caucus debates over the years. While I’m not going to go into details this  wouldn’t count as one of them.

GILBERT: But there are some on the Left who aren’t happy -



BOWEN: Look -

GILBERT: - with yet another tough measure in this area?

BOWEN: You’ve always - this is a difficult issue, you’ll always find people with reservations,  but the Caucus was very, very clear in their support of my position today.

GILBERT: You would’ve found it hard to believe though, in the years when the Howard  Government tried to implement the very same policy, they were precluded from doing that  by Labor and some of their own moderates: Judi Moylan, Russell Broadbent, Petro Georgiou  and others; and now Labor’s come full-circle and implementing the Howard Government  policy.

BOWEN: Well this just shows what we’re prepared to do, at our own political cost in some  instances, to try and get this issue fixed, to save lives and get a fairer system for bringing  asylum seekers to Australia. This is part of an entirely integrated package, all the  recommendations of the Houston Panel: the increase in the refugee intake to 20,000, I  mean, something which many people in the progressive side of politics have been calling for  for years, we’ve done.   Just last week, from refugee camps in Lebanon, I announced the breakdown of that 20,000,  the allocation of the places, to give people, in very difficult circumstances around the world,  a chance of resettlement in Australia: people who’ve been in refugee camps for years,  people who’ve been in refugee camps, in some instances, for thirty years waiting for  resettlement.

GILBERT: Would you expect support from the Coalition on this excision?

BOWEN: I would - I would expect support from the Coalition on this matter.

GILBERT: Have you had any indication along those lines?

BOWEN: I had an initial discussion with Mr Morrison some time ago, but I wouldn’t  overstate the level of detail there, it was an initial discussion. But clearly, the first process  was for me, as is normal, to take this matter through the Caucus to get Caucus approval for  this, then of course we provide briefings to anybody interested, including the Opposition.

GILBERT: On another issue, Nauruan’s - this is in The Australian newspaper today -  recruited to work at the detention centre, the reopened detention centre, are being paid as  little as $4 an hour.

Is that appropriate?

BOWEN: Well let’s be clear about this: this has been, frankly, of substantial benefit to the  Nauruan people and economy. This is a small island, population under 10,000,  unemployment very high. I met some Nauruan’s employed at our centre and I asked them,  ‘How long’s it been since you had a job?’, and they looked at me a bit blankly because it was  the first job they’d ever had. You know, this is a very substantial boost to the Nauruan  economy -

GILBERT:  But the paper points out that the Prime Minister just recently had a crack at  Gina Rinehart for talking about those in Africa working for $2 a day. $4 an hour is not much  better is it?

BOWEN: Well our requirement of our contractors, including Transfield Services, is that they  comply with existing conditions and standards, and I understand they’re doing that. Now  yes, wages on Nauru are lower than the wages in Australia, I’ve seen somebody from Nauru  pointing out that public servants in Nauru get paid a lower amount of money.   We require Transfield Services and our other contractors to meet local standards and  conditions, but I will say this: we’ve employed 70 locals on the Nauru Detention Facility - on  the facility at Nauru. That’s just 70 direct employees, then you’ve got all the flow-on impacts  for the Nauruan economy, and giving people a chance to get work and to get experience  working in a different environment and it’s been a good thing for Nauru.

GIBLERT: What’s the latest you’ve got on the protests? We’ve seen claims of people taking  on - attempted suicide, other cases of self-harm: how prevalent is that?

BOWEN: Well we have had some instances of self-harm on Nauru. As we’ve said, we have  seen some protests - peaceful protests by and large. These are people in a very difficult  circumstance, I’ve been and spoken to them about their circumstances, I’ve faced them and

said, you know, this is the situation and this is why Australia is implementing this policy -

GILBERT: Do we just have to get used to it: suicide attempts, self-harm, that’s the norm?

BOWEN: They would much rather be processed in Australia, of course they would, but this  is all necessary in order to avoid - not one or two people, you know, drowning at sea - but  to avoid mass tragedies like we’ve seen. Now, we’ve had -

GILBERT: Self-harm, suicide attempts, that’s just the norm?

BOWEN: Of course that’s not - of course we do everything we can to assist: we’ve  provided substantial mental health support, we have professionals on the Island, on Nauru,  providing that assistance; but of course we’re in a difficult situation, they’re in a difficult  situation, and you do get tensions, and you do get people who are upset about them having  paid money to a people smuggler to get to Australia and then not getting what they paid  for.   And it is a message which I would recognise is a tough one to say that we’re implementing  the ‘no advantage’ test and that people won’t receive a visa until they would’ve if they’d  waited in a detention facility or a camp somewhere else in the world. There are 43 million  displaced people in very difficult circumstances around the world, all of whom, I would  suggest, would love the chance of resettlement in Australia.

GILBERT: And finally I want to ask you as a Cabinet Minister, your view on this case in  South Australia where Don Farrell, a senator, stood aside from the number one spot on that  Senate ticket to allow Penny Wong to take the number one spot. Don Farrell, a former union  boss and powerbroker in South Australia. It’s absurd that it got to this situation, isn’t it?  Labor needs to look at the way it deals with these things, hasn’t it? One of the best  performers, like Penny Wong, relegated to number two, albeit now in the number one spot.

BOWEN: Well Don Farrell’s done the right thing here, he should be congratulated for it:  he’s recognised the broader interests of the Party would be best served by having one of  our best communicators and a senior Cabinet Minister in the number one spot. We do have

pre-selection issues from time-to-time, whether it be in South Australia or New South Wales,  and I’ve got some things on the public record I’ve said before about party reform. But the  important thing here is that Don Farrell has, I think, put the party first. I’m confident that  he’d be elected as a senator from the number two spot, but it is important and appropriate  that our very senior Cabinet colleague Penny Wong lead the Senate ticket in South Australia.

GILBERT: Chris Bowen, thanks for your time.

BOWEN: Thanks mate, cheers.

Ends

