Chris Bowen MPMinister for Immigration and Citizenship  Chris Bowen MP

Minister for Immigration and Citizenship

Boat arrivals, moving asylum seeker children  into community-based accomodation, security  assessments, bridging visas, homestay program,  Craig Thomson  Tuesday, 22 May 2012

Interview with Fran Kelly, ABC Radio National Breakfast

Fran Kelly: Immigration Minister, Chris Bowen, is in our Parliament House studios.  Minister, welcome to Breakfast.

Chris Bowen: Good to be back, Fran. Good morning.

Kelly: Minister, 1000 asylum seekers arriving by boat this month; that's double  what you and your department forecast. This is outstripping your expectations and  your policy capacity.

Bowen: Well, it's not outstripping our policy capacity, Fran. But what it is, is an  indication of what I said when the Opposition said they would oppose our  legislation, that we would see more arrivals. Now, we have seen months with less  than 450: March was a low month. And we have seen months with more than 450.  We adjust that as we go.

But what we have is clearly a situation and as you said, last time there was 1000 a  month the Opposition and the government of the day passed legislation. Kim  Beazley responded to John Howard's request and said, 'Yes, I'll vote for that  legislation.' So we are asking no more of Tony Abbott than John Howard asked Kim  Beazley, and Kim Beazley agreed.

Kelly: Kim Beazley agreed. The Opposition doesn't agree that your policy is a good  policy. And just to stick with the implications of this, at least on the Budget, I mean,  in Senate Estimates yesterday the Acting Secretary of the Immigration Department,  Martin Bowles, said the department's budget is based on estimates of around 450  asylum seekers arriving each month.

Bowen: Arrivals is part of the equation, Fran, it's part of the many things which get  put into the computer in terms of -

Kelly: But clearly, it's going to blow out on arrivals, that's my point.

Bowen: Well, Fran, a number of factors go to determining the irregular maritime  arrivals budget, a number of factors. Arrivals is one; the 450 figure is based on  historical averages. Yes, unsurprisingly, we've seen a large increase in arrivals, as I  said there would be if this legislation did not pass the Parliament.

Kelly: So these Budget estimates are going to blow out?

Bowen: Well, no, Fran.

Kelly: They're estimated on 5400 arrivals this year. We're already at 3268.

Bowen: Well, Fran, you're making an assertion. I'm running you through

Kelly: Isn't it fair enough?

Bowen: No, I'm running you through how the figures are arrived at. I'm also running  you through the fact that the arrival numbers is one of many equations, including  how people are processed or where they're accommodated, etcetera, which goes  into determining the budget.

Kelly: Let's go to some of those areas now, because Senate Estimates also heard  yesterday there are 158 unaccompanied minors currently in detention centres. Why  are they still there when your policy is that minors not be held in detention?

Bowen: Well, let's go through it, Fran. We have 281 minors in detention as at  Friday.

Kelly: Two hundred and eighty-one?

Bowen: Two hundred and eighty-one. You referred to the unaccompanied minors  figure.

Kelly: Sorry about that.

Bowen: That's okay, but in the interest of full disclosure I'm giving you the total  number of minors in detention as at Friday. Now, we move children into the  community, so every unaccompanied minor who arrived in Australia who's eligible  for release who arrived before 22 February this year is in the community. Every  accompanied child who arrived before 11 February is in the community. So what we  do is we source the accommodation, we source the appropriate care arrangements,  and we move people into the community. And when you have a big increase in  arrivals, of course that means that that can take longer. But when you've got  children arriving in February and being in the community by May, I think that paints  a very different picture than, say, the Greens would like to paint, and a more  accurate picture.

You said that we've released 2000 people into the community under this program.  In fact, we've released 4000 people into the community under this program. There's  1966 people currently in the community under this program, of whom 635 are  children. So 635 children in the community, 281 in detention, which is 71 per cent.  We said we wanted to get the majority of children into the community; we've done  that. It's an ambitious program. I'm very pleased with the progress we've made. Of  course, you'd always like to do it quicker, but as I've said to you before, Fran, you  don't drop kids at Central Station and say, 'There you go, you're on your way.' You  make sure you have the appropriate arrangements in place, that's what we do.

Kelly: Certainly, and I want to come back to that in a moment and find out a little  more about how people are held in community detention and how that's  proceeding.

But just with the statement that minors are moving out quickly, not all minors are  moving out. We've heard that there is a problem with some of the ASIO security  assessments. I think six minors at least still held in detention because of hold ups  with those ASIO assessments. The Greens want to change that, they want to give  asylum seekers the right to appeal against a negative ASIO finding. Should asylum  seekers have that right?

Bowen: Well, Fran, let's spend a couple of minutes on this, because it is a very  important area and it's complex. Now, firstly, these ASIO assessments are not  made lightly. ASIO does not lightly issue an adverse security assessment. And I  see lots of speculation around this saying, well, all you need to do is sympathise  and then you get an adverse ASIO assessment. I've got to tell you, a lot of that  commentary is misguided.

Kelly: You've read these assessments and some of these people are bad people?

Bowen: I've read the assessments and these assessments are not made lightly,  Fran. This is a process which ASIO takes very seriously and when ASIO says to a  government and I would suggest any responsible minister, if ASIO says, 'We  believe this person represents a threat to Australia's national security', that minister  would act accordingly.

Now, in relation to appeal, we said last November that there was a case for  examining this. The Attorney-General, Nicola Roxon, has the lead on that. She's  working through what is a complex area. But it's not as simple as just saying  everybody should have the right to an automatic appeal. There are issues to be  worked through as to how that would work in terms of whether that would be held in  camera, what protections there would be for ASIO sources, etcetera. So there's a  lot of complexities, including legal complexities, that the Attorney-General is  working through.

Kelly: Not doubting complexities and also not doubting your concern or your  suggestion that a minister would not take an ASIO recommendation, assessment  lightly, but ASIO does not necessarily get everything right all the time, I guess, and  time and time again we hear from asylum seekers who say they have no  understanding of why they would receive a negative security assessment. Is it fair  that they get some kind of log of claims, so they can answer that?

Bowen: Well, Fran, they're the issues that need to be worked through and that's  what the Attorney-General is doing. So if you like, there's three approaches on this.  The Greens, who just say automatically, you know, this is easy, this should happen.  The Liberals, who say this should not happen, the Liberals are opposed to any  appeal mechanisms for ASIO assessments. And there's us, taking what I think is  the sensible and considered way forward, to say yes, there is a case for examining  this, but we need to get it right and that's what we're doing.

Kelly: Can I ask you about a specific case, not to do with asylum seekers, but a  young boy called Ali Jasmin. He was jailed after being found to be not a minor, an  adult, that was using the wrist x-ray test the Federal Police use; he was charged  with crewing an asylum seeker boat into Australian waters. He was sentenced to  five years' jail in a maximum security adult prison. We now know he was 13 when  he was locked up. How can you guard against this happening again? What's a  country like Australia doing jailing 13-year-olds?

Bowen: Well, Fran, I think the Attorney-General has been very active here in  dealing with this. Of course, these are matters for the courts. The Attorney-General's reviewed a number of cases. I should say very clearly, and I think again  there's often misreporting and speculation - I'm not saying you're misreporting - but  there is often generally misreporting about wrist x-rays. My department has not  used wrist x-rays and haven't for some years.

Kelly: The Federal Police do, don't they?

Bowen: Well, no, the Federal Police now refers us to do the age determination and  we don't use wrist x-rays and haven't for several years. Of course, it's always  difficult to establish. This is a big challenge, Fran. It's difficult for us to establish  ages of not crew, but asylum seekers. You know, people often claim to be minors  and very often it's established they're not minors after an exhaustive process. So  this is a complex area, but I think Nicola Roxon has dealt with it appropriately and  reviewed several cases and the appropriate action's been taken.

Kelly: You're listening to RN Breakfast. Our guest this morning is the Immigration  Minister, Chris Bowen. It's 8.15 am on Breakfast.

Minister, back to the issue of community detention; there's roughly 2000 people  currently held there. You say there's been 4000 people moving out at a quick rate.  When people are in community detention do they have complete freedom of  movement? Can they work? What is the situation?

Bowen: Well Fran there's two types of community releases. We've been talking  about community detention so far. Now this is what we use for families and children  and some vulnerable adults who are obviously having some difficulties. So those  people are accommodated, usually by the Red Cross, and we source the  accommodation and they get some support.

Then, in addition to that, we also have bridging visas which are designed for adults  who are more able to look after themselves. A bridging visa holder, we do not  provide the accommodation for; although they can, of course, go through the  homestay program - which I'm happy to talk to you about; but they do have work  rights, so they can go and work and some have. There's stories of some of them  going up and looking for work in abattoirs et cetera, but people in community  detention don't have work rights but they have more intensive support.

Kelly: And in terms of the homestay program that was set-up just within the last  month; we've heard the first few asylum seekers have moved in to homes. What's  the level of interest and is this going to save the government money - some of that  money that's being spent on the increased number of people arriving?

Bowen: Well, Fran this is an interesting thing and, again, I think Frankly the  Opposition has said some pretty disgusting things about the homestay program and  they need to reflect on some of the things they've said.

Homestay is a long existing program which provides for people with a spare room  or with the will to do it, to provide accommodation to international students. Now,  Homestay approached the government and said, 'look you're releasing people on  Bridging visas which means they have to find their own accommodation - can we  supply some of that accommodation'? We said, 'Well, of course that's a sensible

thing to do - for you to be able to be put in touch with people who are looking for  somewhere to stay'.

So we put the appropriate measures in place. There has been a lot of interest. I  think there's been a couple of thousand expressions of interest. This is just like the  bridging visa program. So, a person on a bridging visa has to go and find their own  accommodation and they'll find it in a variety of ways: some will go and live together  in a house, some will go and rent a flat, others will go through the homestay  program. I think it's a perfectly appropriate thing to do.

Kelly: So all these different versions of people - asylum seekers - who arrive here  by boat, now living in the community; is that the way of the future because you can't  get your Malaysia solution through, there is no offshore processing which is your  preferred policy and the Opposition's preferred policy - that can't get through the  Parliament - onshore processing is what we have; and even though increased  numbers, we're just going to see more and more of these people living in  communities. Is that what Australians are now accepting and preparing for?

Bowen: Fran you're right to say that our position is offshore processing. I think it is  the better system. It enables for a more orderly process. It would enable us, in my  view, to bring more refugees to Australia - again the Opposition opposes that but I  think we can increase the refugee intake but you've got to have a fairer and safer  way of doing it. So I think we can do that -

Kelly: But maybe we don't need it. Maybe we just put people in the community as  you're already doing.

Bowen: No, Fran, you are going to continue to see people arriving by boat which  means you're going to continue to see deaths at sea; and it's all very well to say,  'Well let's do all this in the community', but when you have deaths at sea, that is an  ultimate responsibility.

And Fran, I spend time going around refugee camps. I was in a refugee camp  talking to refugees in India a couple of weeks ago, who wouldn't have dreamed of  having the money to pay a people smuggler; and some of them deserve a better  chance of resettlement in Western countries including Australia at the moment.  That's what has been driving our approaches: a regional framework - getting proper  regional processes in place which would enable us to have offshore processing,  proper offshore processing, which could say to people, 'If you come to Australia by  boat, you're running the risk of being permanently resettled to another country not  Australia. You're not going to get the product you're after'.

But I will say this Fran: while we have onshore processing, I do think that you need  to have a suite of measures available.

Again, I get criticised by the Opposition. They would say everybody should be in  detention. They don't support bridging visas; they say it's a softening of the policy.  They demonise the homestay program and make some quite misleading and  disgusting comments about that. So, they can do that. In the meantime, I think  community release is an important part of an onshore processing regime while we  have one.

Kelly: Now Minister, just finally on another issue: the drama surrounding Craig  Thomson. You're both from the New South Wales Right. Did your former colleague

do enough, in your view, yesterday to clear his name? What did you make of his  statement to the Parliament?

Bowen: Well Fran, in terms of clearing your name, there's a very simple approach  here. Tony Abbott would have you think that the Parliament is judge and jury of  everybody except a member of the Liberal Party. A member of the Liberal Party  gets to answer to a court; Mr Thomson, who's now an independent, has to answer  to him.

Kelly: Well it's not before a court at the moment, it's before the Parliament.

Bowen: Exactly. If there are allegations that a court should consider, a court should  consider those not the Parliament. Now this is a very important precedent Fran  which has been respected for a long time and I understand it's very easy for  political purposes, to throw it out the window and say 'let's appoint the parliament as  the court in this instance'. But if you do that once, you do it for everybody. Except  the approach being taken by the Liberal Party is to say, 'That's what should be  applied to everybody else, but when one of our members gets in trouble they've got  to be protected and their innocence has got to be respected and they should only  answer to a court'.

Kelly: So what did you make of Craig Thomson's statement to the Parliament  yesterday? Did you believe him?

Bowen: Well, it's not whether I believe him or not Fran. It's whether there's an  allegation which is taken through the courts which is important.

Kelly: Chris Bowen, thanks very much for joining us.

Bowen: Good on you, thanks Fran.



