Chris Bowen MPMinister for Immigration and Citizenship  Chris Bowen MP

Minister for Immigration and Citizenship

Compromise with the Opposition, TPVs,  Malaysia arrangement  Wednesday, 27 June 2012

Interview with Marius Benson, ABC NewsRadio

Marius Benson: Chris Bowen, Christopher Pyne has said from the Opposition's  point of view, if you agree to the temporary protection visas that were part of the  Pacific Solution, 'We'll talk turkey'. Is this a breakthrough?

Chris Bowen: Well, this is very different to what Mr Abbott and Mr Morrison have  said. Of course, any indication of a willingness to enter talks is welcome and I do  welcome it. Mr Pyne is not the Immigration spokesman, so Mr Morrison and Mr  Abbott need to clarify. But any indication of a willingness to negotiate with the  government and to return to the table after the Coalition broke off the negotiations  last year is very welcome.

We want to see a breakthrough, we genuinely want to see a breakthrough here.  That's why we began the negotiations last year. That's why we've made significant  offers to the Coalition to adopt elements of their policy and if the Opposition is  considering opening up those negotiations again and Mr Pyne's statements are an  indication of that, then I welcome it very much.

Benson: Can you just clarify the government's position on TPVs, temporary  protection visas, because you've said you would go some way towards accepting  them. You've stopped short of saying you would accept them.

Bowen: Well, I'm happy to run through that, Marius. Last year, we said to the  Opposition we would have an independent inquiry into TPVs and their  effectiveness. Now, we've said that we do not believe TPVs are effective and that  remains the position. But you don't go into negotiations ruling things in or out. I don't  want to slam the door on any discussions. If the Opposition wants to talk about that,  of course our door is open.

Now, one thing Mr Pyne said yesterday is that when TPVs were introduced they  reduced boat arrivals. That's not actually right; in the two years following TPVs, the  number of people arriving by boat went up. But that's not necessarily the argument  we need to have today. The discussion we need to have is getting in the room and  talking through a policy which the government and the Opposition can both support.

Because a very important point is this, Marius: we say Malaysia would be effective,  they say Nauru would be effective. Surely nobody could argue that Malaysia and  Nauru together wouldn't be effective. They would be effective. Even their  opponents, I think, accept that they would be a significant deterrent to dangerous  boat journeys. So if you've got a policy solution which everybody agrees could be  effective, for goodness' sake, why don't we get on and implement it?

Benson: And can I clarify the position on Malaysia now: is that non-negotiable, that  must be part of the mix from the government's point of view?

Bowen: Well, Marius, as I say, all our expert advice is that an arrangement like  Malaysia, with permanent resettlement - not just a processing centre offshore like  Nauru, which is a Christmas Island further away - is an important part of any policy  solution. That remains our advice, it remains our position. Now, if the Opposition  wants to talk, we should talk.

Benson: So that's on the table, then, Malaysia's on the table?

Bowen: As I said yesterday, Marius, we don't go into discussions slamming the  door and saying, 'Well, we'll talk about this and we won't talk about that'. Because  then you would rightly criticise me and say, 'Well, hang on, you can't have  discussions when you're outlining what is possible to talk about'.

Benson: So everything, everything - Malaysia, TPVs - everything is up for  negotiation?

Bowen: Good faith discussion with the Opposition. Now, our policy position is clear:  we have argued it vociferously and we continue to argue it very passionately, that  we need to have measures in place which stop boat journeys to Australia and the  most effective way to do it, all the evidence suggests, is the Malaysia agreement.  It's much more effective than a detention centre at Nauru, which is simply a staging  post for resettlement to Australia. That remains the advice, it remains the position, it  remains what we would argue publicly and privately.

Benson: But you're prepared to give ground on it?

Bowen: No, Marius, what I'm saying is, I'm prepared to have the discussion. The  government has opened the door, as we have since last November. Even the last  correspondence between the government and the Opposition from us said we are  happy to enter into further discussions with you should you change your mind. That  remains our position.

We've made considerable movement on this. Mr Abbott said yesterday we hadn't  moved an inch. He is wrong. He is wrong. But what you don't do is say, 'We want  discussions but we're not prepared to talk about elements of what could be  discussed and not discussed'.

Benson: Chris Bowen, thanks very much.

Bowen: Nice talking to you, Marius.



