Channel 10, Breakfast with Paul Henry, Kathryn Robinson and Andrew  Rochford

Thursday, 23 February 2012

Subjects: Labor leadership

E&OE…

PAUL HENRY    Julie Bishop is the Deputy Leader of the Federal Opposition and she joins us now.

Julie thanks for joining us. In November you called Kevin Rudd a tosser, anything you saw last night

that convinced you otherwise?

JULIE BISHOP    It is a shocking state of affairs when the Foreign Minister resigns from his job while

on official duties overseas because he can’t work with the Prime Minister. And it just shows how

deeply divided and dysfunctional the Government is. It really is in crisis. This is probably the worst

Government crisis since Whitlam in 1975.

PAUL HENRY    Alright, so what do you believe should happen now? What is in the best interests of

Australia?

JULIE BISHOP    Well there is no doubt that the instability and uncertainty and the conflict at the

highest level of government is impacting on confidence across the nation and indeed on our

international reputation, as Kevin Rudd himself alluded to last night. I don’t believe that a leadership

spill will resolve the crisis at the top of government because the two camps are so deeply divided. The

vitriolic and acrimonious statements they are making about each other are not going to be resolved by

a leadership battle that will come to a head next week. I believe that we need to have an election to

put certainty and stability back into the Federal Government.

PAUL HENRY    Who would Tony Abbott, do you imagine or do you know, rather be up against in a

federal election? Julia Gillard as Prime Minister or Kevin Rudd?

JULIE BISHOP    Well they are both deeply damaged goods in the eyes of the Australian public, but

the point is their policies would need to change. And at present they are both on the same page in

relation to the carbon tax, which is so damaging to the Australian economy, they have no different

ideas for the asylum seeker problem, we want to hear what differences they had in relation to the

deepening debt and deficit that they have been plunging Australia into. So it is not a question of

changing the decks on the Titanic, they really do have to look at the policies that they would take to

the next election and spell out to the Australian people what differences they would make.

KATHRYN ROBINSON    This has all really played into the hands of the Liberal Party, have you

discussed with Tony Abbott or do you have any idea what the Liberal Party plans to do over the next

coming days?

JULIE BISHOP    Well clearly this has been brewing for months and I know there have been many in

the Labor Party in deep denial accusing the media and the Opposition of making it up. But the

simmering leadership tensions that we have been witnessing for months have now spilled over into

open hostile conflict. So of course the Liberal Party has been considering the situation should it

change - I mean clearly it was untenable, it couldn’t go on as it has been for the last few weeks in

particular - and the Coalition will be talking over the next few days as to what we expect to happen

next week. But currently the uncertainty, the division, the hostility is undermining confidence in the

Government.

PAUL HENRY    Absolutely, in fact I think confidence is pretty much undermined. Julie just very

quickly I want to come back to a previous question just to get your actual answer to it. Given that it is

unlikely that they will call an early election, that they will call an election, that they will go to the polls,

who would be the better leader Julia Gillard or Rudd?

JULIE BISHOP    Well neither of them will be a good leader because…

PAUL HENRY    I know you don’t like either of them but who would be the better one if you had to

choose?

JULIE BISHOP    Well neither of them have proven to be good Prime Ministers. Kevin Rudd was

dumped by his own party back in 2010…

PAUL HENRY    Sorry to interrupt again, but I know what you are saying is true because we all know

that, except perhaps the individuals involved, but if you had to choose one because we could well be

in the situation where one of those people will go forward, in fact we will be in that situation, who

would you choose?

JULIE BISHOP    If I had to vote in the leadership ballot?

PAUL HENRY    Yes, exactly.

JULIE BISHOP    Well it would be very hard, I would probably go for a third candidate. I would go for

Simon Crean.

PAUL HENRY    Come on. Look, just choose one! There are two of them, you must prefer one to the

other.

JULIE BISHOP    Can’t I have none of the above? Isn’t that an option?

PAUL HENRY    Don’t you understand the question?

ANDREW ROCHFORD     What if we say please Julie?

JULIE BISHOP    I understand the question alright, and I don’t think either of them will be properly

serving Australia’s interests. They haven’t in the past and there is no reason to believe they will in the

future. That is why we believe a general election is required.

PAUL HENRY    Brilliant.

KATHRYN ROBINSON    I don’t think she is going to answer it.

PAUL HENRY    Julie, thank you very much. Thank you very much that was fantastic.

JULIE BISHOP    It has been my pleasure.



