Search this site

Go

Home

Biographical details

Media Centre

Contact details

Department

Minister for Multicultural  Affairs

Links





Chinese asylum seekers, Indonesia,  Coalition opportunism Wednesday, 11 April 2012

Interview with Lyndal Curtis, ABC News 24

Lyndal Curtis: Chris Bowen, welcome to News24.

Chris Bowen: Thank you Lyndal. Good afternoon.

Curtis: The group of asylum seekers have been in talks with  Immigration officials all day. Do you know what the result of those  talks is?

Bowen: Yes. A short time ago the 10 asylum seekers became  asylum seekers. They indicated that they would like to claim  asylum in Australia. I, obviously, think that's a good outcome in that  it means that they won't be undertaking yet again another further  dangerous boat journey. We will now process them in the normal  way. They will be processed for their asylum claim; and their  health, identity, character and security checks will begin.

Curtis: Will they be processed in Darwin or will they be taken to  Christmas Island?

Bowen: They won't be taken to Christmas Island. The process will  begin in Darwin and then, obviously, we will talk to them about  where they can best be accommodated across our network. We  have children involved and we have special arrangements in place  in place in relation to children across the board; in terms of  processing them initially at what are known as 'alternative places of  detention' and then moving them into the community for  processing; which is something that continues for all children and  families, who are asylum seekers who arrive by boat.

Curtis: Do any of them actually have documentation and would  that change the amount of time they're in detention for?

Bowen: My understanding is that eight out of the 10 have  passports; have presented passports. That does make a  difference. It does take longer to establish people's identity when  they arrive in Australia with no documentation whatsoever. Where  somebody arrives with a passport and where we assess that  passport as being valid and legitimate and not a forgery, then that  does make the rest of the process easier and can mean that  people can be processed and are through to the community more  quickly - bearing in mind that our approach is to keep people in  detention for those checks not necessarily for the duration of their  assessment claim but until we're satisfied that those checks have  been completed satisfactorily and then we can consider alternative  options for them.

Curtis: Do you know what changed their minds about their  decision to go to New Zealand? Was it purely a question of the  weather and the danger in the journey; and or did they - as Tony  Abbott suggested yesterday - have a problem with Australia's  mandatory detention regime and the differences with New  Zealand's detention regime?

Bowen: Clearly their original intention was to go to New Zealand.  That's very clear and public. We then explained to them, given the  circumstances, what would happen if they claimed asylum in  Australia. We also made it possible for the New Zealand

Chris Bowen MP Minister for Immigration and Citizenship

Page 1 of 3 Chinese asylum seekers, Indonesia, Coalition opportunism

5/06/2012 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2012/cb185759.htm

Government representatives to talk to them about the dangerous  boat journey to New Zealand and how they'd be processed in New  Zealand.

Now, they've come to their own decision. I'm sure it wouldn't have  been an easy decision for them; they weighed everything up. I'm  not going to speculate on what led to that decision. Certainly, we  did not enter into any - if you like - special arrangements for them  but we explained to them how the process would work and  certainly, we, of course made it clear that they were entitled under  Australian law to claim asylum in Australia.

Curtis: Now two more asylum seeker boats have been intercepted  and are being taken to Christmas Island in the last 24 hours, a  combined total of more than 250 people on-board. Does it show  that attempts to work with Indonesia to stop boats leaving aren't  working?

Bowen: Well let me make a couple of points Lyndal. We do work  closely with Indonesia. I've always said that that's dealing with the  symptoms, not the cause and that you are going to have some  successes, but you are never going to solve the problem that way.  We work very closely with the Indonesian law enforcement  authorities and we do have some success, but while ever that  business model remains intact, while ever we don't have an  effective deterrent by way of offshore processing, then you are  dealing with the symptoms and you are going to see continued  boat arrivals in Australia.

This is a point I've made ad nauseum for 18 months and those  boat journeys are dangerous, and inevitably we will see more  people risking their lives. That's why we've worked so assiduously  to try and get an offshore processing regime in place and that's  why we're pursuing legislation to do so, and I hope that that  legislation passes.

Curtis: Will you be putting that legislation into Parliament - be  pursuing that legislation in Parliament any time soon?

Bowen: Well Mr Oakeshott - of course there are two Bills: Mr  Oakeshott's Bill will come up for a vote, as I understand it, when  we return to Canberra for Parliament and then it will be open for  people to vote on it. The Government will be voting for it, the

Opposition has the chance to vote for it. They say they're for  offshore processing, they can vote for it or they can choose to vote  with the Greens, who have always been opposed to offshore  processing. That's a matter for the Opposition, they've indicated  they'll oppose it. I think that's a shame, I think a party that supports  offshore processing should vote for it.

Curtis: One final question, the Opposition spokesman, Scott  Morrison, says the latest arrivals are the largest number in a single  day, he says - he's putting it down to your policy of putting asylum  seekers in the community and says that's known by asylum  seekers overseas. What's your intelligence? Is that part of the  reason that's drawing asylum seekers to Australia?

Bowen: No, what's been the case consistently is that when you  have no effective offshore processing then that means there's no  deterrent. Now I make no apologies for saying that people being  processed in the community is part of our suite of measures. I don't  believe, as Mr Morrison believes, that every single individual  should be kept in detention for as long as it takes to finalise every  last part of their claim. I don't believe that, that's one difference  between Mr Morrison and I.

But what I will say is this: the Liberal Party two-card trick is starting  to wear very thin. They can't block Government legislation to allow  for offshore processing and then complain about results of that.  They try and block the legislation to let the Government implement  its policies and then say, 'Look, the Government's policies aren't

Page 2 of 3 Chinese asylum seekers, Indonesia, Coalition opportunism

5/06/2012 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2012/cb185759.htm

working'. Well it's a cheap two-card trick and the Australian people,  I think, see through that.

Curtis: Do you think though the blame game from both sides might  be wearing thin with the Australian public?

Bowen: Well I've said consistently again Lyndal that I think the  Australian people have had a gutful of the politics around this: they  see both parties saying that offshore processing can work as a  deterrent to boat arrivals, the Government is prepared to vote for it  and the Opposition should vote for it too, and it is simply not in any  way sustainable for Tony Abbott and Scott Morrison to say that  they support offshore processing but they're not going to vote for it  while the Government is proposing it, or indeed Mr Oakeshott is  proposing it. It is a hypocritical approach, a cheap opportunist

approach and one which does them no credit whatsoever.

Curtis: Chris Bowen, thank you very much for your time.

Bowen: Thank you Lyndal.

See: Index of Speeches

URL:  http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2012/cb185759.htm  Last update: Wednesday, 11 April 2012 at 16:55 AEST

Home Copyright & Disclaimer Privacy Department of Immigration and Citizenship

Page 3 of 3 Chinese asylum seekers, Indonesia, Coalition opportunism

5/06/2012 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2012/cb185759.htm

