



CHRIS BOWEN MP

MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP

*TRANSCRIPT*

INTERVIEW WITH LYNDAL CURTIS, ABC NEWS24

MONDAY, 26 NOVEMBER 2012



SUBJECTS: Regional processing, boat arrivals, ‘no advantage’ principle, Nauru,  Greens hypocrisy.

LYNDAL CURTIS: Minister, welcome to ABC News24.

CHRIS BOWEN: Thanks, Lyndal.

CURTIS: Is your policy of having the bridging visas you announced last week without giving  work rights going to create an underclass of people in Australia?

BOWEN: No, it won’t. I do understand people’s concerns but what is important here is  context. We currently have around 18,000 - just over 18,000 people - in the community as  we speak on bridging visas without work rights. That’s the standard way we deal with  people who claim asylum after they’ve arrived by aeroplane, for example, or who have some  sort of unlawful situation which is then turned into a bridging visa. That’s the standard  procedure.

CURTIS: But they’re on that visa for a shorter period of time.

BOWEN: Well, not necessarily. They can be on that visa for a long period of time as their  claims are processed. They can be on bridging visas for a very long period of time, Lyndal,  already, as we speak. People in community detention don’t receive work rights, too. So I  just think this context is important.

Now, what we’re seeing, though, is a big surge in arrivals from Sri Lanka, which is very  clearly economic migration and we’ve got to do two things about that. We’ve got to return  those who are clearly economic migrants. We’re doing that. We’ve seen around 500 returns  over the past little while; that’s important, it’s new and it’s being noticed in Sri Lanka.

But secondly, we need to send a very crisp and clear message to Sri Lanka and other  countries, that if you are coming as an economic migrant and you are counting on the fact

that while your refugee claim is being processed you can work and send money home and it  can be in your best economic interests to come to Australia - and that’s not possible.

So that’s why we’ve done it. It’s not actually linked to the ‘no advantage’ principle as such;  the no advantage principle is about resettlement permanently - a permanent visa option.  This is a response to what we’re seeing in terms of this phenomena in Sri Lanka in  particular.

CURTIS: But in the meantime, those people who are released into the community or in  community detention are existing on what are relatively small amounts of money, aren’t  they?

BOWEN: They are modest amounts, that’s true, despite what you would read in some  newspapers that it’s a generous allocation. I don’t believe it is a generous allocation.

CURTIS: So how much money is it, exactly?

BOWEN: Well it’s 89 per cent of the Special Benefit, which works out to about $430 a  fortnight for an individual, which is obviously less than the Newstart Allowance, less than the  Age Pension, for example. So it is a modest amount of money, but it is appropriate that  where somebody has come to Australia - for whatever reason, whether it is seeking to claim  asylum or for economic migration - that we provide some support but it be modestly  engaged.

Now, what I do want to do, though, is work with the sector, work with my advisory  committees etcetera, on how we deal with those people who are genuine refugees, found to  be refugees after a process. They still have to wait for permanent resettlement under the  ‘no advantage’ principle, but make sure that they have appropriate support and care, and  where appropriate they have some mechanism in place to be able to support themselves.  We’ll do that over time.

CURTIS: So there’s a possibility those people might get access to some sort of work rights  or higher government benefit?

BOWEN: Well, what I’ll do is I’ll work methodically with the sector to make sure that those  people who are regarded as refugees do have the appropriate arrangements in place. At the  same time, sending that very clear message to Sri Lanka and to other places that if you’re  coming to Australia to work, there’s a way to come to Australia to work and that’s to apply  through the skilled migration program. It’s not to hop on a boat and to come and to have  some sort of claim that you want processed and to work while you’re doing it.

CURTIS: What’s the chance, though, that in the evening period that there might be more  burden having to be carried by, say, welfare or church groups to help out people who are  living on the small amounts of money you say?

BOWEN: Well, as I say, let’s put this in context. Currently, more than 18,000 people in the  community, as we speak, on some sort of bridging visa without work rights. Even for those  people with work rights on bridging visas - say those people who arrived by boat before  August 13 who’ve got some sort of work rights - we think less than 10 per cent of those  have actually got work. Some good work has been done by a lot of providers to try and help  people into work, but let’s not have the misapprehension that all of a sudden huge numbers  of people have been taken out of work and put onto this program.



We haven’t done this lightly. We’ve done it after due consideration of the impact but we do  need to send that very crisp and clear message, and that’s why over and above the ‘no  advantage’ principle of no permanent visa until you would have received one, we’ve taken  that decision to send that very clear message.

CURTIS: Just a note of clarification, if people do get assessed as refugees and then after,  what happens after the ‘no advantage’ period ends? Do they get permanent residency into  Australia automatically or are they potentially resettled somewhere else?

BOWEN: Well, no, the principle is that you will not receive a permanent visa in Australia  until you would have under regional processing arrangements, but then you would receive a  permanent visa into Australia. I’ve said that repeatedly, that’s not new. The ‘no advantage’  principle is about resettlement into Australia.

CURTIS: That’s a difference with Temporary Protection Visas, but other elements are  similar. There were similar amounts of welfare; Temporary Protection Visas was a little bit  more generous. It also had work rights. There was also uncertainty: Temporary Protection  Visas were rolled over after every three years. Your ‘no advantage’ principle is at least five  years. Why don’t you just sign up to the Opposition’s Temporary Protection Visas?

BOWEN: Well, you know, I’ve seen the Opposition out there saying, ‘Oh look, this is  nothing like Temporary Protection Visas’. I’ve seen the Greens out there saying, ‘This is  exactly Temporary Protection Visas’. They’re both saying that for their own political  purposes. I’ve said very clearly there’s some similarities and there’s some differences.  Temporary Protection Visas were designed to say to people, ‘We’ll reassess you; you’ll go  through a whole new refugee reassessment process in three years’ time’. That’s not what  bridging visas are about. And so that uncertainty was created that they might be sent back  at the end of the three years. Very few people were. I mean, more than 95 per cent of  people got permanent protection at the end of the day - so it was a mirage. And we all  know that when Temporary Protection Visas were introduced, the number of people arriving  by boat went up.

These bridging visas are part of our holistic response, which accompanies the opening of the  processing centres on Nauru and Manus Island. It accompanies the increase in the refugee  program to 20,000. It accompanies the change to the family reunion program. Temporary  Protection Visas don’t really fit in with that approach, that no advantage principle.

And by the way, this bill which I’ve not seen, that Mr Morrison’s saying, that Mr Abbott’s  saying they’ll introduce, I mean, Temporary Protection Visas are allowed under the law as  we speak. This is pretty clearly a stunt.

CURTIS: And one final question: the head of your Immigration Department last year  warned reopening Nauru wouldn’t deter asylum seekers because things had changed. In a  widely reported briefing to journalists, he also said onshore processing would lead to 600 or  more arrivals a month, that long term detention would become unviable, large numbers of  asylum seekers would have to be released into the community creating an underclass. Isn’t  that exactly where you are now?

BOWEN: Well, what Mr Metcalfe, the then-Secretary, was pointing out was the fallacies of  this Opposition argument, that all you have to do is open Nauru and everything would be  okay. I think we’re seeing that borne out. By the way, I’ve said exactly the same things:

Nauru and Manus Island can be a complement to other things, and that’s the policy that  we’re implementing.

Also, it would be much more effective if we were able to implement our full suite of policies,  including implementing the Malaysia agreement. And if the Opposition would actually act in  the national interest and say, ‘The Government’s been flexible here, the Government’s done  the right thing, they’ve taken a tough approach, they’ve opened Nauru, they’ve opened  Manus Island. We don’t agree with Malaysia, but we’ll let them do it’, then the Government  would be able to implement its policies and see the full impact of them.

CURTIS: Chris Bowen, thank you very much for your time.

BOWEN: Thank you, Lyndal.

Ends

