Contact Jamie  Mt Barker Electorate Office

Tel: 08 8398 5566

Email: jamie.briggs.mp@aph.gov.au

Current Articles | Archives | Search



Transcript - Sky News AM Agenda - Wednesday 18 January 2012  18 January 2012 in Media

To watch this interview, please click here.



Kieran Gilbert:

Joining me on the program to discuss this and the other issues of the

day,  from  Brisbane,  Labor  MP  Graham  Perrett  and  from  Adelaide,

Liberal MP Jamie Briggs. Gentlemen, welcome.



Jamie Briggs:



Good morning Kieran.



Graham Perrett:



Good morning Kieran.



Gilbert:



Graham, first to you. A number of your colleagues would be quite relieved if this pre-commitment technology is

pushed out beyond the next election, in fact shelved altogether.



Perrett:



Yeah look I am one of the MPs that had the Clubs Australia campaign in my electorate. I don’t think it was a

very effective campaign at all. In fact I think I got responses of about four to one or five to one people saying

this is a good thing to address problem gambling. So I wasn’t worried by the Clubs Australia campaign and all

the glossy brochures. I know Anthony Ball is saying he has a big war-chest ready to go. I think that we need to

do something about pokies and I also know there is a lot of argument, hard to get the facts straight from clubs,

their  sort  of  old  school  70’s  approach  to  change  which  was  not  to  do  anything.  So  I  am  comfortable  with

making sure that we do get it right also the commitment I saw Jeff Howes, the CEO from ACT Clubs say last

night on the 7:30 Report that he’s prepared to do a trial and a trial isn’t necessarily a bad thing.



Gilbert:



You  say  that  you’re  not  worried  about  it.  A  number  of  your  colleagues  have  been  though  haven’t  they

Graham. They would be happy if the Prime Minister cut Andrew Wilkie loose here and as I mentioned at the

start of the program, he is apparently considering walking away.



Perrett:



Well I can’t speak for my colleagues, I can just say that I believe, you know I like my local club, but I think that

we do need to do something about pokie reform and that is the commitment of the Gillard Government, that is

my understanding. I can’t really comment on the rumours of what Andrew Wilkie may or may not do. I think he

certainly seems to be a man of his word and he will do what he can to make sure there is some reform and I’m

sure  most  sensible  Australians  would  agree  with  that  because  problem  gamblers,  recreational  gamblers are

another  thing,  but  problem  gamblers  are  really  are,  it  is  a  great  scourge.   I’ve  got  a  wife  that  works  in  child

protection and it’s horrible to see how some of those roads that people travel down that come down from pokie

addictions and gambling addictions.



Gilbert:



Jamie,  we  are  seeing  the  reality  here  aren’t  we  of  the  Parliament  after  the  defection  of  Peter  Slipper  to  the

Speakership,  that  has  given  the  Government  a  bit  more  breathing  space  too.  Even  if  this  is  delayed,  they

remain  committed  they  argue  to  pokie  machine  reform,  but  it  gives  them  a  bit  of  breathing  space  as  to  how

they implement it given they have a bit more time to do it.



Briggs:



Well what you’ve seen is the reality that Julia Gillard will say anything to anyone to keep power. All it is about is

being in power. It is not about good policy, and we saw that with the carbon tax. People remember and they wil

always  remember  that  just  three  days  before  the  last  election,  Julia  Gillard  said  there  will  be  no  carbon  tax

under a government I lead. Of course she lied about that. She has now implemented a carbon tax which will

start  this  year,  against  the  face  of  all  international  movement.  You’ve  also  got  this  with  the  pokie

Search this site:

Contact Jamie

Friends of Jamie



Join Jamie's  E-newsletter



Facebook

Liberal Party Website

Labor Waste Website





Govt Debt: $139,672,990,007 Your share: $6,090

Federal Budget 2012-13



Jamie's Latest Tweet

loading tweets...







Home About Jamie Mayo Media Centre Photo Gallery Mobile Electorate Office Jamie’s View Survey Online Office



Page 1 of 5 Transcript - Sky News AM Agenda - Wednesday 18 January 2012 > Jamie Briggs MP...

13/06/2012 http://jamiebriggs.com.au/MediaCentre/Media/tabid/64/articleType/ArticleView/articl...

reform. Andrew Wilkie was told, was given a guarantee of his support that they would pursue this, even though

it was always impossible to pursue. It was bad policy in the first place. It wasn’t going to work. She promised it

to get into power. All it is about for Julia Gillard is power. It is not about good policy. It is not about doing the

right thing by Australia, taking Australia forward for the future. It is about Julia Gillard and her own power and

that is what we are seeing here. You just can’t trust Julia Gillard when it comes to making the right decisions

for the future of our country.



Gilbert:



What is your sense of the mood in the electorate? Obviously not every state is like Queensland and NSW, so

reliant on the revenues of poker machines or having them so prevalent around their state. What is the mood in

your seat? Obviously there are many people who want reform in this area, reform of some sort to deal with this

scourge.



Briggs:



Well look I think every state government has become addicted to pokie revenue, certainly the South Australian

state government has, even though they are massively in debt...



Perrett:



Not WA Jamie.



Briggs:



Well other than WA, you are right, but the South Australian Government certainly has become quite addicted to

pokies revenue. Equally, this has been an issue that has been managed by the states from a long  time and

there  are  restrictions  or  inabilities  of  the  federal  government  to  intervene  too  much  in  this  regard.  This  still

should be something I think that’s handled largely by the state governments in ensuring they get the balance

right. You can’t protect people from themselves ultimately. Whether it’s, if you’re a problem gambler and there

is certainly a problem with people who get addicted to gambling - there needs to be policies that address that,

but  just  banning  things  doesn’t  necessarily  work  and  what  we  have  seen  with  this  policy  was  just  an

announcement  for  Julia  Gillard  to  get  into  power  rather  than  to  actually  address  people  who  have  got  a

sickness which is problem gambling. Andrew Wilkie is the latest who can’t trust Julia Gillard, welcome to the

club the Australian people are members of.



Gilbert:



Graham, that very point there that Jamie made at the end - are you worried that this is going to end up being

another question of Julia Gillard’s character here and whether or not she can be trusted. Obviously that is the

way the Coalition is arguing.



Perrett:



No, no not at all. It’s funny hearing Jamie going through his lines reminds me that summer holidays are over,

we are back into it. And I’m disappointed to hear Jamie say that he would walk away from this - that it is too

hard.  The  reality  is  a  good  federal  government  leads  and  we  have  got  a  Prime  Minister  with  incredible

backbone that knows how to lead and bring the states together on this. And I agree that some of the states are

a little bit too addicted to the revenues, but we can work with that. We’ve got a cooperative federal system. We

can  work  with  the  state  governments.  We  can  work  and  try  and  do  what  we  can  to  save  people  from

themselves. So I disagree with Jamie. We can pull a couple of leavers - that was our commitment to Andrew

Wilkie and it is a good commitment. Why? Because it is good for all Australians because society suffers when

there are problem gamblers giving so much of their money to, to put so much of  their money through  poker

machines  and  that  is  why  I  think  it  is  still  good  policy,  good  Labor  policy.  I  don’t  know  how  many  poker

machines are in Mayo.



Gilbert:



But the policy of the government looks like it is going to be shelving it at least to beyond the next election.



Perrett:



Well let’s wait and see. I think a trial is a good thing because we’ve got to get it right. I’m actually personally

very supportive of dollar bets. In Queensland we only go to five dollar bets, NSW over the border you go to ten

dollar bets. I personally think that if you are doing ten dollar bets every time you press a machine that is too

much. Even if it is a dollar bet, you can still lose $200 an hour through a poker machine. I think that is enough

gambling.  I’m  not  a  wowser  at  all  when  it  comes  to  gambling,  but  I  think  if  you  can  pump  $200  though  a

machine that’s, and that’s not going to cost $3.5 billion. The current equipment that we have, the current club

machines  that  we  have  could  be  changed  to  have  dollar  bets,  that’s  not  a  bad  thing  as  far  as  I’m

concerned. Obviously the clubs war-chest will be targeting me because I suggest that good policy like that.



Gilbert:



Ok,  I  want  to  move  on  if  I  can  to  the  subsidies  for  the  car  manufacturing  sector.  Jamie  obviously  this  is  an

industry, a significant industry in Adelaide. What’s your view on this? Nick Minchin, one of the heavy weights

from your state from the Liberal Party has made  an intervention today, urging the Coalition not to commit to

scrap the subsidies.



Briggs:



Well I disagree with Nick, very strongly. The Howard Government, which Nick was a member of the Cabinet,

agreed that we should be funding transitional arrangements for the car industry. I mean one of the arguments

you  hear  out  of  Julia  Gillard  and  I’m  sure  Graham  will  parrot  shortly  is  that  the  mining  industry  has  made  it

impossible  for  the  car  industry  because  of  the  dollar.  Well  that  is  simple  not  true.  I  mean  for  20  years  the

Commonwealth Government has been funding this industry. We keep hearing each time when the next lot of

money goes into it that this time it’s about sustainability, it’s about the future, and yet a couple of years go by

and we are back to the same place - we are talking about whether we chuck another $100 million, $200 million

Page 2 of 5 Transcript - Sky News AM Agenda - Wednesday 18 January 2012 > Jamie Briggs MP...

13/06/2012 http://jamiebriggs.com.au/MediaCentre/Media/tabid/64/articleType/ArticleView/articl...

in, $500 million for the Green Car fund. The word has now changed to co-investment and other words as Kim

Carr said, you don’t own a car industry, you rent it. So basically what the Labor Party want to do is to continue

to subsidise this industry because they’re playing to, well they are basically giving a great big subsidy to the

multi-national  car  companies.  Now  the  perfect  example  about  this  and  about  how  it  doesn’t  work  is

Mitsubishi.  For  17  years,  Mitsubishi  received  large  amounts  of  government  money  all  on  the  basis  that

eventually this will be sustainable and when they left there wasn’t great destruction in the southern suburbs of

Adelaide. It wasn’t because there was a great big mine down the southern suburbs of Adelaide at all. There is

lower unemployment now than there was. There hasn’t been the great civil destruction that people predicted if

the  car industry is to leave. I think we’ve got to get to  the point where the  transitional arrangements that the

Howard  Government  put  in  place,  with  these  subsidies  ending  in  2015  have  to  be  followed  through.  Our

economy  can’t  afford  to  subsidise  one  part  of  it  and  not  another.  Small  businesses  are  struggling  under

financial pressures, due to whatever factors are in the economy - they don’t expect or get a large subsidy from

the  government.  Yet  these  big  multi-national  companies  threaten  the  Australian  Government,  threaten  the

Australian people and they receive large cheques. I don’t think it is right and I don’t agree with it continuing. For

the government to try and blame us when they are the ones handing out this money is just a joke.



Gilbert:



Jamie  what  about  the  argument  though  that  was  put  very  strongly  and  continues  to  be  put  strongly  by  the

Prime  Minister  and  others  that  other  governments  around  the  world  subsidise,  in  fact  wherever  there  is  a

significant automotive industry, governments have to subsidise them and also the argument about the impact

on other businesses not necessary not in that sector, but suppliers to automotive industries and so on.



Briggs:



Well firstly there are 13 countries around the world that makes cars. One of them is America. They are trillions

of dollars in debt. They nearly defaulted on their debt mid last year. It is the same with Europe, we’ve seen a

massive  debt  crisis.  Now  if  we  want  to  go  down  that  path,  that’s  fair  enough  and  the  Gillard  Government  is

doing everything it can to try and take us down that path, but you can’t continue to throw good money after bad

when the  money is running out and that  is what those countries have seen. So that  argument is a complete

furphy.  The  second  argument  about  the  component  industry  is  largely  if  you  are  a  sustainable  components

manufacturer  these  days  you  don’t  rely  on  the  Australian  car  industry,  you’re  part  of  the  global  food  chain

because that is how the industry works. The truth is in Australia, we have a couple of factors right against us

when it comes to manufacturing cars. That is we don’t have the scale, we are a small economy so we have to

export  and  when  it  comes  to  exporting  we  are  a  long  way from  market,  so  it  makes  it  very hard  for  our  car

industry to compete. The last factor is, the consumers have decided. Consumers buy imported cars because

that is their preference. So I think this argument that somehow, and we saw this with Mitsubishi, somehow if

the  government  doesn’t  co-invest  or  in  other  words  nationalise  the  car  industry,  we  are  going  to  see  great

destruction  throughout  suburbs  of  Adelaide  and  Melbourne.  It  is  a  furphy  and  it  has  been  proven  wrong  by

what happened with Mitsubishi.



Gilbert:



Graham  Perrett,  I  guess  that  you  are  obviously  going  to  disagree  with  Jamie  on  that  and  argue  that  this  is

important  for  jobs  in  the  industry.  But  how  long  the  government  need  to  pick  and  choose  here,  to  be

subsidising one industry but not another, like for example retail which is struggling under the weight of the high

Aussie dollar at the moment.



Perrett:



Yeah look, that high Aussie dollar is a big factor and Jamie correctly pointed out some of the problems with our

geographic location. But he forgot to mention all those things that do flow from having a car industry, the high

end engineering, all of those skills, those skills that would be gone forever and that’s what he forgot to mention

about the countries that have closed down their car industry. All those, you know even defence jobs and thing

like defence opportunities that flow from having a strong car industry. So it is certainly as a South Australian...



Briggs:



What are the defence opportunities? I don’t follow.



Perrett:



The  high  end  engineering  and  even  the  technological  skills  that  come  from  or  are  associated  with  the  car

industry, the innovation of the future, the jobs of the future. We can’t assume that Australia is just going to be

able to make some Wine or something like that. We’ve actually got to have a diverse economy and especially a

top-end economy Jamie, a top-end economy where we do take our car products to the rest of the world as you

pointed  out.  So  it  must  be  tough  to  be  a  South  Australian  MP  to  go  along  and  say  to  those  people  that  are

exporting their materials around the world because we make top quality products and say no sorry we are not

going to support you. And it is tough for me to be supporting Nick Minchin.



Briggs:



That  is  a  very  good  point.  Can  I  pick  you  up  on  that  point,  that  is  exactly  right  -  I  do  have  very  high  end

manufactures  that  make  things,  who  don’t  get  a  government  subsidy,  and  who  export  to  the  world.  I’ve  got

great  manufactures  who  do  that.  The  point  here  is  at  what  point  does  the  federal  government,  does  the

taxpayer, who is arguing for the taxpayer in all this, because...



Perrett:



(Inaudible)



Briggs:



Well hang on, you can play the politics all you like mate but you go and tell your businesses in Moreton why

they don’t deserve government subsidies but big multi-national companies in Detroit deserve basically a boost

to their bottom line, which is all what this is.



Page 3 of 5 Transcript - Sky News AM Agenda - Wednesday 18 January 2012 > Jamie Briggs MP...

13/06/2012 http://jamiebriggs.com.au/MediaCentre/Media/tabid/64/articleType/ArticleView/articl...

Gilbert:



Graham,  if  I  could  just  put  this  to  Jamie,  another  point  that  was  made,  providing  the  foundations  for

manufacturing  more  generally.  Something  that  Kim  Carr  said  about  the  manufacturing  skills  achieved  within

motoring flowing on to others, even referred to the Joint Strike Fighter project in South Australia.



Briggs:



But what is the evidence of that? I mean it is a nice line but there is no necessary evidence from that. Again we

get back to the Mitsubishi example, or the Nissan example - there was great predictions, there was front page

after  front  page  about  the  destruction  of  the  southern  suburbs,  about  how  manufacturing  would  end;  it  just

didn’t  happen.  It  just  simple  didn’t  happen.  As I  said  before,  look  at  the  indicators  -  unemployment  is  lower,

there is still manufacturing in the southern parts of Adelaide. When (inaudible) left South Australia some five or

six  years  ago,  again  there  were  the  same  predictions  for  the  western  suburbs  of  Adelaide.  Again  lower

unemployment. The economy adjusts.



Gilbert:



Are you worried though that this might hurt Tony Abbott if he does commit to or retain this commitment to scrap

the automotive transformation fund, $500 million, that that will hurt him in terms of his credibility with blue-collar

workers, which he has obviously been building up over the last year or two.



Briggs:



Well no because  the great  hypocrisy of the government here is that at the same  time as they are squealing

about trying to write out big cheques to multi-national companies in Detroit, they are whacking a big carbon tax

on  them  which  makes  it  impossible  for  the  car  industry  to  continue  to  compete.  I  mean  absolutely

impossible. So there is a great irony here about what the Labor Party is doing. So no, I don’t think Tony, we’ve

had  very  consistent  view  about  this.  You  mention  Nick,  well  Nick  Minchin  was  in  the  Cabinet,  the  Howard

Government Cabinet, the view was about transitional assistance. It wasn’t about co-investment, this great new

line the Labor Party has come up with, which in other words is nationalisation of the car industry, that we are

joint partners to build cars. I mean it is absurd and I don’t think that there is any surprise that the Liberal Party

will  stand  against  it.  We  don’t  support  tariffs.  We  don’t  support  picking  industry  winners.  We  support  giving

people a fair crack, small business a fair crack with the lowest possible tax base that they can pay.



Gilbert:



Well  you  have  had  a  good  crack  this  morning  on  that  one,  and  let’s  move  on.  Let’s  look  at  border

protection.  Now  I  want  to  talk  about  this  which  has  been  an  impasse  now  before  Christmas,  there  was  this

sense of urgency about talks between Scott Morrison and Chris Bowen. It seems a bit absurd now, there has

been no resolution to the impasse, Graham Perrett. Another boat arrived last night. This continues with the two

parties remaining divided. It is a bit of groundhog day as we start 2012.



Perrett:



And  look,  having  been  on  Christmas  Island  inquiry,  the  Joint  Parliamentary  Christmas  Island  inquiry,  I  don’t

think this has been Parliament’s finest moment because the reality is the percentages are there, we know that

every time someone gets on a boat the chances are, a 4% chance that that person will drown. So we are really

as a Parliament I think we need to come together. The two parties need to come together to come up with a

solution. I think there is some politics there. There is some obvious politics there. I just hope when I see that

footage  in  my mind  of  the  Christmas  Island  tragedy and  the  tragedies  that  have  followed  that  we  can  come

together and come up with a solution. And look I firmly believe that the Malaysian solution will work, that there

will  be  sufficient  disincentive  there  for  people  not  to  take  the  dangerous  journey,  especially  in  the  next  few

months as the cyclone season builds up, I hope we can reach an agreement that means people don’t take that

dangerous journey.



Gilbert:



Jamie,  obviously  you  would  disagree  with  Graham  on  the  Malaysian  option,  but  just  generally,  it’s  time  now

isn’t it for a resolution to this, for a bi-partisan stance because the Greens aren’t going to compromise.



Briggs:



Well that is a matter for the Greens, what a surprise that their view of the world which has been proven to be

completely shown to be a disaster. If you open it up, if you encourage the people smugglers business model,

the  result is as Graham said, very sadly you will end up with a  lot of people drowning, and it is terrible. It is

terrible  that  it  is  an  outcome  of  a  government  policy  decision.  And  that  is  what  it  is,  sadly.  That  you  had  a

change  in  policy  in  September  2008,  a  system  which  was  working  was  changed  by  Kevin  Rudd  and  we’ve

seen since that time thousands of thousands of people get on that boat and make a hazardous journey. Now

we  have  said  for  some  time  that  we  are  willing  to  negotiate.  We’ve  offered  an  amendment  to  the  bill  the

government moved. Scott Morrison has been talking to Chris Bowen over the Christmas period and I’d like to

see  a  resolution.  I  think  everyone  in  the  general  public  for  whatever  reason  would  like  to  see  these  boats

stopped.  But  the  government  has  got  to  be  willing  to  compromise  here.  Just  saying  we  want  to  compromise

doesn’t  make  it  happen.  You’ve  actually  got  to  do  something  about  that.  They  are  ultimately  the

government. They are elected to make these decisions and that is how our Parliamentary system has always

worked. So look we are  willing  to  be  part of it. We’ve  offered  up  a  reasonable  proposal,  including  temporary

protection  visas,  which  worked  before  and  they  will  work  again  including  the  Nauru  solution  and  the  Pacific

solution, which worked before and which we think will work again as a plan. We don’t think that just dumping

people in Malaysia is the best way to go, but we are willing and we are as Scott Morrison has been talking over

this  time  because  we  want  to  see  these  boats  stopped.  We  want  to  see  the  fear  of  the  chances  of  people

drowning on a terrible journey reduced by having policies which stop people getting on them in the first place.



Gilbert:



Ok, well Graham, that does make a fair bit of sense doesn’t it, that the government does really need to drive

this. You’re in office. The government has got to be accountable for it.



Page 4 of 5 Transcript - Sky News AM Agenda - Wednesday 18 January 2012 > Jamie Briggs MP...

13/06/2012 http://jamiebriggs.com.au/MediaCentre/Media/tabid/64/articleType/ArticleView/articl...

Perrett:



But remember, we’re in office with the support of Adam Bandt and Andrew Wilkie and other Independents so it

is not as simple as Jamie said - that the government just needs to go and do this. The government of 2008,

the Parliament of 2008 is not the Parliament of 2012. That’s the reality that the people of Australia have to live

with. So we do need bi-partisan support for legislation and it’s not as simple as just go and do it unfortunately

because I do think the Malaysian solution could have saved lives and will save lives if we implement it. So I’m

sure  Minister  Bowen  is  doing  all  that  he  can  because  it  troubles  him,  particularly  troubles  him  and  Scott

Morrison is an honourable man as well. I’m sure that they will be able to come up with a solution that we can

get through the Parliament. There might be a few Independents that don’t support it, but I’m sure the majority

of Parliamentarians support something that prevents people from drowning, particularly children.



Gilbert:



Ok, Graham Perrett, Jamie Briggs, appreciate your time this morning.



Â© Jamie Briggs MP 2011 | Authorised by J. Briggs, Shop 1/72 Gawler Street, Mt Barker SA 5251

Home

About Jamie

Mayo

Media Centre

Photo Gallery

Mobile Electorate Office

Blog

Useful Links

Privacy Policy & Disclaimer

Accessibility Policy

Datasearch Web Design

Login

Page 5 of 5 Transcript - Sky News AM Agenda - Wednesday 18 January 2012 > Jamie Briggs MP...

13/06/2012 http://jamiebriggs.com.au/MediaCentre/Media/tabid/64/articleType/ArticleView/articl...

