CHRIS BOWEN MP

MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP  *TRANSCRIPT*

INTERVIEW WITH LEON COMPTON, ABC HOBART MORNINGS

THURSDAY, 16 FEBRUARY 2012







SUBJECT: Pontville Immigration Detention Centre

LEON COMPTON: Minister Chris Bowen, good morning.

CHRIS BOWEN: Good morning, how are you?

COMPTON: I’m well, thanks for talking with us this morning. Why close  something that seems to be working so well?

BOWEN: Look, a couple of things, Pontville was opened as a temporary centre,  if you like even as an emergency centre when we were short of beds. I gave a  commitment at that time, that it would be closing in March and we have new  centres opening in other places which was the plan - we needed Pontville to be  open until those new centres were up and running. And I feel having made that  commitment in March - that it would close in March - that I need to fulfil that  commitment to the people who took that at face value.

Now what I am very pleased about is that Pontville worked very well, the  community responded well. I think it’s a testament to the community, I think it’s  a testament to the hard working Department of Immigration and Serco staff, and  that is my experience generally. I find that when a detention centre is open in a  community it is very controversial with a lot of opposition, and then when it’s up  and running people see the benefits and people actually find that it works well,  and I’m very pleased with the fact that this has been the case in Pontville.

COMPTON: Of course, Minister and this policy for your party broadly has been  disastrous at times and yet here you have an example of a community that  seems almost fully engaged with it and says it’s working and that it would like it  to stay. Why are you closing something that seems to be doing so well relative to  your other facilities?

BOWEN: Well, as I say, and yes I have had a visit from Tony Foster, the Mayor  of Brighton, I’ve had a call from Bishop John of the Anglican Church and I’ve

spoken to the Premier about it, and I do recognise there is a lot of community  support for this centre and that’s great.

There’s been jobs created and the centre has worked well and there has been a  lot of good community engagement and I’m really very grateful for that. But, as  I say, having made the commitment to people that it would close in March, I  think I need an extraordinary good reason to go back on that commitment.

We have other centres opening. I do prefer centres to be open closer to capital  cities, for example we have other centres, one in Adelaide, which again was very  controversial when I opened it but it is now working very, very well. For all the  people in Pontville, the majority of those will actually be released into the  community and for those who are transferred to other centres we will endeavour  to put them in centres close to capital cities so that they are not in a remote  environment. And I do find that our program of moving children and families into  the community, there are no children or families in Pontville, but just generally  speaking, has been very successful and that will continue.

COMPTON: Indeed, one of the attacks on your Government over the last period  of time has been the issue of promises broken. Is what we’re seeing in Tasmania  at the moment the national politics of Government and a Minister not wanting to  be seen to break a promise become more important than the practical policy that  this thing is working in this place?

BOWEN: Well look, as I say, if I make a commitment to a community that it  won’t open - that it won’t stay open beyond six months - I would need a very,  very strong reason to revisit that. And if you’re criticising me for being too  concerned about holding to my promises, well I’ll accept that criticism. I think if  I, when I’m talking to a community and I give a commitment, it’s very important  that the community is able to take that at face value.

COMPTON: So, you say an extraordinary reason but haven’t you had one here,  I mean you’ve got refugee support groups, you’ve got Bob Brown, who’s been no  friend of the Labor Party’s policies on this, saying that Pontville should stay,  you’ve got church groups, you’ve got the mayor -

BOWEN: Sure.

COMPTON: - And others, how extraordinary do you want?

BOWEN: Well, where I’ve got the situation that other detention centres are  opening which are also in capital cities or close to capital cities, as was the plan,  that Pontville was necessary until they were ready, and that’s all gone to plan  and we’re able to move the majority of people in Pontville into the community -  either in what we call community detention which is detention only in a technical

sense or on bridging visas - and those who are moved to other centres will be  the people who have been in Pontville, or in detention for a much shorter time,  usually less than four months, I just don’t see that I have sufficient reason to go  back on the commitment that I’ve given to Pontville that it would be open only  until march.

COMPTON: It’s only a couple of weeks till the end of the month, could that  reason still materialise here, in your mind?

BOWEN: Well, look I don’t envisage any circumstances which would do that. I  said to Tony Foster, look, he’s got a job to do as mayor and he can continue to  campaign for it and that I understand and appreciate, but I don’t see any reason  that would lead me to change that view. If something comes up well then  obviously I would make the best decision at the time based on circumstance but  my intention is to proceed with the closure of Pontville.

COMPTON: $14 million into the facility, what is it’s future from here then?

BOWEN: Well, look it is a Defence site as you know, and there were some uses  which were re-accommodated. It will return to Defence. What we do do, is we  don’t dismantle the things that have gone in there so that there’s flexibility for  the use of the site into the future. But Defence will obviously make the best use  of the site as it wishes, we will maintain some of our infrastructure there so there  is flexibility going forward, but certainly my commitment is to close the centre  and to have the majority of the people in that centre moved into more  community settings.

COMPTON: And when you say more community settings, more community  settings in Tasmania? And how many people would that involve?

BOWEN: Well, most will actually go elsewhere, we do settle some people in  Tasmania, currently for example we had 14 people who arrived in Australia by  boat living in Tasmania in the community on bridging visas, and we have 56  families, or 56 people who are members of families or other groups who are  living in what we call community detention in Tasmania. The majority get settled  in the mainland, for obvious reasons, but we do settle some people in Tasmania.  There are currently 267 people in Pontville, 267 men, as I say, the majority of  those will go into the community under some sort of arrangement.

COMPTON: And it will close on the first of March -

BOWEN: During. During March. I’m not holding myself to a particular day, but it  will certainly close during March.

COMPTON: What would it take for somebody, I mean you talk about

extraordinary circumstances but there are a lot of people it would seem in  Tasmania who like the jobs, who like the contact with the refugees there. What  would it take for you to be released from your promise? There are plenty of  people who would like to do that.

BOWEN: Well, look, as I say, I understand that, and I think it’s actually a good  thing that heartens me, that the centre has worked well, it really does. But as I  say, where I’ve got other capacities in other centres, I don’t see any reason to  go back on the commitment that I gave last year that the centre would only be  open for six months.

COMPTON: Appreciate you talking with us this morning.

BOWEN: Nice talking to you, cheers.

Ends

