PRIME MINISTER  TRANSCRIPT OF PRESS CONFERENCE  BALI  13 OCTOBER 2012



E & O E - PROOF ONLY

Subjects:      10th Anniversary Bali Memorial Service

PRIME MINISTER: I’m standing at what is effectively our ground zero at the site  where we lost so many Australian lives. I’ve had the opportunity to lay a wreath and  to pay my respects.

I’ve also had the opportunity to talk to Fiona and Robin. They lost their much loved  son, much loved brother here, David, and I’ve seen the photographs and seen the  pain.

This has been a very emotional 24 hours in Bali; very emotional ceremony  yesterday.

I’ve had the opportunity to speak to a large number of families who have gathered  here in Bali. Heard the stories, the memories of the night, the ‘what ifs’, the ‘it could  have been me if I hadn’t walked off the dance floor at that moment’, ‘it could have  been me if I’d just been 5 or 10 feet away from where I was’.

The feelings of  the survivors as they come back, many of them feeling a sense of  reflection. Some of them still doing the ‘what ifs’ in their head about whether or not it  could have been them. Some of them still overcoming the injuries that they got in this  place.

It’s been a very emotional period, but a time for us to mark as a nation what was a  nation-changing event.

An event of such distress, of such magnitude. But also a time for us to reflect on our  friendship with Indonesia on how it has been strengthened, on the way in which we  have worked together.

And as I stood at the memorial I talked to the Governor, who was then the police  chief, about what this site was like immediately after the bombing. But also about the  partnership and cooperation that grew up between our police forces as a result of  our joint hunt to get those responsible, which has happened and this terrorist  network has been held to account.

People have been prosecuted and it has been dismantled because of that policing  effort.

So, it’s with a great sense of sadness that I stand here today but I’ve felt a real sense  of privilege too, to have the opportunity to speak to so many Australians yesterday  and today.

JOURNALIST: PM, did it take you back to the time you were here?

PRIME MINISTER: Look, all of it has taken me back to the time that I was here. This  streetscape, walking up and down this road, buying things, having coffees, having  snacks. So all of this journey has taken me back to that time and that place.

JOURNALIST: And do you feel the sense of unease here? A lot of Australians have  said that they were worried the threats, the terror happening again. How have you  personally felt?

PRIME MINISTER: Personally I’ve felt not anxious about the security situation.  Obviously I am very well looked after both by our own people and our Indonesian  friends.

But I did speak yesterday to survivors who said that they came back on the first  occasion they ever returned with a real sense of terror. For some of them the first  time they came back was for the trials, for some the first time they came back was  the first memorial, and just how gut wrenching that was, how actually scary they  found it.

And I can understand that if you had lived through that incredible moment of terror,  you would return here with a real sense of trepidation.

Fortunately we know, because of the policing work that has been done, that people  can come to Bali and can experience Bali in all of its beauty with all of the rest and  relaxation that if offers for Australians.



JOURNALIST: Prime Minister what has been the most touching moment for you in  the past 24 hours?

PRIME MINISTER: I thought for me the most touching moment of yesterday’s  ceremony was the reading of the names. I thought, in its simplicity, it was an  incredibly powerful moment to just hear name after name and then to hear family  names that are repeated more than once, it had a real sense of power to it.

JOURNALIST: Prime Minister why do you think people do come back to Bali? Since  the bombings, Bali is now more popular than ever. You’ve been here, what is it about  Bali that draws Australians?

PRIME MINISTER: This is a beautiful place, a physically beautiful place. People  come here for the sun, for the beaches for the physical beauty of it. But more than  anything else, I think people come because of the warmth of the hospitality of the  Balinese people.

This is a lovely society where people can feel so at home. I think that is what has  attracted Australians across the generations. And why this and the subsequent Bali

bombing was such a rip in our understanding of Bali and everything that we had ever  experienced here.

It was just so offensive to us, so jarring with the reality that we had known of  travelling in Bali because of the peace of this place and the real warmth of the  hospitality of the people.

JOURNALIST: Prime Minister can anything be done from your end with regards to  the future of the Sari site? Is there anything we can do to transform that space into  something a little more memorable?



PRIME MINISTER: I understand the real sense of distress and discomfort people  have when they visit here. You can feel it yourself. You do want to see something  more there, that marks our emotions, than what stands there now.

I think that it is really very dislocating for people when they come to the sight. It’s just  not in keeping with the emotions that are welling up in them.

So we are going to keep working with the proponents of the Peace Park and with the  Governor of Bali to try and secure the site so it can always be a place that you can  come with those emotions inside you and have an opportunity for reflection, rather  than being hustled past on a street and seeing what is there today.

JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Mr Abbott is already in Jakarta and is meeting with  the President on Monday and is going to talk to the President about stopping asylum  seeker boats and perhaps turning boats back-

PRIME MINISTER: I should have made it clear at the start I am standing at a  memorial and I’m not taking questions on anything other than the Bali memorial.

JOURNALIST: Were you dissappointed then Prime Minister that the President didn’t  make it to the Bali memorial?

PRIME MINISTER: I dealt with that question yesterday. We never anticipated that  President Yudhoyono would be at yesterday’s events. But I am very grateful that the  Foreign Minister was there, that Marty was there.

And I’m very grateful for all the help and support we had from-

JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)?

PRIME MINISTER: Well I dealt with that yesterday, and I’m dealing with it in the  same terms today because that’s how I feel. We were never expecting the President  of Indonesia to be here but we are incredibly grateful for the way in which the  Indonesian authorities had facilitated the ceremony we had yesterday and so many  Australians coming together.

JOURNALIST: Is Governor Pastika on side with you Prime Minister regarding the  site?

PRIME MINISTER: The Governor has been very supportive in our endeavours to  have the site be a true memorial for the lives that were lost here.

Thank you very much.

[ENDS]





