Minister for Trade and Competitiveness  Minister Assisting the Prime Minister on Asian Century Policy  Minister for Tertiary Education, Skills, Science and Research

The Hon Dr Craig Emerson MP

Sky AM Agenda Subjects: interest rates; economy; COAG; asylum-seekers' court challenge.

Transcript, E&OE (Errors and Ommissions Excepted)

4 December 2012

DAVID LIPSON: G'day and welcome to the program; I'm David Lipson. The Reserve Bank is  poised to deliver an early Christmas present to homebuyers later today; most economists  tipping that it will deliver another rate cut, to 3 per cent. Now, that is a level that hasn't been  seen since the GFC and was once described by the Treasurer Wayne Swan as 'emergency  levels'. Joining me now in the Canberra studio is the Trade Minister Craig Emerson. Thanks  for your time this morning.

CRAIG EMERSON: A pleasure, David.

LIPSON: Is there an economic emergency brewing in the Australian economy?

EMERSON: Of course not. In fact, our economy's growing stronger than just about every  developed economy on earth, and that's the forecast for the next couple of years. We've got  investment that's going to reach 50-year highs; our economy is triple-A rated by each of the

three international ratings agencies and stable. That's never happened before. And we have  seen very substantial reductions in interest rates, which is good for small business, good for  households. It used to be 6¾ per cent - that's the Reserve Bank cash rate - when we came  into government. Now it's 3¼ and you're saying that economists are tipping that it will go to 3.

LIPSON: So was Wayne Swan wrong to describe 3 per cent as emergency levels?

EMERSON: That was in the context of the Global Financial Crisis. There isn't a global  financial crisis now. There is still sluggish growth around many parts of the world: obviously  Europe. The United States looks like it's beginning the recovery process. China's recovery  looks to be underway, from what is ordinarily a very high base: you know, 7 per cent-plus  growth is the growth that the developed world would love to achieve, but it looks like it's  picking up. Its manufacturing index is now picking up, and that's good for the rest of the world  and it indicates confidence by China itself in the growth prospects of the rest of the world.

LIPSON: But another interest rate cut is a sign of a weakening Australian economy, isn't it?

EMERSON: Well what it is is that we are, through our fiscal policy, creating the room for  monetary policy to do its work. This is a very rapid fiscal consolidation. I think it's the most  rapid fiscal consolidation of any Western country coming out of the teeth of not only Global  Financial Crisis but the deepest global recession since the Great Depression. We averted  recession - we're coming out of that - and our fiscal consolidation beats, I think, just about

Page 1 of 4 Sky AM Agenda, transcript, 4 December 2012, Australian Minister for Trade and Co...

25/06/2013 http://www.trademinister.gov.au/transcripts/2012/ce_tr_121204.html

any developed country on earth. That creates the capacity for the Reserve Bank, if it so  wishes, to reduce interest rates further, which will be good news for home borrowers. I think  the figures are that on a $300,000 loan the savings, compared with where we were under the  previous government, would be $5,000 a year. That's a lot of money.

LIPSON: What would be your message then to the banks about passing on a full interest rate  cut if there is one?

EMERSON: No excuses - they must pass on any interest rate reduction in full. We know in  the past they haven't done that. The game is up. They need to pass on an interest rate  reduction in full, because the small businesses of Australia, the home borrowers of Australia,  deserve it. The banks have been doing a lot of consolidation of their own, reducing their  reliance on what's called the international wholesale funding market and using more domestic  savings. But really the time has come, gang. Reduce those interest rates commensurately  with any reduction in the Reserve Bank cash rate.

LIPSON: Well this speculation's been prompted by soft economic data - a rash of data you  could say. Wages down; company profits down. Those two make up - well, taxes on those  two - make up the biggest sources of government revenue. Are you sure that the government  will return a surplus in May next year?

EMERSON: As we've said, we went through the Mid-Year Economic and Fiscal Outlook. We  abide by, we stick with, those forecasts; they're on track. As I say, this is the fastest fiscal  consolidation of any developed country, and our net debt of course is one-tenth of that of the  developed world. So while people might look to some indicators, I'm an optimist about our  economic outlook. I spent a lot of time looking at these things. There's a little pick-up in  housing prices; there was a very substantial increase in consumer confidence last month. And  that suggests to me, David, that the consolidation by households themselves may have run its  course. By that I mean this: before the Global Financial Crisis, when money was easy, there  were boom times - it actually turned out to be a bubble; and they do burst, called a global  recession - the household savings ratio here was zero. That is, on average, people spent  everything that they earned. It's now 10 per cent, because they're saying they don't want to  go through that again, and so they've been socking money away - maybe a deposit on a  home, running down the credit card debt - and therefore this is why people feel this so-called  cost-of-living pressure. It's not really "so-called"; it's real. One hundred dollars that they earn:  before they used to spend all of it; now they spend $90 of it and square away, put away, $10.  So it feels like they're trying to do more with less because they are saving. That's actually  good for the Australian economy, but it does mean that households are under pressure - there's no doubt about that.

LIPSON: One of those pressures comes from electricity bills, as we know. And the  Government is hoping to get these reforms through COAG on Friday. But several states have  raised concerns about the Government's plans. Queensland says that it was ambushed. Why  has the Government been using the megaphone on this, rather than negotiating behind  closed doors?

EMERSON: I'm not privy to private conversations that may have occurred, for example from  Martin Ferguson the Resources and Energy Minister. But there've been reports on this, David  - now, a series of them - and very good reports pointing to the gold-plating of poles and

wires. And just to explain that: there has been over-investment, because there's a guaranteed  rate of return - good if you can get it - of more than 8 per cent, so absolutely risk-free. Try to  get that on US Treasury bonds at a quarter of a percentage point. And so there's this  incentive to over-invest to eliminate any possibility whatsoever of any brownout under any

Page 2 of 4 Sky AM Agenda, transcript, 4 December 2012, Australian Minister for Trade and Co...

25/06/2013 http://www.trademinister.gov.au/transcripts/2012/ce_tr_121204.html

circumstance at very high costs to consumers. Maybe consumers deserve a bit of a choice in  this, so they don't have to pay so much for all of the infrastructure and then at zero risk of any  brownout. Maybe they would prefer lower electricity bills. We think so.

LIPSON: But some people, including Paul McClintock, who's the outgoing head of the COAG  Reform Council, are concerned that political manoeuvring could put these reforms at risk.  David Speers spoke to Paul McClinktock. We'll play you what he said about this. He's happy  to see these electricity reforms on the table, but he does have concerns about, as I say, about  political manoeuvring.

PAUL MCCLINKTOCK [CLIP]: There's been a lot of politics in the recent big things that have  been sent out to COAG, and there's been very little effort to try and really build consensus  with the States before these things suddenly emerge.

DAVID SPEERS: What? Things like health reform?

MCCLINKTOCK: Health reform is certainly a case in point. And some elements of the  disability and some elements of education reform all have part flavours of the Federal  Government coming up with a dramatically different way of doing things.

LIPSON: He also points out, Craig Emerson, that of the 49 reforms in the past four years that  were actually agreed on by the Commonwealth and the States, almost half of them are, in his  eyes, at risk or not happening at all … sorry, at risk of not happening at all, or overdue.

EMERSON: The one area that I know best is the deregulation agenda: 27 areas of business  regulatory reform, 17 completed, another two or three due to be completed perhaps by the  end of this year, and another group to be completed by mid-2013. That's a very, very high  accomplishment rate. Now, you don't need two to tango here; you need nine to tango. And  that means all the States and all the Territories. Big reform like occupational health and  safety: Victoria says no. Well, what do you do? I mean, they've just said they're not going to  do it. That's a huge shame, because the number one business priority has been uniform  national occupational health and safety laws. We're still working on trade licencing: the idea of  an electrician from Queensland being able to go to Western Australia without having to apply  for an electrician's licence, because he or she is already qualified in Queensland. You'd think  that could be done. We're pushing very hard on that.

LIPSON: Just very briefly to finish: 56 Sri Lankan asylum-seekers seeking a High Court  injunction to stop their deportation. Is the Government confident that the screening-out  process that it's embarked upon is lawful?

EMERSON: Well, obviously, we are doing what we're doing in we believe in accordance with  the law. High Court challenges aren't new, particularly in this area. Obviously, we have an  argument, and that is … I'm not talking about this case in particular; so I emphasise that very,  very strongly. It would be wrong for me to talk about it. We have obligations under the  Refugee Convention - that is true. We don't have obligations simply to accept everyone who  jumps on a boat and arrives in Australia and says that the reason for coming is that Australia  offers a better life. If we did, as compelling as that case might be, there would be hundreds of  millions of eligible candidates, if on the basis of saying they want a better life in Australia they  were accepted. That's where a number of asylum-seekers have been turned around. They  have basically been economic refugees, not fleeing persecution as under the Refugee  Convention. I'm not commenting, however, on this case.

LIPSON: Craig Emerson, thanks so much for your time.

EMERSON: Thanks, David.

Page 3 of 4 Sky AM Agenda, transcript, 4 December 2012, Australian Minister for Trade and Co...

25/06/2013 http://www.trademinister.gov.au/transcripts/2012/ce_tr_121204.html

Media enquiries

Minister Emerson's Office: (02) 6277 7420

DFAT (Department of Foreign Affiars and Trade) Media Liaison: (02) 6261 1555

Page 4 of 4 Sky AM Agenda, transcript, 4 December 2012, Australian Minister for Trade and Co...

25/06/2013 http://www.trademinister.gov.au/transcripts/2012/ce_tr_121204.html

