



Sky News Agenda  Go



nski review; Peter Slipper

Posted on July 23, 2012

S



UBJECTS: Gonski review; Peter Slipper

E&



OE…………

David Speers: Christopher Pyne, welcome.  If the Government does go ahead with this  re  ported $6.5 billion in school funding do you agree a lot of parents would actually welcome

that?

Christopher Pyne: Oh look David, planning a $6.5 billion injection into the school funding  model on a  n annual basis, which is $26 billion over the next four years is like planning your

family budget around winning Powerball on a Thursday night.  This is a Government whose  surplus is essentially evaporating.  I t was based on 450 boat arrivals a month and they’re  doubling that.  There’s no way they’ll deliver a surplus and there’s absolutely no possibility  that they have $6.5 billion on an annual basis to spend extra on schools.  So, the idea is a  cruel hoax, David and even entertaining the possibility is raising expectations and trying to  fool Australian parents and I’m not going to enter into that trickery.

Speers: Some of this money would come from the states though, although the bulk of it  presumably would come from the Commonwealth.  If there is a way of finding this money,  albeit through spending cuts or higher taxes is there an argument at least for increasing school  funding to this extent.

P



yne: Look, David, the states are broke except for Western Australia, the Federal  Government has a massive debt problem, has no surplus, is running essentially a deficit  budget in a real sense.  If the Government has new plans for increasing taxes then it needs to  outl

ine what they are.  If it has new plans to raise $6.5 billion a year, remembering that the  mi

ning tax is supposed to collect $13 billion - so if they have plans to impose a new tax for  school funding they should come clean and explain it to the Australian public.  It is  a

bsolutely outrageous for the Government to put out there that they will be spending $6.5  billion more when every parent knows in every school that this is a broke federal government  and it doesn’t have that kind of money.  Now that kind of trickery - and we saw it with the  carbon tax before the last election when Julia Gillard said there would be no carbon tax under  a government she led and now she’s introduced one and of course the idea they have that

kind of money - $26 billion over four years is pure fantasy and I’m not going to encourage  the hoaxing of the Australian people by suggesting that money is available because it is not.

Speers:  What would happen though if the Government did find a way of finding this money  and going ahead with the Gonski reforms?  What would happen if the Coalition then won the  next election?  Would you take back that money?  Would you repeal any reforms in place?



Pyne:  Well David really it’s like asking me if it’s true that white rabbits talk in Alice in  Wonderland.  If the Government has $26 billion, let’s see it.  Let’s see the Government put  that money on the table.  The Coalition does not believe the current funding model is  broken.  I’m not prepared to simply accept that it is broken because it isn’t.  It is an objective  needs-based model that encourages private investment, that rewards parents who scrimp and  save to put their children in non-government schools.  If the Gonski model was implemented  lock, stock and barrel hundreds of schools would still miss out.  Hundreds of schools would  lose funding and push up parents’ fees.  If the Gonski model goes ahead without the extra  money then all schools will be facing higher school fees at a time of real cost of living  pressure.  So whatever way you implement the Gonski model, hundreds of schools will be  worse off and that means tens of thousands of parents.  But if the Gonski model is  implemented without the extra money then all schools will be worse off.  So let’s actually see  what the Government’s doing.  They put that story in the paper this morning and now they’ve  gone very quiet on the subject, the Minister for School Education isn’t even at work at the  moment, he isn’t even on duty.  Let’s actually see the colour of the Government’s money  before we start praising anything they’re doing in this space at all.

Speers:  The Government though says no school will be a dollar worse off and funding will  be indexed.  This is just an argument about the sort of indexation that’s going to be  used.  You want to stick with the current funding formula.  Are you therefore saying there is  no case for reform here?



Pyne:  Look David, talk is cheap.  The Government keeps talking.  It‘s had since February  this year when the Gonski Review was publicly released, it’s had the Gonski Review since  last December.  It’s still talking, it’s all hot air.  Let’s actually see the Government’s

response, let’s see the colour of their money.  Now the Coalition’s made a commitment that  we will index the current non-government schools funding at 6 per cent.  The Government’s  made no such promise to the non-government school sector.  The Government’s said they  will lose no dollar in funding.  Well that means no indexation.  That’s a $4.2 billion cut to  non-government schools.  Now all of this is just hot air, it’s just talk from a Government that  is high on talk and short on delivery.  Lets see the colour of their money.

Speers: But if you are going to commit a six per cent funding rise for all schools does that  mean to find the finding for that you would have to undo whatever the government does on  this?

Pyne: I don’t believe the government will do anything on the Gonski review. They are  running out of time.  They won’t have time this year to implement legislation. They don’t  have the money; they have completely run into a cul-de-sac on this issue.  I believe they will  simply roll the current SES funding model over for another year to get them through their  third election without a policy while holding out unrealistic expectations to schools and

parents.  I am not going to encourage those unrealistic expectations by pretending that the  federal government has $26 billion in new money to spend in the government sector.

Speers: What about the other part of the reform, the recommendation for greater transparency  so parents can have more information on their performance on individual teachers?  Do you  support that side of these proposed reforms?

Pyne: Well look David I think the teachers, principals and schools are heavily over  regulated.  Whenever the federal government has run out of things to say, they always talk  about more transparency and accountability.  What that always means is more red tape, more  bureaucracy, more hours spent by teachers and principals filling out forms.  What schools  need is less red tape, less bureaucracy.  What parents want is to see their teachers teaching  rather than acting as bureaucrats in the classroom.  I can’t see what more transparency or  accountability could be required by schools for parents.  Quite frankly, what teachers need is  the opportunity to have more professional development.  What new teachers need is better  training so we have the highest quality teachers teaching the most robust curriculum with  parents as involved as much as possible in their schools which means more principal  autonomy and local control by governing councils.  We don’t need more bureaucracy; we  don’t need more red tap.

Speers: And just finally Christopher Pyne on a separate matter - Peter Slipper - the court  case on sexual harassment claims has been adjourned.  If the case is thrown out by the court,  should he be allowed to return to the Speaker’s chair?

Pyne: Look I haven’t seen the outcome of the action in the federal court today.  From  listening to your news brief it appears that hasn’t been what the Federal Court has  decided.  But of course the issues surrounding the Speaker’s use of the Cabcharge dockets is

not yet resolved. So neither of those matters are resolved and until both are resolved I don’t  think it is appropriate for the Speaker to resume the chair.

Speers: Christopher Pyne, thank you.

Pyne: It’s a pleasure, thank you.

ENDS



