

Francis Keany (Radio 2UE) and Stephen  Dziedzic (ABC radio), Cook Islands  Transcript, E&OE, proof only

27 August 2012

JOURNALIST: Richard Marles, one of the focuses of the forum from Australia's point of  view would probably be our aid budget, the amount of money we spend here - that's set - but  we are going to look at new ways at making that more transparent? Can you tell me what sort  of things you'd like to see agreed to, at this PIF to make sure Australians tax payer dollars are  being spent effectively and transparently?

RICHARD MARLES: Well, there has been a lot of thought given by the Pacific over a  number of years to make sure that we, the Pacific - and when I say we I mean both the  donors and the recipient countries - are operating at best practice. The starting point here is  that doing development assistance in the Pacific is hard; it's hard because you're talking about  very small populations. Here in the Cook Islands, we are talking about 15000 people in very  isolated parts of the world. As we've all experienced, getting here is hard and so getting  viable and sustainable economies in those circumstances is difficult for all of us. We know  that if we are going to see the Pacific meet millennium development goals - and right now  that is a real challenge - then what we need to be seeing is that we are operating at absolutely  best practice.

Now, that means a few things. It means that donor countries and recipient countries need to  be acting in the best coordination possible and the Cairns compact is probably as good a  regional framework for coordination and aid as exists anywhere in the world. Transparency  and accountability, as you have rightly said, is another key component. We've seen under the  Cairns compact that improve significantly over the last few years. There's more room to go  but, with the peer reviews where countries put themselves forward to have their aid projects  reviewed both as donors and recipients, these are really good exercises in getting best  practice and making sure that transparency is at it absolute best. Australia is going to put  itself forward to be peer reviewed as a donor country and will be one of the first, the first  donor country in the Pacific to do that. So all of these are really good measures. I actually  think we are operating pretty well.

JOURNALIST: How about the gender equity initiative the Prime Minister is putting  forward, why does Australia believe that's necessary, what's the problem you are trying to  fix?

RICHARD MARLES: Well, if you look at women's empowerment and women's  participation in the political process, the sad fact is that the Pacific is the part of the world  where women's participation is at its lowest. If you look at the numbers of parliaments in the  world which have no women in them and have never had a woman in them, most of those are  here in the Pacific. If you look at parliaments which have less than five percent of women,  again it's pretty well every parliament here in the Pacific.

So, there is a way that the Pacific needs to go in terms of getting women involved in political  life, in leadership. But it's not just political empowerment, its economic empowerment as  well; making sure people can go about their economic lives, women can go about their  economic lives in a safe way that markets particularly are safe. It's also about making sure  that we continue the fight against domestic violence which is a significant issue in a number  of Pacific countries.

JOURNALIST: How much are Pacific attitudes towards women, without meaning to  generalise, but some pacific attitudes towards women holding back economic development as  well?

RICHARD MARLES: Well what we know is that when you see women in power and  participating fully in the political and economic life of a country, that's when you see  development, that ain't rocket science.

I mean, if you are going to disempower half of your population, it is going to be difficult to  move forward. This is one of the big issues that was raised by the UN Secretary General Ban  Ki-Moon when he attended the forum last year in Auckland. He made the very obvious point  that the task of development is so significant that you simply can't marginalise half of the  population you're trying to meet that challenge. Women have to be involved.

JOURNALIST: The marine environment is expected to be on the agenda for this week's  Pacific Islands Forum, what are you hoping to achieve from that?

RICHARD MARLES: If you look at the marine environment for many, probably most of  the countries of the Pacific, this is the single most important economic resource that they  have, particularly in terms of fishing. But in the future, mineral sea bed mining will be also a  significant economic opportunity for the countries of this region. Now, making sure that all  those are done in an ecologically and economically sustainable way is really important. Right  now the focus is on fisheries. We do have in the Pacific the most robust tuna fishery in the  world, supplying more than half the tuna resources in the world. But we've seen how other  fisheries around the world have been depleted. As a result, you're getting more and more  fishing countries coming to fish in the Pacific. That creates a challenge to make sure that the  fishery here is managed properly. Already Big Eye tuna stocks have been seriously depleted  so we need to see that is managed properly. As we walk down into the brave new world of  seabed mineral mining, we've got to get the ecology of that right. We've got to make sure that  all of that is done in a way which does not affect the environment. So, I think in both  respects, getting robust resolutions around that is going to be really important. I know that  that's a significant focus for the Cook Islands because they, of course, have a very large

exclusive economic zone. But I think their leadership has been fantastic. If you look at a  country like Tuvalu or Kiribati, both have large exclusive economic zones, this is their  income and getting this right means everything for their future economic development.

JOURNALIST: On Fiji, what's Australia's message, I gather it's broadly going to be  (inaudible) the course are you looking towards the 2014 election is that when you think Fiji  should, or could be readmitted and how confident are you that other Pacific Nations share  that view or you can convince them of that view?

RICHARD MARLES: The starting point with Fiji is this: the fact that Fiji is not here is a  great source of sadness for every member of the Pacific Islands Forum, including Australia.  The second thing is that every country in the Pacific recognizes that what's occurred in Fiji  since 2006 has not been democratic and that what we need to see is Fiji move to democracy.  Now, there have been significant moves this year and that is to Fiji's credit and we make no  bones about that. The fact that they have a constitutional process underway at the moment  which is headed by a very eminent internationalist, Professor Yash Ghai gives this a lot of  credibility and we watch with enormous interest. We had a trilateral meeting with the interim  Foreign Minister Ratu Inoke Kubuabola and Foreign Minister McCully and Bob Carr a  month or so ago and that was a significant step forward in building the relationship with Fiji.  I think all of the countries of the Pacific as I've spoken to them about that meeting have really  welcomed that development. That said we need to make sure that what we're seeing in Fiji is  genuine. Human rights need to be respected and the freedom of media needs to be respected.  The ministerial contact group of the Pacific Islands Forum is seized of this issue and is  managing it. What they will be doing is continuing to assess Fiji on an ongoing basis, and  how it progresses toward democracy and what that then implies in terms of Fiji coming back  to the Forum.

JOURNALIST: But the basic principal Australia is going to take is that until there is proof  of real progress towards true democracy in Fiji, then re-admittance remains out of the  question?

RICHARD MARLES: Well I think that is essentially right, in that what we need to see is  genuine movement towards democracy and all of us having a sense of confidence in that. But  I want to emphasise that there have been some very positive steps made this year and if we do  see that there is a genuine process underway and that Fiji is moving towards democracy then  there are a whole lot of questions that come onto the table. But, if the question is right now, in  terms of this week, are we in a position to confidently say that that's where things are at and  that Fiji should come back into the Forum? Well no, I don't think that's where we're at now.  But, the Ministerial contact group is seized of this issue and I think the way forward is for  that group to continually assess the developments in Fiji, to reach a conclusion about what is  appropriate in terms of readmitting Fiji to the range of Pacific Island forums which exist on  lots of issues.

JOURNALIST: The reestablishment of offshore processing is expected to be on the agenda  when Australia meets with PNG and Nauru, how are you expecting those talks to go?

RICHARD MARLES: We've had very positive talks with both PNG and Nauru in relation  to the asylum seeking processing centres. We're confident that we can move ahead with  (inaudible) progress in relation to both those processing centres. In terms of that we're  confident that we'll make progress this week. Obviously we want to see facilities in place as

soon as possible so that we can stop boats making what is really one of the most dangerous  journeys of refuge anywhere in the world. I think in terms of the rest of the Pacific Islands  countries, there is obviously going to be some curiosity about what's happening in relation to  the asylum seeker issue and I expect to be asked that question a lot in the margins this week.  But I don't see it as an issue which will actually come up in the sessions themselves.

JOURNALIST: But in the bilats, are we going to see a MOU signed, I mean I think Nauru  has already drawn up an MOU - is that going to be signed this week? PNG's a bit further off,  but how about Nauru?

RICHARD MARLES: Well look, we're working closely with them, let's see how the issues  progress during the week.

JOURNALIST: Finally, the Secretary of State of course is flying in on Friday for the post-Forum session. There has been a lot of conjecture about exactly what the visit symbolizes or  what it signals. The broad consensus academically seems to be that this is part of the pivot  towards the Asia-Pacific and it's also about, to some extent anyway, countering China's  influence in the Pacific, in particular China's tendency to hand out soft loans to large numbers  of Pacific powers. What's your analysis? Do you see this as something as blunt as countering  China or do you see it more broadly?

RICHARD MARLES: No, I don't see it as being as blunt as countering China, but I do see  it as the US repositioning itself in this part of the world, specifically the Asia-Pacific, if I can  put it that way. From our point of view, the more that we see the United States in the Pacific  the better. The US has history in the Pacific. There are of course a number of overseas  territories of the United States in American Samoa and Guam and the Commonwealth of the  Northern Marianas which are within the Pacific family and you have Hawaii as a state of the  US. In many senses, the US is a Pacific nation and a Pacific island nation. I think there is  much that the United States has to offer and what we see with the Secretary of State coming  to the Forum is a culmination of a move in this direction by the United States. It is not the  only part of that: last year in Auckland, the United States had a 50-strong delegation to the  Pacific Islands Forum. That was the biggest delegation they'd ever had to the Forum.

JOURNALIST: It's different to the Secretary of State though.

RICHARD MARLES: Yes it is, and I think we are seeing this move to increase engagement  but in the last two years we have seen the Assistant Secretary of State Kurt Campbell do a  trip through the Pacific which has been very much welcomed by countries in the Pacific. I  think this is something which is a very positive step for them but I wouldn't characterise it as  being (about) countering China's influence. In terms of China, we all welcome China's  engagement in the Pacific. As I said at the start, doing development assistance work in the  Pacific is hard, and if any country wants to participate in that work, they are welcome. The  one thing that we ask is that we all work together and that is what the Cairns Compact  Framework is about and we would like to see China sign up to that compact.

JOURNALIST: We have to let you go. Thank you very much.

Media enquiries

 Parliamentary Secretary's Office: (02) 6277 4330   Departmental Media Liaison: (02) 6261 1555



