David Bradbury MP  Assistant Treasurer

Minister Assisting for Deregulation



Transcript of interview with David Lipson

Sky AM Agenda

1 November 2012

E&OE



Topics: Poker machine reforms, wheat deregulation, asylum seekers,  budget surplus



DAVID LIPSON - Welcome back, joining me now the Assistant Treasurer David  Bradbury and the Shadow Small Business Minister Bruce Billson. Thanks very  much for your time. Firstly to pokies, David Bradbury what’s your response to  Nick Xenophon’s claims that the reforms that will go into the Parliament today are  piss weak.

DAVID BRADBURY - I don’t think it’s a surprise to anyone that Nick Xenophon  has some pretty strong views on these matters but what I think he should  acknowledge and what Andrew Wilkie certainly has acknowledged, is what we’re  bringing before the Parliament is the most significant package of reforms at a  national level to tackle problem gambling. This is something that has not been a  problem that has manifested itself within the last few weeks or months or years;  this has been a growing challenge right across the country and we are taking  leadership to tackle the scourge of problem gambling and the reality of what is  occurring and what exists in communities right around this country, is something  often brought home to us in very real terms as local members and frankly I think  governments have failed to take action for too long.

LIPSON - Bruce Billson the Coalition was pushing for voluntary pre-commitment  technology for some time so I take it you’ll support this through the Parliament?

BRUCE BILLSON - Well we believe in voluntary pre-commitment and you see  the industry acting responsibly in that way right across the country. But what’s  interesting here is that this legislation is described as being very mild in terms of

Nick Xenophon’s assessment, David’s describing it as land breaking, the Greens  are saying we’ve got some coin out of it but gee we’ve got this mandatory pre-commitment undertaking embedded in it. This will be a measure where there will  be different messages going to different constituencies...

LIPSON - Will you support it though?

BILLSON - Well that’s why we need to see the legislation because you’ve got  the book ends of analysis that have arisen out of the government slipping into the  ‘slippersphere’ for its existence, turning its back on its commitment to Wilkie, now  we’ve got this shandy where we’re not quite sure what it is and those talking  about it either say it’s incredibly weak or incredibly powerful. So you can see why  we’re careful about that. We’re clear, we support voluntary pre-commitment, we  believe you need to focus on the individual having the problem with gambling,  and not just on one technology. Let’s not ignore what’s happening in the  interactive gambling space, you can’t avoid it, it’s exploding, you can lose your  shirt without putting one on, we need to focus on that as well if we’re serious  about it.

LIPSON - Another issue going through the Parliament is the deregulation of the  wheat market, this is something that has caused some division in the Coalition.  We saw two MPs abstain yesterday, Tony Crook crossed the floor, is that a  problem of discipline within the Coalition at all?

BILLSON - No, no unlike the Labor Party, we’re not handcuffed to whatever the  executive decides. In our party, you’re entitled to put different views forward and  the views that were within our team, under the umbrella of all of us believing in  deregulation, was the need to look at how we implemented that policy  commitment. In Western Australia where the growers own the infrastructure and

have all the marketing information and claim they can tackle one of their own  who might be shipping off wheat that’s not to the quality that they say it is,  *inaudible* pretty happy with leaving it to them. But in other states, multinationals  own the infrastructure, there’s a concern about where the market intelligence is  and there’s concern about how do you maintain quality if someone is shipping off  premium wheat to key markets and it’s found not to be that, the whole Australian  wheat brand is damaged and that's where the differences are. So we thought  there were important steps to make sure this deregulation process was done  thoughtfully. Some of our friends in the west thought they were good to go, that’s  okay it’s a national Parliament, we need to look at national responses to these  measures.

LIPSON - What about some of those concerns raised by the opposition, what  guarantees does the government have in this legislation?

BRADBURY - I think the point that needs to be made and there are a range of  protections that are put in place in this legislation and they were definitely

sufficient to persuade Dennis Jensen and Mal Washer that this was something  worth going through and I make the point that Bruce says that we don’t handcuff  our people, I’d like to know what was going on out in the vestibule area when the  vote took place when neither Dennis Jensen or Mal Washer got into the  Parliament to vote according to their publicly stated position. I think what this  does show though, is that the cracks are really starting to emerge in Tony  Abbott’s leadership. We’ve not just got divisions on wheat, we’ve got divisions on  water, we’ve got divisions on asylum seekers and you’ve got to ask yourself why  is it that these divisions are starting to be exposed? I think what we’ve seen over  the last couple of years has been the strength of the vicious negativity of the  scare campaign on carbon has papered over some of these divisions. But as the  puff is starting to come out of that campaign, we’re seeing these divisions  exposed and the reason why these divisions exist is because people are  beginning to realise Tony Abbott doesn’t reflect the views of many within the  Liberal Party when it comes to market principles.

LIPSON - But are they divisions or are they democracy in action?

BRADBURY - Well let’s have a look at some of the market based principles that  most people within the Liberal Party join the party to implement; let’s have a look  at a couple of measures where they’ve walked away from them. Wheat  deregulation; we’ve seen them walk away from a market-based mechanism on  tackling climate change; and significantly we’ve seen support to pay for social  expenditure programs, support for a $12 billion, monster parental leave tax that  will jack up the price of the cost of living for Australians, because it will hit them at  the super market, it will hit them at the petrol station...

LIPSON - Okay, okay just a quick response.

BILLSON - I’m celiac, I can’t eat wheat, but David can’t talk about wheat policy  because it was never about wheat policy it was all about politics and that’s the  way the government operates, it’s why they’re untrustworthy, it’s why they don’t  pursue the national interest. On this fiction about this monster tax they call,  they’re getting that one wrong as well. The issue was about company tax  reductions and those able to contribute to a fair dinkum paid parental leave  scheme...

LIPSON - I want to ask you about Craig Thomson. He has labelled those in the  Labor Party as hypocrites and accused them of pandering to the redneck vote for  the decision to excise the mainland for asylum seekers. What’s your response to  that attack from someone who was within your party, is still a member of the  Labor Party.

BRADBURY - I totally reject that, I think what needs to be understood in the  context of the decision that the government has taken here is that this was one of  the recommendations of the Houston Panel and collectively as a party, we took

the judgement that recommendations made by the Houston Panel should be  adopted. You can’t start cherry picking and pulling out recommendations and  saying this is the particular one we have a problem with. What you need to  consider is that this was part of a package. Yes it did involve embracing offshore  processing, it did involve increasing our humanitarian intake to 20,000 people. If  we were trying to appeal to the redneck vote as some are suggesting, why would  we be increasing our humanitarian intake? Which I might note, is a commitment  that we’ve made that Bruce and his colleagues are refusing to accept and  endorse.

LIPSON - Bruce Billson I’ll give you a chance to respond to that.

BILLSON - What it tells you is you only really know what the Labor Party and  Parliamentarians think when they leave the place, I mean some of our leading  front benchers, Chris Bowen a stain on our national character, Tony Burke  undermines our sovereignty, Simon Crean shameful xenophobic, I mean the only  thing collective going on is the collective amnesia that you need to have to take  these guys at their word. You only find out what they really believe after they  leave the place, or leave the Labor party, ask Maxine McKew, ask Lindsay  Tanner, ask Craig Thomson and then you get a true take on what’s going on. So,  an enormous about face, what’s really needed is to implement the Howard  Government package of measures. Offshore processing, turning around the  boats where it is safe to do so, and temporary protection visas. We’ve had the  highest number of boat arrivals this month ever, ever.

LIPSON - Okay, one minute to go I just want to ask about the surplus. Andrew  Wilkie the latest independent to say he’s not inclined to support superannuation  saving, that’s worth $760 million, can you give a hell or high water guarantee as  Wayne Swan did in 2010, that you’ll get a surplus this financial year?

BRADBURY - We are doing everything we can to achieve that. Can I address  the point that Andrew Wilkie made because I think that there was a suggestion  somehow that this is some kind of budget fiddle. Do not be misled into believing  that. This is a genuine reform that will make sure that people’s lost  superannuation, superannuation that’s not being applied for their retirement  purposes will be...

LIPSON - No hell or high water guarantee from you?

BRADBURY - I’m not going to get into the forms of words you’re trying to put  into my mouth, but we are doing everything we can. We have handed down not  only a budget, but a midyear economic statement, that charts a path to return to  surplus and we’ll do everything we can to do that.

LIPSON - Bruce Billson, 20 seconds left.

BILLSON - Surplus gone, surplus gone. The Labor Party has promised over and  over  again  a  surplus  and  they’ll  never  deliver  one.  Even  if  they  did  deliver  a   surplus, to get back the $147 billion of record deficits, they’d need a century of

these wafer thin fudged and fiction surpluses. It’ll never happen, they’ll just let the  spending spree begin.

LIPSON - Bruce  Billson,  David  Bradbury  thanks  so  much  for  your  time  this   morning.

ENDS

