Ministers' Media Centre Education, Employment and Workplace Relations portfolio

Interview with Neil Mitchell , 3AW,

Friday 25 May 2012 Transcript

The Hon Bill Shorten MP [link:http://ministers.deewr.gov.au/shorten]

Subjects: Craig Thomson, Clubs NSW and school bullying trial, asylum seekers

NEIL MITCHELL: Now Bill Shorten, Joe Hockey in our Canberra studio.

The Minister for Workplace Relations, Bill Shorten, good morning.

BILL SHORTEN: Good morning, Neil.

NEIL MITCHELL: Shadow Treasurer, Joe Hockey, good morning.

JOE HOCKEY: Good morning, Neil.

NEIL MITCHELL: Now you’ll both behave yourself because you’re together, I’m in Melbourne and you’ll be uncontrollable, won’t you?

JOE HOCKEY: No.

BILL SHORTEN: Not at all.

NEIL MITCHELL: All right.

JOE HOCKEY: We get on well.

NEIL MITCHELL: That’s what worried me. Joe Hockey, your leader has said today it’s perhaps time we back off Craig Thompson and he should be sort of sent off on holiday or he should leave the parliament. You agree with him I assume?

JOE HOCKEY: Yes, I do.

NEIL MITCHELL: Okay, will the Opposition then agree not to exploit the fact that the Government loses his vote?

Page 1 of 13 Interview with Neil Mitchell , 3AW, | Ministers' Media Centre

9/08/2012 http://ministers.deewr.gov.au/shorten/interview-neil-mitchell-3aw

JOE HOCKEY: Well that’s a ridiculous question because…

NEIL MITCHELL: Why?

JOE HOCKEY: …he is a creature of the Labor Party, he is supporting the Labor Party. We have to deal with the numbers as they stand in the floor of the house. As you know Peter Slipper is not voting at the moment. He was elected by the Liberal Party.

NEIL MITCHELL: But it is complicating things that - Craig Thompson I agree should go off somewhere and get his head together. But it’s complicating things because if he does that the Government loses a vote. You in an act of generosity in the Opposition could say, we'll let him go and we won’t exploit it.

JOE HOCKEY: Well hang on, what do you mean exploit? I mean do you have to have votes.

NEIL MITCHELL: Well give him pair effectively.

JOE HOCKEY: The independents are holding up the Government, they’re not going to change their position are they?

NEIL MITCHELL: So you wouldn’t make that agreement?

JOE HOCKEY: Well I’m not in a position to make any agreement because he’s voting with the Labor Party, he’s choosing to vote with the Labor Party. He owes the Labor Party hundreds of thousands of dollars for legal fees and I expect that’s one of the reasons why he’ll continue to support the Labor Party. And frankly, [laughs], you know, it’s the independents that are holding up the Government and have been since last election.

NEIL MITCHELL: Okay well Bill Shorten, do you agree that he should go off and get his head together?

BILL SHORTEN: I do agree that the personal destruction and the attacks need to stop. I do believe that it is not the role of parliament to play judge and jury. I’m pleased that if the Opposition’s realised that they’ve done a - not withstanding anything he has or hasn’t done, the attacks which he’s been subjected to are incredibly destructive. So I don’t believe that the personal attacks need to continue. But what I also know is that the parliament can’t act as judge and jury. The Fair Work report is a serious substantial report; it had - details all sorts of findings which are gravely disturbing. But they haven’t been subject to cross-examination and you do have to - once you concluded the investigation stage - go to the court stage.

Page 2 of 13 Interview with Neil Mitchell , 3AW, | Ministers' Media Centre

9/08/2012 http://ministers.deewr.gov.au/shorten/interview-neil-mitchell-3aw

NEIL MITCHELL: Okay, but everybody’s saying their concerned for this man’s mental health, what do you do about it? I mean do you think Bill Shorten he should go off on a break?

BILL SHORTEN: Well I do believe that he certainly needs a break from the personal attacks on him. He’s got - I think he said nine different investigations. He’ll have his day in court and I think in the meantime and I’ve sat through, listened carefully to what the Opposition have to say, they can deplore the conduct reported in the HSU but they’re not a - they’re not judge and jury. And I do think that he’s going to have to answer to a whole lot of people in this court process. He’s going to have to answer to a whole lot of things.

And in the meantime I don’t see what dancing on him - I don’t see how that helps him.

More importantly, I don’t see how that it helps the standing of parliament.

NEIL MITCHELL: Why don’t we just go to an election? I mean seriously, there are probably tens of thousands of people around this country who are sitting in a position waiting for judgement on something they may or may not have done. This is complicated because of the power he has with that one vote. Either ignore that vote or go to an election.

BILL SHORTEN: Well we don’t live a country where you just go to the election every Saturday. We have terms of office…

NEIL MITCHELL: Would you disagree that the people want an election?

BILL SHORTEN: Do you reckon we want a pattern where we can have a revolving door election every week, every month, when you feel like it? No, I don’t buy that, I think Governments are elected to govern. I mean what if the Libs were in power and all of a sudden everyone didn’t like something they did and they all said we should have an election. I don’t see the Liberals saying oh gee, we should go and have an election.

NEIL MITCHELL: Joe Hockey?

JOE HOCKEY: Well let’s go back a step. Firstly, he is not at the top of my sympathy list, Craig Thompson. At the top of my sympathy list are the eighty thousand members of the HSU that cleaned bedpans every day to pay their effectively mandatory fees to a union, entrusting union leaders with a duty of care. They’re my number one priority. And secondly, if you’re asking about who this is hurting, it’s hurting good people in the union movement, it’s hurting good people - and there are good people in the Labor Party. It’s hurting his family, it’s hurting his friends. The process which has gone on for four years, in an agency that Bill yesterday said he has faith in, that’s right isn’t it? You have faith in Fair Work Australia?

BILL SHORTEN: Yep.

Page 3 of 13 Interview with Neil Mitchell , 3AW, | Ministers' Media Centre

9/08/2012 http://ministers.deewr.gov.au/shorten/interview-neil-mitchell-3aw

JOE HOCKEY: And confidence in Fair Work Australia. They’ve come up with an eleven hundred page document with findings. Not speculation, not allegations, findings.

NEIL MITCHELL: So what should happen now?

JOE HOCKEY: Well what should happen is he should disconnect himself entirely - well Julia Gillard should disconnect him entirely from the Labor Party. Bill says let’s -he’s innocent until proven guilty, well why did Julia Gillard throw him out of caucus but not throw him out of the parliament. Because she’s now saying that the Labor caucus has a higher standard than what the parliament should have. That’s unacceptable, he should go. And Julia Gillard is the one who is responsible for this. She’s been defending him for four years, now she has to be held accountable for standing by him on an ongoing basis.

NEIL MITCHELL: So are you going to back off Craig Thompson and concentrate on Julia Gillard?

JOE HOCKEY: We are going to continue to prosecute the case that there is - there are very serious issues here. And that for so long as there is a link between the Labor Party, Julia Gillard and Craig Thompson it is unacceptable that our Prime Minister leave the country in this position.

NEIL MITCHELL: We’ll take a call, yes Rod, go ahead Rod.

CALLER ROD: Hi guys, I'm - it’s interesting to listen to what you’re saying but from an average Liberal voter’s point of view which I have been all my life, I think you -your parties are playing politics with not only the man’s health but the family’s wellbeing but also the general populous of Australia. You’re not doing what you should be doing.

You’ve lost sight of what you’re there for which is to look after. Let the process proceed and get this thing off the headlines, let it rest and let the law take its course. What he’s done in the past is in the past and he may - he will be challenged from that. So get back to running the country for God’s sake for the average person in this country who far exceeds the eighty thousand members of the HSU that lost their money. Far exceed what part of the party you can come with.

NEIL MITCHELL: All righty, either of you got a comment on that?

BILL SHORTEN: Yes it’s Bill, I agree with the caller, I agree with partly also what Joe said. I do have - the top of my sympathy is in fact the members of the union. And I should say to begin with not all members of the HSU and not all branches of the HSU should be tarred with this brush. But in terms of the branches which are caught up in this, yes they have been let down by their union administration, there can be no doubt about that. But when I hear the Liberals talk about sympathy for health workers, then why is it

Page 4 of 13 Interview with Neil Mitchell , 3AW, | Ministers' Media Centre

9/08/2012 http://ministers.deewr.gov.au/shorten/interview-neil-mitchell-3aw

that they don’t support the Fair Work Act which ensures they have a better chance of getting a pay rise? If they’re fair dinkum about health workers, why did they vote against increasing compulsory superannuation for low paid health workers? Why is it that we want to abolish the fifteen per cent tax paid on super by people who earn less than thirty-seven thousand dollars? Do they oppose it? I mean…

NEIL MITCHELL: We’re getting into another area…

BILL SHORTEN: No - no.

JOE HOCKEY: Yeah, this is another area. I’m happy you’ve made each of those points but…

BILL SHORTEN: My point is that sometimes when I’ve heard the Libs bang on about we really care about what’s happened, when it comes to looking after a whole lot of issues which effect people who work in the health services industry, they’re remarkably silent on the rest. But I don’t think I am wrong to express some sympathy for Craig Thompson and his family as a human being. I’m not here to defend individuals, but when is enough personal destruction enough?

JOE HOCKEY: Well I think the issue here at the moment is that he gave a one hour statement to parliament, the Prime Minister continually closed down debate about that one hour statement. We tried to get a proper discussion up, the Government kept closing down that debate. It goes to whether someone is telling a lie. And this is a fundamental point. This is - I understand where that gentleman’s coming from but Mr Thompson made a one hour statement to parliament, we’re trying to hold him to account for that one hour statement because it totally contradicts an eleven hundred page document that was delivered by this Government.

NEIL MITCHELL: Okay well look, we’ve got to take another quick call and then a break, Jeff, go ahead Jeff.

CALLER JEFF: Good morning Neil, gentlemen. Bill, could you honestly sit there with your hand on your heart and said that you’ve never - the Labor and yourself have never played gutter politics and attacked someone’s personal being. That is utter garbage.

And as a member of the Labor Party I’m going to resign, I resigned from my union this morning. What you are doing is a disgrace and you should get on and govern the country and have an election and give what the people want.

NEIL MITCHELL: What’s your union Jeff?

CALLER JEFF: TWU.

NEIL MITCHELL: And what’s your objection? With the way that Thompson’s

Page 5 of 13 Interview with Neil Mitchell , 3AW, | Ministers' Media Centre

9/08/2012 http://ministers.deewr.gov.au/shorten/interview-neil-mitchell-3aw

beingtreated is it?

CALLER JEFF: The waythe publ ic have been treated withthis [ uncl ear] ,Neil .

BI LL SHORTEN: Al lright wel lJeff;I can saythat I haven’ t engaged in this sort of gutter pol itics attackwhichwe’ ve seen on Thompson.So you - I’ ve never met you I don’ t thinkbut I’ l ltel lyou right now I certainl yhaven’ t.Al so if you’ re a member of the TW U you’ d probabl ybe aware that this Government passed throughsafe rates l egisl ation which wil lsee the issues about l ongdistance truckdrivers and the l ow cartage rates theyget paid whichcan comprise their personalsafety.So mate it’ s upto you if you want to be in a union or not,but I’ m not goingto wear the argument that we’ re not standingupfor truck drivers because we are and our opponents oppose us.

NEI L MI TCHELL: Al lright,I need to take a breakbut as quickl y- from eachof you veryquickl y,if we - if you’ re concerned about CraigThompson’ s mentalheal th,is he in a fit state to cast a vote,Bil lShorten?

BI LL SHORTEN: Oh,that I don’ t know.I know that MalW asher’ s been chattingto him.I’ m sure he’ s gettinghis own medicalsupport.I know that individualmembers of the Labor caucus has been doingsome pastoralcare withhim.And I do appreciate some of the change in tone in the l ast twenty-four hours.I thinkit’ s a bit bel ated but I do appreciate an argument whichis emergingwhichsays this guyis goingto be hel d to account bymore enquiries and more forums than most human being.Now some peopl e wil lsayhe shoul d be.Mypoint thoughis that I don’ t bel ieve that catcal l s from the Opposition are goingto add anythingto the sum of human knowl edge on this debate.

NEI L MI TCHELL: Let’ s finish…

BI LL SHORTEN: Let’ s l eave it to the j udges.

NEI L MI TCHELL: Let’ s finishthe topic on this;we’ l lgo to a break.Joe Hockey,is he in a fit state to cast a vote?

JOE HOCKEY: W el lI don’ t know but the fact of the matter is whil st he’ s - there’ s an umbil icalcord between him and the Labor Party,his vote wil lcontinue to be infl uenced bythe Labor Party.I mean Jul ia Gil l ard is l ike a python swal l owinga footbal land pretendingit’ s not there,it is there.

NEI L MI TCHELL: W hat she done?

JOE HOCKEY: You can’ t ignore it and it needs to be deal t with.

BI LL SHORTEN: Yeahbut if he’ s - if he’ s sick,I know one thingthe Libs won’ t give him a pair.

Page 6of 13 Interview withNeilMitchel l,3AW ,| Ministers' Media Centre

9/ 08/ 2012 http:/ / ministers. deewr. gov. au/ shorten/ interview-neil -mitchel l -3aw

JOE HOCKEY: W el lmate…

BI LL SHORTEN: W il lyou?

JOE HOCKEY: W el lno. . .

BI LL SHORTEN: So it doesn’ t matter how sickhe is…

JOE HOCKEY: W el lhe hasn’ t appl ied,we don’ t give independants pairs and you know that.

BI LL SHORTEN: But if he’ s…

JOE HOCKEY: You threw him out of the caucus Bil l ,you threw him out.

BI LL SHORTEN: But Joe you’ ve j ust said that he’ s some footbal lin someone' s throat,so you’ re impl yingthat cl earl yhe votes more than one waythan the other…

JOE HOCKEY: No,he votes entirel ywiththe Labor Party.You said that.

BI LL SHORTEN: That’ s right.So what you’ ve said is you don’ t give independence pairs,what you’ ve al so said is you don’ t know if he’ s sick.Al lI’ m raisingis if he was sufficientl yil lthat he coul dn’ t carryout his j ob,woul d you give him a pair?

JOE HOCKEY: I’ m not giving- I’ m not gettinginto the hypothetical- I don’ t award pairs.But l et me tel lyou,the peopl e out there are cal l ingfor an el ection.They’ ve had a gutfulof this…

NEI L MI TCHELL: But Joe Hockey,your l eader has said that he shoul d be sent off on a hol iday.Now that is compl icated if you don’ t give him a pair.

JOE HOCKEY: W el l ,wel l- you know what…

BI LL SHORTEN: It’ s a fal se offer.

NEI L MI TCHELL: Do you care about him or not?

JOE HOCKEY: They’ l lsend him on a hol iday,provided theycan get power.

BI LL SHORTEN: W el ll et me j ust saythis,there have been manyinstances in the past that are - that are not dissimil ar to this.The Labor Partyhas never hel d backin going after our peopl e.And I know that Dennis Shanahan’ s col umn in the Austral ian this morningabout the hypocrisyof TonyW indsor on these sorts of things.Our j obis not to tryand hol d upthe Government.Our j obis to hol d them to account.

Page 7of 13 Interview withNeilMitchel l,3AW ,| Ministers' Media Centre

9/ 08/ 2012 http:/ / ministers. deewr. gov. au/ shorten/ interview-neil -mitchel l -3aw

NEI L MI TCHELL: Okay,we’ l ltake a…

BI LL SHORTEN: And we are hol dingthem to account.

NEI L MI TCHELL: I apol ogise.W e’ l ltake a breakand come backwithsome other issues.Bil lShorten and Joe Hockey.

NEI L MI TCHELL: Okaywe’ ve onl ygot a few minutes.Bil lShorten and Joe Hockeyin our Canberra studio.Bil lShorten were you ever thrown out of school ?

BI LL SHORTEN: Do you mean detention or expel l ed?

NEI L MI TCHELL: Suspended or expel l ed?

BI LL SHORTEN: No.

NEI L MI TCHELL: Detention?

BI LL SHORTEN: Yes.

NEI L MI TCHELL: W hy?

BI LL SHORTEN: Ohtal kingtoo much.

NEI L MI TCHELL: No real l y?

BI LL SHORTEN: Yeah.Littl e did I know that one dayI’ d be on 3AW .There might be some of your l isteners who stil lwant to give me detention. . .

NEI L MI TCHELL: W hat about you Joe Hockey,ever suspended?

JOE HOCKEY: No.

NEI L MI TCHELL: Ohthat tooka whil e.

JOE HOCKEY: Ah. . .

NEI L MI TCHELL: Are you sure?

JOE HOCKEY: W el lI’ m j ust refl ectingon the Jesuit who’ s turninga hundred at the end of this year who used to strapme for everyspel l ingmistake I made.

NEI L MI TCHELL: And that’ s the worst thingyou ever did?

BI LL SHORTEN: There’ s a rul e isn’ t there Neilthat if you don’ t know he doesn’ t have to tel lyou.

Page 8of 13 Interview withNeilMitchel l,3AW ,| Ministers' Media Centre

9/ 08/ 2012 http:/ / ministers. deewr. gov. au/ shorten/ interview-neil -mitchel l -3aw

JOE HOCKEY: That’ s right.

NEI L MI TCHELL: Yeahal right.The reason is there’ s this pol icythat’ s beingtested in New SouthW al es and I know there’ s been a bit of discussion about it.Cl ubs New SouthW al es makingconfidentialrecords - anti-bul l ying,confidentialschoolrecords avail abl e to school s - to prospective empl oyers. Now I’ ve j ust been tal kingto Cl ubs and theysaywel lif the kids won’ t provide them theywon’ t get a j ob.Now W orkpl ace Rel ations Minister,is it appropriate to do this?

BI LL SHORTEN: I’ m al lfor doingworkon bul l ying.That’ s whythe Government’ s hel pingfund programs to stopcyber-bul l ying.That’ s whyI’ ve been workingwiththe Panl ockfamil ywho you know. . .

NEI L MI TCHELL: Yes.

BI LL SHORTEN: . . . about makingsure peopl e don’ t get bul l ied at work.This is probabl ynot goingto be - you know,meet the opinion pol ltest because everyone says wel lthat’ s good we don’ t want to have bul l ies.I’ m a l ittl e uneasyabout kids’school records beingused as their future empl oyment documents.Now if the school s are agreeing and if the Cl ubs - I suppose you can’ t - not controlto see how it goes.But if a kid gets into strife at school ,a coupl e of things I thinkfl ow from that.One is if your kid is a bul l yat schoolwhichis unacceptabl e,wel lyou don’ t know what’ s happeningto them at home,or you don’ t know what el se has happened to l ead to that.So I do bel ieve in givingkids a second chance.The other thingabout it al lis that it’ s a - I reckon the kids shoul d be given a chance to get workwhen theyl eave school .So l et’ s see how this trialgoes,but I’ m j ust -for once I can’ t sayI’ m compl etel yenthusiastic,but if there’ s a trialand there’ s peopl e of goodwil lwel lthen maybe we’ l lhave a l ookat how it goes.

NEI L MI TCHELL: YeahI’ m withyou.I’ m a bit uneasyabout it.Joe Hockeydo you support it?

JOE HOCKEY: You know I was j ust thinkingBil lgave a prettygood answer.

NEI L MI TCHELL: Good grief.

JOE HOCKEY: YeahI know.I thought it was a good answer.LookI don’ t have anyprobl em withan empl oyer tryingto find out if someone - how someone behaved at school .I don’ t have anyissue withthat.W hen it’ s industry-wide I thinkmmm geezthat sort of grates a bit.It means there’ s no second chance if that is their industryof choice for a career.But,you know,the temptation is - and rightl yif you were a bul l yat schoolyou maywel lbe a bul l yat workand an empl oyer’ s got a dutyof care to other empl oyees.So I thinkBil l ’ s answer’ s prettymuch- prettymuchright.Let’ s have a l ookat it.

Page 9of 13 Interview withNeilMitchel l,3AW ,| Ministers' Media Centre

9/ 08/ 2012 http:/ / ministers. deewr. gov. au/ shorten/ interview-neil -mitchel l -3aw

NEI L MI TCHELL: Okay.I’ l laskyou botha question.This weekwe’ ve had the highest number of asyl um seekers in one boat in the l ast two years,a hundred and seventy five.W e’ ve had three thousand one hundred and eighty-eight peopl e arrive on forty boats.W here does the Government stand on asyl um seekers and where does the Opposition stand because it seems to have disappeared as an issue but the numbers have increased? Bil lShorten?

BI LL SHORTEN: W el lwe stil lstand that we bel ieve that havinga regional sol ution’ s the best wayto go.W e’ ve reached out the hand to the Opposition to tryand do somethingcol l aborativel y,but in the meantime we’ ve got peopl e comingon boats.So I thinkthis is one where it’ d be good to have a bipartisan approachas opposed to a point scoringapproach.

NEI L MI TCHELL: Okay.Joe Hockey?

JOE HOCKEY: W el lthe Labor Partysays a bipartisan approachon their terms.It was our pol icythat worked.It was our pol icythat stopped the boats.W e are advocating the same pol icytodaythat previousl ystopped the boats.The Government’ s not wil l ingto give it a try. . .

NEI L MI TCHELL: So no room for bipartisanship?

JOE HOCKEY: Nauru and. . .

NEI L MI TCHELL: No,no room for bipartisanship?

JOE HOCKEY: Ohwel lwe’ ve tried to offer exactl ythe same pol icythat worked previousl y.Theywere the ones that changed the pol icy,then the boats started.Now they’ re tryingto find - theyhad an East Timor sol ution whichwas a j oke before the l ast el ection.They’ ve had a whol e l ot of things.W e’ re the ones that sayyou need to have Nauru,you need to have temporaryprotection visas and where it’ s safe you turn the boats around ful lstop.That’ s what worked,that’ l lworkagain.

BI LL SHORTEN: Okay,wel lwe don’ t quite accept that Nauru was the disincentive that the Opposition say.Nearl yhal f the peopl e who were processed throughNauru ended upcomingto Austral ia.Our concern is that when peopl e put to sea in unsafe boats some of them wil ldrown.Imagine if we were - if we knew that a Grand Finalat the MCG,a hundred thousand peopl e go - if we knew that at l east four thousand of the peopl e l eaving that Grand Finalwoul dn’ t get home safel y,you’ d probabl ycancelthe Grand Final .W e bel ieve in our strategyof a regionalsol ution incl udingMal aysia.That is a far greater deterrent than the sort of - the mixture of pol icies whichJoe j ust put forward.But I know

Page 10of 13 Interview withNeilMitchel l,3AW ,| Ministers' Media Centre

9/ 08/ 2012 http:/ / ministers. deewr. gov. au/ shorten/ interview-neil -mitchel l -3aw

that Minister Bowen has al ways been upfor bipartisan discussions and J oe says ohwel l because the Government won’ t immediatel yagree witheverythingwe thinkwel lthen there’ s no room for change.Ij ust thinkwe owe it to the peopl e to do it differentl y.

NEIL MITCHELL: Veryquickl yBil lShorten The Australian reports todaythat the Government’ s goingto fast trackmigration for weal thybusiness peopl e who’ ve got five mil l ion dol l ars to invest in Austral ia.I s this right?

BILL SHORTEN: IthinkMinister Bowen’ s givinga speechat the Press Cl ubtoday and in the press reports Isaw that we are keen to encourage enterprisinginnovative migrants to come to Austral ia.

NEIL MITCHELL: But W ayne Swan won’ t l ike that wil lhe? He doesn’ t l ike rich peopl e.

BILL SHORTEN: Idon’ t know,l et’ s not go the ol d dogwhistl e. . .

JOE HOCKEY: I t’ s not a dogwhistl e;it’ s a matter of fact.

BILL SHORTEN: Ohl isten. . .

JOE HOCKEY: Come on Bil l .

BILL SHORTEN: . . . if we want to tal kabout. . .

JOE HOCKEY: . . . you’ re embarrassed about Swanny. . .

BILL SHORTEN: I f we want to tal kabout cl ass warfare,I ’ ve never seen a cl earer picture of it when the Libs said that you can’ t - when the Government proposed directl y payingthe money. . .

JOE HOCKEY: No,no.

BILL SHORTEN: W hen the Government proposed directl ypayingthe schoolkids’ bonus,the four hundred and ten for your l ittl e primaryschoolchil d,into the account of the primaryschoolparent,the concern was we coul dn’ t trust parents not to spend it on other things. . .

JOE HOCKEY: And then you criticise us for givingthem a non-means tested baby bonus.You can’ t have it bothways. . .

NEIL MITCHELL: Al right.

BILL SHORTEN: W hil st I ’ m not as cl ose to the miningmagnates as the Liberal s. . .

NEIL MITCHELL: That' s not a cl ass snipe,is it?

Page 11of 13 I nterview withNeilMitchel l,3AW ,| Ministers' Media Centre

9/ 08/ 2012 http: / / ministers. deewr. gov. au/ shorten/ interview-neil -mitchel l -3aw

JOE HOCKEY: Of course it’ s a cl ass snipe.

BILL SHORTEN: I ’ m not fussed if Idon’ t get to go to their birthdayparties,that’ s l ife.

JOE HOCKEY: Idon’ t get invited to their birthdayparties.

BILL SHORTEN: W el lthen J oe most of your col l eagues shoul d put you on the l ist.

JOE HOCKEY: . . .how cool .

BILL SHORTEN: You’ re a man of the peopl e J oe.

JOE HOCKEY: Iam a man of the peopl e.

NEIL MITCHELL: Next time thougheither of you want to set upan inquiryinto the media can you give me a cal l .You’ ve spent four hundred and eightythousand dol l ars Bil l Shorten on wages for two peopl e inquiringinto the media in what was a nonsense report anyway.Seriousl yfor a,you know,five weekinquiryor something,four hundred and eightygrand to Finkel stein and Ricketson.How on earth. . .

BILL SHORTEN: Iwil lpass - Iwil lpass on your vol unteeringto Stephen Conroy.

NEIL MITCHELL: Thankyou verymuchfor your time.

BILL SHORTEN: That’ s al right.

NEIL MITCHELL: Bil lShorten,J oe Hockeythanks.

BILL SHORTEN: Bye bye. JOE HOCKEY: Pl easure.

- ENDS -

For more information

Media Contact:media@ deewr. gov. au [ l ink: mail to: media@ deewr. gov. au] Non-media queries:1300363079

Page 12of 13 I nterview withNeilMitchel l,3AW ,| Ministers' Media Centre

9/ 08/ 2012 http: / / ministers. deewr. gov. au/ shorten/ interview-neil -mitchel l -3aw

Page 13of 13 I nterview withNeilMitchel l,3AW ,| Ministers' Media Centre

9/ 08/ 2012 http: / / ministers. deewr. gov. au/ shorten/ interview-neil -mitchel l -3aw

