THE HON. STEPHEN SMITH  MINISTER FOR DEFENCE

THE HON. JASON CLARE MP   MINISTER FOR HOME AFFAIRS  MINISTER FOR JUSTICE

MEDIA RELEASE



Christmas Island tragedy Coronial Inquiry

23 February 2012

The Federal Government today acknowledged the findings of the Coronial  Inquiry in the Christmas Island tragedy which occurred on 15 December 2010.

The Government will now consider the Coroner’s Report in detail.

This was a terrible tragedy - 50 people died. If not for the bravery of Customs  and Border Protection officers, Defence personnel, officers from other  Commonwealth agencies and community members involved in the rescue  many more people would have died. Their actions went above and beyond  the call of duty and saved the lives of 42 people.

The Coroner’s Inquiry is the fourth review held of the tragedy.

The day after the tragedy the Prime Minister announced a review of the  incident would be conducted by the Australian Customs and Border Protection  Service.

The review report was released on 24 January 2011.

It made eight recommendations, seven of which are now complete.

Implementation of the eighth recommendation - a trial of a land based radar  surveillance system - is underway.

On 2 March 2011 the Australian Parliament established a Joint Select  Committee on the Christmas Island Tragedy to examine the events  surrounding the tragedy.



The Committee made three key recommendations, all of which have been  implemented which included monitoring the well-being of survivors and the  personnel involved in the rescue efforts and exploring an option for a  permanent memorial.

Individual committee members made nine other recommendations of which  seven were agreed. These have all been implemented or are underway.

The Christmas Island Emergency Management Committee also conducted a  review and made 21 recommendations of which 16 were agreed to in whole  or part.

Of these 11 have been implemented and the remaining five are nearing  completion.

A table detailing the implementation of the recommendations from these three  reviews is attached.



Media contacts:   Stephen Smith: Andrew Porter: 0419 474 392  Jason Clare: Korena Flanagan 0418 251 316

Australian Customs and Border Protection Service Review

Summary Status of Recommendations as of 21 February 2012

Recommendation Customs and

Border  Protection  Response

Status of  Recommendation

Committee Recommendation 1:

That, as part of normal BPC operational  planning cycle, the operational policies,  processes and procedures informing the  posture of assets be reviewed in light of the  current number of irregular maritime arrivals.



Agreed Completed

Committee Recommendation 2:

That the trial of a land based radar  surveillance system of the northern maritime  approaches to Christmas Island be completed  and considered as a priority.



Agreed Ongoing.  A land

based radar trial on  Christmas Island has  been extended to  trial a more  sophisticated type of  radar system and to  enable ongoing  testing during the  2011-12 monsoon  season

Committee Recommendation 3:

That the current arrangements for reporting of  incidents (including sightings of Contacts of  Interest (COIs) other than by BPC assets) to  Customs National Operations Centre (CNOC),  and CNOC’s responsibilities for transferring  information of relevance to Australian  Maritime Security Operations Centre’s  (AMSOC) responsibilities, be confirmed and  reinforced.



Agreed Completed

Committee Recommendation 4:

That, in collaboration with relevant agencies,  specific procedures be developed,  documented and exercised for dealing with  SIEVs arriving directly at Christmas Island in  severe weather conditions.





Agreed Completed

























































Committee Recommendation 5:

That both an officer level de-brief of this  incident and ongoing desktop activities be  conducted to further enhance interagency  command and control capabilities relevant to  such an incident.







Agreed Completed

Committee Recommendation 6:

That the procedural documentation for tender  operations in ACV Triton be revised.





Agreed Completed

Committee Recommendation 7:

That communication protocols and  procedures between Customs and Border  Protection at Christmas Island and BPC  response vessels should be reviewed.





Agreed Completed

Committee Recommendation 8:

That critical incident support follow-up  activity continues to monitor the ongoing  safety, health and wellbeing of officers  directly involved in the incident.







Agreed  Completed

Response to Christmas Island Emergency Management Committee Report  Recommendations as of 21 February 2012.

Recommendation Government

Response

Status of  Recommendation

CI EMC Recommendation 1:  Throwable grenade life jackets/ inflatable life  rings.

Agreed Completed



CI EMC Recommendation 2:  Hand-held radios.

Agreed Completed

CI EMC Recommendation 3:  Rescue trailer containing life jackets,  inflatable rescue rings, ropes, lighting,  generator, fire extinguishers, first aid kits,  flares, radios, megaphones, blankets, rope  ladder.

Agreed Underway - expected

completion end March-April 2012 (subject to  shipping schedules and  ability to unload at CI  Port - weather is  affecting delivery)

CI EMC Recommendation 4:  VMR rescue kits (miniature version of rescue  trailer).

Agreed  Underway - expected

completion end March-April 2012 (subject to  shipping schedules and  ability to unload at CI  Port -  refer to serial 3 re  rescue trailer, weather is  affecting delivery)

CI EMC Recommendation 5:  Waterproof mobile phone bags.

Agreed Completed

CI EMC Recommendation 6:  Mats that do not hold water for people to lie  on when recovered from the sea.

Agreed Completed

CI EMC Recommendation 7:  Incident management tabards.

Agreed Completed

CI EMC Recommendation 8:  Body bags.

Agreed Completed

CI EMC Recommendation 9:  Coffins.

Agreed Completed

CI EMC Recommendation 10:  Dedicated chiller container with racks for the  morgue.

Agreed in part Completed

CI EMC Recommendation 11:  Toyota Land cruiser PC troop carrier (to be  used as an ambulance).

Agreed Completed

CI EMC Recommendation 12:  Life rings placed at strategic places on  shoreline.

Agreed Underway - life rings are

installed at all locations,  with radio alerting of use  expected completion  date end of March 2012

CI EMC Recommendation 13:  Life saving devices at Ethel Beach.

Agreed Underway - Expected

completion date end of  March 2012 (part of  serial 12 - weather is  affecting delivery)

CI EMC Recommendation 14:  Emergency lighting at Ethel Beach.  Not Agreed



CI EMC Recommendation 15:  Toilets at Ethel Beach.

Not Agreed See 14 above.

CI EMC Recommendation 16:  Shelter at Ethel Beach.

Not Agreed See 14 above.

CI EMC Recommendation 17:  Ramp improvements at Ethel Beach.

Agreed Completed

CI EMC Recommendation 18:  Surf jet ski.

Not Agreed

CI EMC Recommendation 19:  Surf RHIB.

Not Agreed Procurement of

replacement search and  rescue vessels is well  advanced - delivery  expected by end 2012.  Interim vessels are in  place.

CI EMC Recommendation 20:  Accident/incident familiarisation course for  members of the community.

Agreed Underway - business as

usual

CI EMC Recommendation 21:  General upgrade of VMR headquarters and  facilities, e.g. boat shelter, air conditioning for  meeting room, emergency generator.

Agreed Substantially completed.

The only outstanding  item is boat shelter  which cannot be  completed until  procurement of new  Search and Rescue  vessels (see serial 19).





The Joint Select Committee on the Christmas Island Tragedy Report

Summary status of Recommendations as of 21 February 2012

Recommendation Government

Response

Status of Recommendation

Committee Recommendation 1:

The Committee recommends that DIAC and its  relevant contractors continue to monitor the  wellbeing of the survivors and that counselling  and support services should be provided for as  long as is necessary.



Agreed Complete and ongoing



Committee Recommendation 2:

The Committee recommends that the Department  of Regional Australia and DIAC liaise with the  Christmas Island community to explore options  for a permanent memorial to be erected on the  island, at a site of the residents' choosing, for  the victims of the tragedy.



Agreed Complete - memorial was erected in time  for anniversary of the tragedy on 15  December 2011

Committee Recommendation 3

The Committee recommends that relevant  Commonwealth agencies continue to monitor the  wellbeing of their personnel and that counselling  and support services should be provided for as  long as necessary.



Agreed Complete and ongoing

Senator Crossin Recommendation 1:

That, in addition to the implementation of the  recommendations of the Emergency  Management Committee in its January 2011  report, the Department of Regional Australia,  Regional Development and Local Government  take all necessary steps to ensure reliable radio  coverage is available on all parts of Christmas  Island before the end of 2011.



Agreed in part Implementation of the Recommendations  of the Emergency Management  Committee substantially completed.



Radio Coverage underway



Senator Crossin Recommendation 2:

That the Department of Regional Australia  immediately establish a full time Community  Emergency Management Officer on Christmas  island, to serve both Christmas and Cocos  Islands.

Agreed Underway - to be finalised during

February/March 2012).





Senator Hanson-Young Recommendation 1:

The Australian Greens recommend that as matter  of urgency an independent review into  Australia’s border protection surveillance is  established.



Not agreed

Senator Hanson-Young Recommendation 2:

The Australian Greens recommend that  Commonwealth funding be directed to establish  a full-time emergency services volunteer  coordinator on Christmas Island



Agreed Underway (as part of Senator Crossin  Recommendation 2)

Senator Hanson-Young Recommendation 3:

The Australian Greens recommend that a  permanent mental health team, funded through  the Department of Regional Australia, Regional  Development and Local Government, is  established on Christmas Island, as part of the  Christmas Island health service, to provide  services for all members of the community.







Agreed Complete

Senator Hanson-Young Recommendation 4:

The Australian Greens recommend that the  Department of Regional Australia, Regional  Development and Local Government, implement  all recommendations from the Christmas Island  emergency management report.



Agreed in part Implementation of the Recommendations  of the Emergency Management  Committee substantially completed.



Senator Hanson-Young Recommendation 5:

The Australian Greens further recommend that  the Department of Regional Australia, Regional  Development and Local Government, conduct an  infrastructure audit on the standards and  conditions of facilities on Christmas Island.



Agreed Complete and ongoing

Senator Hanson-Young Recommendation 6:

The Australian Greens recommend that as a

Not agreed

matter of urgency, a review into the protocols by  which decisions are made to transfer asylum  seekers with special needs to the mainland, is  established.



Senator Hanson-Young Recommendation 7:

The Australian Greens recommend that the role  of community liaison officer, funded through the  Department of Immigration and Citizenship,  continue to be funded.



Agreed Complete



