



Remarks at the launch of "Diasporas in  Australia" report  Canberra

Speech, E&OE, check against delivery

15 August 2012

Introduction

It is a great pleasure to be here to help launch this report 'Diasporas in Australia'.

It is an incredibly important study.

Because if we want to look at what marks us out as a nation and what it is that gives us our  vibrancy and our strength, as a community, and as an economy, it is the way in which new  cultures make themselves at home here in Australia.

The links that are established with the wider Australian community and the ties that are  maintained with their homeland means - as a nation - we are constantly growing, constantly  learning and constantly shifting our idea of what it is to be an Australian.

Australia is one of the most multicultural countries on the planet.

One in four of Australia's 22 million people were born overseas.

We identify with some 300 ancestries and speak just as many languages.

Australia has become a new home and provided better opportunities for millions of people.

Since 1945, a total of 7 million people have migrated to this country.

Multicultural Australia

As Australians we have become adept at absorbing the gifts from these new cultures into a  uniquely Australian character.

What meal of fish and chips is complete without spring rolls and dim sims?

Or, pizza night with friends - that's Australian, isn't it?

I couldn't imagine Australia today without the four diaspora communities that this report  focuses on.

The Italian, Macedonian, Vietnamese and Tongan communities are a fundamental part of  Australian society.

And each has been important in driving Australia's bilateral and commercial relationship with  their home countries.

Australia's Italian community

The Italian community is the third-largest ancestry group in Australia and Italian is the third  most popular language spoken in Australia after English and Mandarin.

Almost 1 million Australians claim Italian ancestry.

Generations of Italian migrants have helped build our mining, fishing, construction and  agricultural industries.

They have made an enduring contribution to Australia's food, wine and tourism industries  and have made their mark in politics, sport, journalism, the arts and the law.

Italian-Australians have integrated fully into Australian society while maintaining a strong  cultural identity.

The strong community links between Australia and Italy provides a valuable platform from  which the Government promotes our bilateral relationship.

The affection that our two countries have for each other was on display when the Governor  General met with President Napolitano during the 150th anniversary of Italian Unity in June  last year.

The Italian diaspora also plays an important part in driving our bilateral and commercial  relationship with Italy at the sub-national level.

We have strong regional linkages at the State and local government level and sister-city  relationships, some of which have really significant spin-offs.

Australia's Macedonian community

The Macedonian community has also made a valuable contribution to Australian society.

The first Macedonians arrived in Australia back in the late 1880s.

Not too far from here, some of the first Macedonians in Australia worked in eucalyptus oil  distillation plants.

Today, Australia is home to Macedonia's largest overseas community.

More than 100,000 Australians identified as Macedonian in our most recent census - just  over 40,000 of these were born in Macedonia.

That nearly 70,000 of these still speak Macedonian at home demonstrates the strong ties that  the Macedonian diaspora has with its homeland.

But despite those incredibly strong links to their homeland, this report also found that the  uptake of Australian citizenship is comparatively high among the Macedonian community.

And that highlights a very strong sense of belonging to Australia, while also being proud of  their Macedonian roots.

At the end of the day, our Macedonian community is the bedrock of our bi-lateral relationship  with Macedonia.

Australia's Vietnamese community

The 220,000 people that make up Australia's Vietnamese community make up the sixth  largest migrant community group in Australia.

The first major wave of Vietnamese migration in the mid-1970s is now being followed by a  second wave made up of international students and skilled migrants.

The Vietnamese diaspora remains primarily a refugee community but this is changing.

After the United States, Australia is the second most popular destination for Vietnamese  migrants.

Vietnamese Australians have made a name for themselves in all areas of Australian life,  including in entertainment, politics, journalism, sports and academia.

Importantly it is our Vietnamese community with their Vietnamese language skills which  helps Australia get into the burgeoning Vietnamese market.

They are the bedrock of our bilateral relationship.

Australia's Tongan community

Just over 25,000 Australians claim Tongan ancestry, which is an amazing number given that  Tongan's total population is around 103,000.

It's also remarkable given significant Tongan migration only began in the 1970s.

Tongan Australians have achieved great success particularly in Australian sport - in rugby  union, rugby league and the AFL.

Tongan workers have also been critical to the success of the Government's Pacific Seasonal  Workers scheme, which we recently made a permanent scheme.

Of the 1,588 Pacific workers who have come to Australia so far under the scheme, almost  1,300 were from Tonga.

Tongans have earned a reputation as hard workers under the scheme and many farmers have  specifically requested Tongan workers.

The Tongan workers who return to live on Australian farms year after year, earn money to  send home to their communities, building their economies.

There is no more important foreign policy in the Pacific than this.

Conclusion

I couldn't imagine Australian society without the four diaspora groups that this report focuses  on.

We are fortunate, indeed, to hear their stories told in this way.

It reminds us that no two communities are the same in the way they establish themselves here  and maintain ties with their homeland. Each is unique and each is to be valued.

I congratulate the Australian Research Council on this report, and each of the universities  which contributed to the research.

Thankyou.

Media enquiries

 Parliamentary Secretary's Office: (02) 6277 4330   Departmental Media Liaison: (02) 6261 1555



