

Senator the Hon David Johnston  Shadow Minister for Defence   I   Senator for Western Australia  Transcript  RADIO AUSTRALIA Interview with Bill Bainbridge 5/9/2012 RE: Pakistan. Afghanistan, border security Early Kabul exit will cause Afghan refugee influx, says senator Updated 5 September 2012, 17:51 AEST  The Australian Opposition's defence spokesman David Johnston says an early retreat from Afghanistan could create a national security threat for Australia. Senator Johnston has just returned from a parliamentary visit to Pakistan, but he wasn't able to travel into Afghanistan because of a rocket attack at Kabul Airport. He says politicians and lobby groups who want to curtail Australia's commitment in Afghanistan aren't recognising the impacts of an early withdrawal. He says an early exit would lead to an increase in the number of Afghan refugees fleeing their homeland. Presenter: Bill Bainbridge Speaker: Senator David Johnston, Australia's opposition defence spokesman JOHNSTON: I think the main problem is that Pakistan is best placed to deal with refugees and of course their economy is unstable and they're trying to return refugees back into Afghanistan. Now if the Taliban were to come back and further destabilise Afghanistan, I think that we're going to see a lot of people wanting to leave that region, and I think we're going to see greater pressure on people wanting to come down to Australia by boat particularly. And that's something that I'm really keen we try and avoid. BAINBRIDGE: But is this the right way to characterise it if we're talking about an influx of refugees, why is that a national security threat to Australia?

JOHNSTON: Well I don't know whether it's a national security threat and I don't think  I used the words national security threat. But it's an economic threat because look  Australia has always been very considerate of people moving from region to region  in circumstances such that we see in the Middle East. What I was concerned about  is that Pakistan is struggling to deal on its western side, western border with a very  unstable terrorist insurgency that is really causing them some great economic and  democratic distress. Now their elections are coming up in Pakistan and they've got  83-million voters, and they're going to be voting at 80-thousand polling places. Now  when we met the parliamentarians, the senators and the national congressional  members, they are all very, very keen for a peaceful transition in the next election,  which will be the first peaceful transition if they can achieve it that I think the country  has ever had in its history, because there's been a series of military coups. Now  what I was saying is that Pakistan actually is the sort of model that I think we should  attempt to aspire to in Afghanistan. Now there are a number of incidents on a day-by-day, month-by-month basis, probably about five to ten significant incidents in  Pakistan every month, as opposed to five to ten in Afghanistan every day. And what I  was saying is that we need to consider Pakistan every time we talk about  Afghanistan, because I think that is really crucial. The region needs to be considered  as a whole, not just as one country.

BAINBRIDGE: You mentioned that Pakistan really is at the forefront of dealing with  people who are fleeing Afghanistan. What did you see there about their capacity to  deal with those people who are coming now and who may exit in very large numbers  after 2014 if things don't go to plan?

JOHNSTON: Well they're doing their best with very limited resources. Their economy  is under great stress. Certainly tourism is virtually zero into Pakistan because of the  negative press and media that they've had with various bombings and other things,  particularly on the western border. The federal administered tribal areas and North  and South Waziristan, very unstable, and of course that's a direct mirror of what's  happening in Afghanistan. So people are moving through these areas trying to  escape the violence, and Pakistan unfortunately has had to try and accommodate  them and deal with them. Now there's a lot of assistance coming from the United  Nations, from NGOs and other places, but it's a very big task for Pakistan. And  there's a lot of negative issues on that front and on the eastern side of the country  the relationship with India has improved dramatically, which is a big positive, and  you've got this struggle going on right now. And all I can say is I was greatly  encouraged by the members of parliament wanting to fund, it's costing them five-billion rupees, a huge democratic process that will be the next election.

BAINBRIDGE: But we know, I mean a lot of analysts suggest anyway, that Pakistan  is playing a kind of a double-game here with on the one hand suggesting that they'll  crack down on the Haqqani network, but then on the other allowing terrorism to  flourish in their borderlands and trying to have influence over what the outcome is in  Kabul. Are you confident that those parliamentarians are really in a position to make  these kind of commitments when there are so many elements in Pakistan that are  working towards other ends?

JOHNSTON: Well remember that Pakistan is an Islamic state. Now the government  of Pakistan has to be very, very careful that it strikes the right balance in retaining  stability, and yet retaining the confidence of the majority of its population. Now these  are sort of problems that Australians can hardly imagine. You've got a 170-million  people and they're all Muslims and a reasonably significant percentage, something  five to ten per cent are fundamentalists or moving in that direction. And the  government in Islamabad has a big issue in trying to deal with that. And yet what we  saw was a potentially very friendly country, on the eastern side very stable, and  cause for some considerable celebration in many respects. But on the western side  there are huge problems.

BAINBRIDGE: Ok and if I could just get your quick response to another matter,  Australia's Defence Minister Stephen Smith is in Indonesia today, he's signing a  defence cooperation agreement. Is the opposition backing this agreement and the  one signed yesterday to enhance search and rescue links with Indonesia?

JOHNSTON: Anything that assists Australia to manage this problem has got to  welcome and a positive thing. The main concern I have is that for no good reason we  put our navy personnel in harm's way on the high seas off Indonesia. This has been  a policy fiasco, if the government can do anything to try and arrest the problem,  because they created it, I will celebrate that and it has bipartisan support.

Rebecca Horton

Media Adviser   I   Senator the Hon David Johnston  Shadow Minister for Defence   I   Senator for Western Australia

183 Great Eastern Highway | PO Box 531 |BELMONT WA 6104  Suite S1.101 | Parliament House | CANBERRA ACT 2600

Perth | T: 08 9478 2088 | F: 08 9478 1746   Canberra | T: 02 6277 3222 | F: 02 6277 5772  Mobile: 0427 449 120

Visit Senator Johnston's homepage - www.senatorjohnston.com.au

