Chris Bowen MPMinister for Immigration and Citizenship  Chris Bowen MP

Minister for Immigration and Citizenship

Expert panel, offshore processing legislation,  compromise with the Coalition, Nauru  Friday, 29 June 2012

Interview with Leigh Sales, ABC 7.30

Leigh Sales: Chris Bowen, is this panel the equivalent of outsourcing your policy  formulation?

Chris Bowen: No, not at all, Leigh. What we're facing here is a situation where the  Parliament has missed the opportunity to implement offshore processing legislation.  Now the government's had the benefit of expert advice for many months about the  best policy options for eliminating the people smugglers' business model. Now we  want a process where we can have that expert advice available to the whole  Parliament, where we can have a fresh set of eyes come in and advise the whole  Parliament on best way forward.

Clearly the government has a preferred position here. Clearly the government  believes in the policy advice it's received, but clearly we've reached an impasse and  a stalemate and that has to be acknowledged and we need to move to the next  step. So this is a move by the Prime Minister in good faith to work with the  Parliament so we can get an outcome and we can get one very soon.

Sales: What makes you think that a policy devised by this Parliament is any more  likely to get through the Parliament than Rob Oakeshott's bill this week?

Bowen: Well look, it's a matter for others as to whether they accept the advice of  the panel, but we think this is a genuine process. We think the Australian people  want to see a breakthrough. This is a good opportunity in a transparent way for all  the issues to be put on the table. There's a lot of myths and misconceptions even  amongst members of Parliament about these policies: about what has worked in  the past and what might work in the future. So let's get some very eminent and  respected people - Angus Houston, respected, I would have thought, very clearly  across both sides of aisle. Paris Aristotle, likewise, not a household name perhaps  in Australia but somebody who would be deeply respected, I would have thought,  on both sides of the parliamentary divide. And let's get people like that in a panel  going through the issues, advising the Parliament as a whole: the Government, the  Opposition, the cross benchers; as to what are the pros and cons of different policy  approaches. And maybe, just maybe, we'll get a breakthrough here. We need a  breakthrough and we've got to take every opportunity to get a breakthrough.

Sales: Have you approached Scott Morrison or Tony Abbott in the past 24 hours to  say, ‘Hey, how about we have a face to face meeting, sit down and try and sort this  out'?

Bowen: Oh look, we've been through that, Leigh. We had several meetings last  year -

Sales: But you've got to keep trying though, don't you?

Bowen: Well, we have been. Nobody could question how much the government  has tried in the last 24 hours and 48 hours to get this through the Parliament. But  let's be clear -

Sales: But have you actually made a phone call?

Bowen: Well let's be clear about what's happened here, Leigh: that we instigated  discussions with the Opposition last year. The Opposition rejected those  discussions, said they wouldn't have discussions unless we made ‘an offer'. So we  made an offer after deep consideration. That was a very substantial concession by  Government, we said, ‘Look, we will open a detention centre on Nauru', not  something which sits easily with many people in the Labor Party, but we needed  that breakthrough.

Sales: Sorry to interrupt you. Sorry to interrupt you, but I don't want to go through  ancient history; I want to try and talk about where we're going to go forward.

Bowen: No, no, but it's important. I agree, Leigh.

Sales: I want to know: don't you think that most Australians would expect our  political leaders to be able to keep sitting down, discussing this face-to-face until  you can come up with something that is mutually acceptable?

Bowen: Yes, I do. Yes, I do. I agree with you.

Sales: Well so how come you haven't made a phone call in the past 24 hours?

Bowen: Well what we've done, Leigh, is we've made many offers over the last 24  hours very publicly to the Leader of the Opposition that we are happy to meet, that  we are happy to talk these issues through. Now this issue from Mr Abbott, ‘The  Prime Minister hasn't called me', I mean, it's Year 7 stuff, it's like pass me a note at  recess stuff. The offer has been clear and the offer has been there. And not only  that, the government has made substantial concessions and attempts at  compromise, the Opposition has moved not one centimetre.

Sales: Do you think -

Bowen: The only change we've seen from the Opposition was a change yesterday  which was designed not to get legislation through, but a change in fact designed to  do the opposite, to stop one of their members of Parliament voting for the  legislation.

Sales: Do you think - do politicians think that Australians really buy this pantomime  that your side is right all the time and the other side is always wrong?

Bowen: No, I don't - I don't, and that's not what we're saying. In fact we're saying  the opposite, Leigh. What we've said is this, very clearly: we think Malaysia's the  right policy, the Opposition disagrees. The Opposition says Nauru's the right policy,  we disagree. Well let's move on - let's move on, let's do both.

Sales: Ok, well let's move on. Surely trying Nauru on its own is better than nothing,  which is where we're at now.

Bowen: No, no, I don't accept that and I'm happy to go through that, Leigh. I mean,  there's a reason why all the expert advice to us has been that Nauru would not  work as a stand-alone deterrent. Why? Because it's been tried before. What  happened before? Boats kept coming, Nauru got so full that they then had to open  Manus Island as well, and the worst maritime disaster with an asylum seeker vessel  this nation has seen, SIEV X: the loss of 353 men, women and children; occurred  while Nauru was open and operating. I do not accept for one second the myth by  the Liberal Party that opening Nauru would stop drownings at sea because we've  seen it before, we saw 353 souls perish while Nauru was open. We do have all the  expert advice -

Sales: We still have more boats coming now than over that period. Let's look at  Labor's record on this since forming government in 2007. There was the  dismantling of offshore processing, then there was the go-nowhere East Timor  Solution, then the re-embracing of offshore processing, then the Malaysia Solution,  overturned by the High Court, and now we have this current predicament. The only  reason we're currently in this situation is because of Labor's mismanagement, isn't  it?

Bowen: Well no, obviously I don't accept that characterisation, Leigh, and you just  said you didn't want to go through ancient history, you want to talk about moving  forward and I'm happy to move forward, because -

Sales: But you can't tell me that you've done a good job when I've just listed that  string of things.

Bowen: Well, no - well - in the time that we've between dealing with these issues,  we've seen a very significant increase in asylum seekers around the world and we  can go through the pros and cons of the Pacific so-called ‘Solution', we can go  through why all the expert advice to us is that it would not work if re-implemented  now because it was simply a Christmas Island further away. We can go through  how when temporary protection visas were introduced, the number of boats arriving  in Australia actually went up in the two years following despite some of the myths  we hear about temporary protection visas. I've just run through the experience of  Nauru, including SIEV X with the loss of 353 people and Nauru being full.

We can go through that, but I think the Australian people are frankly sick of that  discussion and sick of that debate. Yes, we've been frustrated by the Parliament, of  course we have, governments do get frustrated by senate's from time to time. But  we do need a breakthrough in this impasse, that's why the Prime Minister has made  this good faith step today to try and take some of the politics out, get the expert  advice front and centre in the debate and hopefully the Parliament and the  Australian people can get the policy settings we need to stop people dying at sea  and we can finally resolve this issue.

Sales: Chris Bowen, thank you very much.

Bowen: Thank you Leigh.

