Chris Bowen MPMinister for Immigration and Citizenship  Chris Bowen MP

Minister for Immigration and Citizenship

People smuggling, Enterprise Migration  Agreements  Tuesday, 5 June 2012

Interview with David Speers, Sky News

David Speers: Minister, welcome to the program. Can I start by asking: what was  your reaction watching this Four Corners program last night? Were you shocked to  learn that a people smuggling kingpin could be living and operating his trade right  under the government's nose here in Canberra?

Chris Bowen: Well David, I watched the show, obviously, and there are serious  allegations. Now, when we have people who have been granted refugee status on  the basis of wrong information, that can be subsequently revoked. It's happened  before that new information comes to light and visas are cancelled.

Of course, I've asked my department to examine this case to see whether there is a  case to answer for his visa to be reviewed. These are allegations that have been  made and they need to be seriously but appropriately dealt with.

Speers: Sure, refugees have had visas cancelled before, but this is an allegation of  a people smuggler, kingpin no less, posing as an asylum seeker, gaining refugee  status and then operating his trade here from Canberra. Were you shocked to even  hear such an allegation?

Bowen: Well, I know that there's people smuggling activity going on, David.  Everybody knows that, everybody also -

Speers: - In Australia? In Canberra, in this country?

Bowen: Well, David, if you let me finish the sentence. Also I know that the  Australian Federal Police have charged, I think it's 14 people smugglers in Australia  and that at least five people have been sentenced to up to seven years in prison.

So the Australian Federal Police does have a very considerable effort on this  project, and of course I'm not able to comment on - as to whether this individual  was already under investigation or not. That's an operational matter for the  Australian Federal Police which I wouldn't publicly comment upon.  But we do know that there's people smuggling activity going on, of course there is. I  also know that the Australian Federal Police deals with it very seriously. I also know  that there are other people in detention who are detained because ASIO has a view  that they are a risk to national security because of their links and involvement in  people smuggling.

Now, I'm sometimes criticised for having too hard a line on this. I'm sometimes  criticised for having too rigorous processes in place and that it takes too long for  some of these claims to be assessed.

But I think last night's show provided two things. It provided a, I thought, a strong  argument for offshore processing and some of the things I've been arguing for, for a  long time and also it underlined some of the complexities that are dealt with when it  comes to asylum claims and people smuggling.

Speers: Well, it sure was a strong argument for a rigorous process, but this man  and about six others were processed in a time period of two to three months and  then granted refugee visas. That is fast by any standard, certainly compared to  many clogged in the detention network. Did that alarm you and does it concern you  also the allegations that one of them has a wife who works in your own Department  of Immigration? Is there fast-tracking going on?

Bowen: No. Let me deal with each of those elements to that question. Firstly, yes,  some people are processed more quickly than others. Again, I'll answered  questions that you've asked me, David, in the past, why it takes so long to process  some people. It takes longer to process some people where their claims are either  weaker or more complex. The department assesses people; sometimes they are  able to reach a quick assessment as to whether somebody should be granted  refugee status, other times it takes longer because there is a rigorous process in  place.

In relation to the allegation that there's a wife of a person involved is an employee  of the Department of Immigration, that wasn't aired last night on the show, but I did  hear the allegation made yesterday. Obviously, I've asked that all steps be taken to  investigate that, as I've also asked my department to examine whether there's a  case to answer for the passport - sorry, for the permanent residency or the  protection visas for any individual to be reviewed on the basis of new information  which is brought to light.

Speers: Well, surely that wouldn't take too long at least to find out whether one of  the Immigration Department's own staff is married to an asylum seeker who is  granted a refugee visa fairly quickly.

Bowen: Well, of course, the allegation's been made, David. It's a very broad  allegation. There's many thousands of staff in the Department of Immigration. It's  being checked thoroughly.

Speers: Getting back to Captain Emad, the man at the centre of this story last  night. You said that you can't comment on whether he is already under Federal  Police investigation. Are you able to give us any assurance today that he is being  questioned, that he's not still operating his trade from Canberra?

Bowen: Well, as I say, David, I've asked for a thorough investigation on his claims  in his protection visa. Secondly, I don't comment on Australian Federal Police  matters. They have ongoing investigations, active investigations into people  smuggling in Australia and elsewhere. As to what individuals are covered by those  investigations, for obvious reasons, David, that it could jeopardise ongoing  inquiries, I won't comment on those suggestions one way or another, other than to  say the Australian Federal Police takes these allegations seriously and would

examine all information; information that was publicly aired last night, information  that they would have through other sources, in relation to all individuals.

Speers: What do you say to the suggestion that the government is aware of people  smugglers operating in Australia and is perhaps monitoring them to try and catch  the bigger fish up the chain. Has that happened?

Bowen: Well again, the Australian Federal Police has a range of operational  activities that they use and they make judgments based on each case. And of  course it's well known that law enforcement authorities will have a range of  weapons that they use in terms of monitoring people and gathering the evidence.  Of course that's the case, because they then want to get a successful prosecution.  In relation to any individual matters, David, as to what the AFP would be doing  about an individual, I won't be commenting.

Speers: Nonetheless, this was a pretty damning story, a credible program, a  number of witnesses interviewed. Will it undermine confidence in the system?

Bowen: Well, I think, David, it was a strong argument for offshore processing. I  mean, there was an allegation that an individual came from Malaysia. I've argued  on your show consistently and on the media across the country consistently that the  vast majority of people who come to Australia by boat start their journey in Malaysia  and that the only sustainable solution to this is to return them to Malaysia. Not to  process them in another country and then have them settled in Australia, as is the  Opposition's policy, but to return them to Malaysia to be processed alongside the  other 100 000 asylum seekers in Malaysia. And I thought last night's program was  good evidence that that would be a sustainable solution to the people smuggling  trade and a major breakthrough, as has been advised to the government by every  relevant expert.

Speers: Can I turn to another issue: a boat that went missing back in October of  2009, just 17 nautical miles off the coast of Java. Now, Fairfax newspapers have  reported that it was an AFP, an Australian Federal Police spy that tipped off  Customs and Border Protection to the fact this boat was in trouble, but they sat on  that information for four hours because they were worried about disclosing where  the intelligence had come from. Are those reports correct?

Bowen: Well, the relevant minister, Jason Clare, dealt with this matter this morning,  and he outlined that the AFP's operational response, which always puts human life  first, of course, and that's a matter that he has dealt with and he has responded to  appropriately as the minister responsible for the AFP.

Speers: But is it possible that information, if it does come from an Australian spy,  could delay an emergency response to a boat in trouble?

Bowen: Well, the Australian authorities will always put human life first. Clearly that  is the appropriate thing to do.

Speers: And did that happen in this case?

Bowen: Well, as I say, Jason Clare has responded to that allegation this morning in  a holistic way. And clearly, I mean, the allegation that Australian law enforcement  authorities would put people's lives at risk is a very serious one and shouldn't be  bandied around lightly.

Speers: And finally, Minister, could I turn to the Enterprise Migration Agreement  issue which has caused some grief within Labor? A simple question: When did you  tell Julia Gillard that Gina Rinehart was going to be granted a deal to bring in  foreign workers?

Bowen: Well, David, I've dealt with this ad nauseum in the Parliament and  elsewhere. I've made the statement that the Prime Minister's office was provided  with a detailed brief early in the week of 21 May. I'm not going to provide any further  commentary other than to say this: I'm very pleased with a policy which creates  8000 jobs and at least 6700 jobs for Australians. I think we need to focus on the  policy substance here, and it would be good to actually have a discussion about  some of the threats to the mining boom in Australia, one of the threats being  resources projects not being able to guarantee access to skilled labour to ensure  that the project finishes on time and on budget -

Speers: - Sure.

Bowen: - Therefore, just as we announced in the 2011 Budget that we would  implement, we then worked assiduously to implement a policy which ensures this  project goes ahead. I think if you listen to some of the commentary, you'd think  there was only 1700 jobs on this project and they're all going to 457 workers. The  fact is this is a project which creates -

Speers: - Sure, I understand the argument for the policy...

Bowen: - 8000 jobs and…

Speers: - We understand that's the policy.

Bowen: ...in order to make sure the project will proceed we've said that if they can't  get access to enough Australian workers, we would allow 1700, 457 visas over  three years, over three years, and that is a perfectly appropriate policy.

Speers: Okay. We understand that policy. We still don't know when you told the  Prime Minister, and this is important.

Bowen: Well, I've answered the question, David. I've answered it just -

Speers: - Well, just tell us. When did you tell the Prime Minister?

Bowen: The Prime Minister's office was provided with a detailed brief in the week  commencing 21 May. I've answered that question in Parliament.

Speers: But what about the Prime Minister? Did you talk directly to the Prime  Minister?

Bowen: Well, the information, David, was provided to the Prime Minister's office  early in that week.

Speers: But did you talk to the Prime Minister?

Bowen: Well, David, I've answered the question in Parliament, I'm answering the  question now, that the information was provided to the Prime Minister's office.

Speers: You haven't answered this question. Did you talk to the Prime Minister  about this?

Bowen: Well, David, discussions occur across the government between offices. I'm  not going to play the game with you. I'm going to talk about the policy substance  and this government creating jobs for Australians by ensuring a project can proceed  that otherwise was in real risk of not proceeding.

Speers: All right, Immigration Minister, Chris Bowen, thank you.

Bowen: Thank you, David.



