Australian Minister for Trade and Competitiveness The Hon Dr Craig Emerson MP

SKY AM Agenda Subjects: HSU, Chen Deming's visit, BCA's White Paper submission, asylum seekers

Transcript, E&OE (Errors and Ommissions Excepted)

10 April 2012

KIERAN GILBERT: Good morning and welcome to the program. The messy in-fighting in the Health Services Union continues. The  national executive of the union now wants the national secretary Kathy Jackson to go. Kathy Jackson wants the executive to go. All  of this before an internal report is released by Ian Temby QC, which itself is expected to be explosive. As for the MP caught up in the  middle of all of this saga, the Prime Minister is not budging. She's standing behind Craig Thomson.

PRIME MINISTER AUDIO: Well I'm taking the same approach as Prime Minister Howard took in comparable circumstances, Fran,  which is that proper processes should be worked through. During the Howard Government there were members who were subject of  referral to the DPP. Indeed, one of those Members of Parliament is currently a parliamentary secretary on Tony Abbott's front bench.  Prime Minister Howard then said proper processes should be worked through. Tony Abbott supported him in that. I'm saying what  was good enough then should apply now.

GILBERT: Julia Gillard there talking to Fran Kelly on the ABC. With me this morning to discuss this and the other issues of the day,  the Minister for Trade, Craig Emerson. Minister, thanks for your time.

CRAIG EMERSON: It's a pleasure.

GILBERT: The Health Services Union: it's such a messy situation. And as I mentioned in the introduction, Ian Temby QC set to  release an audit as well. This is going to … looks like it could get a lot worse.

EMERSON: Well, I think the Health Services Union has to sort out its mess - and it is a mess. I, of course, haven't seen or been  briefed on the Ian Temby report, nor should I. But just going from media reports, this is about the management of the Health  Services Union after the period when Craig Thomson was the head of part of the union. So it just goes on and on. I think they're  doing no service to the union movement more generally. I imagine that their members are despairing at this fighting, and I think it just  needs to be settled. But it's strictly a matter for the Health Services Union, not for the Federal Government.

GILBERT: Well the Government also says it's a matter for Fair Work Australia, and that's an independent body. But given how  dysfunctional some of this has been - more than three years investigation - there's got to be a limit, doesn't there, as to the  Government saying 'okay, it's an independent body', when it's such a mess. Isn't it up to the Government to say 'get your act  together'?

EMERSON: Well, here are the options, and we probably should rehearse those. Basically they are to interfere or not to interfere. If  we do interfere then we'll be accused, and I understand the basis of the accusation, of interfering in the processes of an independent  agency.

GILBERT: You don't have to interfere. You could just make a comment. Say 'we're not happy with your performance'.

EMERSON: Whether we made a comment or not I think there's plenty of people who are making the comment and I don't think it'll  fundamentally change the situation. What's happened has happened. It has been a long investigation by Fair Work Australia. But,  honestly, if we started saying … passing judgements on that and interfering we'd go down the very path that Tony Abbott wants us to  do, and that is to interfere. But at the same time he throws his hands up in horror when a staff member asks Fair Work Australia a  couple of years ago whether a particular report in the newspaper was right. And he says that constitutes interference. So we're not  going to go into this silly world of Mr Abbott where he wants us to interfere but he wants us not to interfere. We'll do the right thing.  That's what's important.

GILBERT: There's a lot to talk about today, so I want to get across a few issues. The mining tax: the Neilson Poll shows that 85 per  cent of people think the mining boom has been good for the nation, but only 12 per cent say they've benefitted a lot from the boom.  Surely there's some fertile ground for the Government on this. Why is the mining tax not a lot more popular?

EMERSON: During the period when the campaign against the mining tax was at its zenith, the mining tax was not popular. Since  that time, and since the time when Julia Gillard and Martin Ferguson negotiated the Minerals Resource Rent Tax, it has become  increasingly recognised that the Australian people do deserve to share in the benefits of the mining boom more broadly than they  have been. Sure, let's pay credit where credit is due: they can get some superannuation benefits if they're shareholders in  superannuation firms that invest in the companies. But overall, overall the truth is that the benefits of the mining boom could be more  fairly shared, and that's why we have the mining tax.

GILBERT: Are you confident, just quickly, that this will turn even further in the Government's direction?

Page 1 of 3 SKY AM Agenda, transcript, 10 April 2012, Australian Minister for Trade and Comp...

14/08/2012 http://www.trademinister.gov.au/transcripts/2012/ce_tr_120410_sky_am_agenda.html

EMERSON: Indeed. And after July 1, when the tax breaks for small business come in and the superannuation increases for working  Australians come in and infrastructure investment all come in, plus a company tax rate reduction, it'll then switch, Kieran, to Mr  Abbott seeking to explain why he thinks these things aren't worthwhile, are not worthwhile, and that the mining industry's already  paying too much tax and should have that revenue back.

GILBERT: Well, the Business Council of Australia is warning in its submission to the Government's White Paper on the Asian  Century that it's worried that Asian economies are looking to other nations within Asia to provide resources and other imports,  shunning the Australian business community because of poor productivity and labour costs. This is only going to add to that burden,  isn't it, in terms of a lack of competitiveness?

EMERSON: Well without being sanguine about it I just state a fact: that we do have $450 billion of investment in the pipeline, and the  Reserve Bank estimates that investment as a share of GDP in the coming months will reach a 50-year high. But that doesn't mean  we can be complacent about it. Of course we need to do what we can to boost the competitiveness of Australian industry, and to  boost the attractiveness of Australia. But that doesn't mean, nor is the Business Council suggesting, driving wages down. Our future,  Kieran, is as a high-skill, high-wage economy where our young people can look forward to a vast diversity of career opportunities,  not a race to the bottom of low skills and low wages. That's a race we should never enter and a race we should never want to win.

GILBERT: You'll be meeting with the Chinese Commerce Minister Chen Deming today. Apparently, there's also going to be a new  infrastructure deal signed.

EMERSON: Yes.

GILBERT: What are the implications of that? And how soon will Australia sign a free trade agreement with China?

EMERSON: Well on the infrastructure deal Anthony Albanese has worked with the Commerce Ministry on that. And it's a good  development, because I think the developed world needs to come to terms with this: China and India will be net lenders in the 21st  Century. We're used to developing countries borrowing money from rich countries. It's going to be the other way around. In  Australia's case, we've always been borrowers because we've never had sufficient domestic savings to fund all of the investments  that are attractive in this country. So the memorandum of understanding that Anthony will sign with Minister Chen Deming will involve  encouraging more Chinese investment in Australian infrastructure. We have had an infrastructure deficit through much of the '90s  and the first half of the 2000s. And this will also involve major project facilitation, if you like, so as to perhaps streamline the  regulatory approval processes. But, of course, only those investments that are in the national interest would be considered, and we  have our Foreign Investment Review Board that does that.

GILBERT: Okay. On the free trade agreement: do you think that there is any likelihood that would be signed any time any time  soon? And do you expect also that the Minister, the Chinese Commerce Minister, is going to raise Beijing's concerns with you over  the exclusion of the telco Huawei from the National Broadband Network - because clearly they're annoyed at that.

EMERSON: The political graveyard is full of people, I've learned, who give predictions as to when negotiations on trade deals are  going to be completed. I can say that the last round - most recent one; the 18th - was especially productive. But I'm working with my  friend and colleague Minister Chen Deming. It may be different ways of approaching these free trade agreement negotiations. If they  aren't progressing far you need to stop, take stock of where you are and consider alternative ways of bringing that agreement to  conclusion. But I also would point out that we've got a flourishing trade relationship with China that has not required a free trade  agreement, and we'll continue to have that and diversify it into services and agriculture.

GILBERT: But on the Huawei concern, you would expect him to raise that with you, would you not? They are obviously worried  about that.

EMERSON: It's up to the Minister as to whether he raises it or not. But I am confident of this: that irrespective of the decision on  Huawei, we will have a strong, flourishing commercial relationship and a good friendship with China. Chen Deming is a lovely man;  he's a good guy. I've met him 10 times now, and he's always focussed on the future as to how we can broaden and deepen that  relationship between our two countries. China actually views Australia as a very attractive place for investment. It's got a fond  attitude towards our country. And I think the future is a brilliant one in the Asian Century. That's why Julia Gillard has launched the  Asian Century White Paper Project.

GILBERT: On another issue to finish: it looks like a couple of concerns on the asylum-seeker front. There's a group of Chinese  asylum seekers, members of the Falun Gong apparently in Darwin on their way to New Zealand onboard a yacht. This doesn't sound  like the safest journey. Will the Government seek to stop their departure?

EMERSON: We don't have the legal capacity to stop their departure. We … for those who have documentation there will be a very  temporary visa issued to allow them to replenish their supplies. But we don't have that capacity.

GILBERT: It's obviously a perilous journey, though.

EMERSON: Indeed, indeed. And that was going to be my next point in relation also to the other issue that I'm sure you'll raise: and  that is it is a perilous journey and Bill English, the Deputy Prime Minister of New Zealand, has pointed that out. And that's why we  seek to put in place the Malaysian arrangement. So, despite the fact that we share a belief with the Coalition that offshore processing  is an important part of the deterrent to people risking their lives on the high seas, we can't get that through the Parliament. That's  what we want. We call again, yet again, on Tony Abbott to show a bit of heart, to show a bit of compassion, and don't pretend that  this is all about Malaysia mistreating asylum-seekers when they'd be quite happy, quite happy, to sign up to an agreement with  Somalia under their own legislation.

GILBERT: Minister Emerson, thanks for your time. Appreciate it.

EMERSON: Thank you.

Page 2 of 3 SKY AM Agenda, transcript, 10 April 2012, Australian Minister for Trade and Comp...

14/08/2012 http://www.trademinister.gov.au/transcripts/2012/ce_tr_120410_sky_am_agenda.html

Media enquiries

Minister Emerson's Office: (02) 6277 7420

DFAT (Department of Foreign Affiars and Trade) Media Liaison: (02) 6261 1555

Page 3 of 3 SKY AM Agenda, transcript, 10 April 2012, Australian Minister for Trade and Comp...

14/08/2012 http://www.trademinister.gov.au/transcripts/2012/ce_tr_120410_sky_am_agenda.html

