

Australia Network 'Newsline', Interview  with Jim Middleton  Transcript, E&OE, proof only

22 October 2012

JIM MIDDLETON: Away from its budget troubles the Australian Government's enjoying  the success of its bid to win a temporary seat on the UN Security Council. Parliamentary  Secretary for Foreign Affairs, Richard Marles, was at the heart of the campaign.

Richard Marles, welcome to the program.

RICHARD MARLES: Thank you. It's a pleasure to be here, Jim.

JIM MIDDLETON: First, if I may, to the latest death of an Australian soldier in  Afghanistan, a moment of sadness indeed, also pointing, does it not, to the danger that  Special Forces face not just now but also when most foreign forces have left the country by  the end of 2014?

RICHARD MARLES: There's no doubt about that. This is a very dangerous mission and it  has been so from the very first day. That's why there is such enormous admiration for the  work that our service men and women are doing in Afghanistan.

Of course today, with the very tragic news of another loss of life, our thoughts are very much  with the family and friends of that soldier who would be feeling unspeakable grief today.  Also, for the soldier's mates in Afghanistan with whom he was serving.

But, the other point to make here is that the most important way we can honour his legacy  and his sacrifice is to see this mission through to its conclusion. That is very much the  determination of this Government, to make sure that we complete our mission as it's been  decided by ISAF.

JIM MIDDLETON: A question or two about the budget update. The Opposition's pointing  out that there are no figures for the additional cost of refurbishing asylum-seeker processing

centres in Papua New Guinea and on Nauru. Some of that money is coming from your aid  budget. Don't taxpayers deserve to know what they're paying for and what they're paying?

RICHARD MARLES: The most important point to make is the determination of this  Government to see our budget return to surplus. We're in a position to return the budget to  surplus. That was our commitment at the last election, it has been the whole way through,  that's what we legislated for in the last budget and we are determined to see that through.

In terms some of the costs associated with Manus and Nauru coming from the Development  Assistance budget, that will happen where it is ODA-eligible expenditure and that will see a  genuine improvement for the lives and the development of both Manus Island in PNG and  Nauru, so that's entirely appropriate.

JIM MIDDLETON: Can you also guarantee that any money from the aid budget that is used  on infrastructure associated with those processing centres will be topped up in other areas? In  other words, that there will be no cuts in other areas of Australia's aid abroad?

RICHARD MARLES: We have made clear what our aim is with our development  assistance budget and that is to see Australia's ODA reach 0.5 per cent of GNI by 2016-2017  and we will honour that and see that through.

Now, in the context of what we're doing in both Manus and Nauru, where there is ODA-eligible expenditure, that is to say, where we are making expenditure in those places which is  clearly going to benefit the local population and improve the development of those places,  well then there will be a use of the ODA budget for that and that is fair enough.

JIM MIDDLETON: Let's go to the successful campaign to win Australia a seat on the UN  Security Council. The key to success does seem to have been winning the African camp away  from its commitments to Finland. What is it that Australia had to offer that Finland did not?

RICHARD MARLES: Firstly, I think the support of Africa was very important to our  success. But I would make the point that we had support across all the regions of the world  and the backbone of our campaign was very much our friends in the Pacific and, indeed, in  the Caribbean.

But in relation to Africa there is very much a sense that Australia is in Africa to stay. Our  development assistance has increased significantly in Africa and is centred on supporting our  private sector role in Africa, through the Mining for Development initiative as well as  through the significant number of scholarships, 1000 scholarships are being offered across  the continent every year.

This is really important. I think one of the great benefits of the Security Council campaign,  which will go well beyond the two years we spend on the Security Council, is that it has  really helped sharpen our foreign policy around the world and Africa is a great example of  that.

JIM MIDDLETON: Israel voted for Australia. Did Australia make any commitments to  Israel in relation to future votes in the UN on UN recognition of Palestine?

RICHARD MARLES: No. No. There are absolutely no commitments in relation to that and  that's not the way in which we have run this campaign.

We will pursue each and every issue as it arises on the Security Council in accordance with  its merits. We've been very open about what Australian values are and where we stand,  including in relation to issues in the Middle East. So, in that sense, we will pursue every issue  on its merits and there is no question at all of having done any arrangements in relation to any  particular issue.

JIM MIDDLETON: There have been suggestions from Chinese sources that Australia  should show its independence from the United States in its votes on the Security Council.  Australia does have to demonstrate, does it not, that it is not there simply to put its hand up  whenever the US votes one way or the other?

RICHARD MARLES: There's no question of Australia bringing to bear an independent  position in relation to all the issues that we face on the Security Council.

As questions arise we will look at them from the perspective of Australian values. There will  obviously be occasions on which we agree with the United States but there may well be  issues on which we disagree with the United States. To suggest we will be there simply as an  additional number for the United States is completely wrong. I think that the sense in which  we will bring a fair and balanced view to the Security Council is part of the reason why we  managed to gain the support and the trust of countries from around the world.

JIM MIDDLETON: Is Syria a defining issue for the United Nations, to its relevance, given  that what happens there is already spilling into the rest of the Middle East with deaths in  Lebanon now but also dangerously high contention in other key countries in the region -  Turkey, Iran and even Saudi Arabia?

RICHARD MARLES: There is no doubt that Syria is a very important question for the  Security Council. I wouldn't describe it as a defining question in terms of the relevance of the  Security Council and the United Nations.

One of the important points to understand, if we take a step back here, is that if you look at  the number of resolutions which were dealt with by the Security Council, back in 1985 when  Australia was last sitting on the Security Council, it was about 22 resolutions a year. Now,  last year the Security Council dealt with 66. Its work has tripled in that time and it is a body  which is meeting frequently, on a daily basis, and it's only doing that because countries  believe that it is relevant in terms of taking their issues to it and having them resolved.

In the case of Syria, what we seek to do is bring to that story an Australian practicality. So,  whilst there isn't an ability to have consensus on the points that came up through Kofi  Annan's process, we are now seeking to get agreement around having security for medical  supplies and services provided to Syria which will make a real difference, a real humanitarian  difference to the people who are suffering in Syria.

Now, that doesn't solve the issue but it makes a difference. That's the kind of experience and  the kind of attitude that we will bring to bear to our work on the Security Council.

JIM MIDDLETON: Richard Marles, thank you very much.

RICHARD MARLES: Thanks, Jim, it's a pleasure.

Media enquiries

 Parliamentary Secretary's Office: (02) 6277 4330   Departmental Media Liaison: (02) 6261 1555



