Greens: Human rights report brings justice too late for Indonesian minors

The Australian Greens today welcomed the release of the Australian Human Rights Commission’s report An  Age of Uncertainty which highlighted travesties of justice in Australia's detention of at least 63 Indonesian  children in adult prisons.

"This report shows how terribly the Australian government has failed these children. It is shameful that this  abuse of children's rights went on, with the full knowledge of the Government, for years before anything was  done. These young boys will never get their childhoods back." said Greens spokesperson for human rights  and children, Senator Sarah Hanson-Young.

"The Attorney-General today has failed to recognize the very clear recommendations that Australia's laws be  changed so that skeletal X-rays be banned from use in all age determination.

"We call on the government to urgently consider the report's recommendations, some of which are already  encapsulated in my Crimes Act Amendment (Fairness for Minors) Bill currently before the Senate.

"The AHRC has conducted a thorough review and highlighted the appalling fact that 63 young people were  wrongly detained in Australian adult prisons for up to 864 days.

"The report casts a very unfortunate shadow over the repeated decisions and official processes of Australian  agencies over 2008-2011 which saw the continued use of discredited wrist X-rays and expert witness  evidence and led to the wrongful conviction and incarceration of Indonesian children in adult jails.

"The Attorney-General's response today shows that, despite some changes made to departmental  procedures, the government has once again refused to change the laws banning skeletal X-rays and  improving treatment of minors.

"We know that the Indonesian public and government have been greatly concerned about their children in  Australian prisons, and it is an international shame that our authorities followed processes that  fundamentally breached the rights of these children.

"The Senate references inquiry that I established will utilize this report in its upcoming hearings and ask the  obvious question - how did these travesties of justice keep happening?

"Australians would not accept this treatment for our own children. The ongoing inquiry will look at what  impact this has had on Australia's relationship with Indonesia and how we can make amends.

"We know that many of the children who are used as boat crew on asylum seeker vessels are impoverished  fisher folk who are not aware of the political or legal circumstances of the boat trip or whose involvement is  only to cook noodles on the vessels.

"The Greens also applaud the AHRC's recommendation of an independent guardian to look after the best  interests of children in this position and that minors should be accommodated in the community if there is  any question of their age.

"We should be looking at ourselves as a nation and asking how we let this happen, and how the 63 children  who spent months and years in adult jails can be compensated for the harms we exposed them to.

"The government must heed the very clear recommendations of the AHRC and reform the laws properly so  that injustices like these never reoccur.”

Media Contact: Kelly Farrow 0407244501

27 July 2012

