Interview Transcripts

Joint Doorstop Interview with Mr Scott Buchholz, Grantham,  Queensland

Posted on Wednesday, 4 January 2012

Subjects: Visit to the Lockyer Valley; flood recovery; the government’s failed border protection

policies; industrial relations.



E&OE……………………….……………………………………………………………



TONY ABBOTT:

It’s good to be here in Grantham. I want to thank Scott Buchholz for all the work he has done for the

people of his electorate, particularly the people of the Lockyer Valley in the twelve months since this

area was hit by Australia’s most devastating floods of modern times. I want to thank Derek and his

family for bringing Scott and I onto this property. This is one of the great properties of the Lockyer

Valley. Obviously, there has been a lot of clean-up, a lot of work needed to be done here. I want to

thank the people of Grantham for the community morning tea that I’ve been to earlier and I want to

particularly thank the people who told Scott and me their stories.



There are hundreds of human stories that came out of last year’s floods: stories of heroism, stories of

tragedy, but above all else deeply human stories. Now, it’s the responsibility of local and national

leaders not to forget what happened here and to remember that while the floods have gone, the work

continues. There’s a lot of physical rebuilding still to be done, there’s a lot of mental rebuilding still to

be done. Some of that mental rebuilding will take a lifetime. It’s important that we do, at all levels of

government, everything we humanly can to allow the people of this district to be whole again.



I think Scott has done a marvellous job as the local member. Local members have an extraordinary

range of responsibilities but in the twelve months since the floods hit this area, Scott has been

extraordinary. He has been exemplary: he has been a counsellor, a facilitator, a clean-up manager, at

times he has been a parish priest and it’s just fantastic to see a great local member at work - a great

local member who has a big future in Canberra as well as a big future here in the electorate of Wright.

So, Scott you might just like to say a few words, but I just think that it’s very important as the

anniversary of these floods draws near, that Australians don’t assume that the work is done. Much

has been done, but much remains to be done and it’s important that all levels of government and all

the other institutions that have been involved in the clean-up and recovery continue to stay focussed,

particularly some of the insurers. Many of them have been magnificent, but there’s always work that

remains and it’s important that, at all times, governmental and other semi-official bodies remember

that these are human problems that need to be dealt with, with humanity. They can’t just have the

book thrown at them.



SCOTT BUCHHOLZ:



Thanks, Tony. Thank you very much. Firstly, let me say thank you and welcome for your presence

here in the Lockyer Valley. As you can see firsthand, we’ve got an enormous amount of rebuilding still

to do. But before I go on, let me say thank you to Derek and his family for having us and letting us see

firsthand how the valley is starting to rebuild. Here we are twelve months on in a community and I

think it’s important with Tony’s presence here that we remind Queenslanders and we remind Australia

that the Grantham community has not completely rebuilt itself. There are a million success stories, but

there are those little businesses, there are those families, there are those mums and dads that have

fallen through the cracks.



I’m sending the call out to Australians either to let you know that I will be calling on you once more to

come and assist my community in helping in that last bit of rebuild. I’ll be calling on department heads

to have another look at the fine print in their documentation when we’ve got people that are being

forced to spend their insurance money on just staying alive when they should be rebuilding their

houses with it. I’ll be calling on state and federal members to assist me in my cause and I’ll take that

fight up along with the Coalition and Tony when we get back up to Canberra. But I again would like to

thank Tony for his very generous time in coming up here - a time where he would normally be

spending with his family and his friends over this Christmas break. It just goes to show the

compassion and the heart that Tony has for this electorate and I do appreciate your humility and the

time that you’ve invested, not only in me personally, but for the people of Grantham and the Lockyer

Valley. Thanks, Tony.



TONY ABBOTT:



Thanks mate. Are there any questions?



QUESTION:



Mr Abbott, why did you come to Grantham?



TONY ABBOTT:



Well, this is my third visit to Grantham since the floods and I think it was very important that I should

come up here on the eve of the first anniversary. This was one of the epicentres of the disaster. It was

a totally traumatised community twelve months ago. Much has been done, but much remains to be

done and I think it’s very important particularly with the significance of a first anniversary, that the

people of Grantham know that they are not absent from our thoughts. So often when trouble strikes,

everyone is rallying around to help, but then when the cameras go, when the caravan moves on, the

people who were afflicted are just left on their own and that’s not going to be the case as far as I’m

concerned and I know as far as Scott Buchholz is concerned with the people of Grantham.



QUESTION:



But why this week and will you be back next week? Or are you going to give next week when the

anniversary service is running, you’re going to give that a miss?



TONY ABBOTT:



Well look, I’ve got another schedule next week, but I didn’t want the anniversary to go without paying

what I thought was appropriate respects to the people who went through what for most of them was

the most extraordinary, the most tumultuous, the most traumatising time of their life.



QUESTION:



Is there something that you heard today that you thought, “Look, if it was up to me, I would do this for

you?”



TONY ABBOTT:



I think you hear that all the time when you’re talking to people who’ve gone through a really harrowing

experience and I think there are some people who want to rule a line behind that and get on with their

lives and they’re struggling to do that. There are other people who want the insurance company to just

settle a claim. There are people who want someone, anyone, to come in and finalise the clean-up.

Now, no one can work miracles but one of the great things about being a member of parliament is that

you do have a certain moral authority, particularly when you’re dealing with institutions and that’s why

it’s very important for local members and national leaders to be aware of all of this because they can

light a fire under people who are dragging the chain, who are being, dare I say it, shiny-bummed

bureaucrats rather than real human beings trying to help other human beings, through the most

difficult time of their lives.



QUESTION:



Are there any specific fires you’re intending on lighting?



TONY ABBOTT:



Well, I think that there are some of the insurers that still have some work to do. I think that…



QUESTION:



Do you care to name them today?



TONY ABBOTT:



No, look I’m not going to do that today, but I think - while a lot of the insurers have done

tremendously well and have enhanced the reputation of business - I think occasionally some of them

haven’t been so good and I know Scott has got a list of calls that he is going to make and if he needs

my help to provide a bit of a

hurry-up, well, he’ll have it of course and then there’s the clean-up. Now, there is still work to be done

and not all of it can fall on the shoulders of locals because one individual - particularly one individual

who is trying to run a family and run a business - can’t be expected to carry all of these burdens

alone and that’s where I think that you’ve got try and enlist the support of the wider community to

help.



QUESTION:



You keep saying more work needs to be done, but can you give some examples of the type of work

that still needs to be done?



TONY ABBOTT:



Well, you’ve seen it on this farm. I mean, not all of this farm has been rehabilitated back to production.

Just out there you see a bore which is an important part of the productivity of this farm which is being

hidden for twelve months, just been dug out and it’s now being put back into action. You only have to

drive around the town of Grantham to see a lot of buildings which are still uninhabited and they need

to be brought back to life and that’s the kind of thing that I hope will be facilitated by this visit.



QUESTION:



Do you think the army should be brought back in?



TONY ABBOTT:



Look, I don’t want to be too prescriptive because this is my first visit here in about six months and I

think the important thing is to appreciate the work that still remains and then try to consider how it’s

best done and Scott and I have been bouncing around a few ideas and I think you’ll see more from us

in the weeks ahead.



QUESTION:



Can I ask you about the visa change that’s happened, with Indonesia set to relax these visa

restrictions? Do you think we’ll feel the impact of that here?



TONY ABBOTT:



I think the problem here in Australia with border protection more generally is not the Indonesian

Government, it’s the Australian Government. Now, yes, we expect our region to work cooperatively

with us to address this problem, but in the end, the source of the problem is the changes that the

current Australian Government has made to the law and to the arrangements here in this country. The

current Government dismantled a border protection system that worked: it closed Nauru, it scrapped

temporary protection visas, it refused to turn boats around. They were the policies that worked and

the current Government has turned this country of ours into a magnet for people smuggling

operations. Now, I would like to see the closest possible cooperation with Indonesia. I wonder what, if

any, consultation did take place and if, as I suspect, there was none or very little consultation, you’ve

got to wonder what the Prime Minister and the Foreign Minister have been doing and frankly if we had

a more functional government where the Foreign Minister and the Prime Minister were capable of

having a conversation, we wouldn’t have the difficulties that we do with the Indonesians on this issue.



QUESTION:



Do relaxed visa conditions equal more boats?



TONY ABBOTT:



Obviously, nearly all of the boats come from Indonesia and if potential boat arrivals can more easily

enter Indonesia, that is potential for a problem. But, again, I don’t believe that now is the time to be

critical of Indonesia. It’s the Australian Government which has really fallen down on the job here and

that’s why I say that if Kevin Rudd and Julia Gillard actually had a working relationship, it would be a

lot easier to build the kind of cooperative engagement with Indonesia that we need.



QUESTION:



How are those talks going between your side and the Government?



TONY ABBOTT:



Look, I’m happy to discuss with the Government how it can do the right thing more easily and if the

Government wants our help to reopen Nauru, it’s got it. If the Government wants our help to reinstitute

temporary protection visas, it’s got it. If the Government needs our support to turn boats around where

it’s safe to do so, it will have it. I mean, the Government can be absolutely confident that this

Opposition will support good policy. What we aren’t going to do, though, is to connive at bad policy

and what I have said all along is that the Malaysia people-swap is a dud deal for Australia and a cruel

deal for boat people. No self-respecting country enters into an arrangement which is as one-sided as

this one is. The idea that we take 4,000 of theirs and they only take 800 of ours is not the sort of

arrangement that a self-respecting country would ever make. It demeans our country to enter into

these sorts of arrangements and the fact that there’s been some 3,000 illegal boat arrivals since the

Malaysia people-swap was first announced proves that this was never going to work. So, I say get

cracking with Nauru. You don’t need to be talking to the Coalition, you need to be talking to the

Government of Nauru. Get the centre open there. The centre there could be reopened before

Parliament gets back. So, get on the phone to the President of Nauru and get that centre opened

now, because once you’ve got Nauru, you won’t need Malaysia.



QUESTION:



Have you had a discussion with Scott Morrison about whether or not he should be taking a holiday at

this time?



TONY ABBOTT:



Look, I have discussions with all of my colleagues all of the time at need and the Coalition always

stands ready to respond appropriately to what’s happening but everyone needs a holiday. I noticed

that the Prime Minister was on holiday before Christmas, notwithstanding the fact that a lot was

happening. Now, I don’t criticise the Prime Minister for taking holidays then, notwithstanding the fact

that when similar things happened last year she broke her holidays and I don’t think anyone should be

critical of anyone else for taking a holiday at this time.



QUESTION:



Is there any room for compromise from the Coalition on offshore processing?



TONY ABBOTT:



The job of the Opposition is to support good policy and to reject bad policy. It is our job to stand up for

what is right for Australia and what you won’t see from us are weak compromises with a bad

government. What you will see from us is a very clear articulation of what we think is the right way

forward for Australia and for more than a decade now, the Coalition has had a very clear policy when

it comes to stopping the boats. We will stop the boats in the future as we’ve stopped them in the past

and what you should do when you’ve got a problem is put in place the tried and true ways of dealing

with it and we know that Nauru, temporary protection visas and turning boats around will stop the

boats. It’s done it before, it can do it again.



QUESTION:



Is the Federal Government doing enough to protect Australia from a potential rabies epidemic?



TONY ABBOTT:



Look, I’m aware that there are outbreaks of rabies in countries to our north and I think it’s important

that we do all that we reasonably can by way of quarantine and other forms of bio-border protection to

keep our country safe. Border protection is not just about stopping the boats, it’s also about stopping

disease and it’s important that the Government do what it can.



QUESTION:



Business groups are saying that productivity is going to be one of the big issues of 2012, so isn’t it

about time the Coalition released its IR policy?



TONY ABBOTT:



I think what we need to see is a community debate about exactly what is happening under the current

Government’s laws. Now, I’ve been calling for that debate now for twelve months. It’s good to see that

more and more business groups are speaking out. More and more community groups and individuals

are talking about the impact of the Government’s laws, about the problems with flexibility, the

problems with productivity, the problems with increasing strike action, particularly strike action in

areas which are vital for the prosperity of Australia. I think it’s really important that we’re now having

that debate. Now, at the right time, the Coalition will respond to that debate but I want to stress that

what you’ll get from us is cautious, careful, responsible proposals for constructive, pragmatic change

in response to real problems. That’s what you’ll get from us and you’ll get in good time before the next

election.



Thanks very much.





[ends]





4 January 2012



