2SM, Breakfast with Grant Goldman

Wednesday, 07 March 2012

Subjects: border protection

E&OE…

GRANT GOLDMAN    The Deputy Opposition Leader is Julie Bishop and I believe we have her on

the line. Good morning Julie.

JULIE BISHOP    Good morning Grant, how are you today?

GRANT GOLDMAN    Very good. Up nice and early?

JULIE BISHOP    Indeed, it is a very early morning here in Perth, but I know your program is on

between 5 and 9 in New South Wales so I thought I better get in touch with you now.

GRANT GOLDMAN    Fantastic. We want to talk about immigration this morning too. The boats keep

arriving and people keep complaining about it but nothing ever seems to be done?

JULIE BISHOP    Well I was told that yesterday there was a talkback caller to the program who

claimed I was changing the Coalition’s policy on border protection and asylum seekers and I couldn’t

let that claim stand uncontested, so I am ringing in to let you know that the Coalition’s position on

border protection remains clear. It will be our policy, as it has been for the last 10 years, to turn back

boats where it is safe to do so, to have offshore processing on Nauru and to reintroduce temporary

protection visas.

GRANT GOLDMAN    It is very interesting that Kevin Rudd was actually starting to lean towards

Nauru and obviously well he is never going to be Prime Minister again or the leader of the Labor

Party, mind you, you can say ‘never say never’!

JULIE BISHOP    Oh Grant I wouldn’t make that claim! I don’t think Kevin’s given up his ambitions at

all.

GRANT GOLDMAN    Oh really?

JULIE BISHOP    I don’t think he has. I think whilst he might not challenge again in the same way, he

certainly still harbours a desire to a) get revenge on Julia Gillard for taking the job off him in the first

place. But b) I believe he would love the opportunity, should it arise, to be drafted back into the role.

GRANT GOLDMAN    The interesting thing though with regard to the boat people, you’ve got these

illegal boat operators sending people to this country and some of them to their deaths obviously as

well, as has happened, and their becoming millionaires out of it. They are becoming millionaires out of

what I call an illegal act.

JULIE BISHOP    It is a criminal activity and there are criminal gangs and rings involved in the people

smuggling trade, and that is why we must stop the boats by whatever means we can, and that is why

our policy of turning the boats back where it is safe to do so, to have temporary protection visas and

processing on Nauru worked in the past and we believe it will work again.

We have got to stop people taking this dangerous journey to Australia and as we have seen some

people have actually died on that journey, far too many people, for it to be in the least bit supported or

encouraged, and that is a tragedy. That is why we are so insistent that the Government should

embrace our policies.

As it stands, the Government has no policy. The East Timor solution didn’t get off the ground, the

Malaysia solution has been found by the High Court to be illegal, so the Government currently has no

policy on border protection.

GRANT GOLDMAN    So what you are saying is whilst they have got no policy have they actually

given up and moved on from that and said, ‘okay we’ll accept whatever boats arrive and we’ll deal

with it then’?

JULIE BISHOP    Grant last week in Parliament Julia Gillard taunted the Coalition saying that we

wouldn’t accept her Malaysia solution legislation. So Tony Abbott moved a suspension of standing

orders to allow Labor to introduce their Malaysia solution legislation and let the House of

Representatives vote on it, because they have the numbers in the House of Representatives. So if

they believe, if the independents supported their Malaysia solution, we gave them the opportunity to

introduce it into the House and everyone could vote on it, and Julia Gillard didn’t do that.

GRANT GOLDMAN    As you say with the Coalition saying we will turn back the boats, it is not as

simple as that is it?

JULIE BISHOP    No that’s right.

GRANT GOLDMAN    Because you have got directions from the United Nations charter that says if

people are in trouble at sea you have got to rescue them. And they are well versed in what they have

to do from the illegal boat operators that, well, make a mess of the ship so they do have to actually

rescue at the end of the day. So it is a problem.

JULIE BISHOP    You are absolutely right. That is why our policy is to turn back the boats where it is

safe to do so. If the boat people seek to sabotage or damage their boat then our Defence personnel

would have to make a decision at that time whether it is safe to turn it back - and as we have always

said, it is our policy to turn back boats where it is safe to do so.

GRANT GOLDMAN    You know at the end of the day though, why can’t we get some kind of

cooperation with Indonesian authorities to work with us so that these boats actually don’t even leave

in the first place? Especially given the fact that we give so much in aid money to Indonesia you would

think we could use that as a bit of a bargaining tool?

JULIE BISHOP    Well that is absolutely essential to the whole solution - close cooperation with the

Indonesian Government is essential for strong border protection. That is what we did with the Howard

Government, behind the scenes - none of this megaphone diplomacy saying that Indonesia’s got to

do this, Indonesia’s got to do that - working quietly behind the scenes with Indonesia to get close

cooperation with them and that is what we would seek to do again.

I am in close contact with the Indonesian Ambassador in Canberra and that is what we would do,

should we be honoured to be the next Government of Australia, we were certainly develop that close

cooperation with the Indonesians.

GRANT GOLDMAN    I have always thought that the Opposition policy was quite clear and straight

forward. Thanks for your time this morning.

JULIE BISHOP    My pleasure, thank you Grant.

GRANT GOLDMAN    All the best, Julie Bishop in Perth. So she has called in from Perth which is -

wow! - 3 o’clock in the morning is it? Thank you for that Julie Bishop, the Deputy Opposition Leader.

