







Transcript

Hon Christopher Pyne MP  Doorstop  8 December 2012



SUBJECTS: Leaked Labor polling; PM carpet-bombing Rudd

E&OE................................



Hon Christopher Pyne MP: Polling has been released by shadowy figures, the faceless men of the  Labor Party last night on the television news that shows that Labor would be defeated if there was a  federal election held, this is internal Labor Party polling by UMR research. It showed that Labor  would potentially pick up seats in Western Australia, South Australia, Victoria and Queensland, but  be catastrophically obliterated in Western Sydney and in Tasmania and would lose the election.  There is only one reason that the Labor figures have released that polling, and that is to undermine  Julia Gillard and to precipitate a Kevin Rudd leadership challenge. At the same time, stories have  appeared today in the newspapers that Julia Gillard herself coordinated and ran the war room that  carpet bombed Kevin Rudd in February this year in the leadership ballot. The story is that Julia  Gillard, Wayne Swan and four other members of her staff and his staff met every morning and every  night either in person or by phone to plan the coordinated attack on Kevin Rudd’s credibility which  brought out Kate Ellis, Greg Combet, Nicola Roxon, Wayne Swan and sundry other Labor members  who talked about Kevin Rudd’s psychotic nature, his bullying, his failed Prime Ministership; the  dysfunction and division that occurred during Kevin Rudd’s leadership. Both these stories point to a  divided and dysfunctional Government. Coming as they did this week on John Faulkner’s speech  about how rancid the Labor Party culture has become and what a danger it is to Australia’s  democracy. So Julia Gillard presides over a Government where polling has been released by her own  side showing that she would be obliterated in a federal election and counter stories appear about  how Julia Gillard led and coordinated the carpet bombing of Kevin Rudd’s leadership. All of this has  been done to precipitate a Kevin Rudd comeback; it’s no surprise that the leakers also said that  Kevin Rudd was very popular in Western Sydney where Labor is slated to lose six or seven seats if an  election was held today. So Labor ends the year as it began it, divided, dysfunctional with the  Hatfield and the McCoy war between the Rudd and the Gillard forces continuing right through to  Christmas.

Journalist: You say that this has been done to precipitate a challenge or takeover, do you think that  it will happen, will there be a challenge?

Pyne: Well polling of this nature, inside Labor party polling is only ever leaked for a purpose, the  purpose is to frighten the hell out of Labor marginal seat holders, both frontbenchers and  backbenchers and to make sure that Julia Gillard ends the year on a sour note rather than a positive  one to wipe away any positives the Government might have gained in the last three or four months  and to start next year with a cloud hanging over her leadership.



Journalist: Who do you think will be leading the Labor Party to the next election?

Pyne: Well that’s a matter for the Labor Party; I don’t think it will be Kevin Rudd. My view is that if  Julia Gillard becomes completely untenable which it appears is the plan from the Rudd forces, that  Bill Shorten will step in and take the leadership with his AWU faction, which won’t solve any of the  problems that Australia faces. Basically the Labor Party is entirely focussed internally, focussed on  itself, focussed on Kevin Rudd or Julia Gillard or Bill Shorten. Nobody in the Government is focussed  on the Australian public, on cost of living, on job security, on border protection and on economic  management.

Journalist: Are you confident that your Party will win safe Labor seats (inaudible)

Pyne: Well the polling that the Labor Party has released, the faceless men of the Labor Party shows  that we would sweep the field of Western Sydney, and that’s because people in Western Sydney are  feeling the effects of job insecurity and the rise in cost of living very, very keenly. And they see a  Government that has lost control of our borders in a way that means 30,000 asylum seekers have  arrived in the last five years, where only three arrived in the previous five.

Journalist: (inaudible)

Pyne: Well I’m not confident of anything until the election is held. What the polling indicates is that  we would win them and that’s why the polling’s been released to undermine Julia Gillard and to  support Kevin Rudd, I can’t say whether will win them or not, I won’t know until an election is called  and over. I hope we’re going to win them.

Journalist: Are the ICAC hearings responsible for Labor’s bad polling in Western Sydney?

Pyne: There is no doubt that the Labor brand has been very badly damaged by the revelations in the  ICAC about Eddie Obeid and Ian MacDonald. John Faulkner referred to that very specifically this  week in his speech about Labor factions and Western Sydney voters would be aghast that during the  last New South Wales Labor Government it was essentially the Rum Corp back in control of New  South Wales again. That Labor brand has been damaged all across Australia, starting in February  when Julia Gillard coordinated the carpet bombing of Kevin Rudd’s Prime Ministership, in fact that  phrase - Kevin Rudd is destroying Labor’s brand - popped up regularly on the media monitors from  different speakers because that was the message that Labor wanted to get out to destroy Kevin  Rudd. Labor’s brand is toxic in Western Sydney, it’s toxic in Australia and Julia Gillard is to blame for  that, she started it in February when she carpet bombed Kevin Rudd’s leadership.

Journalist: When it comes to polling Tony Abbott is still a fair way behind the PM, why and what can  be done to turn it around?

Pyne: Well Opposition Leaders are never usually tremendously popular because their job is to point  out how hopeless the Government is on a regular basis. But I think you’ll see Mr Abbott being Mr  Positive from now right through to the next election, he’s already been giving numerous speeches,  launched a book recently about his speeches this year, he has the plans for the future, but the Prime  Minister’s popularity is the most important issue facing Labor today and of course the primary vote  and the two party preferred vote of Labor shows them being obliterated if there was an election  held today.

Journalist: You do see Tony Abbott’s popularity going up?

Pyne: Well his popularity is not as important as the plans we have for the Australian economy, for  reducing cost of living pressure, for returning security to people’s jobs, protecting our borders, good

economic management and he will restore integrity to the politics and to the Parliament. When  people start to follow those policies I think his popularity will improve.

Journalist: Finally, the Daily Telegraph is reporting Gillard’s team wanted to ensure that Kevin Rudd  never recovered politically from the February spill, did they achieve that?

Pyne: Julia Gillard and Wayne Swan coordinated the carpet-bombing of Kevin Rudd’s leadership in  February this year with staff from both their offices and themselves, they had teleconferences or  meetings every morning and every evening to coordinate the destruction of Kevin Rudd’s  reputation. They’ve tried the same with Tony Abbott this year, it hasn’t worked. In Kevin Rudd’s  case, well the fact that his supporters are still leaking internal Labor Party polling showing that Labor  would be obliterated and leaking the fact that Julia Gillard coordinated the carpet-bombing of her  own people indicates that he hasn’t been killed off by Labor. But it also goes to the very essence of a  Prime Ministership, when Julia Gillard would put destroying Kevin Rudd above relieving cost of living  pressure, protecting our borders and the job security of Australians.

ENDS

