Current | Archives | Search

AM Agenda, Sky News Australia - Border security;  Australia’s relationship with Indonesia; Julia Gillard

Posted on July 17, 2012 10:53

KIERAN GILBERT: Joining us now, Labor frontbencher Mike Kelly here in the  Canberra studio; in Adelaide, Liberal frontbencher Senator Simon Birmingham. Good  to see you both, gentlemen. Mike, first to you... the asylum seeker panel today - Angus Houston meeting with various representatives of the political parties... ...

KIERAN GILBERT: Senator Birmingham, there is one response today to the  Coalition comments in recent days - Marty Natalegawa, the Indonesian foreign  minister, is quoted in the Fairfax press this morning saying that... rejecting Scott  Morrison’s argument that there’s a dysfunctional relationship between the two  countries. He says ‘I disagree with that’ flat out.

SIMON BIRMINGHAM: Well, look, of course, Indonesia, I’m sure, wants to  maintain the best relationship it can with whoever the Australian Government of the  day is but we need to be very clear here that, if you look at things like the live cattle  trade decision, this Government’s handling of our relationship with Indonesia has  been appalling and, of course, you need a very strong, a very robust, relationship  with Indonesia to be able to deal with this issue of people smugglers, to be able to  implement the sensible policies that have worked in the past, and we think that the  Howard Government had a far stronger relationship with Indonesia. It didn’t subject  them to the types of ad hoc decisions, without consultation, on live cattle that this  Government has and we are focused and determined on rebuilding that and I know  that Tony Abbott and Julie Bishop and the team have said our first priority as a  government, on the foreign policy front, is absolutely with Indonesia to make sure  that relationship is as robust and strong as possible.

...

MIKE KELLY: ... the Coalition oppose this because they know that that Malaysian  plan [Labor’s Malaysian people swap] would work and the Malaysian plan also offered  us a way forward in developing a regional solution.

KIERAN GILBERT: The argument against the Malaysia plan, Senator Birmingham...  it does seem to contradict itself, that you’re willing to send boat people back to  Indonesia, which isn’t a signatory to the UN Convention [United Nations Convention  Relating to the Status of Refugees], but you are to Malaysia and the other point is the  Defence advice. They’re worried about the impact on Naval personnel.

SIMON BIRMINGHAM: Well, Kieran, let me quickly deal with a few issues there.  Firstly, you’re turning boats around to go back to a country from which they have  come. That’s vastly different from picking people up and flying them to Malaysia and  putting them at the back of a queue there...

MIKE KELLY: In what way? How is that different? How, physically, morally, legally,  is that different, Simon? How is it different?

SIMON BIRMINGHAM: Well, Mike, it is very different because you are sending  them back to a country from which they have voluntarily come. They’ve come  through Indonesia and you’re sending them back to Indonesia...

MIKE KELLY: It’s just rubbish, mate. You’re completely contradicting yourself on the  UN Convention. You’ve had Scott Morrison out there saying it’s a worthless  document...

KIERAN GILBERT: We’ll wait for Senator... carry on, Senator Birmingham, sorry.

SIMON BIRMINGHAM: They’ve come through Indonesia; you’re sending them  back to Indonesia. That’s vastly different from picking them up and flying them to  Malaysia and putting them at the back of a queue with no human rights safeguards  or anything else there but the next point is: boats have been turned around in the  past, safely, and they can be done again but the last point I’d make here as to why  not Malaysia... well, the pretty simple question here that always needs to be asked is  ‘how do you save these lives at sea, how do you stop the people smugglers, with the  lowest possible impact on the rights and protections for the people you are trying to  save?’ Now, the previous Coalition policies of Nauru, Temporary Protection Visas and  turning back the boats did that. Malaysia doesn’t do that, doesn’t afford any of those  types of protection.

KIERAN GILBERT: Alright, let’s move on because we’re not going to resolve that

Print page

17

Interview Transcripts

Page 1 of 2 AM Agenda, Sky News Australia - Border security; Australia’s relationship with Indo...

6/02/2013 http://www.senatorbirmingham.com.au/MediaCentre/InterviewTranscripts/tabid/63/arti...

this morning. Hopefully Angus Houston’s got better powers of persuasion than  anyone else that we’ve seen in this debate. People’s forum - let’s talk about this - last night. Julia Gillard swayed quite a few in that room. It was very different to the  rest of the political climate in WA, in that room, it seemed. It was chosen by an  independent research agency...

...

KIERAN GILBERT: 30 per cent of people supported the scheme on the way in,  Senator Birmingham. That was up to nearly 50 per cent on the way out so, face to  face, the Prime Minister is able to persuade people much more effectively.

SIMON BIRMINGHAM: Well, Kieran, I’ve run some community forums, with  hundreds of people, with Tony Abbott and I think they’ve left more certain and  determined in their support for him and our policies at the end of those forums than  they have at the beginning. To be frank, a politician who gets an hour or two of  dedicated one-on-one face time with a group of people hopefully can sway those  opinions but, of course, in the end they will listen to all sides of the debate in an  election campaign - they’ll listen to all sides of the debate at present - and what  comes through loud and clear, when I just talk to people in the street, is that they  don’t trust the Prime Minister. That’s the biggest hurdle. Yes, they have problems  with the carbon tax and with the policies of this Government but they also don’t trust  a Prime Minister who promises one thing before an election and does the exact  opposite afterwards and that’s, of course, the biggest hurdle for her to get over.

KIERAN GILBERT: There is a very different... Mike Kelly... yeah, well, you look at  the politics generally... as Simon Birmingham says, that is the perception out there  and Joel Fitzgibbon... we played the comments [on ABC TV’s Q&A] at the start of the  program... he says populism matters in politics, it’s true, unpopular leaders don’t  remain leaders for very long.

MIKE KELLY: Well, you know, that matter was resolved in February. You know,  we’ve moved on but I think...

SIMON BIRMINGHAM: I don’t think Joel has.

...

KIERAN GILBERT: Senator Birmingham, just quickly, populism matters - it’s the  same on both sides of politics, just quickly?

SIMON BIRMINGHAM: Oh, look, people have to listen to public opinion - that’s  important - but what we have here is Joel Fitzgibbon, the Chief Government Whip,  saying he doesn’t have confidence in the Prime Minister. Nobody believes him when  he says he thinks she’ll turn the polls around - the studio audience laughed when he  said that. He clearly expects there to be a change. Here we go through the same old  sorry saga again on this Labor side of politics.

KIERAN GILBERT: Senator Birmingham and Mike Kelly, good to see you both,  gents. Have a good day. Appreciate it.

MIKE KELLY: Cheers, Kieran.

SIMON BIRMINGHAM: Cheers.

[ends]

Posted in: Interview Transcripts

Page 2 of 2 AM Agenda, Sky News Australia - Border security; Australia’s relationship with Indo...

6/02/2013 http://www.senatorbirmingham.com.au/MediaCentre/InterviewTranscripts/tabid/63/arti...

