

Julie Bishop MP

Shadow   MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS

Sky News Lunchtime Agenda

23 November 2012

Subjects: AWU slush fund, immigration policy

E&OE…

LAURA JAYES Joining me now out of Melbourne is the deputy opposition leader Julie  Bishop, thanks so much for joining us this afternoon.

JULIE BISHOP That’s my pleasure.

LAURA JAYES Now these allegations last night, is this the smoking gun you were looking  for?

JULIE BISHOP I’m not looking for a smoking gun. I’m looking for a full and frank  explanation from the Prime Minister of her role in setting up an incorporated association that  ultimately led to a massive fraud being perpetrated against the Australian Workers Union by  Ms Gillard’s then boyfriend and I think the Australian people deserve to hear the Prime  Minister’s full and frank explanation in the Parliament as to what she knew about this  massive fraud.

LAURA JAYES Ok let’s look at these new allegations last night. The insurance certificate of  currency was sent and received by Julia Gillard in 1993, it was required for the approval of a  $150,000 mortgage on the Fitzroy property. Julia Gillard denied knowledge of the mortgage,  knowing of the mortgage in 1995, in a statement in the last few hours she says she has no  recollection of seeing the bank statement. There’s still no proof that she saw that letter and  still no proof that she knew of the fraud. Would you agree with that?

JULIE BISHOP No I don’t agree with that at all. The Prime Minister’s version of events has  been contradicted now by two people who have come forward, who had intimate  knowledge.....

LAURA JAYES It may have been contradicting Julie Bishop but there’s still no hard  evidence though.

JULIE BISHOP Well I disagree with that and I’ll be putting a series of questions to the Prime  Minister in Question Time when she has to answer in a full and frank way,otherwise she  should avoid in any way seeking to mislead the Parliament.

It’s one thing to give answers to journalists at a press conference it’s another thing to give  answers in Question Time because there are consequences of misleading the Parliament.



But there are a series of matters that the Prime Minister should answer including her  knowledge and her conduct in relation to a conveyancing file and mortgage over a house that  was bought with stolen funds from the union slush fund that she helped set up.

LAURA JAYES Ok so what are these specific questions that you still want answered and  have they been broadened from the allegations last night or is this something that you already  did know of?

JULIE BISHOP There are very detailed questions that I wish to put to the Prime Minister in  Question Time next week and I will do that without going into all of the information now  because it’s obviously very complex.

It will involve for example, the illegal witnessing of a power of attorney, the unauthorised  setting up of an incorporated association and a person no less than her own Cabinet colleague  Bill Shorten said the other day that this was an unauthorised slush fund, that it was  inappropriate and that he has effectively accused the Prime Minister of improper conduct.

So when Julia Gillard says this is a smear campaign by Tony Abbott and the Liberals, these  are charges being led by her own Cabinet colleague Bill Shorten, former law partners and a  number of former union officials.

LAURA JAYES She keeps on saying to her defence that she stood up here at Parliament  House and gave a very long press conference and answered all the questions from journalists.  Perhaps journalists were asking the wrong questions at that time. But do you think since that  press conference there’s been perhaps more allegations or more serious questions raised?

JULIE BISHOP Absolutely. I watched that press conference and drawing on my 20 years  experience as a practising lawyer a number of statements that she made about what she did as  a lawyer just did not stack up. And I began looking forensically to the available information  to see whether her story was valid and I’m afraid she was less than honest in the answers that  she gave to journalists at that press conference. Admittedly a number of them didn’t know the  detail of the case and wouldn’t have had access to a number of documents that I have now  seen and so there are many questions that the Prime Minister should answer.

I’ll take some time in question time next week to put them to her and if she’s done nothing  wrong as she consistently maintains, then she should have no difficulty answering these  questions.

LAURA JAYES Julie Bishop you say you’ll put these questions to Julia Gillard in Question  Time next week but do you think up to this stage, you have put a number of questions to her  already in Question Time, are you alleging or do you think that she has misled Parliament in  any way?

JULIE BISHOP I have put a number of questions to her and she has not answered most of  them. In a couple of instances she has given answers which I believe need further following  up and that’s what I intend to do next week in Question Time.

LAURA JAYES Ok, just on to this asylum seeker issue today. How will decreasing the  humanitarian intake, stop people from getting on boats?



JULIE BISHOP No what we are saying is that we wish to maintain the humanitarian program  at its current level that is 13,750 people, that’s what it is today.

Chris Bowen has admitted that increasing the humanitarian intake will not stop the current  rate of people arriving by boat. The Government cannot afford any further blowouts in the  refugee or in the border protection system because they’ve already blown the budget by  billions of dollars. $1.3 billion can be saved if the current level of humanitarian visas is  maintained.

LAURA JAYES Yes but one of the other things that Tony Abbott has put forward today and  the Coalition, this work for the dole type system with people in the community seeking  asylum, they will be able to receive these welfare payments but they’re going to have to show  that they are doing something to work for it if you like. But that’s going to be expensive to  implement and quite difficult to police.

JULIE BISHOP I don’t accept that. Mutual obligation is a principal that the Coalition has  supported for some time. We expect Australians who are receiving welfare to do something  in return for that - mutual obligation and this builds on the policy we took to the 2010  election about temporary protection visas and encouraging people to work to give something  back to the community.



And so we believe that if Australians are expected to undertake mutual obligation  requirements then so should people seeking asylum who are receiving welfare benefits from  Australian taxpayers.

LAURA JAYES Now, Julie Bishop you are a former lawyer, you stood next to Tony Abbott  yesterday whilst he described these asylum seekers as illegals. Are they? And how?

JULIE BISHOP Well the Prime Minister Julia Gillard has described them as illegal arrivals,  so has Kevin Rudd and in those circumstances I’m interested that people are questioning  Tony Abbott’s use of the word when the Prime Minister and the former Prime Minister have  used that term.

LAURA JAYES But are they illegal? Are they coming to Australia illegally?

JULIE BISHOP Well if you arrived in the United States without any papers and without any  proper documentation you would be considered an illegal arrival.

LAURA JAYES Ok Julie Bishop we are going to have to leave it there.



