THE HON BRENDAN O’CONNOR MP  MINISTER FOR HOUSING   MINISTER FOR HOMELESSNESS  MINISTER FOR SMALL BUSINESS

E&OE TRANSCRIPT  NEWS BREAKFAST  ABC24  SUNDAY, 30 SEPTEMBER 2012

10.15AM

SUBJECTS: Alan Jones; Asylum Seekers

ANDREW GEOGHEGAN: Well federal Liberal frontbencher George Brandis is the latest to criticise  Alan Jones’ comments about Prime Minister Julia Gillard’s father. The broadcaster told a Young  Liberal fundraiser last weekend that John Gillard, quote, “died of shame” because of his daughter’s  lies. The remarks have also sparked controversy on Twitter, where the story first broke. Well for  more we’re joined live from Darwin by Government frontbencher Brendan O’Connor. Welcome to  you. Let’s start with Alan Jones’ comments. Other than the clear offence that this would have caused  to the PM, is the Labor Party worried about what Alan Jones says and who’s listening?

BRENDAN O’CONNOR: Well firstly, Andrew good morning, and secondly, look, in relation to this  matter, can I say that these cruel and heartless remarks do not just offend the Prime Minister.  Remember there are other members of the Gillard family that are grieving the loss of John Gillard.  And so they are cruel and heartless and the person in question, Alan Jones, should apologise.

But the other point to make is that these comments were made at a Liberal Party function and  therefore it is incumbent upon the Leader of the Opposition Tony Abbott to repudiate these  comments because if he doesn’t condemn them he condones them.

ANDREW GEOGHEGAN: Tony Abbott was quite gracious in the days following the death of John  Gillard. Do you expect that he will step forward and say something?

BRENDAN O’CONNOR: Well I do expect him to step forward as the Leader of the Liberal Party, when  someone says something, such atrocious things, and I would therefore expect the Leader of the  Opposition, Mr Abbott, to repudiate Alan Jones. This was a speech at a Liberal Party function and if  the Leader of the Opposition doesn’t repudiate the remarks, then he clearly condones them.

ANDREW GEOGHEGAN: Let me go back to my original question - are you concerned about the  influence of Alan Jones?

BRENDAN O’CONNOR: Look I think everyone has a right to have different views and indeed we need  to have people having very diverse views in the media. It’s not a question of whether we disagree  with Mr Jones and his commentary generally, it’s about the standards that we would expect people  in public life to apply.

This was a speech that Mr Jones may have believed was in private but it was held in a Liberal Party  forum and I think it is therefore incumbent upon Mr Jones to apologise. I am hoping that he is sorry  for his remarks, not sorry that he was recorded.



ANDREW GEOGHEGAN: But Alan Jones has certainly stuck to his theme that Julia Gillard is a liar.  Does that sort of talk hurt you?

BRENDAN O’CONNOR: As I say, people have different views and I don’t question the capacity for  commentators and the media to question people. But I think there has to be a line and the line was  certainly stepped over by Mr Jones in relation to these remarks. I mean these are highly offensive,  not just to the Prime Minister but to other members of the Gillard family who are grieving.

ANDREW GEOGHEGAN: Alright, Brendan O’Connor, let’s just move on to other issues and September  saw a record number of people arriving by boat in Australia. Has your latest policy failed?

BRENDAN O’CONNOR: We’re seeing some very positive signs. We’ve always said that this would take  some time to work and indeed we need to continue to implement all of the 22 recommendations as  outlined in the Houston report and we call on the Opposition to accept the recommendations and  work with the Government on this very important matter.

But as you see with people returning to Sri Lanka, people being processed off shore, we will I think  continue to see more people understanding that there is no advantage by getting on these vessels.  And more to the point, they will not risk their lives going on these perilous journeys on very unsafe

vessels, and I am very much hoping that not only will we see a reduction in irregular arrivals, we’ll  see a great reduction in people that area dying at sea.

ANDREW GEOGHEGAN: So you’re saying the message is slowly getting through, not the fact that it’s  being ignored?

BRENDAN O’CONNOR: I think what was the case and we made this clear was the people smugglers  would attempt to continue to lure people onto these unseaworthy vessels by saying they must get in  now. We did anticipate there may be a spike in arrivals and that has transpired.

But what we’re also now seeing is people returning to their country of origin where they don’t  believe they need to seek protection. That in itself is a very strong message to those that might be  contemplating getting on these dangerous vessels.

And I think also when people are now seeing people being processed offshore, they do understand  that there is no advantage in endangering their lives as they’ve done so in recent times and indeed  in times gone by.

ANDREW GEOGHEGAN: Nonetheless, some 3,200 asylum seekers have arrived since the  Government announced that it was returning to offshore processing. Now that’s more than the  capacity of those camps on Nauru and Manus Island.

BRENDAN O’CONNOR: And I think the fact that we’re seeing returns to country of origin will relieve  some of the pressure there. We knew that there would be an attempt to get people here quickly.  We knew that there would be lies perpetrated by people smugglers. That has occurred.

But what we’re now seeing now is increasingly people returning to their own country and indeed  people realising that if they are to come to Australia in this manner they will be processed offshore.

ANDREW GEOGHEGAN: Well the Opposition spokesman Scott Morrison is urging the Government to  put in place arrangements with Sri Lanka to have asylum seeker boats intercepted outside Australia’s  waters - does that have merit?



BRENDAN O’CONNOR: Look there have been situations in the past where the Sri Lankan Navy have  intercepted vessels. Of course that’s a decision that should be taken by Sri Lanka and we work  cooperatively with all countries in the region. If people do not have legitimate claims for asylum and  they are seeking to engage people smugglers to arrive in this manner, I think it’s of course  incumbent upon that country to assist in preventing such vessels. We are seeing too many people  lose their lives at sea not to want to see great cooperation between countries in the region to stem  the flow of vessels.

ANDREW GEOGHEGAN: But are you also talking to other countries such as Indonesia about  preemptive moves of apprehending or at least meeting these boats outside Australian waters and  turning them back?

BRENDAN O’CONNOR: Well what we have with Indonesia is a very strong relationship in preventing  people getting on these vessels. Whilst there has been an increase in arrivals from Indonesia in this  short period, over the last few years there have been many many disruptions as a result of the  efforts by the Australian Federal Police working closely with the Indonesian National Police in  Indonesia - the people smuggling taskforce, there’s 16 taskforces in Indonesia where the Indonesian  National Police do disrupt these operations, do bring people to justice. So it’s not to say that  Indonesia is not cooperating.

But we need a regional solution to these challenging problems. We need to have all countries -  countries of origin, countries of transit and countries of destination - working through and having a  regional approach. And the Houston recommendations are consistent with that approach, and that’s  why the Minister for Immigration ensured that we had the architecture in place at the last Bali  Conference.

So there are efforts being made by our friends in the region to tackle people smuggling head-on. But  let’s not pretend it’s an easy issue. It is a complex matter, there are many many displaced people  around the world and there are people that have been up until now willing to endanger their lives by  getting on these vessels.

ANDREW GEOGHEGAN: Brendan O’Connor, thanks for your time.

BRENDAN O’CONNOR: Thanks very much Andrew.

ENDS

