



CHRIS BOWEN MP

MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP

*TRANSCRIPT*

INTERVIEW WITH SABRA LANE, ABC AM

WEDNESDAY, 31 OCTOBER 2012



SUBJECTS: Changes to the Migration Act, Expert Panel, Malaysia Arrangement.

SABRA LANE: Chris Bowen, back in 2006 you said the Coalition’s idea to excise the  mainland from the migration zone was, ‘… a bad bill with no redeeming feature’, and, ‘… a  stain on our national character’. By your own words, you’re now responsible for staining  Australia’s national character, aren’t you?



CHRIS BOWEN: I’ve changed my mind, Sabra. A couple of points I’d like to make: firstly,  yes, this is a change in position. Yes, you can go back and look at what I said as an  opposition backbencher a long time ago and you can compare it to what I’m doing now as  Minister for Immigration; that’s perfectly legitimate.

Now I’ve changed the Labor Party’s position and I’ve changed my mind based on the  evidence, based on the recommendation of the Houston Panel and based on the evidence  that this will save lives. If I’ve got a choice being consistent with something I said six years  ago and saving somebody’s life, well I’ll save somebody’s life.

Secondly, this is part of an integrated package, unlike this one-off measure that the Howard  Government proposed in 2006.

LANE: This bill that you’re introducing though today really relates to a small percentage of  the overall problem -

BOWEN: Yes.

LANE: Not many people actually make it to the mainland.

BOWEN: That’s correct.

LANE: Is this more about sounding tough?

BOWEN: No. Firstly, as I say, we previously have said we’d implement every  recommendation of the Houston Panel; this is one of the recommendations of the Houston  Panel. I don’t believe you can cherry-pick and say, ‘Oh, we’ll do this bit but not that bit’.  You’ve got to have a fully-integrated, determined approach. The Houston Panel, for  example, said this will be important to ensure that the introduction of processing outside  Australia does not encourage asylum seekers to avoid these arrangements by attempting to  enter the Australian mainland: ‘Such attempts would increase existing dangers inherent in  irregular maritime travel’. I was quoting there from the Report.

So the evidence is pretty strong here. Yes, the numbers involved are small, about 1,500  people have attempted to make the mainland since 2008, and a smaller proportion of that  have actually succeeded. The arrangements in place now could create the perverse  incentive to strike for the mainland to avoid being processed offshore. That wasn’t the case  in the last couple of years where the numbers arriving at the mainland are small.

LANE: Labor’s ‘Pacific solution’ so far has failed to slow the arrival of boats to Australia. The  number of boats arriving here has actually increased since the Government embraced  offshore processing; I think it’s 30% more since the changes were introduced, compared  with the same comparable period - the boats aren’t slowing.

BOWEN: Let me make a couple of points. Firstly, yes, we have seen a continuing increase,  particularly from some cohorts, particularly from Sri Lanka for example. Some other types of  arrivals have reduced since we made those changes, but I’ve consistently said we need a  fully-integrated, total package. It’s not me who said for years, ‘Well, why don’t we call Nauru  and that will fix the problem?’ I said -

LANE: Well when will it work Minister? It’s now your responsibility, when will it work?

BOWEN: Well Sabra, as I was just saying, I think we need a completely integrated package  being introduced and implemented and clearly communicated in the region.

LANE: The Government keeps clinging to the idea of the ‘Malaysia solution’, what active  talks are actually continuing now with the Malaysian Government to negotiate the  strengthened protections that the Expert Panel called for?

BOWEN: Not sure I share your language there, but nevertheless I take your point.

The point is here: we could have all the discussions with Malaysia we like, we could enter  into all the increased negotiations and conditions that we like; I would want to see some  sort of evidence from the Opposition that they would do what I’ve done and the Labor Party  has done and said, ‘Well, we’ll do what it takes to save lives here, even if it means changing

our position’.

We can’t implement the Malaysia agreement without the agreement of the Parliament,  which means we need a change of position from the Greens party or the Liberal Party, and  the Liberal Party previously has said, ‘Oh, we could never enter into an agreement with  Malaysia or approve an agreement with Malaysia because they’re not signatories to the  Refugee Convention’.

Well, they want to turn boats around to Indonesia, which is not a signatory, and they want  to turn boats around to Sri Lanka, which is not a signatory. So their argument, frankly, lies  in tatters. You raised with me earlier -



LANE: - The allegations of hypocrisy though, sounds hollow, given what the Labor Party has  just done regarding the excision of the mainland -

BOWEN: No, quite the contrary Sabra, I’m making the point that the Government has said  we’ll do what it takes to save lives, even if it means taking positions that we’ve opposed  before, even if it means people trawling through our speeches and pointing out what we’ve  said before, because we’re determined to save lives. And the Opposition can show a similar  determination to try and save people’s lives and to actually do something to back up their  sloganeering.

ENDS



