

THE HON NICOLA ROXON MP  Attorney-General  Minister for Emergency Management



TRANSCRIPT OF INTERVIEW WITH CHRIS UHLMANN ON ABC 730-  5 OCTOBER 2012

TOPIC: M47 High Court Case

E&OE ONLY

CHRIS UHLMANN:   Nicola Roxon, welcome.

NICOLA ROXON:     Hello.

CHRIS UHLMANN:   Does this decision mean that more than 50 people in indefinite  detention because they were refused protection visas on the basis of an AISO security  assessment will now have to have their cases reassessed?

NICOLA ROXON:     Well, it doesn't automatically mean that, it's a very complex decision,  131 pages and seven judges all with slightly different reasoning. In fact, the case has upheld  the process that ASIO has undertaken for its adverse security assessments, but it found one  of the migration regulations to be invalid. That means that the particular plaintiff has to have  his case reassessed but the consequences for others will depend on circumstances for each  of those, and of course the Government's carefully considering and will quickly consider  implications for the 50 or so people that are in similar circumstances.

CHRIS UHLMANN:   But does it mean for this man who was a member of the Liberation  Tigers of Tamil Eelam that he now cannot have an ASIO assessment used against him as  he applies for a protection visa?

NICOLA ROXON:     No, it doesn't mean that and the decision clearly says that the ASIO  process did provide procedural fairness. What the decision has declared invalid is a  migration regulation that says that you are not allowed under any circumstances to give a  visa to someone who has an adverse security assessment. So it takes away that strict  implication, the judges say the decision now needs to be remade with respect to this one  individual and they explicitly say by a majority that he is to remain in detention while that's  done.

CHRIS UHLMANN:   Now, what do you say to those people who would say that now you'd  have a tendency to lose these migration cases in the High Court, are you constantly  surprised by this court's rulings?

NICOLA ROXON:     No, in fact we've done a significant amount of preparation for this, the  court has upheld a number of issues that were in contest. They've also specifically not dealt  with a range of issues that potentially will be raised in other matters that were put on hold  before the court.

Don't forget our Government's made clear that we believe it is time to introduce a  more transparent review process for ASIO adverse security assessments that was actually  backed up in this decision. We're just considering the implications of this case to see exactly  what that review process should look like and we'll be able to make some announcements  shortly on that.

CHRIS UHLMANN:   One of the things the court did not consider this time was whether or  not the executive can indefinitely detain people which is the effect of what was happening  here. How confident are you that this court, which is now constituted differently than it was in  2004 where by a narrow margin last time it was decide that you could, won't rule against you  next time?

NICOLA ROXON:     Well previously the High Court did back the Government's ability to  take such action. Obviously, there are new people on the court, it can obviously reconsider  its position.

This decision explicitly did not deal with that issue but we do know that there are  other cases that were put on hold while this one was being dealt with which will no doubt  now be heard by the High Court at some point in the future and the Government will put its  arguments in that case.

CHRIS UHLMANN:   What the court said was that a regulation cannot override the law, will  you now need to return to Parliament to ensure that you can use these ASIO assessments?

NICOLA ROXON:     Well I think we need to carefully consider the detail reasoning of the  High Court decision today. There is a lot of reasoning that will be relevant to any remedy that  might be applied. I think it's too early, just a couple of hours after the decision's been handed  down for us to say which particular consequences flow from it.

CHRIS UHLMANN:   Could you blame people, who are looking from the outside at the  moment when it sees the High Court decisions on two major occasions now and looking at  what's happening on border protection thinking that the entire border protection process this  Government has in place is a mess?

NICOLA ROXON:    No, I think actually it's important to point out that we've had a win in  four cases in migration matters just in the last month, none of which have been reported in  the media, so it is a matter which is litigated extensively. We win some, we lose some,  obviously these are important issues that effect people's liberty, but as a Government we're  always determined to make sure that we respect our obligations under the refugee  convention but that we also take seriously our obligations in national security and to protect  the community from some people that might be of risk.

Now, that's a very difficult balancing act and obviously that court's going to have a  view on the way those two issues interact with each other, and that's why we take seriously  the decision and will look at any implications for the future. What they have said is that ASIO  conducted a proper process for this particular person.

CHRIS UHLMANN:   Nicole Roxon, thank you.

ENDS.

For all media enquiries, please contact the Attorney-General’s Office on 02  6277 7300 or 0409 945 476



