



THE HON GREG COMBET AM MP  Minister for Climate Change and Energy Efficiency  Minister for Industry and Innovation

TRANSCRIPT

GC 171/12

1 July 2012

TRANSCRIPT OF INTERVIEW WITH HUGH RIMINTON - MEET THE PRESS, CHANNEL TEN

SUBJECT: Carbon pricing

E & O E - Proof only

RIMINTON: Melanie, thank you, and now welcome back to the program, Greg Combet. Good  morning, Minister.

COMBET: How are you, Hugh?

RIMINTON: I’m doing alright, more to the point, how are you? You put a lot of work into  getting to this day. How does it feel this morning?

COMBET: Well astonishingly, given the prophecies of doom from Tony Abbott, it looks like the  sun has come up okay. And I'm getting reports from all around the country that life is going on  as normal. We have seen some video evidence from Whyalla that it hasn’t been wiped off the  map and indeed - heard some evidence that people have gone to supermarkets already and  there’s no price increases to be seen. So life as normal, which is exactly what we suggested.



RIMINTON: The first few hours seem to have got by okay then. But on all of the available  evidence, people right now hate this tax. How do you turn that around?

COMBET: Well, I think we are moving, of course, from the fiction that Tony Abbott and others  have created over the last months, to a position from today, where people will be able to test  their experience against the facts, what it's really like. And of course, it will be a very, very  modest price impact. We are providing tax cuts, pension increases, increases in family tax  benefits and many other payments to people, so that, averaged across all households, there is  about $10.10 a week extra in assistance. Industries are going well. The coal industry will not be  wiped off the map as Tony Abbott forecast. And this will be an environmentally effective  scheme. It will cut our greenhouse gas emissions.

RIMINTON: Okay. That's well and good, but the tax will cut emissions by coming down hard on  what are polluting industries, if we take just one example, the aluminium industry. A   question from Tony Abbott to the Prime Minister in Parliament - I’ll put it to you too, first of all  here it is:

TONY ABBOTT: Will the Prime Minister confirm that the Government's own carbon tax  modelling forecasts a 61% reduction in aluminium production as a result of her tax?

RIMINTON: It does, doesn't it, by 2050, mean heavy reductions in aluminium, and that means  jobs and industries going off-shore or shutting down completely?

COMBET: No, that's misleading, The way that he's put that particular question, and what we  are facing in the aluminium industry at the moment, as you can see, in some of the public  commentary, is that the industry is under great pressure, which has nothing to do with carbon  pricing. It’s everything to do with global oversupply, low aluminium prices and the high value of  the Australian dollar.

RIMINTON: Okay. So those are separate pressures on aluminium, but the fact is, that the  carbon price is about those high energy-intensive industries like aluminium, that's the purpose  of the thing. So what's misleading about him quoting back your modelling, that that is the  effect of the carbon tax on aluminium, just to take that industry?

COMBET: Well, because the modelling is very comprehensive and takes into account all of  these issues and looks against a ‘business as usual’ case for making forecasts about the long-term future - and that's the treasury modelling took those positions out to 2050. And there are  significant international factors, for example, the massive expansion of aluminium smelting in

China, and the fact that aluminium companies are moving their smelting operations to  countries where there are very low emissions, electricity sources, gas and renewable energy  resources in particular. It's a very energy-intensive commodity to produce aluminium.

RIMINTON: You can't get it out of renewables, can you?

COMBET: Well yes you can. Hydro-electric power will provide the electricity that is necessary to  produce aluminium and does so in many countries. That's one of the reasons why Norway, for  example, is a very active producer and corporate player in the aluminium sector.

RIMINTON: Well, the Opposition has already said that it will axe the tax, if you like, and in fact,  have today given a timetable of six months to get it in, if necessary, going to a double  dissolution election, if they were to win the next election and Labor was to resist the reform of  this tax. Presumably, they have got an alternative - they have spoken about direct action. What  would be the consequences of that, do you think?

COMBET: Well firstly, let me say that Tony Abbott can't and won't repeal the carbon pricing  scheme. And it's not in the national interest that he do so. If he were to attempt to do so, even  assuming he was able to win the next election, he will have to put up taxes, cut pension

increases, cut family benefits, etcetera, to pay for it. But it won't happen. And this is an issue  that Labor has stood up for for a long time. We do as a country have to cut our greenhouse gas  emissions as part of an international effort to tackle climate change.



RIMINTON: It sounds like you’re bound for a double dissolution election then, if you are saying  that you won't let of it happen, if they were to win the next election, you are saying that you  wouldn't accept a mandate to get rid of the tax?

COMBET: Well, we'll fight for what we believe in, and we have to be part of an international  effort to tackle climate change. But again, Hugh, you are giving the next election away already.  Sure, we might not be travelling that way in the polls at the moment, but I’ll tell you what -  we’re going to fight for what we believe in and fight to win the next election. But even if Tony  Abbott gets into Government, in that event, that unfortunate event, then he can't and he won't

be repealing the carbon price mechanism. And even if he puts his own policy into action, this  so-called direct action policy, that’s to deploy solar panels and plant trees and buy emissions  reductions from large polluters - guess how that's paid for? Out of people's taxes. And guess  what the cost of deploying solar panels on rooftops costs, per ton of greenhouse gas emissions  it’s reduced? Anything up to $400 a ton of greenhouse gas emissions that are reduced. In fact,  it's a massively greater cost, his policy, and none of that's been tested yet. The reason that the  Government has gone down the path that it has, is that it is much, much cheaper to be able to  do so, and it's the big polluters that pay, and we’re using most of that revenue to give to  households.

RIMINTON: Okay, we’re going to take a break. We'll be back with the panel in just a moment or  two.

[break]

RIMINTON: Welcome back, this is Meet the Press. Greg Combet is our guest, and welcome now  to our panel, Karen Middleton from SBS and Jessica Wright from Fairfax. Good morning to both  of you.

KAREN MIDDLETON: Minister, you have got three years of a fixed carbon price before you  move to a trading system. Now, you can't control the world's financial climate any more than  you will control the weather. If you are in a situation where businesses are going under, are  feeling too much pressure, how much room is there for you to either tweak the system or give  them more money?

COMBET: Well, let's just step back from that for a second and have a look at the state of the  economy, it’s growing at 4.3%, unemployment’s around 5%, interest rates have come   down. We are one of the best performing economies in the world. And the outlook for  Australian business is strong. Yes, there are pressures in some sectors, in particular, in  manufacturing, and we have policy settings in place to relieve some of that pressure. But we  are in good shape. And the way that we have set this carbon price scheme up takes into  account, you know, the state of the economy and we believe that it is an entirely feasible and  economically responsible policy measure.

RIMINTON: Mind you, John Howard when he brought in the GST said the same thing. He had to  tweak it, they had to change the compliance issues for business in particular, because there  was revolt out there. Are you saying there will be no shift to the carbon price from here? That  you are totally locked in on all elements of it?

COMBET: If some tweaking is justified, of course we'll consider it, but it has been debated for  four years essentially in great detail with the business community and people understand  exactly what it involves in the business community and we think we have got the settings right,  Hugh. It is an entirely manageable economic reform, and at the end of the day it’s important in  the long-term, because it will help ensure the competitiveness of our economy and our major

trading partners in the Asia-Pacific regions are doing similar things and expecting us to do the  same.

KAREN MIDDLETON: But you have also got an Opposition that pledges to repeal this legislation  if it wins. The polls are suggesting at the moment that it's in front, well and truly. So business is  anticipating the real possibility that this system will only be in place for a short time. Isn't that a  drawback? Isn't that a problem in terms of getting them to restructure the way you want them  to now?

COMBET: It's a problem for businesses, having certainty, but can I state this very clearly: Tony  Abbott can't and he won't repeal the carbon tax mechanism.

KAREN MIDDLETON: He says he can and will.

COMBET: Not much that Tony Abbott says is to be believed. He said that the coal still would be  destroyed from today. Just have a look around, I’ll be visiting a coal mine later today. It's  working, I've checked in. Whyalla’s still here, he said they’d be wiped off the map. He said there  would be unimaginable price increases and Coles and Woolies haven't put their prices up. Tony  Abbott is not to be believed, and he's about to be found out.

JESSICA WRIGHT: Good morning, Minister. The sun did rise today, but all doom and gloom  jokes aside, is it naive to assume that Tony Abbott's campaign against this tax is going to lose  any potency in the run-up to the election? You know what a good fear campaign did, you ran  WorkChoices and that delivered you the 2007 election.



COMBET: Well, the WorkChoices campaign that I headed up at the ACTU - we ran on facts and  on people's lived experience, the actuality of being sacked in the workplace. We didn't  exaggerate a thing, whereas Tony Abbott has been running a fear campaign based on fiction.  And now from today, we are moving to factual assessment of his claims, and people in  Australia are practical people, they will test this against their real experience. They will have  heard all the nonsense that’s gone on over the last 18 months and will now check it against the  lived experience, the reality of it. And I think they will find that Tony Abbott has really been  outrageously misleading and deceitful.

RIMINTON: I’d like to take you up to the other big issue, that’s the asylum seeker issue - the  impasse is now, the log jam almost, is almost complete. There is the expert panel now re-examining the whole issue, but whatever they find, Tony Abbott is now suggesting it won't shift  the Parliamentary numbers. Here's what he said:

TONY ABBOTT: The Coalition doesn't need an expert committee to tell us what our policy  is, because we have a policy, and it's a policy that we will stick to.

KAREN MIDDLETON: Minister, what was the point of bringing this legislation in the way you  did, with no warning, when you knew everybody's positions were fixed and really, we ended up  after two days of debate with no change?

COMBET: Well, everybody's positions weren't fixed. There was quite a significant shift in  sentiment in the Parliament in, you know, in the light of the tragic circumstances of so many  people losing their lives over the last week or so. And that's why the bill that was put forward,

which is a compromise bill put forward by Rob Oakeshott, an independent, was ultimately  carried through the House of Representatives. It's because positions did change. But I tell you, I  am totally disgusted by the position that Tony Abbott and the Greens took in the Senate to  defeat that bill, because it leaves us in a position of not being able to prevent more people  being killed at sea in these boats. And that ultimately, is the critical test. And Tony Abbott, what  we just heard from him in that clip, is his total intransigence, his total aggression, his total  negativity, and his total disregard for the consequences of his actions. We are going to hold him  to account for that.

JESSICA WRIGHT: Minister, the fact is here - you have got all of the evidence that you need for  the Opposition and the Greens. Malaysia is out, they’re not going to move on this. You are the  Government. When will you bring legislation to the Parliament that has a chance of passing  both the House of Representatives and the Senate. Do you think the people smugglers are

going to look at the inquiry and think ‘that's it, our model’s broken. No more boats’?

COMBET: Look, the Government shifted its position. The legislation that went through the  House of Representatives allows both the Coalition's policy to be implemented, and the  Government's policy to be implemented. We supported an Independent's bill to shift - you  know, we shifted to that position, to get that through the Parliament. Andrew Wilkie supported  it at the end of the day, and had struggled with his conscience. It's a very difficult issue, but  there needs to be movement from the Greens and the Coalition on this issue, because the one  really critical test is what is the policy position that will give them the maximum chance of  people not dying at sea, and getting this bill that went through the House of Representatives,  ultimately through the Senate, is important in that regard. I think the Prime Minister has  responded very sensibly by now, saying in light of that intransigence, to ask Air Chief Marshal  Houston, who is a person of unimpeachable character, and Paris Aristotle who is well known in  this field, and Michael L’Estrange, a very experienced diplomat, to look at these issues and to  report to the Parliament what we need to do, because we have really got to get past the

politics with this, and place some value on people's lives and try and stop people getting on  these boats.

RIMINTON: Alright, we’ll see how much it actually shifts any Parliamentary views once they  come back. We have got Rob Oakeshott coming up next. But Minister Greg Combet, thanks  very much for joining us on this day, of all days.

COMBET: Thanks for having me on, Hugh.

ENDS

