



Transcript of doorstop  20 December 2012

Topics: Disaster resilience for schools website; Mr Abbott's failure to read the James Ashby  Federal Court judgement; Australian Aid

NICOLA ROXON: Thank you very much for coming. My name's Nicola Roxon and I'm the  Attorney-General. I'm also the local Member for Gellibrand, which is why I'm here at the  Spotswood Primary School, a very nice little school in my electorate, to promote an amazing  website that's been produced by the emergency management team in my department in the  institute.

It's a tool that children and teachers alike can use, with a very simple message about being  ready for a potential emergency. Unfortunately, coming into the summer season, we do have  to think about the risk of flood and fire. In other parts of the country, the risk of tsunamis and  cyclones.

This is a fantastic online learning tool. It's got some very fun games for kids to play on, but  it's got a lot of educational information as well, with really simple messages about how to be  ready, how to be prepared, what you can do to make yourself and your home safer, what you  can do to make your holidays safer and also information that you might need if you're  involved in the recovery after the event, if a disaster does strike.

So it's really important to make sure that kids in Australia know that we live in a very safe  country. In relative terms, there are not as many risks as in other parts of the world. We have  fantastic emergency service personnel that are ready to help if there is a disaster. But it's good  for children to learn more, to be prepared, to be ready, and to make sure that they are resilient  if there is a problem that strikes.

I also just want to mention that we've announced today as a government that we will be  issuing an apology next year on 21 March to those mothers, fathers and children who were  subject to forced adoption. This is a sorry tale of our past and we've seen state governments  across the country issues their apologies as the primary level of government that's responsible  for adoption policies.

But next year we will be able to, on behalf of the whole nation, issue that apology and  hopefully make clear that, particularly the mothers who have lived for decades with a sense  that they were bad mothers, or they were bad girls - that's what they were told - actually will  be able to feel some sense of vindication that it was a bad policy, rather than them at fault and  that we don't want to repeat those mistakes of history.

We hope that the offering of this apology will go some small way to helping the healing  process for those many families who have been devastated by the impacts of forced adoption.  Over to you.

QUESTION: Is there any decision yet on where the apology will happen? Will it be in  Parliament? Will it be in the Great Hall? And when exactly can we expect it?

NICOLA ROXON: This is an apology that will be offered by the Prime Minister of this  nation. I think that's a fitting recognition of the seriousness of the impact of these policies on  many thousands of Australian women and their families. We've been working for six months  with a reference group of those affected by forced adoption. They've given us some advice on  the wording of an apology and the way it can be handled.

We'll continue to have those discussions and early in the New Year we'll be able to announce  some further details. Also the sort of support services that will be available for people who  want to participate. It's going to be a public event, but there will be people that will want to  register. That information will all be online in the New Year.

QUESTION: Has the Government decided if it will hold an inquiry into the failed Peter  Slipper sexual harassment case?

NICOLA ROXON: Well, the Government's considering further action - if any further action  should be taken. I have to say I am completely staggered by the admission today from Mr  Abbott that he has not yet read the Federal Court decision. Mr Abbott was very quick out of  the blocks when these allegations were first aired. He demanded Mr Slipper's scalp before the  court case had even started.

Now that the Liberal Party, and Mr Brough in particular, has been roundly criticised by the  Federal Court, I think it's astounding that Mr Abbott hasn't taken the time to read this  decision and hasn't taken the time to respond to allegations and comments made in the  Federal Court decision about the Liberal Party and its intentions to try to damage Mr Slipper  and the Government.

QUESTION: Is the Government considering referring the use of Mr Slipper's diaries to the  Australian Federal Police?

NICOLA ROXON: Well, the Government's looking at all sorts of options, but a number of  these matters are matters for the police, not for the Government. Other matters, I think, need  to be considered by the professional boards involved. The very serious comments made by  the judge about Mr Harmer and his conduct of the case as a lawyer. No doubt those matters  will be pursued.

There's a number of issues, but the clearest issue that came from this decision of the Federal  Court more than a week ago is that the Liberal Party and Liberal Party activists and a pre-selected Liberal Party candidate, who Mr Abbott calls a friend, were involved in a conspiracy  to try to harm the Government.

They weren't bringing this case because of the sexual harassment complaints. They were  bringing it for a political purpose. And Mr Abbott stood up - every Liberal Party member has  stood up and said that Mr Brough's got nothing to answer. They clearly haven't read the

decision, which is very critical of Mr Brough. And Mr Abbott needs to read it and then come  forward and answer the serious questions that are there about the way the Liberal Party plays  in these matters.

QUESTION: And just on another issue as well, we've seen a number of disasters recently  overseas. Are you worried that the Government's decision to move - or to spend some of our  foreign aid on asylum seekers in Australia - are you worried about that at all? And do you  think that it's something that may cost lives?

NICOLA ROXON: Look, I think that we are one of the most generous countries in the  world when it comes to overseas aid. We have very complex programs that support all sorts  of things from, you know, helping women in Papua New Guinea with proper maternity  services, through to governance and infrastructure support, through to responding when there  are crises and disasters.

But it's entirely appropriate for decisions to be made by Government about how that money is  spent and the impact that might be, of course, assisting refugees, or those planning to be  refugees, either overseas or here in Australia. Those are priorities that the Government is  fully entitled to make assessments about and Mr Carr - Minister Carr - has, I think  commented very fully on those matters already.

Okay. Thank you very much for coming.

Media contact: Attorney-General's Office - 02 6277 7300



