



Transcript of interview with Alexandra  Kirk ABC PM program  15 August 2012

Topics: High Court decision on plain packaging; Houston Expert Panel Report

MARK COLVIN: The Federal Government's target is to reduce smoking from the current  rate of 15 per cent, down to 10 per cent by 2018.

The Attorney-General Nicola Roxon, who used to be the health minister, says today's High  Court win will help Australia get there. She spoke to Alexandra Kirk a short time ago.

NICOLA ROXON: We think this is an important part of our measures to reduce smoking  rates across the country. We've increased excise, we've run very strong education  campaigns, we've put nicotine patches onto the PBS. So we think as part of that strategy it  will help us get to that target of 10 per cent.

But we're world leaders here. Although all the research shows us that this will be an  effective measure, we don't have another country to look at where we can say, this is the  percentage it will drop in this period of time and we've been quite careful to make that clear  right from the start.

ALEXANDRA KIRK: British American Tobacco claims that smoking rates will go up,  particularly among young people who will have access to cheap, illegal cigarettes, and at  the same time warning that the black market will flourish because all packets will look the  same and therefore they'll be easier to copy. Is that a real danger?

NICOLA ROXON: No I think this is the tobacco industry pulling out yet another one of  their arguments from the grab bag of arguments they've used from day one to try and  oppose this measure.

Today was a victory for every family that's lost someone from a tobacco-related disease,  and I think that these claims can be looked at with some scepticism in the same way that  people were sceptical when they made threats about their legal action that were obviously,  today, proved to be wrong.

ALEXANDRA KIRK: You still face a World Trade Organization challenge courtesy of  countries like Honduras, the Ukraine and the Dominican Republic. Are you sure that you're  not flouting free trade rules?

NICOLA ROXON: Well I feel very confident that the trade rules and decisions that have  been made by trade organisations in the past have never said that as a blanket rule you can't  introduce measures to protect a community's health. They've never said that.

It's interesting that those three countries are ones that we have next to no trade with, of  course, and it's interesting that other countries that might in normal circumstances raise  trade issues have not because they understand the public health impact of the measures that  we're taking.

ALEXANDRA KIRK: Your immigration amendment passed the house today, paving the  way for offshore processing. Are you sure that it is High Court proof?

NICOLA ROXON: Well we believe that we need to do all we can to implement the  measures that were recommended by Mr Houston and his team. We believe that they are,  you know, they've put their minds to this very difficult issue.

Of course there will be risks of challenge in the future and some of the other  recommendations that we are going to consider with slightly more time will need careful  drafting and careful legal advice.

You can't stop legal action being taken in Australia, but you can do your best to ensure that  they withstand challenge and obviously we will be doing that.

ALEXANDRA KIRK: You'd remember the anguish suffered by many of the asylum  seekers who were sent to Nauru and Manus Island by the Howard government, the severe  mental health problems that they faced, that continue in some cases to this day. Back then  Labor said it was cruel. Is your conscious clear about what your government is about to do?

NICOLA ROXON: Look my conscious is clear that we're trying to do the best we can in  very difficult circumstances with the best of advice, and I must say I, and many other  people, were comforted for example that Paris Aristotle, very well respected leader,  someone who treats people who have suffered from mental health problems, suffered  torture, trauma, has also come to the view as a member of this panel that this package is the  best way for us to protect people from loss of life...

ALEXANDRA KIRK: But it was cruel then, is it cruel now?

NICOLA ROXON: …And from further anguish. Well the reason I'm answering your  question in your particular way is we're not choosing between one thing that is good and  one thing that is bad. We're choosing between some very difficult options, all of them with  some level of suffering attached to them, and I am convinced that the panel has identified  the best package which gives us the most chance of stopping people from risking their lives  at sea, and of course then builds in the great humanitarian benefit of us massively  increasing our refugee intake.

ALEXANDRA KIRK: What about the children? The Immigration Minister is the guardian  of unaccompanied minors when they come to Australia, that won't apply when the children  are sent to Nauru and Manus Island. How can that be in their best interests, bearing in mind  that the guardian's role is to look after their best interests?

NICOLA ROXON: Well look, the recommendations from the panel made clear that we  need to do more than existed in the past for the way people were held on Nauru, and that  includes looking at vulnerable people, that would include children that were  unaccompanied, it might include people who have particular mental health issues or other  health needs.

The Minister, I understand is working through exactly how we would apply that and  identify the people it would cover.

ALEXANDRA KIRK: So are you saying that unaccompanied minors might end up  staying in Australia?

NICOLA ROXON: No, obviously the rules would apply about when you would be given  any permanent sort of residency but it might mean that there were people that are  vulnerable and it would not be appropriate to be held on Nauru for a period of time and I  would imagine unaccompanied minors would be likely to be in that category.

ALEXANDRA KIRK: But didn't the High Court say that the Minister responsible, as their  guardian, has to act in those children's best interest, and as a result, the Minister later agreed  not to send children to Malaysia. So shouldn't he now promise not to send them to Nauru or  Manus Island?

NICOLA ROXON: Well I think those questions you can put to the Minister for  Immigration. What I'm saying is we've accepted in principle the advice of the panel, the  panel identifies people who might be at risk or vulnerable as those that might need extra or  different treatment.

This panel's report was handed down to the Government on Monday, we are working with  sleeves rolled up, I was about to say something very unparliamentary, working our butts  off, to make sure that we actually can implement the whole package, and it includes taking  account of these issues.

But we're simply not in the position to answer each and every practical question while we  work through that whole of the report.

MARK COLVIN: The Attorney-General Nicola Roxon speaking to Alexandra Kirk.



