

Radio Australia 'Pacific Beat', Interview  with Bruce Hill  Transcript, E&OE, proof only

23 August 2012

Australia's Parliamentary Secretary for Pacific Island Affairs, Richard Marles is making final  preparations to attend the Pacific Islands Forum in the Cook Islands.

He is due to arrive in Rarotonga late Monday and will attend a series of meetings ahead of the  official opening with Australia's Prime Minister Gillard on Wednesday.

Richard Marles spoke to Bruce Hill from Parliament House in Canberra.

RICHARD MARLES: Good afternoon Bruce. I think - the theme for this forum is Large  Ocean States - the Pacific Challenge. That really speaks to the big challenges facing the  Pacific at the moment; climate change, and the sustainable management of oceans is really  the form of sustenance for the Pacific.

I think they are very important topics to be considering, particularly after Rio+20, and  particularly given how the Pacific is really on the frontline of the effects of climate change.

You see that most significantly with the low lying coral atoll nations which we've spoken  about before and are absolutely dead flat and are very susceptible to sea level rises and  changes to water security. But, even for a place like the Cook Islands and other countries  which have a significant reliance upon tourism, changes in climate patterns can have a big  impact on the tourist product because of storms and so forth. And those, in turn, have a  significant impact on Gross Domestic Product.

So, looking at those challenges will be a focus.

From Australia's point of view, while participating in those discussions, and very keen to do  that and continue our advocacy on behalf of small island states around the issue of climate  change, we're also keen to raise the issue of gender equality within the Pacific. Michelle

Bachelet, the head of UN Women, will be at the Pacific Islands Forum. This is a really good  opportunity, to put a focus on increasing women's empowerment in terms of the political life  of the Pacific but also the economic life in the Pacific and women's safety within the Pacific.  Seeking outcomes in relation to that will be a focus for us as well.

BRUCE HILL: Mr Marles, there's going to be a bit of a difference with this forum.  Apparently the US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton is going to be there. Why do you think  she's coming?

RICHARD MARLES: Well, I've seen those reports. I've not had them absolutely confirmed.  But, of course, if Hillary Clinton comes to the forum, it would be a wonderful thing for the  forum, and it will be a first in terms of the US Secretary of State attending the forum.

What it says is that there has been an increasing American engagement in the Pacific which,  from our point of view, is very welcome. There is much that the US can contribute to the  Pacific in terms of maritime surveillance and in terms of economic engagement...

BRUCE HILL: Well, there is a theory going on around out there that what's going to happen  is - they said that Hillary Clinton was coming essentially to order Australia and New Zealand  to make nice with Fiji, to counter the influence of China. Any truth in that?

RICHARD MARLES: No, there's no truth in that. Look, Fiji is really a separate question  which I'm very happy to go through, and that's a question which is being dealt with at length  by the forum's Ministerial Contact Group. And no doubt it too will be an issue discussed at  the forum.

But I think what this represents is an ongoing growth in the involvement and engagement of  the United States within the Pacific, and we've seen some of that over the last few years. At  the last forum in Auckland, America sent a 50-strong delegation, the largest delegation it had  ever sent to the forum. In the last two years, Kurt Campbell, the Assistant Secretary of State  responsible for this part of the world, has led an American mission through the Pacific - did  that last year, did it again this year - which has been very welcomed by Pacific countries and  I think is really raising awareness within the State Department about the issues of the Pacific  and the significance of the Pacific.

So there are lots of issues that America needs to be engaged within the Pacific and we are  seeing a very welcome increasing engagement by America in the Pacific. If the Secretary of  State does attend the forum, I think that's a culmination of that process.

BRUCE HILL: Australia has changed its policy on asylum seekers at the moment, and that  affects obviously Papua New Guinea and Nauru. Do you think that asylum seekers are going  to feature at the forum at all?

RICHARD MARLES: I think Bruce there'll be an understandable curiosity about what has  occurred in terms of Australia's policy in relation to asylum seekers and the arrangements that  we are reaching with Nauru and with PNG. And that curiosity, as I say, is very  understandable and we'll be very happy to answer questions amongst the other Pacific Island  countries as to what the change in policy in Australia means and what we're doing with both  PNG and Nauru.

But I don't see this as an issue that will come up in any formal sense during the actual  discussions. I can't see this as being an issue which would be the subject of any communiqué.  But naturally there will be a fair amount of interest in what's going on.

Media enquiries

 Parliamentary Secretary's Office: (02) 6277 4330   Departmental Media Liaison: (02) 6261 1555



