

THE HON NICOLA ROXON MP  Attorney-General  Minister for Emergency Management



TRANSCRIPT OF INTERVIEW WITH BARRIE CASSIDY ON ABC  INSIDERS - 7 OCTOBER 2012

TOPICS: James Ashby case; Tony Abbott and women; M47 High Court  decision

E&OE ONLY

BARRIE CASSIDY:   Attorney-General, good morning. Welcome.

NICOLA ROXON:     Good morning. Thanks.

BARRIE CASSIDY:   Do you still maintain that James Ashby brought a case against Peter  Slipper to ruin his reputation and to harm the government?

NICOLA ROXON:     Well, I've been very clear in the comments that I have made about this  case, that I was always prepared to explain the processes of what was happening, what  applications were being made, including that the commonwealth made an application that  this was an abuse of process.

That matter has now been settled and the settlement is public, with no admission of  liability, with a payment being made and commitments to some training for MPs but also for  their staff. So I think that that is all on the record. Obviously, there is still a live matter before  the court between Mr Slipper and Mr Ashby, so we do have to be careful in commentary that  we want to provide about any detail of that case that's still before the court.

BARRIE CASSIDY:   But did he bring this case to ruin Peter Slipper's reputation and harm  the Government?

NICOLA ROXON:     Well, that question is still being asked in the court. That is an issue  between Mr Slipper and Mr Ashby.

BARRIE CASSIDY:   But haven't you already made a judgement on that?

NICOLA ROXON:     Well no, we've made a settlement with Mr Ashby, the terms of those  are public; in fact, they were made public, not by us, before they were even finalised. What  I've been clear about is that it is appropriate as the Commonwealth Attorney-General to  explain those processes. It's not appropriate for me to express my view on whether  something was an actual abuse of process or not while that is still a live question before the  court.

BARRIE CASSIDY:   But you have. But you've already said that; you've already questioned  his motives.

NICOLA ROXON:     No Barrie, what I have been clear to do is say what application the  commonwealth was making before the Federal Court. We've made that application, and we  explained what that application was. That matter has been settled between the  commonwealth and Mr Ashby, but the very same question is being litigated between Mr  Ashby and Mr Slipper. The case was heard last week. The judge has reserved his decision.

You know, it is not appropriate for me to try to sit in the judge's position and  determine whether that is what the court will find or not. I simply don't know and it is not  appropriate for me to try to guess.

BARRIE CASSIDY:   So you took the abuse of process application forward because you  felt, you believed - the Commonwealth believed - that James Ashby's motive was to ruin his  reputation and harm the government. That is no longer your view, clearly; you've withdrawn  that application.

NICOLA ROXON:     Well as I've also said before, and I think anybody that's been involved  in litigation would have an appreciation, settlements don't necessarily mean that one person  is right and the other is wrong. They are an agreement that is struck, in this instance without  an admission of liability. A payment has been made to Mr Ashby; terms have been agreed  about some training for sexual harassment laws, both for MPs and senators and for staff,  about how to appropriately bring complaints if there are issues. That's all public.

That matter is now settled, but some of the issues are going to continue to be  litigated. That is unfortunate but that is as it is, and the court currently has a number of these  matters before them right now as we speak.

BARRIE CASSIDY:   Isn't it fair to assume though that if you had any prospect of winning  the case, you would not have withdrawn, you would not have settled?

NICOLA ROXON:     No, look, we take legal advice. We look at all of the circumstances, and  one of the very significant factors - just one amongst others but nevertheless a significant  one - was the huge amount of money that is being spent on this. Taxpayers have to pay for  that. The commonwealth, remember, is a defendant. We didn't choose to be in this litigation,  and, already, before the settlement, over $700,000 had been spent on it.

Now that weighs heavily for me, that taxpayers money is being used in this way. We  get legal advice, we weigh up all of the circumstances and that's what we believe was the  best course of action.

BARRIE CASSIDY:   So from here on in then, no member of the government will be  questioning James Ashby's motives?

NICOLA ROXON:     Well, obviously, there are particular matters before the court now,  some of them which, I don't think you or your listeners would be surprised, I have fairly  strong views about. But while they're actually evidence in the case that's before the judge  being decided right now, I don't think it's appropriate or possible for us to be able to make  comments, even if people wanted to.

BARRIE CASSIDY:   Because you have talked in the past about Liberal-National Party  shenanigans. You've said that - you've talked about the active involvement of at least one  journalist. What suspicions do you harbour there about the journalist and the active  involvement of the journalist?

NICOLA ROXON:     Well they were in the claims that we made. They are in public  documents that are before the court. They are part of the matter that is now being settled.  Obviously I don't resile from those comments, they've been publicly made and those  allegations were in the court documents. But it is now a settled matter between Mr Ashby  and the commonwealth.

BARRIE CASSIDY:   Peter Slipper was criticised for not attending in person on Monday. Did  you advise him not to turn up?

NICOLA ROXON:     No, I've not had any discussions with Mr Slipper.

BARRIE CASSIDY:   Well, he also entered via the judge's car park. Did you in any way  approve that or encourage that to happen?

NICOLA ROXON:     Well look that, I think certainly with the benefit of hindsight, was a  mistake. I have an office in the same building and, of course, people are able to get access.  Of course we should have thought more carefully about the potential for that to compromise  - or at least the view of what was happening in the court. I've apologised to the court, as has  Mr Slipper.

BARRIE CASSIDY:   So in what way did you get involved?

NICOLA ROXON:     Well the ComCar accessed the car park. A staff member of mine was  in the office. I think that it was misunderstood that the request was for us, rather than for Mr  Slipper. Really, I can quite clearly and openly say I think that that was a mistake.  Nevertheless, I don't think anybody can draw some conspiracy. It's my office there; of course  my staff come and go at times when the court is not even open. Nevertheless, I understand  that that could provide a perception, which is the wrong one.

BARRIE CASSIDY:   So is this something you communicated directly to Peter Slipper?

NICOLA ROXON:     No, it's not.

BARRIE CASSIDY:   And you do concede than it seemed to imply favouritism: to have two  parties to a dispute turn up and one turns up in the judge's car park and the other comes  through the front door?

NICOLA ROXON:     Yeah look, it's the car park that we use as well. It's not just the judge's  car park but I can completely understand that that perception is created and I think it's  unfortunate because, obviously, I don't agree with a whole range of the other criticisms. No  one in politics wants to give the other side a free kick, and I think we did in this instance.

BARRIE CASSIDY:   Now, Julie Bishop and others have said that have said that you should  set Peter Slipper adrift essentially for the remarks that he made about women's genitalia and  that text message that was released in court this week. It was obscene.

NICOLA ROXON:     Well, as I say, it won't surprise you that I have very strong views about  those comments, but they are, directly, the evidence that is before the court at the moment,  that the judge could well be sitting and writing his opinion on as we speak, and I just don't  think I'm in a position to be able to make comments about it as much as I may want to.

BARRIE CASSIDY:   But she does make the point that you accuse others of sexism and this  it was sexist and it was misogynist.

NICOLA ROXON:     Well, but there's a court case that's in play here, where this is part of  the evidence. There isn't a court case for Mr Jones. There isn't a court case for Mr Abbott. I  am a political senior minister. I'm able to make comments about other comments, but in this  instance, when they are directly being provided as part of a case before the Federal Court -  evidence of two text messages between individuals, not a public speech, not something that  is being said in the parliament or in the media - I just am not in a position to be able to  express a view even if I would want to.

BARRIE CASSIDY:   Okay, in the past couple of days we've had had this intervention by  Margie Abbott on behalf of her husband. Are you going to back off as a result of that now?

NICOLA ROXON:     No, look I think - I mean, good on Margie Abbott. She obviously loves  her husband. The truth is though Mr Abbott is not running in some election to be Husband of  the Year or Father of the Year. He wants to be the prime minister, and what I think it's fair  game for me, or any other senior minister, to do is to hold him to account for his public  behaviour and his public comments, and that is what we have been doing. And I don't think  because I am a woman minister I should be prevented from being able to do that, which  seems to be what the Opposition are suggesting.

BARRIE CASSIDY:   No, but Tony Abbott is saying that if you continue to make this remark  that he has a problem with women, then Margie Abbott will be trotted out, and she will refute  it.

NICOLA ROXON:     Well that's entirely a matter for them. I mean they can obviously - it's a  matter for Margie and Tony and no doubt they will talk about whether or not she will make  public comments. I don't express any view on that. It's as it should be that a wife loves her  husband and vice versa. So I don't think that's really the issue.

The issue is whether or not, we believe, as the government, that Mr Abbott will do  things that will be beneficial to the community or not, whether they will be beneficial to  women or not. If he makes comments or treats people in a way that we think is  inappropriate, well, I think we should be free to say that.

BARRIE CASSIDY:   But do your allegations go further than that? Do you in fact claim that  he's a misogynist and that he doesn't get women?

NICOLA ROXON:     I don't think I've ever have used those words. I've said that I certainly  think he seems to have an issue with capable women. I mean my direct experience with him  is that he'll turn his back on me when I speak in the parliament. We use to go to events  together when I was the shadow minister; he would refuse to acknowledge me and turn his  back at functions, much to the discomfort of the stakeholders who would invite us - both  sides trying to be polite. And normally, and I've had this experience with other members of  the Liberal Party, that is a very friendly sort of environment because you're a little bit off-duty.  Not so with Mr Abbott.

You know, he swears when he doesn't turn up at public debates. We've got a bit of a  record together. It's, I think, known that we don't like each other, but I don't think that there's  any reason that I am not able to express those views. That's part of politics and I intend to  keep prosecuting our case.

BARRIE CASSIDY:   But because you do of course you - what do you make of this term, the  handbag hit squad? And I think it is accepted that you're the leader of that group.

NICOLA ROXON:     I should have brought my handbag today. I mean to start with when I  heard it I had a good laugh. I thought it was a funny comment.

It has been worrying me a little bit, because I think what it really is implying, that as a  senior female minister, if we make a criticism that somehow it should be dismissed. If  Anthony Albanese or Wayne Swan, or someone else makes it, people will take it seriously. I  mean there's a bit of reverse sexism in this. People probably know that actually women in  the Gillard government are responsible for more than half of the federal budget. We also  have the finance minister and prime minister as women. Do people expect that we won't go  out and argue our case as strongly as we can?

BARRIE CASSIDY:   Okay, I want to ask you about the High Court decision during the week  that seems to put into question the country's ability to detain an asylum seeker found to be a  security risk. Is that the case? Do you any longer have the power to keep people in detention  that are regarded as a security risk by ASIO?

NICOLA ROXON:     We do and it's a complex case. What in fact the case decided was that  the ASIO assessment was done with procedural fairness; it actually backed up the process  that ASIO uses; it explicitly said that there's ability to take account of national security risks  as part of the refugee convention. It did knock out a 20-year-old regulation which said having  an adverse security assessment automatically prevents the minister from being able to grant  a visa.

So what we're now doing, busily, with all the lawyers is saying, well, how is that taken  account of? Is the decision making clear that national security should just be one amongst a  number of factors? Do we need to change the law, or can the existing, for example,  character tests apply? It has unfortunately got seven separate judgements. It is nearly 200  pages long. The reasoning we have to look at carefully.

But we are not in any way concerned that the balance of assessing the obligation to  protect refugees and the need to protect national security still is something that the  government can and should do. The particular regulations that those decisions are made  under are obviously being scrutinised carefully.

BARRIE CASSIDY:   But George Brandis raised the question whether there is a real risk to  community safety as a result of this. Is there?

NICOLA ROXON:     Well the court made clear that it's appropriate for this particular person  - remember this decision was about one person in this situation - is able to be kept in  detention while the minister remakes his decision. They expressly decided that. So I don't  think there's need for alarm. What there is need for is for us to assess us properly what the  court said, make sure that any changes that are made are ones that comply with this  description and decision from the High Court.

BARRIE CASSIDY:   And, on balance, won't that mean legislation in the end, and then you'll  be looking for support from the Coalition?

NICOLA ROXON:     Well, it could mean legislative change in the end, and I note that the  Coalition, in this instance, has already come out and said that they want to work with us on  that, and I understand Mr Bowen and Mr Morrison are meeting early next week. But I just  think we need to get their full advice about the impact of the case. There are already some  existing powers, which it seems the court was indicating could or should be used, and we  will make those decisions as soon as we have that proper advice.

BARRIE CASSIDY:   Thanks for your time this morning, appreciate it.

NICOLA ROXON:     My pleasure.

For all media enquiries, please contact the Attorney-General’s Office on 02  6277 7300 or 0409 945 476



