Search this site

Go

Home

Biographical details

Media Centre

Contact details

Department

Minister for Multicultural  Affairs

Links





Chinese asylum seekers, boat arrivals,  Malaysia Arrangement Wednesday, 11 April 2012

Interview with David Speers, Sky News PM  Agenda

David Speers: Minister, thanks for your time.

Chris Bowen:Pleasure.

Speers:In the end, what did convince these Chinese nationals to  stay in Australia?

Bowen: Well, look, I can't really comment on what may or may not  have convinced them. All I can do is go through what information  was made available to them. It was certainly made clear to them  that they can claim asylum in Australia, how the process would

work, what the detention arrangements would be, and certainly we  made it possible for the New Zealand Government to also speak to  them, so that they could give them their perspective, and also of  course the dangerous nature of the journey from Darwin to New  Zealand which is still a very long way was also made clear to them.

So they made their own decisions. I daresay it wasn't an easy one,  because their original intention was very clearly to go to New  Zealand. But they've weighed up all the options available to them  and decided to apply for asylum in Australia.

Speers: So what were they told about detention arrangements?  Will they go into detention or not?

Bowen: Yes, they will be. They've already been detained, as is  normally the case, and they will be detained initially at least in  Darwin. As you know -

Speers: Is that at the Northern Immigration Detention Centre?

Bowen: No, at the alternative place of detention in Darwin, not the  Northern Immigration Detention Centre.

Speers: Which is what?

Bowen: It's the facility near the airport. It's called the Darwin  Airport Lodge.

Speers: It's a motel, isn't it?

Bowen: It's a former motel which has been converted, but it is very  clearly an alternative place of detention. Now, of course we have  special arrangements in place for children. That's the case across  the board, where they are detained in different places of detention  before they're moved into the community.

Speers: So this is the point: they were told, 'We're not going to  take you to Christmas Island, you'll go into the airport lodge and  then released into the community.'

Bowen: No, let's be clear: the process of detention as it applies to  everybody was explained to them. That is, that they will be  detained while we're conducting our checks which go to health,  character, identity and security, and then they would be considered

Chris Bowen MP Minister for Immigration and Citizenship

Page 1 of 4 Chinese asylum seekers, boat arrivals, Malaysia Arrangement

5/06/2012 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2012/cb185767.htm

as is every other asylum seeker who arrives by boat for alternative  arrangements.

I want to be very clear about this, David: no special arrangements  in place for these people. They will be detained and then  considered along with everybody else for different arrangements  as and when is appropriate.

Speers: It is different to asylum seekers who do arrive on the  Australian mainland, some of whom are taken back out to  Christmas Island and put into the detention centre there. It is a  different situation for these people.

Bowen: Well, they'll be detained in Darwin, and whether they're  detained in Darwin or Christmas Island or elsewhere, people who  are detained at Christmas Island often only spend a very short  period of time before they're then transferred to Darwin or another  mainland detention centre. That's the case.

For example, we have had up until very recently less than 200  people on Christmas Island and now we've got a little bit more than  that, but clearly people get transferred off Christmas Island onto a  mainland detention centre, including the Darwin Airport Lodge or  other detention centres across the network.

It is the case that these are obviously different arrangements to  your run of the mill, ordinary asylum seeker boat, because very  clearly it's been a different set of circumstances. But it is the case  that eight out of 10 have a passport, which we regard at this stage  as being a valid and genuine passport. That will make identifying

their identity checks easier and quicker. One of the big challenges  is when people arrive without documentation, whether they've  destroyed it or they don't have it. That can make establishing their  identity obviously a lot more difficult. That might not be the case in  this instance and obviously when those checks are complete they'll  then be considered for other arrangements, as is the case for  every other asylum seeker who arrives by boat.

Speers: But just to be clear on this, you say they're in detention.  Can you just explain, though, what the situation is at that airport  lodge? Are they free to come and go?

Bowen: No. No, the Darwin Airport Lodge is a place of detention.  If they are then moved into the community, which is particularly the  case for families and children, down the track then they are able to  come and go as they please. But that's as the case for every other  asylum seeker who's processed in the community.

For example, people who've arrived in Australia in a family  situation since the end of November are now being processed in  the community. We have a very clear program of moving people  into the community for processing, particularly in relation to  families and children. That will apply to the families and children in  this case, just as it would with any other.

Speers: Now, what about the fact that they are Falun Gong  members? What has been the history of claims for asylum by  Falun Gong members in Australia? Some have succeeded, haven't  they?

Bowen: Yes. It's important, obviously, David, that I make clear that  I can't comment on individual cases or the strength of individual  cases. But let me put a bit of context on this. Obviously, this is a  very high profile group of people. But we did have well over 1,000  claims for asylum from China last year. They obviously were

people who'd arrived by plane and had been granted other types of  visas. They had a range of circumstances for which they claimed  asylum, of which being Falun Gong practitioners would be a very  prominent one.

And often the challenge is determining who is genuinely a Falun  Gong practitioner and who is claiming to be a Falun Gong  practitioner for the purpose of claiming asylum. I've had a lot to do

Page 2 of 4 Chinese asylum seekers, boat arrivals, Malaysia Arrangement

5/06/2012 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2012/cb185767.htm

with the Falun Gong Association over the years. It's been an  interest of mine and one of the things I've discussed with them is  how you make that determination about who is genuine and who is  not. But very clearly we have the situation if somebody claims  asylum because they are a practitioner of Falun Gong, that's  something taken very seriously.

Speers: Well, it essentially means that Australia accepts  practitioners of Falun Gong are persecuted in China.

Bowen: Well, every case is taken on its merits. Every case is  considered. The Department of Immigration considers it in the first  instance and then if the result's negative it can be appealed to the  Refugee Review Tribunal. And you would find that a significant  part of the caseload of the Refugee Review Tribunal is people  claiming asylum from China because it is our largest group of  people who claim asylum by air, is actually Chinese nationals, and  of course they claim it for a range of purposes. They may be  political views, religious views, and membership of Falun Gong.  They all get taken seriously and assessed.

Speers: You just said you've taken a personal interest in this,  about this issue of Falun Gong practitioners. Do you believe they  are persecuted in China?

Bowen: Well, I made the point, David, that I'd taken a personal  interest in the status of Falun Gong practitioners since I was a  Member of Parliament, not as Minister for Immigration. It's  something that's been a long interest of mine and I've had regular  discussions with a range of groups around this.

Speers: And are they persecuted?

Bowen: Well, clearly people are entitled to make the claim that  they're being persecuted because of their religious or other beliefs,  and those views are considered. Now, as Immigration Minister,

David, I cannot comment on the strength of individual claims and  whether individuals are persecuted or not. That's something which  is at arm's length from me as minister.

Speers: But as a group, though?

Bowen: - That's something that is at arm's length from me as  Minister, as is appropriate. If I make commentary on that, then you  would rightly that I was then interfering in individual decisions -  which I'm not going to do.

Speers: Okay. Can I turn to the 255 asylum seekers who have  arrived overnight on two boats? These are big numbers, more than  1 800 have now arrived this year so far - more than double for the  number last year. Now you blame the Opposition, the Opposition  blames you. Are you prepared to actually sit down again with Scott  Morrison and work on a bipartisan solution to find an offshore  processing solution?

Bowen:Well let's be clear here, David. We sat down and had a  number of meetings before and through Christmas where there  Government said, 'Look we believe the Malaysia agreement would  work as a very effective deterrent. We also understand you're

committed to Nauru, so we'd be prepared to open a detention  centre at Nauru.' The Opposition said no.

I made it clear that we were happy to hear any constructive  suggestions or recommendations from the Opposition - they had  none.

We came to the table with a very constructive set of arrangements.  We even agreed to open a detention centre on Nauru as part of a  bipartisan framework going forward. Mr Abbott chose to say no.  We offered a full, transparent, independent inquiry into the issue of  Temporary Protection Visas - he said no. He brought to the table  absolutely nothing. I think we're entitled to reach -

Page 3 of 4 Chinese asylum seekers, boat arrivals, Malaysia Arrangement

5/06/2012 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2012/cb185767.htm

Speers: - That's because he's opposed to Malaysia, which you  insist must remain part of a solution here. Why not - if you have no  philosophical objection to Nauru - why not at least give it a go, on  its own for six months? See if it works, test the Opposition's theory.

Bowen: Well because what we've said is that if it was part of a  broader suite of measures and a complement to an agreement like  Malaysia, then we're prepared to do it. What we're not prepared to  do is spend $2 billion of taxpayer's money, which is the treasury  estimate - and the Opposition can say they don't think it'll cost that  much, apparently they know more about it than treasury.

We're not prepared to do that when all the expert advice to us is  that if people are simply processed on Nauru and then resettled  into Australia - just like Christmas Island but further away and  more expensive - that's going to have a zero deterrent effect.

Now if Mr Morrison or Mr Abbott wants to make an announcement  about people being processed on Nauru and then where those  who are found to be refugees would be settled; and if it's a country  other than Australia, well then let's have a look and see if that  would have a deterrent effect. But as we stand, their policy - the  only conclusion is - that people be processed on Nauru and then  resettled into Australia, just as people who are processed on  Christmas Island are resettled into Australia - zero deterrent effect.  Zero.

Now if you have an arrangement like Malaysia, where people are  told, 'Look we're going to process you in Malaysia and you won't  be resettled into Australia, you'll only be considered in line with the  other 100 000 asylum seekers in Malaysia, for example' - that is a  deterrent effect. All the expert evidence is that that would have a  very significant effect.

I think the Opposition knows that. That's why they're so determined  to stop it, because they've made a political conclusion that boast  arrivals are in their own political, personal best interest.

Speers: Alright, Minister Chris Bowen, we'll have to leave it there.  Thanks for joining us this afternoon.

Bowen: My pleasure David.

See: Index of Speeches

URL:  http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2012/cb185767.htm  Last update: Thursday, 12 April 2012 at 09:09 AEST

Home Copyright & Disclaimer Privacy Department of Immigration and Citizenship

Page 4 of 4 Chinese asylum seekers, boat arrivals, Malaysia Arrangement

5/06/2012 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2012/cb185767.htm

