Chris Bowen MP

Abbott needs to turn back on dangerous asylum  seeker policy  Monday, 09 July 2012

Revelations over the weekend that the Leader of the Opposition failed to raise the  Coalition's 'turn backs' policy in a face-to-face meeting with the Indonesian President  are embarrassing and highlight the flaws in Coalition asylum seeker policy.

Tony Abbott is happy to have Australian navy personnel do the 'dangerous' heavy  lifting on turn backs, but he doesn't even have the courage to raise his policy directly  with the Indonesian President.

Mr Abbott has more questions to answer on his fraught turn backs policy.

What will happen to asylum seeker boats that don't originate from Indonesia?

Would Mr Abbott turn back boats to Sri Lanka knowing that they will never make the  return voyage?

Would Mr Abbott turn these same boats back to Indonesia?

If Mr Abbott is looking to create some form of exemption of boats depending on what  country they come from, won't that encourage people to make even more dangerous  journeys from countries that are further away than Indonesia?

How are turn backs to Indonesia or elsewhere consistent with the Coalition's 2010  election commitment that boat turn backs 'require a commitment from the return  country not to return persons seeking asylum to the place from which they claim to  be fleeing persecution'*?

The turn backs policy is dangerous and unworkable. Tony Abbott continues to  shamelessly spruik a policy the experts say is a dud, that the Navy says risk lives,  that the UN's refugee chief believes breaches the Refugee Convention, and which  the Indonesians have clearly and repeatedly said they won't agree to.

Last month we saw an impassioned plea from Joe Hockey that he would never  agree to minors being sent overseas unsupervised, but he was a minister in a  government that did just that. If his current position is to be taken seriously, he must  demand that Tony Abbott drop his turn back the boats policy.

The Coalition's policy of turn backs to Indonesia underlines Tony Abbott's and Joe  Hockey's hypocrisy on asylum seekers - on the one hand they oppose asylum  seekers being transferred safely to a country like Malaysia where we have  protections in place, and on the other hand they support asylum seeker boats with

young children being turned back to Indonesia, also a non-signatory country, where  they have no such agreements in place.

Mr Abbott needs to drop the policy that he admits puts Australian personnel in  harm's way and work with the expert panel, the Government and the Parliament to  come up with a genuine solution that will stop people making these dangerous  journeys to Australia.  See: Restoring Sovereignty and Control To Our Borders Policy Directions Statement  (283KB PDF file)

1. TURN BACK BOATS...In particular, these requirements require a commitment  from the return country not to return persons seeking asylum to the place from which  they claim to be fleeing persecution...(page 5)



