Australian Minister for Trade and Competitiveness The Hon Dr Craig Emerson MP

ABC 24 Capital Hill Subjects: Foreign Minister's PNG remarks, Indonesia's comments on Coalition asylum seeker policy, foreign investment in  agriculture, Queensland state election.

Transcript, E&OE (Errors and Ommissions Excepted)

16 March 2012

LYNDAL CURTIS: Craig Emerson this week has settled back into his portfolio of Trade and Competitiveness, until Tuesday he was  Acting Foreign Minister. He has nothing but praise for his replacement even though Bob Carr earlier this week threatened sanctions  against Papua New Guinea if it delayed elections, in comments he now says were misunderstood. I spoke earlier to Mr Emerson  today.

Craig Emerson, welcome to Capital Hill.

CRAIG EMERSON: A pleasure.

CURTIS: If we can start with Bob Carr's first week as Foreign Affairs Minister. He's had to clarify comments he made during the  week where he raised the prospect of having to, in his words, organise the world to condemn and isolate Papua New Guinea and  consider sanctions if that country delayed its scheduled elections. He says the comments were misunderstood and used out of  context. But it was a pretty big threat wasn't it, especially given Australia's position as the dominant player in the region?

EMERSON: Within a hypothetical world, and the reality is that these elections will take place…

CURTIS: How hypothetical is it? Isn't he just dealing with the 'if this doesn't happen, then we will do this'.

EMERSON: Well, that's what makes it hypothetical - if something doesn't happen, then something else might happen. The truth is  that Bob is organising for a very high level of support, strong support, from Australia in the logistics of having that election, including  the use of aircraft to make sure - you know it's a very mountainous place - to make sure that people get the opportunity to vote. But  the government is going to have the election on time, and that's a great thing, and we're very happy to see that.

CURTIS: You say it's hypothetical because it's dealing with what Australia might do if something didn't happen, but doesn't the  Government do that all the time? Say that if this doesn't happen, then this will result? And isn't it, in essence, a pretty big threat to  pull out against one of Australia's closest neighbours?

EMERSON: Bob was saying that this was in an unlikely, kind of worst case scenario. But the reality is…

CURTIS: But he didn't use those words at all, he just said that the immediate priority is to see the election held next year. Without it,  you've got a shocking model of misgovernance that is there, planted in the Pacific.

EMERSON: And that is the priority: to see the elections occurring next year, on time, and they will.

CURTIS: Was it a mistake though, to canvass that hypothetical situation in such strong language?

EMERSON: Bob's put out a statement, he's explained his position on that. He believes that it was taken out of the broader context of  him saying that he expects that those elections will in fact take place on time, and they will.

CURTIS: It's a hiccup though, at least, in the first week as Foreign Minister to have another country haul in Australia's high  commissioner to complain about something that's been said.

EMERSON: Well, I think you're dwelling on it now. I think we've covered it and Bob was talking about this in a very unlikely, worst-case scenario. He did express confidence that the elections would take place on time - and that's right, the elections will take place  on time.

CURTIS: Indonesia's Foreign Minister was in Australia this week. He's again raised questions about the Coalition's policy of turning  back the boats. Isn't it possible though, that if the Coalition wins government then it could negotiate some form of agreement with  Indonesia to allow it to turn back the boats in some specific circumstances?

EMERSON: Well, I didn't see that in the statements that Marty Natalegawa made as a result of the two-plus-two meeting here in  Australia. I thought the Foreign Minister was very clear, and that is that Australia needs to take responsibility for asylum seekers who  enter into our waters and it is no policy to tow boats back into Indonesian waters. And Mr Abbott has basically thumbed his nose at  Indonesia this morning saying 'well, that's what we're going to do because they're Indonesian flagged ships and we will tow them  back.' We've got a lot of lectures from the Coalition about the relationship between the Gillard Government and Indonesia. That  relationship would be all but destroyed under a Coalition government because Mr Abbott has indicated this morning that he doesn't  care what view the Indonesians have, he will tow those boats back where he decides that it's safe to do so.

CURTIS: But if it was a priority for a Coalition government, it's not completely outside the realms of possibility is it that an Australian  government could negotiate some form of understanding with Indonesia?

Page 1 of 2 ABC 24 Capital Hill, transcript, 16 March 2012, Australian Minister for Trade and Co...

14/08/2012 http://www.trademinister.gov.au/transcripts/2012/ce_tr_120316.html

EMERSON: Well, I didn't get any sense that the Indonesian Foreign Minister and the Indonesian Government sees the funny side of  this at all, or sees that there is any possibility of them agreeing to boats being towed back into Indonesia. From the statements that  have been made, from the position that has been consistently enunciated by the Indonesian Government, what they are saying - and we agree with this - is it's a shared responsibility. That's why we have a Bali Process, that's why we seek a regional solution to a  regional problem. The Coalition is not interested in doing that. What they are interested in doing is harvesting votes out of boats. For  them, more boats equals more votes, and they are quite happy to see more boats arriving and they are not interested in a viable  solution to this. And then simply to antagonise our nearest neighbour - with which we do actually have a very good relationship - by  saying this morning he doesn't care what the Indonesian Government thinks, he's going to tow the boats back is unjustifiably  provocative, but that's Mr Abbott. He doesn't care about our relations with our near neighbours, all he cares about is votes and for  him, more boats equals more votes.

CURTIS: If we could go onto another issue: Barnaby Joyce, the Nationals Leader in the Senate and the Shadow Regional  Development Minister, has called for tougher rules covering foreign investment in agricultural land and agribusiness. He's said that  the threshold for making a decision has to come down. He also says that what should be uppermost in the consideration, in the  minds of those who consider these issues, is the national interest. Is he right that the national interest should always be the first  consideration?

EMERSON: Of course it should always be the first consideration, but what is in the national interest can be in the eye of the  beholder. What Barnaby Joyce is actually saying - through his folksy examples of wanting to build an extension on the house but it's  wrong to ask your neighbour to do it - is saying that he's actually against foreign investment in agriculture. And when you see the  statements that he's made again today, that he believes that the Coalition policy is to drop the threshold for screening, then he is in  violent disagreement with the Liberals, he's also in disagreement with other Nationals. They are a shambles over this. Let me point  this out: if that threshold were dropped, as Barnaby Joyce has reaffirmed is Coalition policy today - well, from the best I can tell - that would tear up the US-Australia Free Trade Agreement negotiated by the Howard Government. It would tear up the agreement  with Singapore; it would tear up the agreement with Thailand; and it would completely scuttle an Australia Korea free trade  agreement, which the farmers desperately want.

CURTIS: Finally Minister, you're from Queensland and Queensland will go to the polls in just a little over a week. If Labor loses  government in Queensland as expected, you will need to negotiate with Coalition-led states in Australia's biggest states - New South  Wales, Victoria, Queensland and Western Australia - to get your policies through that you need to coordinate with the states. Will  that make life more difficult?

EMERSON: It depends on the behaviour of that particular government. We do find that we can make progress on some issues with  some Liberal governments, and not with others. I don't know what's going to happen in this election, I don't ever subscribe to the  view that an election has already been held before people actually go into the ballot box. I don't care what the opinion polls say, I  want to wait until the last vote is cast and counted. But we will have the prospect of a bizarre situation where the would-be premier of  Queensland may well not win a seat in the state parliament. And as Anna Bligh said, she's still trying to work out who her rival is - is  it Jeff Seeney or Lawrence Springborg or Tim Nicholls or Campbell Newman, who is to know? Anyway, I guess we will know a lot  more in a bit over a week's time.

CURTIS: Craig Emerson, thank you very much for your time.

EMERSON: Thank you.

ENDS

Media enquiries

Minister Emerson's Office: (02) 6277 7420

DFAT (Department of Foreign Affiars and Trade) Media Liaison: (02) 6261 1555

Page 2 of 2 ABC 24 Capital Hill, transcript, 16 March 2012, Australian Minister for Trade and Co...

14/08/2012 http://www.trademinister.gov.au/transcripts/2012/ce_tr_120316.html

