

Interview Transcripts

Press Conference, Sydney

Posted on Tuesday, 24 January 2012

Subjects: Prime Minister’s betrayal; Craig Thomson; Andrew Wilkie; Peter Slipper; border protection;

Toyota plant in Altona; poker machine reform



E&OE……………………….……………………………………………………………



TONY ABBOTT:



Well thanks very much for coming along today. If I could just make a few opening comments and then

obviously throw to questions. Look, the Prime Minister has begun this year the same way that she

began last year. She began last year betraying the Australian people over the carbon tax. She’s

begun this year betraying Andrew Wilkie and his supporters over poker machines. Now, Andrew

Wilkie’s departure from the Government’s effective majority means that Julia Gillard’s survival as

Prime Minister depends entirely on the vote of Craig Thomson in the Parliament. This is a tainted

Government because it depends upon the vote of a tainted Member. Craig Thomson is under criminal

investigation in two states. He’s also under Fair Work Australia investigation, an investigation which

has now run for fully three years. Wars have started and concluded in less time than it has taken Fair

Work Australia to conclude its investigation. So the Government’s survival depends upon Fair Work

Australia’s investigation lasting even longer than the three years it has already taken.



Now, late last year, the Coalition received FOI information from Fair Work Australia stating that the

Thomson investigation would be concluded by the end of 2011. Plainly, that is not the case. So, today

Senator Abetz, the Opposition Leader in the Senate and the Shadow Minister for Workplace

Relations, has written to Fair Work Australia formally requesting answers to some very important

questions. First of all, when will the investigation finally be completed? What factors exist to justify the

extraordinary length of this investigation? And what has transpired to delay the expected finalisation

of this matter beyond the end of last year? These are very important questions. Fair Work Australia

owes it to the public to provide speedy answers to these questions. I think the 70,000 members of the

Health Services Union are entitled to an explanation of what happened to their money, why it was so

obviously misused in the way that we all know it has been misused and above all else, the Prime

Minister needs to stand up and explain to the Australian people, does she have full confidence in Fair

Work Australia’s investigation, the way she continues to claim she has full confidence in Craig

Thomson. Any questions?



QUESTION:



So you believe that the Government has any influence over how long it takes Fair Work Australia to

do its investigation?



TONY ABBOTT:



Well the Government obviously has political responsibility for the system and any system which takes

three years to investigate what on the face of it looks like an open and shut case of misuse of union

members’ money, is not a just system. It’s not a system that is operating fairly and justly in this case.

So that’s why it is incumbent upon the Prime Minister to explain whether she has full confidence in

Fair Work Australia’s investigation of this matter.



QUESTION:



It operates as an independent body, doesn’t it, Fair Work Australia?



TONY ABBOTT:



It is ultimately part of the system for which the Government is accountable, for which the Prime

Minister is answerable and the Prime Minister needs to explain how any fair and just system can

justify taking three whole years to investigate something which on the face of it looks like an open and

shut case. Now, Fair Work Australia said in documents released to the Opposition last year that the

investigation would be concluded by the end of 2011. Plainly that has not been the case. That’s why

we’ve written to Fair Work Australia but that’s why the Prime Minister needs to be accountable for her

system and the delays that are apparently endemic in her system.



QUESTION:



You say that Andrew Wilkie has departed the effective majority of the Government but he said that he

won’t back gratuitous no confidence motions, he will still pass supply and will assess all bills on their

merits. What’s really changed? What sort of degree of support has he really withdrawn in real terms?



TONY ABBOTT:



Well, he has abandoned his commitment to support the Government on matters of supply and

confidence.



QUESTION:



But he, well, it’s not an unqualified abandonment, is it? He said he won’t back politically motivated no

confidence motions. He will only back them in the case of serious government misconduct or serious

political misconduct.



TONY ABBOTT:



And a no confidence would only be moved in the event of serious misconduct. But the fact is they can

no longer count on Andrew Wilkie’s vote in the parliament. The Government’s position is more

precarious than ever. The Government’s position now absolutely and critically depends upon the vote

of Craig Thomson. That’s why it’s a tainted government because its survival depends upon the vote of

a tainted member.



QUESTION:



Will you move a no confidence motion when parliament resumes?



TONY ABBOTT:



I’m not going to pre-empt what may or may not happen when the parliament comes back. I think that

no confidence motions should only be moved in the event of serious maladministration. The fact is I

don’t have Craig Thomson’s vote. The Prime Minister has Craig Thomson’s vote and that’s why I think

it is absolutely imperative that the Fair Work investigation get concluded, that Fair Work Australia

cooperate fully with the criminal investigations taking place in two states and the Prime Minister come

clean and tell us what she thinks about a Fair Work Australia investigation that has taken more than

three years to complete.



QUESTION:



What about Peter Slipper? He originally said he wouldn’t have changed sides if his vote was, if they

were depending on his vote. What do you make of that action now? Would you take him back?



TONY ABBOTT:



Look, I think the Speaker is more than capable of answering that sort of question for himself. I

suggest that’s a question that would perfectly properly be put to him in his capacity as a member of

the parliament. My hope is that all members of parliament consistently support the principles on which

they were elected and I’m very conscious of the commitments that all Coalition members made before

the last election.



QUESTION:



[Inaudible] if he has to make a cast?



TONY ABBOTT:



Look, I think it’s a matter that is quite properly something that you would put to the Speaker but as a

general principle, I think that members of parliament should be true to the commitments that they take

to an election and plainly the commitment that was taken by every Coalition member to the last

election was a) a desire to see a Coalition government as opposed to a Labor government and b) a

desire to support Coalition policies rather than Labor ones.



QUESTION:



Has there been any further progress in Scott Morrison’s talks with the Government on asylum seekers

or has there been a breakdown there?



TONY ABBOTT:



Look, we said the Government in a letter that Scott Morrison sent to Chris Bowen last week that we

expected them to respond to us by a certain point in time and let’s wait and see what the Government

has to say.



QUESITON:



Do you think it’s odd that Craig Thomson is taking credit for the Government’s decision to back down?



TONY ABBOTT:



Look, I think this is very interesting. Not only are they relying on Craig Thomson’s vote in the

parliament but it seems that the Prime Minister is acting upon his policy advice. I mean, this is a Prime

Minister and a government which is trying to blame the betrayal, the Andrew Wilkie betrayal on factors

beyond it’s control and yet you’ve got Craig Thomson boasting in the paper today that in fact it was

Craig Thomson himself and Labor members of parliament who have forced the Prime Minister into

this position. Now, we all know, we all know the Prime Minister has abandoned her deal with Andrew

Wilkie because she was terrified of the use that Kevin Rudd was making of this issue in order to bring

his leadership challenge to a head.



QUESTION:



Asylum seekers… just how specifically, this is a question about returning boats to Indonesia. Do you

acknowledge that Indonesia has a right to refuse vessels escorted by the Australian Navy and if they

do have that right, what do you do if they exercise it?



TONY ABBOTT:



I just make the point that these are Indonesian flagged vessels, Indonesia crewed vessels,

Indonesian ported vessels with people on them who were a resident in Indonesia. Now, if these

vessels have no business in Australia, they should be in Indonesia.



QUESTION:



Can you do that safely though? Because Retired Admiral Chris Barrie on ABC today raised questions

about the safety involved in sending boats back?



TONY ABBOTT:



Look, the Navy has done it safely before. No reason why they can’t do it safely again. It’s been done

before, it can be done again. I have full confidence in the professionalism of the Navy to carry out the

reasonable instructions of the elected government.



QUESTION:



Do you think that the - Australia’s relationship with Indonesia might be collateral damage in that

policy. Do you accept that might have a damaging effect on the relationship?



TONY ABBOTT:



I am entirely confident that the next Coalition Government will have vastly better relations with

Indonesia than the current Government. Let’s face it, nothing could have been more disruptive to

good relations with Indonesia than cancelling the live cattle trade in a panicky overreaction to a

television programme. Now, just imagine how Australia and Australians would have felt if a staple of

our diet supplied by another country had suddenly been cut off? Now, this Government has really

badly damaged our relationship with Indonesia, because of its actions. The next Coalition

Government will have a Jakarta focus to its foreign policy, not a Geneva focus.



QUESTION:



Just in response to your - following up on your earlier answer, are you saying that a Coalition

Government would return Indonesian vessels, even if Indonesia refused to accept them?



TONY ABBOTT:



I make the point these are Indonesian flagged, Indonesian crewed, Indonesian ported vessels. They

belong in Indonesia.



QUESTION:



What if the Indonesians don’t see it that way?



TONY ABBOTT:



An Indonesian flagged vessel has a right to be in Indonesia.



QUESTION:



Does that mean that we have a right to return them, even if the Indonesians don’t [inaudible], is that

what you’re saying?



TONY ABBOTT:



What I’m saying is that you’ve got to remember where these vessels have come from, where their

legal home is. The legal home of these vessels, Indonesian flagged, Indonesian crewed, Indonesian

ported is in Indonesia.



QUESTION:



There is speculation that hundreds of jobs at the Toyota plant in Altona are going to go. Does that

give you any cause to reconsider the Coalition’s policy on the car industry?



TONY ABBOTT:



Look, the Coalition is very happy to make lavish assistance available to the car industry. Under our

proposals, there will be $1 billion in the automotive transformation scheme. Now, I think that is a lot of

money to help the car industry to flourish in this country. I want a viable car industry for the long term

in this country, but we’ve got to ensure that it really is viable over the longer term. The Coalition is

prepared to invest in that viability, but we’re not prepared to invest, beyond the $1 billon that we say

should be in that fund.



QUESTION:



Mr Abbott, just back on pokie reform. Do you support the Greens $1 bet limit proposal?



TONY ABBOTT:



Look I think that if the Greens have a proposal, they should talk to their partners in Government.

That’s what they should be doing. Bob Brown is effectively the Deputy Prime Minister of this country.

He’s been given that position by Julia Gillard. If they’ve got something that they want to see

implemented, well they should go and talk to Julia Gillard as she’s their partner in Government. I just

want to conclude by making this fundamental point. How can anyone take seriously our institutions

and their integrity, if an investigation such as this, which on the face of it, looks like an open and shut

case of misuse of union money, drags on for more than 3 years. Now, the Prime Minister is the

person who has ultimate responsibility for the systems under which our country operates and she

really has to say, whether she has full confidence in Fair Work Australia’s investigation. Whether she

think it’s reasonable for an investigation on which the future of her Government depends to have

lasted even longer than the three years that it’s currently taken.



Thanks.



[ends]



