



Transcript of interview on ABC 730 with  Leigh Sales  15 August 2012

Topics: High Court decision on plain packaging of tobacco and Houston Expert Panel  Report

LEIGH SALES, PRESENTER: To discuss the asylum seeker laws and the Government's  victory in the High Court today, I was joined a short time ago by the Attorney-General  Nicola Roxon.

Nicola Roxon, we'll come to the asylum seeker legislation in a second. But firstly to start  with the High Court decision today on the plain packaging. Three countries have mounted  action against Australia in the World Trade Organisation over this legislation.

If that succeeds, will it compel the Government to drop the plain packaging plan despite  this High Court victory?

NICOLA ROXON, FEDERAL ATTORNEY-GENERAL: Well let's do this one step at  a time because it's obviously a very big victory today for anyone who's lost someone to  tobacco-related disease and I think we should be pleased that the High Court has upheld this  decision of the Government and of the Australian Parliament. There are two other actions  underway in international forums.

I think today is a good opportunity for the tobacco companies to say, "Look, the highest  court in Australia has said that an Australian law passed by the Australian Parliament for  the benefit of Australians is valid."

Actually that's the time to say, "Let's get on with implementing it." I fear they may not be  persuaded by my suggestion that they do that.

LEIGH SALES: I think you might be right!

NICOLA ROXON: And we of course will defend our legislation in any other forum. But  there's no established principle anywhere that says that we are not allowed to because of  trade arrangements take measures in our own country that would protect the health of the  community. And that's ultimately what the argument will come down to.

LEIGH SALES: So, are you saying there that even if the WTO found against you in that  particular case that you wouldn't necessarily have to abandon the package?

NICOLA ROXON: Well, no, what I'm saying is a think it's a very difficult case for the  tobacco companies to make out. This is not just a trade dispute with no other factors.

The fact that the High Court has dismissed the claims all based on intellectual properties  claims essentially, and that is what is the subject of a trade dispute.

I think it makes it even harder for them to make out their case. And interestingly of course,  it's three countries that we have virtually no trading relationship with.

There's a very big concern that our trade laws might be used to overturn an important health  measure like this. And obviously, my belief is we should now be absolutely able to get on  with introducing this law, and the tobacco companies, if they want to sell their products  post 1 December in Australia, will have to do that.

LEIGH SALES: The tobacco industry claims that plain packaging will increase  competition in the cigarette market and so therefore lower the price of cigarettes. Will you  consider further raising the excise on tobacco to counteract any downward pressure on  prices?

NICOLA ROXON: Well we're not currently considering that. I think it's a pretty sort of  desperate last, "What else is in the grab bag of things we can pull out?," to tell the  community why this is a bad measure.

All the others have been sort of progressively disproved. But remember that excise already  makes up more than half of the price of cigarettes.

Of course that's a measure if tobacco companies decide they're gonna start giving away  cigarettes so that they can hook young people onto their products, of course the  Government would look to see what action could be taken to stop that. But I think we're a  long way from that.

LEIGH SALES: Attorney-General, I also want to ask you about the expert panel's report  on asylum seekers, as I mentioned before. The Government has said that it will embrace  every recommendation.

One of those recommendations is to change the laws relating to Indonesian minors and  other people crewing unlawful boat voyages from Indonesia to Australia. How will you be  changing the current mandatory sentencing laws?

NICOLA ROXON: Well we have said that we agree in principle with this whole package  that's been recommended by our expert panel and it includes some complex proposals in my  portfolio area.

We're looking closely. We've only had this report for two days and we've been able to get  one of the most important parts of it through the House of Reps in that very short time, but  we haven't been able to do all of the legal work that would be required. But there are a  range of different options of course.

We have people smuggling offences. We can look at having a better separator, if you like,  of the aggravated offences and those where people might not be so culpable.

There have been complaints made for some time that the mandatory sentencing is quite  harsh for those who are not involved in organising these affairs, but we need to make sure

that we can be very tough on those who are. So that's important that we design this in a way  that's going to work properly.

LEIGH SALES: Well not just harsh, there's also the criticism that they are infective  because they're not capturing the big guns as predicted, instead they're getting minors and  small fish in the greater scheme of things.

NICOLA ROXON: Well and I think there's also some merit to the argument that you  perhaps take away an interest in people pleading guilty or co-operating with police if  they've got no sort of discretion and are going to have a five-year minimum apply no matter  what they do. We're looking at all of that.

We have of course considered these issues before because they have been raised with us  from a number of quarters and I would expect that over the coming weeks we'll be able to  make announcements about that proposal, but also about others that require more advice.

LEIGH SALES: Well the panel specifically recommends three options that you can  consider. You either give discretion back to Australian courts on sentencing, you try people  here and then put them in Indonesia for - if they're going to be jailed, or you return accused  people smugglers to Indonesia for the entire process. You say you're still considering  things, but can you rule out any of those options?

NICOLA ROXON: No, we've said that we will take seriously all of the options that are  put to us by the panel. I think that the most work has been done on those that affect the  Australian legal system directly because of course a number of the others require extensive  negotiations with Indonesia and this is part of what's only been with us since Monday and I  think people would understand that we've had prioritise the most urgent of those issues  immediately and that's why you've seen us focus on that in the last two days in the  Parliament.

LEIGH SALES: Do you know how many Indonesian miners are currently in Australian  prisons?

NICOLA ROXON: Well we think that there are none in Australian prisons. We obviously  conducted a review requested by the Human Rights Commission and with the Indonesian  Government having raised concerns, I've reviewed 28 of the people that were identified as  potentially minors and a large number of those people became clear that we were not able  to confidently say that they were adults and therefore they are returned to Indonesia.

Others were found clearly to be adults. So there shouldn't be as a result of this review others  and there are certainly not others that are known to us.

That doesn't mean over time that we mightn't have people who contest their age in the  future, but we're pretty confident that all of the people that were of concern were identified  to us and they've all been reviewed and not all of them released, but a large number  returned - I think off the top of my head it was 19 out of the 28.

LEIGH SALES: Do you accept that this matter of minors being captured and held in  Australia is a substantial irritant in Australia's diplomatic relationship with Indonesia and  hinders our ability to build a regional process around this matter?

NICOLA ROXON: I think it is a significant issue for the Indonesians. It's part of the  reason of course that we were prepared to engage on it, quite apart from the seriousness

with which we take advice from the Human Rights Commission here in Australia when  they raise these concerns.

I think given that the panel has made a number of recommendations that do encourage us to  engage more broadly with the region and more deeply, that this will be one of the things in  engaging in Indonesia that we'll want to pursue very closely, and again it sorta underscores  why this whole package is important.

There are may be some components that your listeners or viewers might think are a bit odd,  but as a whole package together are an effective way for us an establish a more regional and  more comprehensive method for dealing with what is a serious problem.

LEIGH SALES: Nicola Roxon, thank you very much for joining us.

NICOLA ROXON: It's a pleasure.



