



THE HON GREG COMBET AM MP  Minister for Climate Change and Energy Efficiency  Minister for Industry and Innovation

TRANSCRIPT

GC 328/12 6 December 2012



TRANSCRIPT OF DOORSTOP - OPENING OF TOYOTA ENGINE PLANT, ALTONA NORTH

SUBJECT: Manufacturing Leaders Group; Automotive Supplier Advocate; opening of the  Toyota Engine Plant.

E & O E - PROOF ONLY

COMBET: As the Prime Minister indicated in her speech the Government’s also announcing  three further measures today, designed to assist the manufacturing industry through difficult  times. Earlier this week the Prime Minister announced a set of measures to improve the  support for the manufacturing industry in cases where there is unfair dumping of products in  Australian markets.

Today, we’re also announcing the establishment of the Manufacturing Leaders Group, chaired  by the President of Boeing Australia, which of course is a very important international  company with significant operations within Australia. And that Manufacturing Leaders Group  will provide strategic advice to government in coming years in relation to the manufacturing  industry.

Secondly, we’re announcing today the Automotive Supplier Advocate, Mr William Angove,  who is a person with a long background in the automotive industry. He’ll have a particular  focus on encouraging Australian governments and the private sector with fleet purchases in  lifting the level of Australian-manufactured vehicles in Australian fleets. Between the  Commonwealth, the Victorian and the South Australian governments about 77 per cent of the  fleets of those three governments, including our own, are Australian manufactured vehicles.  But when you look around at other states like Queensland or Western Australia or New South  Wales the level of Australian manufactured vehicles in those fleets is significantly lower, in the  order of 40 or 44 per cent. The motor vehicle industry, which is facing very difficult times,  could be significantly assisted by other governments and private fleets, significantly lifting the  level of Australian manufactured vehicles in their fleets. And that’s one of the objectives that  we are going to ask Mr Angove to pursue. In addition he’ll work with automotive suppliers,  the components manufacturers, to help them find further work in supply chains and  particularly global supply chains and also to help them in the diversification of their  businesses, to use their technologies to find other markets.

The third thing that we are announcing today is that the first round of funding from the  Industrial Transformation Research Program, a Federal Government program, worth $236  million, that the first round will concentrate on research relevant to the food manufacturing

sector. Food manufacturing is an area that has been under considerable pressure but it’s also  an area where there’s tremendous opportunities for manufacturers in the years to come,  especially with the growth in Asia and the demand for manufactured food products.  Australia’s got great opportunities in the years ahead in that area and we’ll be encouraging  business and universities to work together on finding ways of us becoming more productive  and competitive and seeking those market opportunities.

Here today at Toyota,  I was a union official before going into Parliament, in 1994 and 1995 I  was one of the union negotiators for the industrial agreement for the manufacturing plant  here. Since that time many motor vehicles have been produced. 1.8 million engines have been  produced in this engine facility alone. So today’s development is an enormously important  one. It’s a $330 million investment. Only another plant, a second plant outside of Japan, that  will produce both petrol and hybrid engines. And it is a demonstration that even in an industry  going through tough times, large international firms will invest in Australian manufacturing  and that we can be more innovative, more environmentally effective. These are very efficient  motor vehicle engines that will be produced here and we can win work. And I’m very pleased  to be able to participate here with Toyota and the Federal Government contributed in excess  of $60 million to this plant and it’s to support these people’s jobs and jobs in future years. I’m  happy to answer any questions you might have.

JOURNALIST: What’s the target of the Automotive Advocate? Is that aware, with South  Australia at around 77 per cent that with the rest of the country, what target will we have?

COMBET: We’ll we just want to lift the level of Australian manufactured vehicles in fleets and  some of the states, particularly Queensland for example, they’re off a pretty low base. And I  think in this country where we’ve got a high dollar, lots of the pressures that are being  experienced by the industry, one thing that governments and large private fleets, one thing  that they can do is make sure that they’re purchasing as many Australian cars as possible. It’s  supports people’s jobs in this industry and it’s a big industry.

JOURNALIST: But it would be expected that the other states would get up to around 70 per  cent or 80 per cent?

COMBET: We’d like to see them lift there fleet content. Mr Angove will discuss with them how  that can be achieved.

JOURNALIST: inaudible

COMBET: Well the car industry is a very important industry in our economy. As the Prime  Minister indicated, about 50,000 people are directly employed and a further 200,000 jobs and  their families depends upon this industry. It’s a very large part of our manufacturing industry.  About 25 per cent of our research and development effort in manufacturing is for the motor  vehicle industry. This is an industry that is facing difficult times. The government assistance to  the industry is designed to achieve the support the companies and the employees through  difficult times and achieve competitiveness when our dollar is at parity with the US dollar.  That’s a big shift in recent years. There may be a trend, we were about 80 cents to the US  dollar, if the outlook is as it is that we’ll be at parity with the US dollar for some time to come.  That means business models have to change in this industry to ensure it’s got a viable future  and the Government’s role is to assist these workers and these companies through that  period of change.

JOURNALIST: Minister, a lot of fleet companies actually discriminate against six cylinder  vehicles so how is the Advocate going to address the fact that a lot of fleets don’t buy six  cylinder cars which are made in Australia?

COMBET: Well we’ve got six cylinder vehicles manufactured in Australia, we’ve got four  cylinder vehicles manufactured in Australia. Environmentally efficient very good engines are  going to be produced here in the Hybrid Camry. I’ve got a Hybrid Camry, it’s the best car I’ve  ever had. But Holden is also manufacturing the Cruze of course in South Australia and it’s an  excellent car, great fuel economy, enormously well designed and performing vehicle, second  or third best-selling vehicle in the Australian market I think at the moment. So there are  plenty of options. Ford are manufacturing the Territory too so fleets that are seeking larger  utility vehicles, I think there are plenty of options available.

JOURNALIST: inaudible

COMBET: What we’ve found with the appointment of Advocates in other industries is that an  experienced business person getting around talking to manufacturers and the suppliers and to  governments of all levels, and in this case large fleet operators, it’s a person who can be a very  strong advocate for the markets that exist in this country. Stronger, in some senses, than  individual companies can be that are marketing their own particular product. Mr Angove is  very familiar with the industry. He was an executive with Ford and we think he’s got the skills  and capacity to make a good case for why there should be a greater level of Australian  manufactured vehicles in our fleets in this country.

JOURNALIST: Minister on other matters, have you abandoned or postponed plans to develop  environmental approval powers to the States?

COMBET: No and I’m not responsible for environmental planning powers and the Prime  Minister’s discussing that issue with the leaders of the States and Territories in Canberra  today, so it’s not appropriate that I comment upon that.

JOURNALIST: Are you able to comment on the Sri Lankan asylum seeker matter? Are you  confident that none of the Sri Lankans who were sent back to Sri Lanka have been treated  badly by Sri Lankan authorities?

COMBET: I think my colleague, the Immigration Minister, has made comments about that and  obviously he is the person with direct responsibility so I’d refer you to him. But I’d be very  confident of how the Government’s conducted itself in that matter.

Thank you very much.

ENDS

