Sky News, AM Agenda with Kieran Gilbert

Tuesday, 10 April 2012

Subjects: Chinese asylum seekers in Darwin; asylum seekers in Indonesia; Papua

New Guinea elections; North Korea; Syria; mining tax

E&OE…

KIERAN GILBERT    Welcome back to the program. The Government says it doesn’t have the power,

as you heard from Craig Emerson before the break, to intercept or to detain Chinese asylum seekers.

A group of about 10 of them have been intercepted in Australian waters and stopping them from

heading to New Zealand which is apparently where they are going to seek asylum. But it will be a

perilous boat journey on boat a yacht. The Prime Minister was asked about this this morning on the

ABC.

JULIA GILLARD    My understanding of that matter is that we are not in a position where we could

detain these people. They have not asked for asylum in Australia and they are on a seaworthy vessel

so we are not in a position where we could detain them against their will.

KIERAN GILBERT    Joining me now from Perth, the Deputy Opposition Leader Julie Bishop and the

Shadow Minister for Foreign Affairs. Thanks so much for your time. What do you make of this case?

It’s obviously a difficult one by law if they haven’t sought asylum.

JULIE BISHOP    Well my understanding is that they have arrived in Darwin for supplies, they are on

a seaworthy vessel and they are heading for New Zealand. I understand that there are some details

about getting a visa here in Australia for the purposes of resupplies. But they are heading for New

Zealand and the question is whether they are going to claim asylum when they reach New Zealand

and whether New Zealand will accept it. So clearly this will have to be negotiated with New Zealand

and I think until we know more details it is hard to see what is going to happen, but clearly the journey

from Darwin to New Zealand is fraught with danger and that must be pointed out to them.

KIERAN GILBERT    There is another standoff at the moment, a group of asylum seekers at the West

Java port of Merak. It is a difficult one again for the government; they can’t really intervene in this

given this is a matter in Indonesian waters at an Indonesian port. It is different to the previous Oceanic

Viking standoff in that the government doesn’t appear to have asked the Indonesians to intercept this

vessel?

JULIE BISHOP    I understand that this vessel was intercepted by a commercial vessel, Singaporean

flagged vessel, and taken back to Indonesia. But what it does point out Kieran is the tragedies that

can occur when the people smuggling trade is back in business. I understand that this boat was

sinking and it was rescued so hopefully a tragedy was averted.

But this is the danger that people face when they invest in the people smuggling trade and that is the

tragedy behind Labor’s softening of the framework of border protection laws that we had in place.

When they dismantled those border protection laws they reinvigorated the people smuggling trade

and we have seen the consequences of a reinvigorated people smuggling trade, with the number of

people coming by boat to Australia escalating since Labor softened our laws.

KIERAN GILBERT    There are a number of issues internationally of significance I want to ask you

about. First of all, Papua New Guinea, it looks like the Prime Minister, Peter O’Neill, has said that the

nation will have the June 23 elections as scheduled. You were there just last week, do you think that

commitment, or recommitment, is looking promising?

JULIE BISHOP    I did have a very long meeting with Prime Minister O’Neill and members of his

senior cabinet last week. I also met with the Electoral Commissioner and with the Head of Police,

Tom Kulunga and the Head of the Defence Forces Brigadier General Agwi, and so the PNG

authorities were focussing on holding an election in accordance with the Constitution, that is by

June/July, and the writs have to be issued in April. That is what they were hoping to do.

There was a vote in the parliament last Thursday where a majority of the elected representatives

voted for a six month delay but I understand that over the weekend Prime Minister O’Neill spoke to

the Electoral Commissioner, got more information about the state of the rolls, the state of security

arrangements.  He held a cabinet meeting and they decided to go ahead with the elections as

planned. Now of course in Australia we should welcome that. We should also remember that Papua

New Guinea is a sovereign country, it is a member of the Commonwealth, it is a democracy, it is

committed to holding free and fair elections and we should do what we can to support them in that

aim.

KIERAN GILBERT    On to North Korea, that regime looks like it is wanting to show off its latest plans

for a missile launch. Should Australia be worried about our own security in this context? As far as you

are aware do these long range missiles that North Korea have the capacity to launch, do they pose

any threat to Australia?

JULIE BISHOP    Well there was a faint hope that on the death of Kim Jong Il we might see a change

of course from North Korea but that hope has been dashed. It seems that the current leader is as

determined to be as provocative and belligerent as his father was.

Any missile launch from North Korea is a cause for concern and consternation because of its past

behaviour and this talk of launching a satellite of course will be met with great suspicion from the

international community.

Any missile that is directed towards Australia of course causes concern but I don’t believe that

Australia is being targeted, I think that North Korea has issues with its near neighbours. It is more

likely to be focussing on the activities of its near neighbours than Australia. But Australia is right to

express its great concern should anything be directed towards this country.

KIERAN GILBERT    And the Chinese obviously, the international community hoping that they will

exert as much pressure as possible on Pyongyang?

JULIE BISHOP    Well that is right. China is now a global player in every sense and we certainly look

to China to assist in using whatever influence it has over North Korea so that it abides by the

sanctions that are imposed upon it. I mean there are some very tough sanctions on North Korea in

relation to a launching of missiles. So any action that would be in breach of those sanctions should be

widely condemned by all including by China.

KIERAN GILBERT    On to Syria, it looks like the UN brokered peace deal is in tatters Julie Bishop.

There really want much prospect was there of Assad honouring this commitment? It just looks like the

Syrian regime has no sign of relenting against that opposition and the opposition forces.

JULIE BISHOP    It is very hard to predict where this will all end. There was some hope that Kofi

Annan could broker a peace deal but that hope seems to have been dashed, particularly overnight

with the escalation of violence. People are being targeted over the borders, outside of Syria, and that

adds another frightening dimension to this conflict.

I can see no way through other than for President Assad to direct his troops to stop firing on the

people of Syria and for him to stand down. He has lost all legitimacy as a leader when he has ordered

troops to fire on his own people.

Kofi Annan must continue to seek to negotiate but I fear that the violence will only get worse from now

on. And also the fear that the sectarian conflict between the Shi’a and Sunni will go broader than just

Syria. I mean the fault line of the Shi’a-Sunni divide crosses into many other nations in the Middle

East and so the fear that this could be part of something broader. Let’s hope it can be contained to

Syria at present but most certainly the actions overnight give us cause for great concern.

KIERAN GILBERT    Is there any prospect of a Libya style international intervention in Syria?

JULIE BISHOP    Well we would need the support of Russia and at this point our concern is that

Russia is still supporting the Syrian regime, still supporting President Assad, and I can’t see any

future where the Assad regime can continue to govern Syria. So we need Russia to stop providing the

kind of support that it has in the past, stop providing weapons and also moral support to Syria. So it is

a different situation than Libya. Each one of these conflicts needs to be handled with a different set of

imperatives in place and in the case of Syria, I think the key is Russia.

KIERAN GILBERT    Alright, I want to ask you just quickly about a couple of domestic issues if I can.

The mining tax, it looks like the mining boom, according to the Financial Review 85 per cent of people

think that it is a good thing but only 12 per cent think they have benefited a lot from the mining boom,

doesn’t that show that a redistribution via a mining tax is a good thing?

JULIE BISHOP    The mining tax is an absolute debacle. Its inception, the way it has been

implemented is just typical of the incompetence and the shambolic conduct of this government in

everything that they seem to touch. There are huge questions about who is actually going to pay the

mining tax and how much will actually be raised even though the government has already spent, it

has already allocated, the proceeds of the mining tax, even though there is huge doubt that it will

raise anything like they say it will.

And also this triple taxing of the mining sector is very short term. This is not how you build a long term

industry to keep providing revenues to Australia into the future. The mining companies are already

paying company tax, they are already paying state royalties, this Gillard government tax on top of that

will make mining in Australia internationally uncompetitive. It might not happen tomorrow…..

KIERAN GILBERT    A lot of people don’t feel like they are benefiting from it at all according to this

Fin Review survey.

JULIE BISHOP    Well the reason people aren’t benefiting from the revenues that flow to government

is because government, the Gillard government, has been wasting those revenues. The waste and

mismanagement of the federal budget is reaching unbelievable proportions.

So if the Australian people don’t feel that the budget is being well managed, that is the fault of the

Gillard government. It is not the mining sector - that is paying its taxes, paying its royalties - it is the

way the government has been dispensing with the revenues that it receives. And driving the budget

into deficit and racking up a massive government debt with very little to show for it is what is at the

heart of this whole issue.

KIERAN GILBERT    Deputy Opposition Leader Julie Bishop, I appreciate your time this morning.

Thanks very much for that.

JULIE BISHOP    My pleasure.



