Chris Bowen MP  Minister for Immigration and Citizenship

Coalition negativity aiding people smuggling trade  Saturday, 09 June 2012

Joint media release with Chris Bowen MP - Minister for Immigration and  Citizenship and Jason Clare MP - Minister for Home Affairs, Minister for  Justice and Minister for Defence Materiel.

The Coalition's ongoing refusal to support offshore processing legislation continues  to have consequences, with the latest asylum seeker boat intercepted the 46th and  47th boats since the coalition rejected the government's offer to implement offshore  processing in Malaysia and Nauru.

The Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Chris Bowen MP, and Minister for  Home Affairs, Jason Clare MP, said Tony Abbott refuses to act to stop people  smugglers plying their trade, resulting in more boats and more lives risked on  dangerous boat journeys.

'We know that we can break the people smugglers' business model with a genuine  deterrent such as the Malaysia arrangement, but Mr Abbott simply isn't interested in  any constructive solution to this issue,' Mr Bowen said.

'If Mr Abbott puts his own political interest ahead of the national interest when he's  Opposition Leader, imagine what he'd be like as Prime Minister.'

'We have a solution. It is called offshore processing. Tony Abbott is stopping it being  implemented,' Mr Clare said.

'If Tony Abbott is really concerned about people smugglers give us the power to put  them out of business. No one will pay them $10 000 to be sent back to Malaysia.

'Tony Abbott knows this - he wants more boats to come because he thinks it will  mean more votes for him. That is why he is stopping the government from passing  laws to put people smugglers out of business.

'We can stop this now. Tony Abbott just has to stop opposing laws that will put the  people smugglers out of business.'



See: Index of Media Releases

URL: http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2012/cb187427.htm  Last update: Tuesday, 12 June 2012 at 10:57 AEST

