

Deputy Leader of the Opposition and Shadow Minister  for Foreign Affairs and Trade

Julie Bishop

2GB Drive with Luke Grant

26 October 2012

Subjects: Asylum Seeker rioters, Bob Carr travel expenditure, Labor budget blowouts

E&OE…

LUKE GRANT Now as I mentioned earlier, asylum seekers convicted of participating in riots that  caused more than $5 million damage to the Christmas Island detention centre have been handed  protection visas to stay in the country. Gemma Jones has this exclusive story in the Daily Telegraph  today. Just one of seven offenders convicted over the riots had his visa application rejected today by  Immigration Minister Bowen on character grounds. The character test clearly states, ‘if an asylum  seeker has been convicted of an offence while in detention they fail the test’. Three men found guilty  of offences relating to riots where accommodation at administration facilities were burned down and  rocks thrown at police, had been granted protection visas to remain in Australia. Two others convicted  were found not to be refugees and another has a current protection claim but is appealing against his  conviction. Six of the seven remain in Australia.

Julie Bishop is the Deputy Opposition Leader and Shadow Minister for Foreign Affairs and joins us on  the line. Julie Bishop, good morning.

JULIE BISHOP Good morning.

LUKE GRANT Very nice to talk to you again. Can you understand why the public is so angry over this  story today?

JULIE BISHOP It is scandalous. Here was an opportunity for the government to send a clear and  unequivocal message, that we will not tolerate illegal behaviour, that we will not be bullied by the  tactics of the people smugglers and once again Julie Gillard and Chris Bowen have failed on the  fundamental issue of border protection. What does it take for a Labor Minister to take responsibility for  their policy failures?

LUKE GRANT Well they just don’t believe in it do they? They don’t believe in strong measures, they  don’t believe seriously in what the former Howard Government did. They just aren’t committed to  anything.

JULIE BISHOP Well Labor’s decision to wind back the strong border protection laws that were put in  place by the Coalition is arguably the greatest policy failure in a generation. If he had a shred of  integrity, Chris Bowen would have resigned many times over because of the failings. I mean how  many other ministers have overseen a policy failure that has led to an ongoing cost blowout of billions  of dollars? We’ve seen deaths of hundreds of people at sea, we now have thousands and thousands  of people coming by boat and there are thousands in detention. It is a scandal. Taxpayers’ funds  mean nothing to Labor. Out of sheer stubbornness they’d rather waste billions of dollars than go back  to the policies that work.

LUKE GRANT Now this is, absolutely, now we go back to what Bowen said. This goes back a little  while, but he made this statement, ‘to make it very clear that anybody who commits an offence  regardless of the penalty, regardless of the sentence, while they were in immigration detention, will

fail the character test and can be denied a permanent visa’. I don’t know anyone listening to me that  wouldn’t think that if you cause $5 million worth of damage on Christmas Island then as a  consequence you’ll never get to live here. What’s so complicated about that? Would a Coalition  Government ensure that the rest of us who see that as common sense would make that in fact part of  their policy platform?

JULIE BISHOP We certainly would and we would return to the policies that work. Chris Bowen has  failed to meet the test he set himself. He’s failed to meet the commonsense test. The fact is Australia  is in a battle of wills with the criminal people smuggling syndicates for the control of our national  borders and under Labor the people smugglers are winning. Now I have no hope at all that Chris  Bowen will do the right thing but quite frankly he should resign and let someone else do the job if he’s  not up to it.

LUKE GRANT Well there used to be Ministers of the Crown who lost their portfolio because they, and  I’m thinking back to the 70s here, wrongly brought in colour tvs. Given the disaster this bloke’s  presided over it’s just a miracle that he still has his portfolio but perhaps that’s one of the outcomes of  having minority government and having members of your front bench who don’t want you running the  country. Perhaps that’s what’s going on.

This book by Maxine McKew is going to make life particularly unpleasant for the Prime Minister as  well won’t it?

JULIE BISHOP Well once again Julia Gillard’s version of events is simply not believable. Her claim  that she only decided to challenge Kevin Rudd at the very last minute has been blown out of the water  by Maxine McKew’s book. Julia Gillard’s honesty and her integrity is again under serious question.

LUKE GRANT What do you make of Bob Carr, whose your opposite number in the government? He’s  defended the presence of his wife on overseas trips. I’ve just got a little of what he said last night on  Channel 9 news.

Clip, Bob Carr: Here was the Foreign Minister saying Australia is a multicultural country accompanied  by his wife who was born in Malaysia, Chinese mother and an Indian father and that alone sent a  powerful message.

LUKE GRANT It’s not only the fact that you have to take your partner with you should you travel  overseas but it helps if your partner isn’t of Anglo Saxon descent, I guess he’s saying there. Well what  do you make of firstly the expenditure and those comments he made?

JULIE BISHOP Australia’s foreign minister is required to travel extensively. It’s part of the job and  Australia is a long way from many parts of the world. However, discipline must be applied to such  travel. It must be considered carefully in terms of the benefit to the Australian people, because it’s  their taxes that are funding this overseas travel.

It is not common practice for a foreign minister or a secretary of state to travel with a spouse for the  business part of a visit. There may be occasions where the spouse has been specifically invited along  to official engagements but it’s difficult to believe that this would apply to virtually every overseas trip  that Bob Carr has taken. He’s given a number of reasons to try and justify why his wife is travelling at  taxpayer’s expense for all of his trips. He says she visits foreign aid programs. Well I’m not aware of  any official role. Senator Carr should explain what his wife’s unofficial role is in relation to aids  programs and why the taxpayer should fund that. He’s also said, as you’ve just played in that excerpt,  he’s also said, in what I find a rather patronising tone, that his wife helped Australia’s bid for the UN  Security Council because she was born in Malaysia to Indian and Chinese parents. Well what is  Senator Carr suggesting? That other countries wouldn’t have voted for Australia had he not taken his  wife along?

I guess what’s quite concerning is it is against the Government’s own Ministerial guidelines. They  specifically state as a general rule a Minister should not be accompanied by their spouse on official  overseas travel and they can only do it with the Prime Minister’s approval. So the Prime Minister

should explain why she has given approval for Senator Carr’s wife to travel on virtually every  overseas trip that Senator Carr has taken.

LUKE GRANT Yeah, that’s a very good point. Finally when it comes to the budget, there’s been a  couple of callers this morning. I’ll make the point, and I guess with your many years in politics you  know this is sadly the reality of the way politics works in this country. We’ll have an ALP government  come in and spend and spend, then we’ll elect a conservative government to get the budget back  because I think at the end of the day, I think most Australians like the idea that we’ve got money in the  bank. It certainly got us through the GFC I think many commentators would say. So you come in and  you cut the hell out of the budget because you want to get us back to where we should be and then  the other mob say look how mean they are, they’ve cut a hundred teachers, or they’ve done this or  they’ve done that. Is there any way out of this?

JULIE BISHOP That seems to be the lot of the Coalition. We have to clean up the mess left by Labor  Governments. Our belief is that governments have to live within their means. This government  inherited zero government debt. Your listeners will recall that the Howard Costello Government paid  off every cent of the Keating $96 billion debt and now in less than five years, gross debt is more than  $250 billion dollars. Labor have borrowed beyond the government’s debt ceiling. They’ve maxed out  on the national credit card if you like. So we’ve now got debt having gone from zero to about $256  billion and the interest payments on the debt alone is about $12 billion a year. So that’s $12 billion  that could be going to other services.

Over the past four budget deficits Wayne Swan’s, sorry over the past four budgets they’ve all been in  deficit, Wayne Swan has essentially spent about $170 billion more than has been brought in through  revenue. This is just unsustainable and we have been warning for years that the government cannot  keep wasteful spending then borrowing, then trying to tax their way out of this cycle. And as we saw  yesterday they can’t even apply a tax competently.

LUKE GRANT They can’t even raise money from a new tax. It’s rather bizarre. Always..

JULIE BISHOP This is the point, when this government leaves office I am sure they will not have paid  one cent off the massive debt they have rung up on behalf of the Australian people.

LUKE GRANT They won’t because they won’t have a surplus, and we know that now and there’s  daily new evidence to suggest that they won’t at the end of this year. So there will be no money left to  pay down any debt at all, you’re absolutely right, then you’ve got to inherit that mess and deal with it.

JULIE BISHOP …and the new taxes? Their new taxes don’t raise any revenue. It is simply bizarre.

LUKE GRANT It is, always enjoy talking to you. Now please assure me you’re still not staring at  gnomes.

JULIE BISHOP (Laughs) well none that I’ll admit to.

LUKE GRANT (Laughs) always good to talk to you thank you. Julie Bishop there, the Deputy  Opposition Leader. Did you see that? I don’t know, it was a show on the ABC, it was probably one of  those chaser boys doing it, she had to stare down garden gnomes. Very funny, very funny.



