Chris Bowen MP  Minister for Immigration and Citizenship

Speech

United States school shooting, Budget surplus,  the Australian economy, scathing Federal Court  judgement on Liberal Party, Sri Lankan returns,  refugee resettlement  Saturday, 15 December 2012

Interview with Chris Kenny, Sky News Saturday Agenda

Chris Kenny: Joining me in the studio now is the Immigration Minister, Chris Bowen.  Thanks for joining us, Chris.

Chris Bowen: Pleasure Chris, good morning.

Kenny: This news out of the United States is just horrific. We've seen mass  shootings like this before in the States, we've seen talk about gun control and  nothing ever happens. This time, of course, so many young children killed.

Bowen: Terrible. Terrible, unspeakable tragedy, Chris. Too many little lives cut short  in a place that should be a haven, where they should be safe. And we've seen this  far too many times, in America in particular.

Kenny: I expect our government would be going through the motions. I'm not  downplaying it, but it's just futile, it can't do anything, but I imagine we will be sending  condolences officially.

Bowen: We will. Of course we would be doing that, and I'm sure that is underway,  and I just hope that if anything comes out of this, then there's some reform, frankly,  speaking very frankly, in America. The right of a five-year-old girl to go to school and  participate in that in safety, the right of her parents to send them, thinking they're  safe, should outweigh anybody's alleged or perceived right to carry a semi-automatic  weapon or guns around in America.

So, we just see this far, far too often. We go through it far too often. Hopefully, this is  a spur for some very real action.

Kenny: Is there, perhaps, some chance that because President Obama has been re-elected, he's now in his second and final term, that there will be a chance for him to  grab some impetus and get some gun control laws through?

Bowen: Well, speaking as an individual, I hope so. I certainly hope that America, as  a society and under the leadership of the President, can tackle this issue, because

America - a very great friend of Australia's - but we've seen this far, far too often, and  you can't say there's no link between lax gun laws and these events occurring far too  regularly, in my view.

Kenny: All right, I'll switch to domestic issues now and I want to come to your  portfolio area of border protection in a moment, but firstly some other issues.

We've started to see a debate really unfold about whether the government is too  committed to delivering a surplus this year. We've had the OECD suggest that  Australia should be more flexible; we've had Joel Fitzgibbon, the chief government  whip and obviously a former minister, suggest it's creating problems, the push for a  surplus; and now we read in the Australian Financial Review, Doug Cameron and  Steven Jones - a couple of more prominent Labor MPs - suggesting the  government's just too wedded to the surplus. They have a point, don't they?

Bowen: Well look, we've committed to the surplus, the government's made that very  clear, and the OECD report is a ringing endorsement, frankly, of the government's  economic management. The director general of the OECD, Angel Gurria, referred to  Australia as the Iron Man of the world economy - not my language, his language -  and they did say that of course Australia needs to retain flexibility going forward, but  they certainly haven't called for us to step away from the surplus at this point.

I think the surplus and our fiscal management has been important in putting  downward pressure on interest rates. I think that's one of the great achievements of  this government. Cost of living pressures are real, but when you look at a family with  a $300,000 mortgage, now paying $5,000 a year less than they did under the  Howard Government - that's a real achievement. And, frankly, the Liberal Party  would never be able to credibly run that campaign again - that interest rates would  be higher under a Labor Government - just simply never be able to do that.

I think it's important in terms of the confidence that we continue the mid-year  economic forecast, make it clear that we're on track for it to surplus, and I support  the Treasurer's efforts to do so.

Kenny: Is there any chance that this surplus debate could be a bit of a stalking horse  for more leadership tensions? Joel Fitzgibbon is known as a strong Kevin Rudd  supporter and other people are speaking out about it - obviously a little bit of disunity  in the ranks from the Labor side. I suppose if there was a leadership change and you  had a new Treasurer, it would be very easy to junk that surplus promise.

Bowen: I think all sorts of people jump to read all sorts of things into this, and that's  not the case. Joel voted for the Prime Minister back in February. Joel is a very good  friend of mine and he's very entitled to his views. I happen to support the  government's policy and the Treasurer's commitment to returning to surplus.

Kenny: Well we look at the economy and the need to rebound and build investment  growth and build greater productivity and lift the rate of growth in the economy.  Business leaders have been out today, saying that the negative politics - among  other factors of course - but they're saying the negative political debate in this  country is undermining confidence and causing investment to slow. But they have a

point there, don't they? And they're blaming sides, not just the government or just the  Opposition.

They're saying that we need some more positive leadership in order to build investor  confidence.

Bowen: Well, there's a positive message for the Australian economy and investor  confidence should be high, absolutely. And you'll forgive me for saying, Chris, when  you've got people like Joe Hockey and Tony Abbott out there saying growth has flat  lined - which is just not the case, just not true in any reading of the figures - trying to  talk down the economy, that is a worry.

So we do have a good story to tell in terms of economic management as a nation,  and we should be telling that story and investor confidence should be building on  that very good story: that Australia has got not only through the Global Financial  Crisis, that as economic growth rates are much higher than other nations around the  world over the past five years and as a result low unemployment compared again to  those other countries - a very good story to tell.

The government needs to be telling that story and we are. And, frankly, it would do  them more credit if the Opposition accepted and recognised some of those facts  about our economy instead of constantly trying to talk our economy down.

Kenny: But isn't the Prime Minister actually at fault here as well? We saw her give  an interview yesterday and instead of talking about the need for productivity  improvement in Australia or the positive economic news or her agenda on the NDIS  or education reform, the Prime Minister sat there and completely - was completely  obsessed with Tony Abbott and was attacking him over smear and negativity. I mean  this surely sends out all the wrong messages to the country, investors and also to  your voters who want to see a Prime Minister that's actually focused on governing  the country, not attacking Tony Abbott.

Bowen: I don't think anybody could say the Prime Minister's not focused on  governing the country, but of course the Prime Minister -

Kenny: - Well I am saying precisely that. We see her time and time again completely  obsessed with attacking Tony Abbott. Isn't that beneath the Prime Minister?  Shouldn't she leave that to her, other ministers?

Bowen: I think it's easy to be - it's this, Chris: that all prime ministers engage in  political debate. I mean John Howard did, quite appropriately, he attacked the  leaders of the Opposition that faced him. Paul Keating, Bob Hawke, none of them  were wallflowers when it came to talking about their then opposition leaders. This  Prime Minister is a very good communicator and she's no different, and of course it's  perfectly appropriate for her to point certain things out. Like for example - I mean  what you were referring to - this extraordinary Federal Court judgement which found  an abusive process by a Liberal Party candidate being involved in - not just any  Liberal Party candidate, a former Cabinet Minister - being involved in an abuse of  court process.

Now Tony Abbott just shrugs his shoulders and says I have no specific knowledge.  Well, what general knowledge did you have? I mean these are questions that he  really should be answering and the Prime Minister is right to say he should be  answering those.

Kenny: You're absolutely right, there are questions to be answered there and you're  the right man to be pointing them out and other ministers. My point simply is the  Prime Minister might be better off talking about some of the other positive agendas -

Bowen: - And not just us, Arthur Sinodinos too, quite a straight shooter and  somebody with respect on both sides of the aisle, has said Mal Brough's got  questions to answer. He's not answering them and Tony Abbott's not answering  them.

Kenny: Look, off to your portfolio area now, and I want to start off with what I think is  good news. Now you've taken the tough decision - and your department - to reject a  lot of applications from Sri Lankan asylum seekers. They've been forcibly returned to  Sri Lanka; Sri Lanka a country that's in a post-conflict phase. Its government says it  doesn't have refugees, that these people are economic immigrants to Australia. So  this is tough but so far I would suggest, been successful.

We had Sri Lankans making up at least half of our asylum seeker arrivals of late. We  haven't had a boat for how long from Sri Lanka?

Bowen: About 11 days since we had a boat from Sri Lanka. Now obviously it's - this  is a constant battle and I don't want go out and crow about these things, but this was  a tough decision to say, well look these people are very clear economic migrants and  they should be swiftly returned. We have returned 682 people to Sri Lanka over the  last couple of months involuntarily, plus the voluntary transfers on top of that.

I think people understand that our refugee program is there for a reason and if  people are after an economic better life - for reasons I completely understand - that's  not what the refugee program is for and we do need to take the decision to swiftly  return people, and I think that is having an impact. When somebody turns back at  their village a couple of days after leaving and says, 'Look, here I am, back again, it  didn't work', that sends a pretty strong message right up and down Sri Lanka that  this is not going to work; the Australian Government does have a tough approach,  but if you come for reasons which are very clearly economic, you will be swiftly  returned. And that's what we've been doing. We've been communicating that  throughout Sri Lanka, through roadshows, et cetera, saying 'Don't come to Australia  if you're after an economic outcome, because you will be returned,' and that is  having an effect.

Kenny: Don't you need to get that same result happening with some of your Middle  East asylum seekers? I mean you must believe that some of the people coming to  Australia from the Middle East are also economic migrants and unless you can reject  their applications, you will never stop the inflow of boats.

Bowen: Well you deal with the circumstances with each particular country and each  particular circumstance. With Sri Lanka we had a very clear program of economic

migration, frankly, and the number of arrivals going up just as the number of arrivals  from other countries were stabilising and in some cases falling after our  announcements on 13 August. And we have a government in Sri Lanka that was  happy to cooperate with the return of people. Every country is different. We've seen  the first return to Afghanistan under our negotiated returns agreement. There will be  more returns. It is a different group of people. They go through their process and at  the end of the day when a claim is not considered after its full processing they're  being returned. That's important.

We have a range of challenges with Iran for example, which isn't as cooperative -  nowhere near as cooperative - and that's an issue that the previous government had,  that we face. Where a government just says we're not going to cooperate with  returns, that's a big challenge.

Kenny: Just briefly, you're implementing also a new program whereby church  groups, community groups, can sponsor refugees into Australia. It's only a pilot  program at this stage. Does this not send out the wrong message? When you're  trying to send out this tough message, you're also trying - you're also opening up this  new avenue of coming to Australia.

Bowen: No, on the contrary, I think, Chris. I strongly disagree with that. I think it  sends exactly the right message. The increase in the refugee to 20,000 and this  community sponsorship pilot within that 20 000 means, that the message is there's  another way to come to Australia. You don't have to get on a boat. Australia has a  generous refugee program that we're proud of, but we want an orderly system, we  want a fair system and, we want a safe system. Now this program -

Kenny: But the numbers are piddling compared to the 10 million refugees registered  around the world.

Bowen: Sure, sure. But it is the largest resettlement program in the world per capita,  per head of Australian population, and depending on how you define it the second or  third largest in the world in absolute terms, with Canada being very close to it. So we  are a very important resettlement country. After the United States, Canada and  Australia there's daylight in terms of countries willing to go in, get people out of  camps, out of difficult situations, and bring them to Australia.

This private sponsorship program, community sponsorship program, was inspired by  groups coming to me, saying, 'Look, we want to play a role, we want to pay for  people's costs of coming to Australia, we want to look after them here'. And I had to  say, no, there's no provision for you to do that. This is designed to get over that  problem. If a community group wants to sponsor somebody in a desperate situation,  wants to look after them here, that's something we should be doing. Canada's done  it for a very long time and I'm pleased that we've been able to introduce it too.

Kenny: Chris Bowen, you've got one of the toughest jobs in the government, but  you've always been prepared to come here and share your views with us, so thanks  for that, and have a good Christmas and New Year, no doubt you'll be busy  throughout it.

Bowen: Well and same to you and the family, Chris, and have a great Christmas  with the new little addition.



See: Index of Speeches

URL: http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2012/cb192487.htm  Last update: Monday, 17 December 2012 at 09:12 AEST

