Current | Archives | Search

Capital Hill, ABC News 24 - Border protection, Australia’s  relationship with Indonesia; Uranium sales to India,  Australia’s relationship with India

Posted on October 16, 2012 18:39

LYNDAL CURTIS: One of the central planks of the Government’s latest policy on  asylum seekers is what’s called the ‘no disadvantage’ test for the time it takes to  process asylum claims but it’s still a test without a firm definition. The President of  the Human Rights Commission has told a Senate Estimates hearing in Canberra today  it has no legal content yet. She is, however, happy with the Government’s decisions  to allow reviews of adverse ASIO [Australian Security Intelligence Organisation]  security assessments for asylum seekers. The Government’s attacking the Opposition  Leader, Tony Abbott, for failing to raise with the Indonesian President the Coalition’s  policy of turning back asylum boats where safe to do so. Joining me to discuss the  day are two Senators in town for the Estimates, Labor’s Louise Pratt and the Liberals’  Simon Birmingham. Welcome to the program.

SIMON BIRMINGHAM: Good afternoon.

LOUISE PRATT: Good afternoon.

LYNDAL CURTIS: First to Mr Abbott’s visit to Jakarta. After telling an audience in  Jakarta that a Federal Coalition Government would have a policy of no surprises, he  went on to a meeting with Indonesia’s President and didn’t discuss the policy to turn  back boats.

CHRIS BOWEN: He talks tough in Canberra, doesn’t talk at all in Jakarta.  He’s a lion in Canberra and a mouse in Indonesia. He is simply not willing to  try and talk to the President of Indonesia about this policy which he beats his  chest about whenever he’s got TV cameras in front of him in Australia but  won’t even raise with the people who are the key to making it work.

ERIC ABETZ: Do you honestly believe that the President of Indonesia does  not know what Australian Liberal policy or what Australian Coalition policy is in  relation to turning back the boats? Of course he knows what our policy is in  that area along with a host of other areas. What you do with these  delegations, as I’ve just said, is that you have your headline meeting with, in  this case, the President of the country and then you break off into individual  meetings with Shadow Ministers or Ministers relevant to the particular portfolio

and discuss those issues in detail.

LYNDAL CURTIS: Simon, Mr Abbott told the lunch yesterday that the Coalition  would deal with Indonesia as a candid friend and never make decisions that impact  on Indonesia without discussing them first. Why not begin the leader-to-leader  discussions now on a policy that Indonesia has problems with?

SIMON BIRMINGHAM: Lyndal, I think it’s evident here that we are treating  Indonesia with great respect and what is remarkable, and we are grateful for, is the  respect that Indonesia has shown in return to the Coalition. It is remarkable to have  a Leader of the Opposition meet with the Indonesian President. It is a meeting of  status that is not normally afforded to Leaders of Oppositions around the world.

LYNDAL CURTIS: The two did meet, though, when the Indonesian President came  to Darwin.

SIMON BIRMINGHAM: However, it is unusual in the visit of a Leader of the  Opposition to another country to have these types of engagements. It was a  successful meeting. Of course, in a meeting at that head-of-government level, you’re  going to expect to have general policy discussions and then, when you’ve had that  general policy discussion, you go through, as occurred, with Julie Bishop and Scott  Morrison and the senior Indonesian Ministers, detailed policy discussions. That is  what occurred. That’s the normal order of things.

LYNDAL CURTIS: Why not have that detailed policy discussion at a leader level,  given that, if Mr Abbott wins the next election, he’ll be the Prime Minister and this is  something that will take some management with Indonesia, isn’t it?

SIMON BIRMINGHAM: And obviously without, of course, going through the detail  of discussions, because Mr Abbott has said he want to respect the confidence of the  Indonesian President or any world leader with whom he deals, but Mr Abbott has  indicated it’s been a successful meeting with the Indonesian Prime Minister. We have  that rapport now established and I have absolutely no doubt that if we win the next  election the relationship between a Coalition Government and Indonesia will be far,

Print page

16

Interview Transcripts

Page 1 of 3 Capital Hill, ABC News 24 - Border protection, Australia’s relationship with Indonesi...

7/02/2013 http://www.senatorbirmingham.com.au/MediaCentre/InterviewTranscripts/tabid/63/arti...

far stronger than it has been under this Labor Government just as it was previously  because we won’t have surprises like ending the live cattle trade or things like that  that have fundamentally damaged aspects of our relationship with Indonesia and  trust between the two countries.

LYNDAL CURTIS: Louise, as Simon, says, the issue was discussed at a subsequent  meeting between Julia Bishop, Scott Morrison and the Indonesian Foreign [Affairs]  Minister, Marty Natalegawa. It’ll be fair to say, wouldn’t it, that Indonesia will be  entirely unsurprised that the turnback of boats is part of the Coalition’s policy suite.

LOUISE PRATT: Well, Tony Abbott said that he would talk to the Indonesian  President about this issue and he has failed to do so. He said he would have dialogue  and he hasn't and I think what that shows… that this policy of turning back the boats  is actually about a domestic messaging issue for Australia. It's not a serious policy,  credible policy, and he knows that the Indonesian Government and, indeed, that  Australian law enforcement and customs officials don't think it's a credible policy  either.

LYNDAL CURTIS: But the process of managing the policy with the Indonesian  Government… isn't that something you do when the policy is actually implemented,  when you win Government - that's when you start the talks?

LOUISE PRATT: Well, I think the only reason he… if there was goodwill towards this  policy already from Indonesia, why wouldn't they have discussed it?

LYNDAL CURTIS: So you think that… sorry, Simon?

SIMON BIRMINGHAM: Equally, if the President of Indonesia had such serious  misgivings about it, why didn’t he ask Mr Abbott about it?

LYNDAL CURTIS: Well, it is Mr Abbott’s policy, isn’t it?

SIMON BIRMINGHAM: And surely that’s just it - if the President had such serious  misgivings, as some want to try to pretend is the case, why would he not have raised  it with Mr Abbott? Obviously it was a ‘two-way street’ conversation between President  Yudhoyono and Mr Abbott. Each had the opportunity, I’ve got no doubt, to discuss a

range of factors. In the end, it was, as we’ve been told, a cordial, successful general  policy discussion over a range of issues, not just, of course, this important issue of  dealing with people smugglers.

LYNDAL CURTIS: Do you know if the Foreign Minister, Marty Natalegawa, raised  concerns about it in his subsequent meeting with Julie Bishop and Scott Morrison?

SIMON BIRMINGHAM: No. I’ve seen comments by Julie and Scott that make clear  that the detail of the policy measures, along with other detailed issues, were more  broadly canvassed in that meeting but, at all of these levels, we’ve sought to respect  the confidence of meeting with these senior Indonesian Ministers and not repeat  what it is they’ve said or the issues they’ve raised.

LYNDAL CURTIS: We might move on now to the Government’s policy. The  President of the [Australian] Human Rights Commission, Professor Gillian Triggs, has  welcomed the decision to review ASIO’s security assessments of asylum seekers but

she says the definition of ‘no advantage’ test which means asylum seekers get no  advantage in processing their claims by coming to Australia than they would if they  stayed in Indonesia is far from clear.

GILLIAN TRIGGS: At the moment, the concept of ‘no advantage’ appears to  have no legal content. We don't know what it means. It may acquire a  meaning but at the moment there is no benchmark or average against which  one can measure an advantage or disadvantage.

…

LYNDAL CURTIS: Simon, do you think the lack of certainty about the processing  times could, in the end, be a deterrent in itself?

SIMON BIRMINGHAM: Lyndal, I think what we want to make clear is that asylum  seekers and more particularly, though, people smugglers actually see very clearly that  Australia has a clear policy and a well understood policy. The idea of having a policy  that we either don't know what it is or won't say what it is doesn't exactly sound like  something that's going to turn people smugglers away. They've taken every chance  along the way to ‘gain’ the system, to exercise legal challenges, to make sure they  take every advantage possible in this cruel trade of people across the seas and a  dangerous voyage that people have to take. I think we should be making sure that  our policies are clearly known, clearly understood and clearly spelt out to dissuade  them of this. I don't think the idea that, because the Government doesn't know what  its policies are, it will create a situation where people smugglers are somehow turned  away… just doesn't gel.

…

LYNDAL CURTIS: I'll ask you both - you first, Simon - are you happy with the  decision of the Federal Government to allow a review by a former Federal Court  judge of adverse ASIO assessments of asylum seekers?

SIMON BIRMINGHAM: Well, I think a balance obviously always needs to be struck  in these matters, Lyndal, and it is important that security factors remain a paramount  consideration in determining whether people are able to stay in Australia or not and  that should always be at the top of considerations, so I want to see the detail of the

Page 2 of 3 Capital Hill, ABC News 24 - Border protection, Australia’s relationship with Indonesi...

7/02/2013 http://www.senatorbirmingham.com.au/MediaCentre/InterviewTranscripts/tabid/63/arti...

review mechanism that's been proposed to ensure it keeps security at the forefront  but allows an appropriate mechanism for review of such determinations.

…

LYNDAL CURTIS: We might move on, finally, to the Prime Minister's trip to India.  She's hoping to build relations in the country where it's arguable that Australia has  not put in enough effort. She's announced cricketer Sachin Tendulkar will be made a  Member of the Order of Australia.

…

LYNDAL CURTIS: Maybe more importantly, is Australia's decision - the Labor  Party's decision - last year to allow uranium sales to India…

…

LYNDAL CURTIS: Simon, do you think it's wise to take the time to put in place the  safeguards that are needed?

SIMON BIRMINGHAM: Of course you need to put in place the safeguards that are  needed. Australia has a very strong tradition of successfully doing so, in exporting  uranium to many countries around the world including states with nuclear weapons.  What, of course, is disappointing is: we should have been taking these steps five  years ago when we, under the Howard Government, started a process of indicating  we’d make sales to India and negotiate this. This, of course, is now a repair job of  the relationship with India to try to get things back on track after decisions like this to  cut it and then change the mind and reopen those negotiations.

LYNDAL CURTIS: And that’s where we’ll have to leave it. Louise Pratt and Simon  Birmingham, thank you very much for your time.

LOUISE PRATT: Thank you, Lyndal.

SIMON BIRMINGHAM: Thanks, Lyndal.

[ends]

Posted in: Interview Transcripts

Page 3 of 3 Capital Hill, ABC News 24 - Border protection, Australia’s relationship with Indonesi...

7/02/2013 http://www.senatorbirmingham.com.au/MediaCentre/InterviewTranscripts/tabid/63/arti...

