

THE HON GREG COMBET AM MP  Minister for Climate Change and Energy Efficiency  Minister for Industry and Innovation

THE HON MARK DREYFUS QC MP  Cabinet Secretary

Parliamentary Secretary for Climate Change and Energy Efficiency  Parliamentary Secretary for Industry and Innovation

GC 336/12   17 December 2012



FUNDING TO SUPPORT SMART ENERGY USE IN LOW INCOME HOUSEHOLDS

The Gillard Government has announced additional support to those who need it most, allocating  $39.8 million to Round One recipients of the $100 million Low Income Energy Efficiency Program  (LIEEP).

The Minister for Climate Change and Energy Efficiency, Greg Combet, and the Parliamentary  Secretary for Climate Change and Energy Efficiency, Mark Dreyfus, today confirmed 11 successful  recipients for Round One.

“This funding will be used to trial ways of helping low income households to become energy  smart. Up to 25,000 low income households are expected to benefit. The LIEEP is also designed to  create new local job opportunities,” Mr Combet said.

The 11 projects will be delivered by various consortia, including not-for-profit groups, with a focus  on energy efficiency; welfare organisations; charities; trade unions and manufacturing companies.  Service providers with experience working with low income families and an understanding of the  issues they face will also be engaged.

Each project aims to address the barriers to energy efficiency uptake - such as access to  information, upfront capital costs and existing behaviours - through trials that will collect data to  inform future energy efficiency programs and policies.

The projects also focus on often hard to reach parts of low income Australia, for example, people  living in long stay arrangements in caravan parks and within remote Indigenous communities.

“The LIEEP is part of the Gillard Government’s effort to assist in the transition to a clean energy  future and will help support households most vulnerable to rising prices to make smart energy  choices and reduce their energy costs,” Mr Dreyfus said.

“As a Labor Government, we are pleased to be partnering with trusted community organisations  to trial these projects and offer further help to low income households.”

Activities will include retrofitting low income houses with energy efficient appliances, installing  in-home displays to show energy consumption, providing financial training and brokerage

assistance, and engaging specific target groups such as workers on low incomes or Indigenous  communities in their own language through peer training.

The successful projects will be rolled out over four years, with the lead organisations receiving  funding progressively over that time. The LIEEP is funded by revenue from the carbon price.

“Investment in smart energy use now will help to lower our energy use in the future and help  households to lower their electricity bills,” Mr Combet said.

Full details of the 11 successful Round One recipients are attached.

To find out more about the LIEEP visit: www.climatechange.gov.au



Media contact: Mark Davis, Gia Hayne (Mr Combet) 02 6277 7920    Giulia Baggio (Mr Dreyfus) 0400 918 776

Low Income Energy Efficiency Program - Round One recipients



Lead Organisation  Name  Project Title Project Description Consortium members names Target low income groups  State LIEEP

funding

Brotherhood of St  Laurence  Home Energy  Efficiency Upgrade

Project (HEEUP)

HEEUP will assist low income households to upgrade  to more efficient hot water systems. We will provide  information and advice on savings and the pay-back  period for a hot water upgrade, financing opportunities  and a rebate. Working in parts of Melbourne and  regional Victoria, we expect most households will be  homeowners, such as pensioners or single parents.

Brotherhood of St Laurence, AGL, Monash  Sustainability Institute, Alternative  Technology Association, NSW Department  of Premier and Cabinet

Australian Health or  Concession Card Holder,  Culturally & linguistically  diverse, metreopolitan/  urban, Non-English-Speaking background,  Retirees/ elderly, Rural/  Remote, Billing Hardship  programs participants

VIC $4,258,621

City of Sydney Energy Efficiency  on a Shoestring  (EEoS)

The project will engage 1,500 low income households  across five inner Sydney local government areas to  trial and measure the impact of different types of  energy efficiency interventions involving low cost  retrofitting, appliance replacement, peer learning and  mentoring. Comprehensive data generated and  evaluated from the project will determine the  comparative costs, benefits and feasibility of  implementing the trialed interventions widely.

City of Sydney Council, Marrickville Council,  City of Canterbury Council, North Sydney  Council, Randwick City Council, NSW  Federation of Housing Associations, Institute  of Sustainable Futures, NSW Office of  Environment and Hertiage, Womens  Housing Company, Community Housing Ltd,  Bridge Housing Ltd, Link Housing Ltd, St  George Community Housing Ltd, Affordable  Community Housing Ltd, City West Housing  Pty Ltd, Metro Community Housing Coop Ltd

Australian Health or  Concession Card Holder,  Culturally & linguistically  diverse, Indigenous,  Metropolitan/ urban, New  Migrants, Non-English-speaking background,  Renters, Retirees/ Elderly

NSW $1,652,911

Kildonan  UnitingCare

Koorie Energy  Efficiency Project  (KEEP)

KEEP is trialling and evaluating activities and  strategies that address Victorian Aboriginal  experiences of energy and water in Victoria as  detailed in a recent report published by Consumer  Utilities Advocacy Centre (CUAC). The project will  enable Aboriginal consumers across Victoria to focus  on energy affordability, managing rising consumption  costs and to navigate the energy market.

Kildonan UnitingCare (Kildonan), Aborigines  Advancement League, Victorian Aboriginal  Child Care Agency, Ngwala Willumbong Co-operative Limited, Consumer Utilities  Advocacy Centre, RMIT University, Origin  Energy

Australian Health or  Concession Card holder,  Indigenous, Metropolitan/  urban, Renters, Rural/  remote

VIC $5,540,779

GV Community  Energy Pty Ltd  Affordable Energy  Efficiency for Low

Income  Households

Individual and community-level engagement to deliver  immediate and ongoing savings in energy usage and  costs to 2,750 low income households in target  communities including permanent residents of caravan  and cabin parks, retirement estates and others  disengaged from mainstream energy efficiency  projects, while developing a verifiable dataset  measuring relative success of different engagement  methods over a range of low income communities.

GV Community Energy Pty Ltd, Monash  University, City of the Greater Shepparton,  Connect GV, Ethnic Council of Shepparton &  District, Finborough Place Residential  Village, Harmony Village Inc, Kelvin Grove  Relocatable Home Village, Murchison River  Road Caravan Park, Dame Pattie Menzis  Centre Inc, Rural Housing Network,  Shepparton Access, Shepparton Villages, St  Vincent de Paul Society, Victorian Caravan  Park's association, Sustainable Regional  Australia Pty Ltd

Australian Health or  Concession Card holder,  Culturally & Linguistically  diverse, Indigenous,  Metrepolitan/ Urban, New  Mitgrants, Non-English-speaking background,  Renters, Retirees/ elderly/  Rural/ remote

VIC $1,849,998

Indigenous  Essential Services  P ty Ltd

Manymak (Good)  Power Use  'Manymak (Good) Power Use!' will enable low-income  households in participating East Arnhem Indigenous

communities to achieve measurable gains in energy  efficiency for social, economic and environmental  benefit. Local Indigenous people will be at the centre  of the design and delivery of the Project, which will be  rigorously evaluated and developed as a framework  for application in other remote Indigenous  communities.

NT Department of Housing (Remote), East  Arhem Shire Council, Bushlight, Charles  Darwin University, Power and Water  Corporation.

Australian Health or  Concession Card Holder,  Culturally & Linguistically  diverse, Indigenous, Non-English speaking  background, Renters,  Retirees/elderly,  Rural/remote,  Students/youth, Very remote  Indigenous households.

NT  $9,400,300

Brisbane City  Council

Green Wisdom The Green Wisdom program will help to improve the  residential energy efficiency of 2,000 low income  seniors across Brisbane by delivering a unique  combination of energy efficiency modifications to  seniors' homes, tailored advice and behaviour change  education, and access to affordable energy-efficient  appliances. It will assist them in managing rising  energy costs and support them in staying healthy and  comfortable in their homes for longer.

Brisbane City Council, CSIRO, ENERGEX,  BoysTown, Good Guys, Home Assist Secure  community service providers, Council on the  Ageing (COTA), National Seniors  Association, Australian Pensioners and  Superannuants League, Queensland NILS  Network, Centre-Based Respite Care  Services (CBRC)

Retirees/elderly QLD $2,905,077

Nature  Conservation  Council NSW

The Power Savers  Challenge - energy  solutions for  renters and low  paid workers (the  Challenge)

The Challenge aims to reduce energy use and  household energy costs through an innovative and  empowering combination of engagement, education,  advice, support and communication. The low income  households targeted are renters, people from non-English-speaking backgrounds and households who  fall within the two lowest income quintiles. The  geographical areas we are targeting are Sydney, the  Hunter and Illawarra Regions.

United Voice NSW - Community Welfare  Organisation; Institute for Sustainable  Futures UTS (ISF) - Research Organisation;  Solarhart Industries Pty Ltd - Energy  Appliance Retailer; Nature Conservation  Council of NSW - Non-profit Organisation

Metropolitan/ urban, Non-English-speaking  background, Renters, Two  lowest household income  quintiles

NSW $2,998,991

Environment  Victoria

Future Powered  Families  The arrival of a baby can dramatically increase energy  use while also creating greater motivation to provide a

safe climate future for their child. This program helps  first-time parents reduce their energy use, emissions  and bills, and provides parents looking to re-enter the  workforce with skills to deliver home energy  assessments for first-time parents in their  communities.

Environment Victoria, City of Brimbank, City  of Darebin, City of Hume, City of Latrobe,  City of Yarra, Hindmarsh Shire, Wimmera  Volunteers, ecoMaster, Smith Family, RAMP  Environmental Services, Swimburn  University National Centre for Sustainability

Culturally & Linguistically  diverse, indigenous,  Renters, New Parents

VIC $1,803,200

South East  Councils Climate  Change Alliance

Low Income  Energy Saver  Direct Care &  Motivators Project

Create new and innovative ways for Direct Care  Workers in south east Melbourne who currently  provide council services to low income retired, elderly  or disabled to increase energy efficiency through a  tailored retrofit and behaviour change program.  Frameworks, systems and tools will be developed to  install energy efficienct technology to maximise capital  return and energy efficiency while maintaining trust,  limiting intrusion and managing risk.

SECCCA, Bayside City Council, City of  Kingston, Frankston City Council,  Mornington Penninsula Shire Council, City of  Casey, Cardinia Shire Council, Baw Baw  Shire Council, Bass Coast Shire Council,  CSIRO, Envirovision, Home Energy  Makeovers, Just Change, Air Barrier  Technologies (ABT), Aspect Studios, RMIT  PHD Student - Nicola Wiland, Briar  consulting

Australian Health or  Concession Card Holder,  Metropolitan/urban, Renters,  Retirees/elderly

VIC $4,406,251

Mission Australia  Housing  Get Bill Smart Get Bill Smart will trial an innovative community  capacity-building approach to home energy efficiency

intervention to engage, educate and empower low  income households. This approach will be compared  with a more conventional energy efficiency  intervention of in-home education and upgrades. A  combination the two intervention approaches will also  be trialled and a control group will be established.

MA Housing, Sustainable Living Tasmania,  University of Tasmania  Australian Health or  Concession Card Holder,

Indigenous, Metropolitan,  Metropolitan, Renters,  Retirees/ elderly, Low  literacy

TAS $1,748,717

Queensland  Council of Social  Service

Bright Beginning:  Incorporating  Energy Efficiency  into the Settlement  Journey in QLD

The Bright Beginning project is aimed at improving the  energy efficiency knowledge and capacity of refugees  settling in Queensland. It seeks to increase  understanding of energy usage within refugee  communities and how best to deliver energy efficiency  information to this group. Participants will be  supported in making, and resourced to make,  decisions that will minimise their energy usage as they  set up households in Australia.

Queensland Council of Social Service,  Multicultural Development Association,  Moreland Energy Foundation, Terah Pty Ltd

Culturally & Linguistically  diverse, Metropolitan/  Urban, New Mitgrants, Non-English-speaking  background, Renters, Rural/  Remote and Refugees on  Centrelink benefits in private  rentals - Urban and regional  Queensland

QLD $3,201,024



