





Minister’s Office: 02 6277 7500 or 0466 745 615                                       AusAID: 0417 680 590









Transcript of doorstop  Griffith Australia Day Awards  St Thomas' Catholic Primary School, Camp Hill  18 January 2010





Subjects: Horn of Africa famine, manufacturing, poker machine reform,  Australia Day

E & O E - PROOF ONLY

QUESTION: I want to ask you about the Horn of Africa so I'll just start about that. We had two  Australian charity groups say that the world didn't do enough quickly enough.

KEVIN RUDD: I think the Australian charities are right. We in Australia, around the world, are the  fourth largest donors in the world, okay, and we're the world's twelfth largest economy. So, we are  pulling our weight. We've so far donated more than $150 million. In the community fundraising  campaign, dollar-for-dollar, whereby the community puts in a dollar and the government puts in a  dollar, the Australian people have contributed $13.5 million themselves which, of course, we are  matching dollar-for-dollar.

I've been in touch most recently in New York with the Director General of the United Nations Office  for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, Baroness Amos. I saw her just a few days ago in New  York. She says the situation is still dire. We still have a huge problem for this year. The funding deficit  for 2012 is something in the order of $2.2 billion.

So globally, frankly, everyone has got to put their shoulder to the wheel. Australia is, but we always  stand ready to do more.

QUESTION: Are tens of thousands of people dying needlessly?

KEVIN RUDD: In my view, we see thousands of lives at risk and many deaths which can be  prevented. Let me give you one story. When I was in Somalia about six months ago with the head of

MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS

The Hon. Kevin Rudd MP



Minister’s Office: 02 6277 7500 or 0457 791 556                                       AusAID: 0417 680 590

2





the World Food Programme, we literally went up and down the lines of people waiting as they had  walked in across the deserts of Southern Somalia to this refugee camp. And, though I had no  qualifications for this, with her selected these kids from the line who were, frankly, at death's door;  got them to a UNICEF feeding station straightaway. And that sort of work saves lives. In fact, I've got  before and after photographs of a little boy called Sadak who was on death's door and now he's  pudgy, okay. That's the sort of difference you can make. But you can only make that difference if  you've got money to do it.

We put our hand in our pocket as Australia, as I said, fourth largest donors around the world.  Everyone else has got to lift their effort as well.

I don't want to look back in three years' time and say, we could have saved a million lives but we  didn't do it in time. And we, in Australia, stand ready to do more.

QUESTION: Is the car industry subsidy program justified?

KEVIN RUDD: Well, on the details of the current arrangements I'll leave that to the responsible  minister, Kim Carr, and of course his work with the Prime Minister.

My own view, which I have expressed many, many times over the years is that Australia must remain  a manufacturing country. It has always been my view. I haven't changed my view. It will be my view  into the future.

QUESTION: Should it be rolled out to industries like tourism who are in trouble in this state?

KEVIN RUDD: Again, I won't comment beyond my portfolio on the specifics of the arrangements  with each industry. Remember, for example, with various industry groups we engage in taxpayer  funded promotion campaigns. The Australian Tourism Commission, the global public relations

campaign on behalf of Australian tourism, is done in part through the taxpayer dollar.

So government, in way or another, assists with a number of different industry groups.

But on the question of manufacturing, my views have never changed. I believe we must be, into the  future, a manufacturing country and auto is a key part of that.

QUESTION: Just on pokie reform, will the government be pushing ahead on mandatory pre-commitment or breaking its promise with Andrew Wilkie?

KEVIN RUDD: First of all, as I am advised, these negotiations between the Prime Minister and Mr  Wilkie are underway, and they are continuing therefore I have nothing to add to where those  negotiations may have reached or where they may go.

Furthermore, I think as you'd appreciate as Minister for Foreign Affairs, it doesn't lie in the absolute  centre of my portfolio and so I will await to see the outcome of those deliberations.

QUESTION: Do you believe that a trial and a delayed introduced would be a good compromise?

KEVIN RUDD: My own view, again, is that this is not a matter for the Foreign Minister; it's a matter  for the responsible Minister for Families, Jenny Macklin. It's a responsibility also which falls clearly  within the Prime Minister's direct interest and her negotiations with Mr Wilkie.



Minister’s Office: 02 6277 7500 or 0457 791 556                                       AusAID: 0417 680 590

3





And I intend to leave it there, as I think other responsible members of the government will as well,  for the simple reason is that these negotiations are ongoing.

QUESTION: We're just trying to get people - encourage people to go to the Australia Day  celebrations at South Bank. Do you think it's important that people take part in Australia Day  celebrations?

KEVIN RUDD: You know, something about Australians, I reckon one of the good things about this  place is we actually love a good party. I don't say we should be party, party, party all the time but it's  Oz Day, you know, it's who we are. And we have kicked off the celebrations here in our local  community today. And I've got to say, Oz Day, South Bank here in Queensland, perfect place to be,  perfect place to go, get behind it.

You know something, as Foreign Minister of the country, you visit a lot of countries around the  world, this one we should be proud of, this one we should celebrate. That's what Australia Day is all  about.



END

