JOH





LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  THE HON. TONY ABBOTT MHR  FEDERAL MEMBER FOR WARRINGAH

3 July 2012

TRANSCRIPT OF THE HON. TONY ABBOTT MHR  JOINT DOORSTOP INTERVIEW WITH MRS NATASHA GRIGGS MHR,  FEDERAL MEMBER FOR SOLOMON AND MR TERRY MILLS MLA,   LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION IN THE NORTHERN TERRITORY,

DARWIN



Subjects: Julia Gillard’s carbon tax; Melinda Taylor; live cattle export trade; Craig Emerson; waste  facility.

EO&E..............................................................................................................................................................



TONY ABBOTT:    It’s good to be down at Darwin Harbour with Trevor Simmonds and Michael Goonan. I think it is very  important that members of parliament, both nationally and locally, understand the impact of the carbon tax  on businesses like Trevor's and Michael's. Now, I am here with Natasha Griggs, the local member. I am here  with Terry Mills, the Opposition Leader here in the Territory. We understand that this carbon tax is going to  be terrible for jobs, as well as terrible for Australian families' cost of living and a clear message is going  from Darwin and right around Australia to the current government: if you want to protect families, if you  want to protect jobs, dump this toxic tax. We have got not only a federal election coming up at the latest  within the next 12 months or so. We have got a Territory election coming up in just a few weeks and the  people of the Territory need to know that if there is a change of government, amongst many other things, an  incoming CLP Territory government will be a force against the carbon tax because right around Australia,  members of the Coalition understand that had if you want to protect jobs, if you want to boost development,  if you want to add to peoples' prosperity, the last thing you should be doing is hitting people with this big  new tax on everything.     Now, I am going to ask first of all Trevor and Michael to say a few words about the impact of the carbon tax  on their business and then I might ask Terry and Natasha if they have anything to add and then we'll take  questions.     TREVOR SIMMONDS:    Thank you, Tony. First of all, I would like to thank Tony for the interest he's shown in the fishing industry  and that's not just in the Territory, that's Australia-wide. He's actually listening to us. It is nice to have  someone of his standing to actually come down and do it. We have major problems coming up with this  carbon tax. We don't like it. It looks like the possibility of five price increases by the time that the fish are  caught to the time that those fish are consumed at a restaurant and somewhere along the line, the public has  to pay for that. There are many reasons we will go up, one is the price of refrigerant, diesel, electricity, it is

1



2



all going to cost us. These fishermen work very hard, we're all trying to make a living and really, we’ve got  to stop this tax.     Thank you.     TONY ABBOTT:    Michael?     MICHAEL GOONAN:    I’d like to thank Tony for coming down today and showing some support. At the end of the day, I am  directly affected with this tax, with the price of refrigerants. Last year alone, leaking systems, we used 100  kilos of refrigerant. It’s not cheap in the best of scenarios but with this new tax it’s definitely not going to  make it easier. At the end of the day, this cost has to be swallowed up by the consumer. At the end of the  day, if you increase the cost in manufacturing, retail will be affected directly.     Thank you.     TONY ABBOTT:    Well said, mate. Natasha?     NATASHA GRIGGS:     Well, I’d also like to thank Tony for coming along and hearing first-hand from Territorians how this toxic  tax is going to impact the cost of living for Territorians. As we’ve heard from Michael from NT Ice, he’s  going to be experiencing, in some instances, 245 per cent increase in gas costs which will flow onto the  consumer, which is all Territorians. Everyone uses ice in the Territory, whether it is on the weekend when  we're out fishing or out having a picnic, everyone is going to be impacted. The same thing with Trevor,  Territorians are a big consumer of local fish and so the costs, as Trevor said, are going to increase and all  Territorians are going to pay. So, it’s great that Tony is here. He's my friend and my leader, to hear first-hand from Territorians what this toxic tax means to us.    TERRY MILLS:     We stand in the Northern Territory against this tax. It is not the tax we need, nor want. The Territory has lost  4,000 people, productive people, they have chosen to leave the Northern Territory because of the cost of  living in the Northern Territory. That will only increase when this tax is brought into play. It will hit you  whether you're going to fill the esky or your power bill. But it’s going to place greater pressure on the  Northern Territory. The Territory has to increase its productivity and to impose a tax on carbon will not  encourage productivity in the north. We are particularly exposed in the north and we resist it. We don't want  it and we don't need it and it has to go.     TONY ABBOTT:    Thanks, mate. Ok, do we have any questions?     QUESTION:    Tony, Melinda Taylor was released overnight. Do you give Bob Carr any credit for her early release?



3



TONY ABBOTT:    Look, I welcome her release. I think that the Foreign Minister has been assiduous in working for this release  so I thank him for his work and I thank the head of the International Criminal Court for his work in trying to  bring about this happy outcome.    QUESTION:    What are you suggesting to the Indonesian President - when you meet him later - should be done about the  asylum seeker issue? For example, could Indonesia host a regional processing centre?     TONY ABBOTT:    Look, I’ve always said that one of the really important things in tackling this whole boat people disaster is  putting our relationship with Indonesia on the strongest possible footing. As I said in Canberra a couple of  years ago on President Yudhoyono's last visit to Australia, together, we have successfully tackled this  problem in the past and together we can successfully tackle it in the future, but one thing you will never find  from me is megaphone diplomacy. I am not going to broadcast what I am going to say to the President. I am  not going to broadcast what I did say to the President. I think the best way to strengthen relations with  Indonesia, which is such a critically important neighbour, such a very important friend, is to respect private  conversations.     QUESTION:    The Indonesian relationship over the live exports suspension last year is still touchy. Their orders are down  for our cattle. What have the cattlemen been saying and what are you going to be saying try and sort that  situation out?     TONY ABBOTT:    Well again, I think that the Government was guilty of extraordinarily bad faith and extraordinarily  incompetent administration in suspending the live cattle trade in a panic at a television program. Now,  obviously it’s important to ensure that all of our exporting takes place under the best possible circumstances  but one thing you should never do is leave an important friend and neighbour in the lurch through precipitate  actions here in Australia and the Government shouldn't have done it, the Government has not well-handled  the recovery. The best thing we can do for the live cattle trade in the Territory is try to ensure that the  relationship between Australia and Indonesia gets back on to the best possible footing and what I want to  indicate to President Yudhoyono, as I said last night publicly, is my firm resolve in whatever capacity I  have, now and in the future, to contribute to the closest harmony between Australia and Indonesia.     QUESTION:    Tony, you’re at a carbon tax campaign here today. Yesterday we saw Craig Emerson do a song and dance  routine regarding Whyalla. What do you make of that?     TONY ABBOTT:    Look, I think the Australian public want adults in charge and I think what we saw from the Trade Minister  yesterday was conduct unbecoming. Now, look, I don't want to make too much of what was a pretty juvenile  incident. I think Craig himself is probably a bit embarrassed about it now. I just think that the carbon tax  debate should be conducted by adults, in adult terms, and that is what I intend to do.



4



QUESTION:    Mr Abbott, there’s a lot of anger still in the Territory about the prospect of having the waste dump imposed  in the Territory. Is there a better solution than what the Government's going for now?     TONY ABBOTT:    I can understand the local concerns, but I am confident that that any waste arrangements here in the  Territory will be conducted in the most effective possible way with the least possible risk to the  environment. You know, sometimes local concerns do have to give way to the national interest but I want to  congratulate Terry Mills and in particular, Natasha Griggs, for the responsible way in which they have  handled this debate and Natasha has been entirely consistent on this issue both before and after the last  election.     QUESTION:    Mr Abbott, if we do get the waste dump, is the nuclear science agency going to have to raise its game?  Because the Lucas Heights facility is a mess. It keeps having to be shut down. It's had leaks over the years. I  mean, it would be very concerning if the Territory is going to get a facility like that; that would have a life of  hundreds and thousands of years.    TONY ABBOTT:    Except the interesting thing is that the Territory waste centre will be a long, long way from built-up areas  unlike the Lucas Heights centre and this is why it is appropriate to find a remote location for these kinds of  facilities. Now, obviously the facilities have got to be run efficiently. They’ve got to be run in accordance  with the highest possible standards. I am confident that the professional officers and the technical  organisations that will be charged with this will do a world-class job.    Thank you.    [ends]

