Current | Archives | Search

AM Agenda, Sky News Australia - Gun control; Nielsen  poll; border protection; tax reform.

Posted on December 17, 2012 11:12

KIERAN GILBERT: Today we’re taking a look at the last Nielsen poll for 2012. It  has Tony Abbott’s disapproval rating as the second worst recorded by an Opposition  Leader in the four decades of the Nielsen survey. The Labor primary vote... the  recovery appears to be holding up, although momentum for the Government has  stalled.

...

KIERAN GILBERT: Just finally, John, as we wrap up 2012 and head into 2013, if  you’re looking at trends in the Nielsen poll, would you suggest that Labor’s primary  vote... that the momentum in that recovery has stalled and what should we look to in  2013 as both sides obviously try to sway things in their direction in the election year?

JOHN STIRTON: Look, I’m not sure that Labor’s improvement has necessarily  stalled but it’s moving fairly slowly but in our polling since mid-year it has always  been up so if the Labor vote has changed it’s been in an upwards direction. The  Coalition vote, on the other hand, has sat around 43 to 45, up and down for the last  couple of months, so it’s not clear that it’s stalled; it’s not clear that it won’t continue;  it’s not clear that it won’t go the other way. We really can’t predict the future - polls  are a look at where we’ve been, not where we’re going - so next year will be  interesting but I think the most important point at this stage is that Labor finds  themself, I think, in a competitive position at the end of the year but still a losing  position and so we’ll need to see the first round of polls next year to see what  happens.

...

KIERAN GILBERT: Now to our panel this morning - from Adelaide, Liberal  frontbencher Senator Simon Birmingham; in Melbourne, Labor frontbencher Mark  Dreyfus. Gentlemen, good morning. I will get your thoughts on the polls in just a  moment. First of all, we do need to look at this awful tragedy that we’ve seen in the  United States and US President Obama to arrive in Newtown, Connecticut, any  moment now to grieve with the families of those lost. Simon Birmingham, from an  Australian perspective it’s just so hard to comprehend this gun culture in the US and  that, just, things don’t change.

SIMON BIRMINGHAM: Kieran, it is so hard to comprehend and it’s such a tragedy.  As you know, I’m a father of two young girls and it’s safe to say that the news, as it  broke over the weekend, sent a shiver down my spine, as I’m sure it would have of  every parent - around Australia and right around the world - who saw the news and  all our sympathies would go out to all of those affected and to the American people  but, look, it is, I think, very clearly time for action in the United States. When we had  the terrible Port Arthur massacre here in Australia, the Howard Government then  enacted actions that saw 700,000 weapons come off the streets - huge change here  in Australia. It’s time for America to recognise it needs to do likewise and to actually

end this culture of gun violence that places them the leader amongst the developed  world for deaths amongst gun incidents.

...

KIERAN GILBERT: Let’s look on now at that Nielsen poll that we began the  program with, talking to John Stirton about it. He believes that... well, not certain  that Labor’s momentum has stalled entirely, Mark Dreyfus, but obviously the Labor  Party in a better position than what it was, say, six months ago. You must be a little  reassured?

MARK DREYFUS: Of course and it shows a few things. It shows that we’re through  the nonsense and misrepresentation about the carbon price, the incredible smear and  fear campaign that’s been run by the Liberal Party - smear in relation to the politics,  the personal attack, and fear in relation to the carbon price. People are sick and tired  of that kind of politics and I think that’s something you can see reflected in this poll.  The last week of Parliament was spent on a campaign making baseless allegations  against the Prime Minister and I think Australians are absolutely sick and tired of that  and just last week we’ve had the Liberal Party exposed for their conspiracy to bring  down the Government - a conspiracy against the Speaker of the House of  Representatives - and it’s not just me saying it; it’s a judgement of a very senior  judge in Australia who’s actually exposed that conspiracy and that’s, I think,  something that’s fed into this poll.

Print page

17

Interview Transcripts

Page 1 of 3 AM Agenda, Sky News Australia - Gun control; Nielsen poll; border protection; tax r...

8/02/2013 http://www.senatorbirmingham.com.au/MediaCentre/InterviewTranscripts/tabid/63/arti...

KIERAN GILBERT: Senator Birmingham, are you worried that the AWU [Australian  Workers’ Union slush fund] focus at the end of the Parliamentary year and those  other attacks have backfired? If you look at Tony Abbott’s disapproval rating, it’s the  worst result of any leader since Andrew Peacock in 1984.

SIMON BIRMINGHAM: Well, Kieran... well, firstly on that point, I’d note that  Andrew Peacock did far better in the 1984 election than anybody expected he was  going to. Secondly, look, I read somewhere this morning that, of the published  opinion polls since the last election, the Coalition’s had a clear lead in 119 out of 124  of them that have been published, so I’d much rather be in our position than in the  Government’s position but we’ve never pretended winning the next election would be  easy. We know this Government will throw everything it possibly can at trying to win  it. They’ll throw taxpayers’ dollars at it, which, of course, is why we will never see a  budget surplus and we’ll see the country go into deficit again and, of course, they will  throw smear at it, which is why we saw all of the attacks on Tony Abbott about  sexism and misogyny and all of the lies the Government have thrown about, so it’s  little wonder that of course we’ve seen this type of tightening in the polls but we go  into next year focused on outlining a positive agenda for a strong economy and for a  safe and secure Australia.

MARK DREYFUS: I...

KIERAN GILBERT: Well, Mark Dreyfus, I want to put that to you. You can respond  but the negative politics has been evident on both sides, as Senator Birmingham  made it clear there in his retort to your answer that the Government hasn’t got clean  hands itself.

MARK DREYFUS: I don’t accept that for one moment, Kieran. The AWU is a  baseless attack on the Prime Minister and Tony Abbott has been found out. He  accused the Prime Minister and...

SIMON BIRMINGHAM: And the Prime Minister stood up and called Tony Abbott a  misogynist. That’s a fact, Mark...

MARK DREYFUS: And he is... and he is and...

SIMON BIRMINGHAM: Oh, ‘and he is’? Right, so you’re going to continue the  attacks, then?

MARK DREYFUS: It’s important to look at what the nature of these attacks have  been. Right back to the last election, Tony Abbott did not accept the legitimacy of the  result delivered by the Australian people and he’s gone on with these politics of  personal attack. The Prime Minister was quite right in her speech - the attack made  on her in the last sitting week was baseless, as it’s been all year. There was a false  accusation made that she had committed a crime. Tony Abbott couldn’t back it up  and he’s got to stop and now exposed with this conspiracy to misuse the court  system which is why the case was thrown out with Mal Brough, a very senior Liberal,  conspiring with James Ashby to bring down the Government. It’s an attack on the  legal system, an attack on the political system and I hope every single person in  Australia reads this judgement, Kieran, and keeps asking questions of Tony Abbott  about what he knew.

KIERAN GILBERT: Okay, well, let’s have Senator Birmingham. Your response to  that?

SIMON BIRMINGHAM: Well, there you have it, Kieran. If anybody was in any  doubt about the Government’s desperation to smear their way back into office, you  just heard it there from Mark Dreyfus, who, of course, is...

MARK DREYFUS: Where’s the smear? Where’s the smear, Simon? Where is the  smear?

SIMON BIRMINGHAM: Well, you’re the one still calling Tony Abbott a misogynist.  You’re the one who’s now, of course, trying to create grand conspiracy theories here.  You seem, Mark, so desperate...

MARK DREYFUS: This is the judge. You need to read the judgement. You need to  read what a senior judge of the Full Court said.

SIMON BIRMINGHAM: Oh, Mark... and, Mark, you are verballing this greatly, of  course, here but you are the one who just said on air... you interrupted... you...

MARK DREYFUS: On the contrary. I don’t think you’ve read the judgement, Simon,  and I don’t think the journalists have yet read the judgement.

SIMON BIRMINGHAM: Mark, you are the one who very clearly... it was very...

KIERAN GILBERT: Gentlemen, let’s have Senator Birmingham’s response, please,  without interjection, Mark Dreyfus. Your response, Senator?

SIMON BIRMINGHAM: Well, it was pretty clear to me the journalists have read the  judgement, from the weekend coverage, Mark, but, that aside, it is equally clear to  me that you’re the one who said, very clearly on air this morning, Tony Abbott is a  misogynist. Well, frankly, you know, that is an appalling allegation to make. You’re  repeating your Prime Minister’s slurs and it is just self-evident that the Government  will stoop to any depth to try to hold on and cling on to power at the next election.

...

Page 2 of 3 AM Agenda, Sky News Australia - Gun control; Nielsen poll; border protection; tax r...

8/02/2013 http://www.senatorbirmingham.com.au/MediaCentre/InterviewTranscripts/tabid/63/arti...

KIERAN GILBERT: I wanted to look at this meeting in Sri Lanka, in Colombo, today  - the Foreign Minister meeting with the Sri Lankan President. They will be  announcing a four-point plan including greater intelligence sharing...

...

KIERAN GILBERT: Senator Birmingham, you would welcome this, wouldn’t you...  the fact that the Government is, well, sitting around the table today - Foreign  Minister Carr and the Sri Lankan authorities - to deal with this? This has been... a  majority of the arrivals, actually, in the last couple of months have been from Sri  Lanka and many, according to our Government, have been economic refugees.

SIMON BIRMINGHAM: Indeed, Kieran. I wish Bob Carr every success in Sri Lanka.  This, of course, is the type of action that we should have been seeing a long time  ago. It’s been evident for a while that Sri Lanka has become an increasing problem,  in terms of boat arrivals - arrivals that cost Australia more than $12 million for every  single boat that arrives here - so it is a serious problem for Australia. It’s a problem  we should be on the front foot about. I’m pleased that Bob Carr has now eventually  made it to Colombo, something that the Coalition has spoken of needing to happen  for some period of time. I welcome the fact that he’s having these discussions. I look  forward to seeing the details around the four-point plan and the Coalition hopes that  it will work. We know that Sri Lanka have been turning boats around themselves for a  period of time, so that, of course, is something that we would expect, hopefully, will  continue at their end. We just wish, of course, that all of this had happened some  time ago and that we hadn’t seen the policy flip-flopping on how to handle asylum  seekers coming to Australia that we’ve seen from this Government over the last five  years.

KIERAN GILBERT: Finally, onto another issue, the Treasurer, Wayne Swan, hosting  his state and territory counterparts today... tax reform will be on the table but not  any look at increasing the rate of the GST [goods and services tax] or broadening its  base. This was the Treasurer this morning.

WAYNE SWAN: The one thing the Commonwealth won’t be doing today is  that we will not be considering any increase in the rate of the GST or any case  to broaden the base of the GST. That is the lazy way to go about tax reform  and doing that would hit the lowest income earners in our community really  hard.

KIERAN GILBERT: Senator Birmingham, what do you make of Treasurer Swan  ruling out any consideration of the GST even before he gets into the room with the  other Treasurers?

SIMON BIRMINGHAM: Well, I think lazier still than what Wayne Swan just said  then is handballing all responsibility for tax reform to the states, which appears to be  what Wayne Swan is proposing. Now, getting a lecture from Wayne Swan on tax  reform is a little bit like getting a lecture from McDonald’s on healthy eating. In the  end, he is the master of the carbon tax and the mining tax. These policies, of course,  have been seen in the mining tax’s case just to be a complete debacle; in the carbon  tax’s case to have widespread detrimental economic impacts that we will feel over a  period of time in Australia. I think that people should expect this Government to have  loftier agendas. Wayne Swan once commissioned a tax review, we might recall - the  Henry Review - and then, of course, left pretty much all of the recommendations on  the bookshelf collecting dust with the report, so state Treasurers today will rightly  wonder just where the Treasurer’s now coming from with his call for tax reform.

...

KIERAN GILBERT: Mark Dreyfus, Simon Birmingham, thanks so much for your time  this morning.

[ends]

Posted in: Interview Transcripts

Page 3 of 3 AM Agenda, Sky News Australia - Gun control; Nielsen poll; border protection; tax r...

8/02/2013 http://www.senatorbirmingham.com.au/MediaCentre/InterviewTranscripts/tabid/63/arti...

