C hanges to the Ministry

FRI 02 MARC H2012

Prime Minister

Today I announce changes to the C abinet and Ministry that I will recommend to Her Excellency the Governor-General.

I have put together a team that will best equip my Government to pursue our priorities for the nation.

Cab inet changes

Bob C arr will join the Senate, and will take on the role of Minister for Foreign Affairs. Until he takes his place in the Senate, C raig Emerson will continue to act as Minister for Foreign Affairs.

C raig Emerson will also take on an expanded role of Minister for Trade and C ompetitiveness, paying particular attention to increasing Australia’s international economic competitiveness, with a focus on the Australia in the Asian C entury White Paper.

Brendan O’C onnor moves into C abinet to take the position of Minister for Small Business, as well as Minister for Housing and Homelessness. Small businesses are central to Australia’s economy and deserve C abinet-level representation.

Attorney-General Nicola Roxon will take on the additional portfolio of Emergency Management, which as I have made clear I believe must be a C abinet-level appointment.

Tony Burke will take on the additional role of V ice-President of the Executive C ouncil.

Ministrychanges

K ate Lundy is promoted to Minister for Sport and Minister for Multicultural Affairs, as well as Minister Assisting for Industry and Innovation.

David Bradbury is promoted to the Ministry as Assistant Treasurer, and in the newly-created position of Minister Assisting for Deregulation.

Jason C lare will take on the additional portfolio of Minister for Defence Materiel.

K im C arr will move to the crucial services delivery portfolio of Human Services. Minister Greg C ombet will continue to be responsible for manufacturing at a C abinet level.

I wish to thank Robert McC lelland for his many years of service in the Ministry.

I am also announcing a number of changes to Parliamentary Secretary responsibilities.

ParliamentaryS ecretarychanges

Jan McLucas will become Parliamentary Secretary to the Prime Minister in addition to her existing duties, and Richard Marles will assume wider responsibilities with the additional title of Parliamentary Secretary for Foreign Affairs.

Bernie Ripoll becomes Parliamentary Secretary to the Treasurer, while Sharon Bird becomes Parliamentary Secretary for Higher Education and Skills.

Jacinta C ollins will become Manager of Government Business in the Senate following Mark Arbib’s retirement.

I want to thank all Ministers who have served the Government so well in their current portfolios.

I will recommend to Her Excellency the Governor-General that the new Ministry be sworn in on Monday 5 March 2012.

Page 1 of 1 Changes to the Ministry| Prime Minister of Australia

23/10/2012 http://www.pm.gov.au/press-office/changes-ministry-0

