Search this site

Go

Home

Biographical details

Media Centre

Contact details

Department

Minister for Multicultural  Affairs

Links





Immigration Department advice on  Nauru, costings, no Coalition plan to  fund Nauru, Temporary Protection  Visas, ALP policy Wednesday, 25 January 2012

Interview with Lyndal Curtis, ABC News Breakfast

Lyndal Curtis: Chris Bowen, welcome to ABC News Breakfast.

Chris Bowen: Thank you, Lyndal. Good morning.

Curtis: The Opposition's always said that Nauru could be opened  quickly, yet the brief from your departmental officials shows that  work would involve putting up ablution blocks, putting in permanent  water supplies, refurbishing all major buildings, putting in kitchen  facilities. Why do you think that couldn't be done within three  months?

Bowen: Well, the departmental advice that you refer to, Lyndal,  which I'm releasing today, does indicate that there is a lot of work  to be done on Nauru before we would have a detention facility  capable of habitation. Now, the Opposition has always denied this,  they've always pretended that it was there ready to go. This  advice, based on a report from departmental officials who visited  Nauru, inspected the sites, makes clear that that is simply not true  at all.

Now, this advice was commissioned by the Government as part of  our negotiations with the Opposition, because we said to the  Opposition we were prepared to reach a compromise with them  which involved Nauru. Now that meant assessing the full  opportunities and challenges and costs involved, in a very  meaningful and serious way, in establishing the detention centre at  Nauru. And, these are the things the Government would have to  take into account, any government would have to take into  account, when considering whether to open a detention centre on  Nauru.

Curtis: But the advice states that the proposal would involve a  higher level of security than was previously had at Nauru and also  a better standard of accommodation, not the four to a room that  there was previously. Why would either of those things be  necessary?

Bowen: Well, let's be clear, Lyndal: the report also makes clear  that the savings from a lesser level of security, which you could  have, are minimal compared with the overall costs. And also, the  report makes clear the department's expert advice on the safe  level of accommodation at Nauru. So the department has  assessed the sites and assessed how many people you could  accommodate there safely, both for the detainees, the asylum

seekers, and for staff.

And so the Opposition's always very quick to say that on Nauru the  detention facility would be run to Australian standards. The Leader  of the Opposition's said that several times. Australian standards  include a consideration of what is a safe level of the number of  people per unit, per building. So I saw on your show yesterday,  Lyndal, Mr Morrison, in his performance saying he would kick up a  stink if he got a costing like this and he got a report like this.

Chris Bowen MP Minister for Immigration and Citizenship

Page 1 of 3 Immigration Department advice on Nauru, costings, no Coalition plan to fund Nauru, ...

5/06/2012 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2012/cb182079.htm

Well, there's a pattern here, Lyndal. The Navy says that turning  back the boats is unsafe and the Opposition says, 'We don't want  to hear it'. The Department of Immigration says that there are real  challenges and expenses in opening a detention centre on Nauru  and, 'We don't want to hear it'. Well, Mr Morrison might need a  briefing, a refresher course, on the Charter of Budget Honesty and  it would not be appropriate for a minister to tell the department how  they should do their costings. The department makes a costing  based on their expert advice, their best assessment on what it  would cost and the appropriate way forward, and then it's up to the  Government and the minister of the day whether or not to go down  that road.

Curtis: But the departmental advice makes clear that the costing  of $2 billion for operational and capital costs doesn't include costs,  say, of any aid to Nauru. Luxury resorts have been opened, built  for less than a billion dollars. Surely this cost does seem rather  high?

Bowen: Well, it's a capital cost of just over $300 million, Lyndal, is  what the department's advice is, and detention centres are  expensive to build. They're expensive to build on the mainland.  They're expensive to build on Christmas Island, as Christmas  Island was, and they're more expensive the further you go away  from Australia when you look at all the costs involved. The  operational costs are a different matter.

Now, here's a challenge for Mr Morrison, if he disputes these  costs: well, let him prepare and deliver his own and let him explain  how he's funding them. But the Charter of Budget Honesty would  make it clear that when you're looking at capital expenditure, you  are guided by the advice by those who actually have to deliver the  infrastructure on the ground as to how much it would cost. Now,  the Opposition went to the last election promising a detention  centre at Nauru in a matter of weeks after their election, if they  were elected. They issued no costings at all, certainly no funding  plan. This just adds to the Coalition's budget black hole and the  savings that they've already had to find.

Curtis: You suggested in your talks with the Opposition that you  would look at reopening Nauru, you would look at temporary  protection visas; two things Labor has long argued for. Even if you  did strike an agreement with the Opposition, would you have  problems with your own backbench on both of those things and are  you expecting to hear from backbenchers when you have a  strategy, when they're called to Canberra for a strategy meeting,  before Parliament sits this year?

Bowen: Well, Lyndal, we've had many Caucus discussions about  this issue, of course, and it's an issue with strong views. I, on  behalf of the Cabinet, have put the very strong position that we  need to have a deterrent to people arriving in Australia by boat.  I've also put the very strong view, both in the Caucus and to the  National Conference, where the Government carried the day, that  we needed those measures in place. Also, that we wanted to  increase the refugee intake. Australia takes more refugees per  head than any other country in the world at the moment. I want to  see us do even more. We take the third highest number of  refugees around the world. I'd like to see us move into being the  second highest refugee resettlement country in the world, but as  part of an orderly process with those measures in place.

So, of course, there's a variation of views within the Labor party on  this issue, there always have been. But I'll argue very strongly in  every party forum, from the Cabinet to the Caucus to the National  Conference, where again, as I say, we carried the day, that we  need measures in place. In relation to Temporary Protection Visas,  I offered an inquiry to the Opposition to assess their effectiveness.  They've rejected that out of hand. I'd like to know what they have  to hide in relation to a full and proper and transparent inquiry as to  whether Temporary Protection Visas would work or not.

Page 2 of 3 Immigration Department advice on Nauru, costings, no Coalition plan to fund Nauru, ...

5/06/2012 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2012/cb182079.htm

Curtis: Chris Bowen, thank you very much for your time.

Bowen: Thank you, Lyndal.

See: Index of Speeches

URL:  http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2012/cb182079.htm  Last update: Wednesday, 25 January 2012 at 15:18 AEST

Home Copyright & Disclaimer Privacy Department of Immigration and Citizenship

Page 3 of 3 Immigration Department advice on Nauru, costings, no Coalition plan to fund Nauru, ...

5/06/2012 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2012/cb182079.htm

