SBS Annual Showcase event Tuesday 30 October 2012

Introduction

It is always a pleasure to be here at the SBS Annual Showcase.

This is an occasion to look back at the great things that have been achieved, and those to come.

The last year was rich and productive, compelling and thought-provoking. It challenged and buoyed  Australians in the characteristically SBS way.

It pleases me to say that the year ahead promises to be an even better one.

SBS

In our multicultural society, SBS is one of our most important and valued institutions. It is much more  than just a broadcaster.

It plays a special and distinctive role in Australia’s social, cultural and media landscape. It explores  diversity and revels in its complexity, and it delivers programs that would otherwise never be made or  seen.

Awards and statistics

In the past year, SBS has continued to build on its reputation for stimulating content.

The landmark history series Once Upon a Time in Cabramatta explored the experiences of Vietnamese  migrants in Cabramatta. It made Australian broadcasting history in January when it simulcast on SBS  Two with Vietnamese subtitles.

The second series of the ground-breaking Go Back to Where You Came From reframed the refugee and  asylum seeker debate. The first series received national and international acclaim, most notably winning  the Golden Rose at the prestigious Rose D’Or Awards. This was the first time it has been awarded to an  Australian program or broadcaster.

The documentary Immortal, on the work of Noble Prize-winning Australian scientist Professor Elizabeth  Blackburn, was also recognised internationally. It won an international News and Documentary Emmy in  the Outstanding Science and Technology Programming category.

SBS was further honoured at the 2012 Asia-Pacific Broadcast Union Award ceremony in Seoul earlier this  month. Awards went to interactive digital radio station SBS PopAsia; coverage of the 2011 Tour de  France opening; and presenter Michelle Lovegrove.

In 2011-12 an average of 7.6 million people watched SBS each week, remaining steady in an increasingly  competitive media landscape. SBS online received an average 1.7 million unique browsers each month in  2011-12, a 15 per cent increase from 2010-11.

SBS is broadcast in more than 60 languages across two radio networks, double the number of languages  used on the BBC Worldwide.

To put it simply, Australians appreciate and engage with SBS across all its platforms.

Funding

I was very pleased to be able to deliver a boost to SBS funding in the 2012-13 Budget.

This comes ahead of the triennium funding round, which has been postponed a year. The postponement  will allow the outcomes of the Convergence Review to be considered in the context of the coming  triennium.

In the recent budget the government provided SBS with additional funding of $158.1 million over five  years. This is the most significant funding boost the SBS has ever had. It represents a 27 per cent  increase on its core funding over the next four years.

This additional funding has allowed SBS to address a broad range of immediate pressures. It has also  enabled it to adapt to the changing media environment and upgrade its technology.

It takes the total appropriation for SBS to $247.5 million in 2012-13 alone.

Page 1 of 2 SBS Annual Showcase | Senator Stephen Conroy | Minister for Broadband, Communi...

18/06/2013 http://www.minister.dbcde.gov.au/media/speeches/2012_-_minister_speeches/017

National Indigenous Television service (NITV)

The government has provided $63 million over four years for Australia’s first-ever dedicated Indigenous  free-to-air television channel.

This national free-to-air Indigenous television service is built on the foundations of the existing NITV  service. It greatly expands the availability of a culturally specific indigenous broadcast content for all  Australians.

I thank and congratulate SBS and NITV for the successful integration.

Since 1 July, SBS has been operating a service similar to the former NITV service. This has been  broadcast on existing subscription platforms and on the free-to-air VAST service.

The new free-to-air service will be formally launched in the coming weeks. The former NITV Director of  Content, Tanya Denning, has taken on the role of the new Channel Manager and I congratulate Tanya on  her appointment.

The new channel will realise the government’s aims of increasing the amount and quality of original  Australian Indigenous content on free-to-air television.

As you know the Prime Minister on Sunday released the Australia in the Asian Century White Paper. It  was fitting that on Sunday night, SBS was broadcasting the 2012 Asia-Pacific Song Festival.

As described on the SBS website, the festival is:

“viewed by millions throughout Asia, this cultural event showcases the very best K-pop, J-pop, C-pop and  music from member nations of the Asia Pacific Broadcast Union.”

Australia has at least one media outlet that provides content from and coverage of the region.

Conclusion

SBS continues to deliver; its list of achievements is long and impressive.

Its story-telling unites and binds Australians.

The Gillard government is proud to support the SBS... and to see the many facets of our nation and the  world that it presents.

Thank you.

From the Minister

Gillard Government to boost digital skills

Students in years 5 to 10 across the country will be the focus of a new program to encourage more people to pursue a  career in information and communications technology (ICT).

Page 2 of 2 SBS Annual Showcase | Senator Stephen Conroy | Minister for Broadband, Communi...

18/06/2013 http://www.minister.dbcde.gov.au/media/speeches/2012_-_minister_speeches/017

