Transcript of interview with Lyndal Curtis on ABC News 24

27 February 2012 SCT021/2012

Topic: Labor Leadership ballot

LYNDAL CURTIS: We’re joined now by the Regional Australia Minister, Simon Crean. Simon, welcome to  the ABC News 24.

SIMON CREAN: Thank you. It’s a pity we have to be here in these circumstances, but good to be here.

LYNDAL CURTIS: The vote is set, Julia Gillard will win by about 70, Kevin Rudd will get, maybe, 30.  Is  that enough to be considered a resounding victory by the Prime Minister?

SIMON CREAN: Of course.  And it’s a victory that should end what has been described as a farce over  the course of the last couple of weeks, in particular.  But it’s been building over a period of time.

But it’s incumbent on everyone out of this to put the past behind us and build for the future.  We can win  the next election.  But we won’t do it if we’re disunited.  We won’t do it if we’re clouding out our message.   We can do it because we’ve got a strong message and a conviction.

LYNDAL CURTIS: Is that really possible, after the last few days when we’ve seen ministers, such as  yourself, trying to tell the Australian population and, indeed, the Caucus, remind them what life was like  under Kevin Rudd, as you saw it.  Is it possible to put some of that bitterness back in the box?

SIMON CREAN: Well, I believe it is.  But it wasn’t just reminding them of that.  It was reminding them of  two core values. The party’s bigger than the individual and you’ve got to get behind the leader.

Now, I’ve been consistent in that view all of my life, so I can hardly be criticised of taking a different view  on this occasion.

The fact that this has been a much more public exercise is a reason for it.  But today, Kevin Rudd and  Julia Gillard will be judged by their peers.  That’s hour prime ministers are made.  The public does not  vote for a prime minister, no matter how many people think that might be the case.  They vote for parties.   The party that forms the largest number of seats in the Parliament forms the Government and the party  elects the leader.  And it’s the party caucus that makes the judgement.  And overwhelmingly, it will make  the judgement today for Julia Gillard.

LYNDAL CURTIS: Julia Gillard’s been playing what I’ve described as a long game with the difficult policy  implemented - got through the Parliament in the first year, then spends the rest of the term implementing  and selling it.  Even if things don’t seem to be travelling too much better for Labor, does the party have  any option but to stick with the leader they have and the one they will vote back in today?

SIMON CREAN: The party’s got to restore discipline, and people have got to understand what the contest  is about.  It is about governing the country.  It is about creating prosperity for fair distribution.  It is about  those things - all of us who joined the Labor Party came together and collectively decided.

This is not a contest about individuals.  It’s a contest about the future of the country.  And, quite frankly, in  this exercise recently, Kevin seems to think that he’s competing in “PM Idol” when, in fact, the true  decision is “Our Caucus Rules”.

LYNDAL CURTIS: But popularity, the public liking what you have to offer, is a part of the mix. It’s not the  only part of the mix, but it’s part of the mix isn’t it?

SIMON CREAN: It is.  But I think that, from time to time, when tough decisions are taken, unpopular  decisions - and I’ve been in many governments in which decisions were unpopular.  Whether it was to do  superannuation, whether it was to do Medicare, whether we had to defend it when the Howard  Government was trying to dismantle it, these are all tough decisions that position you in the public mind  and they’ll have strong views around those issues.

But, in the end, what they want is leadership.  What they want is knowing that a government that has  been elected is going to act in their interests.  Not in self-interest.  And I think that what they will come to  understand, if we can put this madness behind us, get on with the task of explaining better what it is we’ve  done to date, what we intend to do for the future, I think, come the next election, we certainly can win the  faith back again.

LYNDAL CURTIS: There’s a lot of talk that Julia Gillard doesn’t have the trust of the Australian people,  that while she may be seen as a strong and determined leader, people don’t trust her.  Do you think that  is a problem?

SIMON CREAN: Well - but this too is a question that has to be faced up to.  It’s a question that has to be  restored.  But if that is the assertion, then what’s the assertion in terms of the Caucus where less than a  third will be voting for Kevin.  In other words, the Caucus trusts Julia over Kevin.  And if it’s the will of trust,  again, it’s the dichotomy between the public perception and the reality of those that have to work with the  respective leaders.

A A A

search

Page 1 of 2 Transcript of interview with Lyndal Curtis on ABC News 24

27/07/2012 http://www.minister.regional.gov.au/sc/pressconf/2012/SCT021_2012.aspx

LYNDAL CURTIS: But you could be pretty much guaranteed that members of Caucus are going to vote  Labor, so you need the public, who may not necessarily be thinking of voting Labor to see that.

SIMON CREAN: I think it was interesting the other day in the opinion polls, the one that was done - the  Fairfax one, I think it was, that whilst one on one Kevin came out in front of Julia, it was evenly split as to  whether there should be a change.

Now, I think that this is what people need - it depends on the question that’s asked, Lyndal, and the  question that’s asked in the Caucus today is who do you want to lead the party and, therefore, continue  as Prime Minister.  Overwhelmingly, the decision by those people who had to go and fight these causes in  their electorates, sell the message, overwhelmingly, that will be a vote of confidence for Julia.

LYNDAL CURTIS: Today concentrates on the leadership, but have members of the Cabinet and the  wider ministry, do you believe, asked themselves the question whether they’re doing enough - a good  enough job, whether they should lift their own performance in order to help her?

SIMON CREAN: I think we all have to lift our performance.  But the ability to lift performance is going to  be significantly enhanced if there’s a pledge of unity. Now Kevin’s made that pledge.  He’s got to honour  it.  And so too…

LYNDAL CURTIS: Do you believe he will?

SIMON CREAN: He must.  He must.  But most importantly, those that have supported him should take  the lead that Anthony Albanese made on the weekend, and that is this is the opportunity to make a  decision, because it’s been brought to a head.  But after this, we have to get on with the task of healing,  but, most importantly, of selling what is a very good message, what has been a good government, but a  government that has had difficulty getting its message out.

LYNDAL CURTIS: There’s a question in life that you learn from the mistakes of your - of the past.  It’s  been - some have said it was a mistake not to say in 2010 why you got rid of Kevin Rudd.  What have  you learned?

SIMON CREAN: Well, I think that should have been better explained, just as we should have better  explained the mess before we got into the MRRT.  That’s why we should have better explained why we  backed away from the carbon pollution reduction scheme.  We should have better explained what we’re  trying to do with asylum seekers.  It’s true.  I mean, we haven’t done things well, but that’s not just a  responsibility that falls on one person.  That too is a collective responsibility.  And, I think, the sooner we

understand that our strength, if you like, is through the collective, and acting as one, and using every  opportunity to promote as one, rather than present the divisions, the sooner we go back to the former - what we’ve been good at, and when we’ve put our mind to it, the people have continued to give us their  trust.

That’s what we did during the Hawke and Keating days, where we kept getting returned time after time.

That’s what we should be able to position our for… ourselves for this time, because this country is in a  unique position.  We’re going through the greatest transformation the world has ever seen and Australia is  better placed than most to take account of it.

Now sure, there’s a lot of restructuring and change going on.  We are an economy in transition.  But who  is best to help make the transition?  It’s always been Labor governments that have had regard for people  in workplaces that have had to make the change.  And it’s always been Labor governments that,  fundamentally, have understood the importance of markets and the importance of encouraging markets  and investment.

That’s what we’ve got to back - get back to.  And if we do it, not only do we set the country up for  greatness, I think the people will see a party and a government that deserves re-election.

LYNDAL CURTIS: Simon Crean, thank you very much for your time.

SIMON CREAN: My pleasure

ENDS

Print

Last Updated: 27 February, 2012

Page 2 of 2 Transcript of interview with Lyndal Curtis on ABC News 24

27/07/2012 http://www.minister.regional.gov.au/sc/pressconf/2012/SCT021_2012.aspx

