CHRIS BOWEN MP

MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP  *TRANSCRIPT*

INTERVIEW WITH MARIUS BENSON, ABC NEWSRADIO

FRIDAY, 17 FEBRUARY 2012



SUBJECTS: Community detention, offshore processing, boat arrivals.

MARIUS BENSON: Chris Bowen, are asylum seekers arriving in Australia  receiving packages worth $10,000 to furnish their circumstances and provide  them with DVDs and TVs?

CHRIS BOWEN: No, and let’s just go through the facts here, Marius. In October  2010, we announced that we would move the majority of families and children  into the community - out of detention centres - because that’s the right thing to  do. And what we don’t Do is drop people off at Central Station and say, ‘There  you go, you’re on your own’.

We do work with Red Cross, we provide very basic support, very basic essential  items for a house, and we work with that family. And when the family leaves the  house - ie. when they are granted a visa - that material stays in the house for  the next family. So this is appropriate and some of the shrill commentary we’ve  seen this morning is quite inappropriate.



BENSON: So can you give us an idea of what those basic provisions cost?

BOWEN: Well, as I say, they receive basic household goods. Obviously they  receive, houses have ovens and fridges and a television. If there’s a baby  involved we provide a basic pack of baby material: blankets, a pram or what-have-you. And the cost varies from house to house, of course. But the key thing  here, Marius, is that that material stays in the house for the next family; it’s not  a handout.

And I saw Tony Abbott this morning, for example, saying that it was rolling out  the red carpet for asylum seekers. That sort of shrill commentary, which just  does nothing to contribute to the debate, is quite inappropriate from the Leader  of the Opposition.

BENSON: So that’s inaccurate, ‘the red carpet’?

BOWEN: Absolutely, absolutely. We have a robust system, but we treat people  appropriately. Now, what I’d like to know is what’s the alternative? Do you keep  families and children in detention? Is that Mr Abbott’s plan? Or do you drop them  at Central Station and say, ‘You’ve got to look after yourself, we’re not going to  provide you with any basic support’? If you’re going to criticise what we do, tell  us what the alternative is.



BENSON: Tony Abbott was taking about detention this morning.

BOWEN: Well if Tony Abbott thinks that detention is a red carpet then he has a  very different view of life than me. I spend a fair bit of time in detention centres  and Mr Abbott’s been to detention centres too and I wouldn’t describe them as  ‘red carpet’.

BENSON: How many people are now going into the community?

BOWEN: Well, look, since that announcement in October 2010 we have  approved 3,000 people for community release under that program. Many of  those, most of those have gone on to receive protection visas, of course, and we  do have a situation where now families and children are moved out of detention

into the community after a couple of months of being processed. But this has  been the case since 2010, and it should be the case and it will continue to be the  case.

BENSON: Arrivals are not attracting the attention they did previously. What’s  the rate of arrival now? There was a day just recently when 200 people were  picked up.

BOWEN: Yes, that’s right, Marius. We have seen a lull in January, but I expect  that to cease and I expect to see continued arrivals, I’ve said that all along. The  reason I continue to expect arrivals is that we don’t have offshore processing in  place because the Government and the Opposition have not reached agreement,  despite the fact the Government has agreed to open a detention centre on Nauru  and have an independent review of the merits of Temporary Protection Visas if  the Government’s legislation was passed, and Tony Abbott has said no to his  own policy.

BENSON: So with that stand-off politically, the onshore detention or onshore  processing is going to be the reality into the future?

BOWEN: As I’ve consistently said, Marius, that is the only practical and legal  reality. If you don’t have legislation authorising offshore processing, then the  only alternative is onshore processing.

BENSON: What about Tony Abbott’s point that if news gets back to people that

they are provided with a string of facilities - which you say is basic and he says  is ‘red carpet’ -  that it will encourage more arrivals?

BOWEN: Well, if Tony Abbott was serious about discouraging arrivals he would  negotiate in good faith with the Government: point one. Point two: I don’t think  that people considering coming across the world and, you know, spending up to  $20,000 on a people smuggler would factor into the equation that they would be  supplied with some basic household goods as their claims were being processed.

BENSON: The number of arrivals last year was something like 6,000. Would you  anticipate a similar number this year or a greater number?

BOWEN: Marius, I don’t comment on intelligence but what I have said is that if  you don’t have a proper offshore processing deterrent in place as part of a  regional framework then you can expect arrivals of that magnitude, of the  magnitude we saw in 2010.

BENSON: Chris Bowen, thank you very much.

BOWEN: Good on you, Marius. Nice talking to you.

Ends





