

Campaign Transcript





TRANSCRIPT OF MINISTER BILL SHORTEN  INTERVIEW WITH JON FAINE  ABC 774  6 SEPTEMBER 2013



E & O E - PROOF ONLY  _____________________________________________________________



Subjects: Election campaign; Coalition’s shambolic costings; Coalition’s  foreign aid cut; Coalition’s cut to urban rail spending in Melbourne; FBT;  Mining Tax  _____________________________________________________________



JON FAINE: Andrew Robb, who is Shadow Minister for Finance from Tony  Abbott’s frontbench - Andrew Robb, good morning to you.

ANDREW ROBB: Good morning, Jon.

FAINE: And Bill Shorten, Minister for Education and Workplace Relations in the  Rudd Government. And according to the polls, the outgoing Rudd Government.  Bill Shorten, good morning to you.

BILL SHORTEN: Good morning Jon. Good morning Andrew.

ROBB: Good morning.

FAINE: It’s very simple - Tony Abbott’s case, Bill Shorten, is that your party  doesn’t deserve to continue to govern.

SHORTEN: Oh, I think his case is that if you vote for a Coalition Government you  will get cuts that you haven’t been told about. You will not ever get a commitment  about getting to surplus. We certainly won’t see a Metro Rail in Melbourne in the  foreseeable future. Schools will get not the same amount of funding that they  would under Labor. These are some of the problems. And jobs will be lost.

FAINE: So the negative campaigning comes straight back in. It’s not about what  Kevin Rudd and a Labor Government will do -



SHORTEN: Oh no -

FAINE: It’s about what might happen. Fear, scare-mongering -

SHORTEN: Sorry, you asked me about Tony Abbott. Yes, I agree, it is a  negative picture with them. In terms of us, our proposition to be re-elected is  simple. We believe in a good society. A good society has a quality education  system. It’s got a quality healthcare system. It’s got jobs at the centrepiece. It’s  got a National Broadband Network. It has superannuation lifting, so people get  decent retirement incomes. And it’s got greater support for small business.

FAINE: Andrew Robb, pure and simple, the Labor Party say don’t believe what  they’re telling us from the Liberal Party side - they’re going to promise all sorts of  things and then later on they’ll do something else.

ROBB: Well Jon, the Labor Party, unfortunately, is in a position where they can’t  defend their record. Their record is so appalling, they can’t defend that. And  they’re in such chaos, they’ve done nothing about really thinking about the future.  So the whole five weeks has just been a litany of negativity. And Bill jumped  straight back into it again this morning. I mean, that was his response.

FAINE: Isn’t it a bit rich for the party that for three years has been the party of  negativity to try and turn that around during the election campaign?

ROBB: No, no, no, no, no - the job -

FAINE: John Howard used to say you can’t fatten a pig on market day. And he’s  absolutely right.

ROBB: Exactly. The Opposition’s job, by definition - it’s called the opposition - is  to keep the government of the day accountable. And I think we’ve done a very  good job at that. We’re also responsible for presenting a solid alternative to the  people. And, you know, we have got in excess of 800 pages, 800 pages of  documents out there. Much of it has been out there for months. We’ve had  costings, much of that been out there for months. And we’ve got a clear vision for  what we will do for the future. So we have provided an alternative. And the  Government hasn’t. They’ve got less than 200 pages of material out there  describing what they might do in the future - a whole lot of thought bubbles.

FAINE: Yesterday’s announcements - we’ll go through some of these in a little  bit of detail. How do you continue to get cooperation from the Indonesian  Government on dealing with asylum seekers when you’re stripping $100 million  or more a year of foreign aid from what we provide to them?

ROBB: Well, we’re not cutting foreign aid -



FAINE: No, I didn’t say cutting all foreign aid -

ROBB: Right, no, no, we’re -

FAINE: “We are reducing by more than $100 million a year...”

ROBB: We are reducing the growth of foreign aid.

FAINE: Well, we don’t know how it’s distributed. You won’t tell us -

ROBB: No, no, well -

FAINE: Joe Hockey on TV last night said I won’t tell you.

ROBB: Well, I’m not- well, it has yet to be distributed. Because that increase has  yet to occur. Has the Government identified how it would distribute that $4.5  billion if they get back into office next week? How would they - it’s money that’s  programmed to be increased above the current levels of foreign aid, which we  will continue with, with an inflation factor. But we won’t, we will defer the increase  in the future. The bottom line is, Jon, we are currently borrowing from overseas  countries, paying interest on that money, and now giving that back to foreign -  we’re in debt. In deficit.

It’s, it’s stupid. Our view is the best thing to do is to spend that $4.5 billion on  economic infrastructure so that we can then afford a sustainable surplus and  then we can make decisions about looking after the world’s poor, with a  sustainable economic position.

SHORTEN: So, did Andrew Robb just say it’s stupid? Are you saying that the  plans we have for engaging in our neighbourhood, in our region, with foreign aid,  is stupid?

ROBB: I didn’t say that - I said it is -

SHORTEN: Alright, I just thought I heard you use the word “it’s stupid” in the  context of foreign aid.

ROBB: It is stupid to go ahead and commit money that we’re just going to borrow  from overseas to give back to people overseas. We’ve got to get into a  sustainable economic position, we’ve got to live within our means.

SHORTEN: If you want to engage in an Olympic Record stupid competition it is  stupid to offer to buy second-hand Indonesian fishing boats like you’re proposing.  That is a stupid idea. That is a Liberal idea. And it is a stupid idea, that every  Indonesian fisherman could front up and have a Liberal Government allocate

Commonwealth taxes - because not only, now, are you trying to stop the boats,  you’re trying to buy the boats.

ROBB: This is all a distraction, Jon. Yeah.

SHORTEN: Well, no, no, it’s your policy. It’s just your policy. It’s a stupid policy.

ROBB: It’s a distraction. We’re talking $4.5 billion which is serious, serious  money -

SHORTEN: So you don’t think $20 million -

ROBB: To go into -

SHORTEN: You’ve said you want to -

ROBB: It’s not a stupid policy to start with. That’s your definition.

SHORTEN: Oh, well it is mate. By my definition.

ROBB: Labor’s not in a strong position -

SHORTEN: How many boats are you going to buy with that $20 million?

ROBB: Labor is not in a strong position to talk about managing boat people,  when they’ve been responsible for over a 50,000 increase in the boat people  since you took office.

SHORTEN: Come on, Andrew.

ROBB: Do not give us lectures on how to manage boat people.

SHORTEN: Okay, Andrew.

FAINE: Bill Shorten, I suspect cutting foreign aid will play very well with swing  voters in marginal seats.

SHORTEN: Oh well, I hope not. Because -

FAINE: I reckon it will. This whole campaign has been about swinging voters in  marginal seats. And I reckon they’ll buy that. They’ll say -

SHORTEN: Well let me put the case for engaging in our region. A secure region  where kids - and we spend a lot more at home, let’s not run for this argument  that somehow foreign aid means we’re not doing anything at home. Foreign aid  is part of foreign policy. I think the Coalition’s policy to buy second-hand

Indonesian to discourage Indonesian fishermen is a stupid policy. But there was  something which everyone - which was said earlier, that Labor can’t run on its  record. I’ve just jotted down five things on our record.

The National Disability Insurance Scheme - established. Better infrastructure in  every school in Australia -

ROBB: With our support.

SHORTEN: Yeah, but we, let’s be honest on who thought of the idea. When we  get to the issue of jobs -

ROBB: [inaudible]

SHORTEN: There’s four launch sites, it’s been started. Jobs - we’ve created,  we’ve been in charge while nearly a million jobs have been created. Interest  rates are low. And inflation’s low. These are good accomplishments. The rest of  the world -

ROBB: They’re crisis levels, the interest rates.

SHORTEN: Sorry, but, as someone who pays a mortgage, as many people who  pay a mortgage know, lower interest rates are not unreservedly bad news as you  would make out. Anyone who lands at Tullamarine Airport after having been  overseas in the last five years knows that this country’s got more good going for  it than bad. And we’ve been the government which has been in place. So we  have a good record. And there’s 190,000 extra kids going to uni than when John  Howard was in power.

FAINE: You can’t start saying, though, that the situation with boats and our  relationship with Indonesia is something that the Labor Government can be  proud of. You just can’t, can you?

SHORTEN: There’s no question that our regional resettlement program, which  we’ve worked out with PNG, that is starting to have an impact.

ROBB: That is collapsing, Bill. Come on. Please.

SHORTEN: No, you guys want to make it collapse.

ROBB: How can you put 3000 people up there in that situation?

SHORTEN: So, you guys are going to cancel the PNG approach?

ROBB: No, no, no, no -

SHORTEN: No, of course not. Yeah.

ROBB: We’re not going to rely on that as our primary strategy.

SHORTEN: You guys have used the boats issue to try and scare people.

ROBB: We’re not going to send everyone there to a hellhole -

SHORTEN: You guys have tried to use the boats issue to scare people. The  reality is that -

FAINE: So have you.

ROBB: We stopped the boats, Bill.

SHORTEN: Yeah, yeah. You’re going to buy the boats!

ROBB: 30,000 still there in our community - can’t process.

SHORTEN: You guys love talking about the boats. And then you say on foreign  aid it’s not a -

ROBB:  What a waste. $11 billion. That money could’ve gone to foreign aid.

SHORTEN: Well it wouldn’t - you’d cut it.

ROBB: $11 billion. Could’ve gone to foreign aid.

SHORTEN: Well, you haven’t even costed your border protection.

ROBB: Yes we have. That’s not true. That is not true.

SHORTEN: Why don’t we talk about your costings and what we say - you say  we’re running a scare campaign on cuts. We would say, first of all, you’ve got it  wrong by not backing in Metro rail, which would see extra track laid in  Melbourne’s public transport network.

FAINE: Just on that point, Andrew Robb - can we confirm $75 million that was to  be allocated to doing some of the preparatory engineering work for metro rail,  that $75 million under Joe Hockey’s announcement yesterday is being  withdrawn?

ROBB: It’s being withdrawn.

FAINE: So you’re 100% committed only to road infrastructure? Nothing, not a  cent for rail?



ROBB: That’s right. That’s correct. That’s correct. But, there’s a, there’s an  important nuance here, Jon. We will support, as has traditionally been the case  with the Commonwealth, roads, rail freight, and ports. And, but, not urban rail,  right. And historically, the   states have taken responsibility for that. What we have done is increase the  Commonwealth contribution back to 80:20 for roads, from the 50:50 that this  government has typically now got to.

FAINE: Yes.

ROBB: And that will free up money for the states to put more money into their  urban rail. So they’ll have more money to do that.

FAINE: Okay, Joe Hockey says he’s not committed necessarily to getting the  budget back on balance straight away. Why not continue to spend money on vital  infrastructure that even Infrastructure Australia, the independent body, says is  urgently needed?

ROBB: We’re not saying don’t spend it - in fact, we are freeing up -

FAINE: No. You’re pulling it out.

SHORTEN: Just don’t come and see us.

ROBB: Hang on. What we’re saying is we’re going to now spend - pay 80% of  the road projects, and the states only contribute 20%. Under this government,  they’ve gone to 50:50.

FAINE: Yep.

ROBB: So the states have got less money if they’re putting it into roads. If we  free, if we take more of the responsibility for roads, it frees up money for the  states to do what they have traditionally done, and that is to fund urban rail.

SHORTEN: Well, but -

ROBB: And the second thing is -

SHORTEN: Sorry, just -

FAINE: I’ll come to you, Bill Shorten.

ROBB: On the budget, we are still borrowing $50 million each and every day.  This is after the biggest resources boom in our history, with terms of trade still  17% above the highest point of the Howard years. And yet, we’re still borrowing

$50 million - we have to start living within our means as a country.

FAINE: Alright, nine minutes to nine on 774 ABC Melbourne. Jon Faine with you,  with Andrew Robb, Shadow Finance Minister, Bill Shorten, Minister for Education  going hammer and tongs through til nine o’clock. Bill Shorten, right of reply on  that issue, on infrastructure.

SHORTEN: Just on, just on rail - there is no way that you can ever sort out road  congestion in Melbourne or in any of the big cities of Australia unless there is  viable public transport. We have costed a proposition with the former state  government about metro rail.

FAINE: Sure, but over six years, now, of a Labor Government - nothing’s been  done.

ROBB: Nothing, not a thing.

SHORTEN: Wait a second.

ROBB: Not a thing.

SHORTEN: Andrew, you’ve just said you’ll never do anything, so the good news  is -



ROBB: Pink batts, school halls, $900 cheques -

SHORTEN: I didn’t interrupt you. Go ahead and interrupt, and then I’ll have a go.  But just let me have a bit of clear air, mate. In terms of rail, Metro Rail - if you  catch a train in Melbourne, the only party you should vote for is Labor, because  we want to add additional track to the Melbourne underground. And when they  say that the state government will fill the void - if you think that this state  government’s going to fill the void, just ask those disability pensioners, as soon  as we increased the disability pension, we had the state government taking all of  the increase in rent which these disabled people had to go to court - we’ve just  heard it at 8:30 today, to take on the state government.  My experience of the State Government is if the feds don’t -

FAINE: Sure - we’re talking about road and rail.

SHORTEN: Yes, but my experience - Andrew Robb’s excuse for not doing  anything in urban rail is, oh well, we’ll leave that to the state government.

FAINE: My point to you -

ROBB: [Inaudible] We’ll give them more money -



SHORTEN: Just ask anyone who goes to a state school in Victoria or catches  the train -

FAINE: My point to you is the last time, over the terms now of the Labor  Government, Kevin Rudd and Julia Gillard, the infrastructure deficit has got  worse.

SHORTEN: No.

FAINE: So you can’t go and say trust us to do it on infrastructure.

SHORTEN: Sorry, let me then give you two simple facts which will demonstrate  our commitment to infrastructure. The amount of money spent by federal Labor  on infrastructure has doubled per head of population to when the Liberals were  last in power. The population of Australia hasn’t doubled. But the amount of  money spent on infrastructure by a Labor Government - second case in point  would be the Western Ring Road, near where I live. There’s now a third lane for  most of the Western Ring Road.

FAINE: Okay, I want to introduce a couple of other issues. And a point was made  on AM this morning, Andrew Robb, about $960 million of superannuation tax that  again is being reintroduced. It’s something that the Labor Party - tax on super for  low income earners - they got rid of it. Is it true that you’re going to reintroduce  it? $960 million worth back into revenue, taken from the superannuation of low  income earners?

ROBB: Ah, we -

SHORTEN: Yep.

ROBB: Said anything that’s funded, to be funded by the mining tax we cannot  afford because there’s no, there’s no money coming in on the mining tax, right?  So, all of those programs, some of which are quite worthwhile, they’re all funded  by borrowed money. As I said, we’re still borrowing $50 million a day.

FAINE: I understand all of that -

ROBB: The view on the other side is there’s some money tree out there -

FAINE: Can we just absolutely confirm, low income earners who got a tax break  on super are going to lose it?

ROBB: Well, this government has taken $3 billion off low income earners in their  super. That’s right isn’t it, Bill?



SHORTEN: [inaudible]

FAINE: They’ve done things to single mothers -

ROBB: $3.5 billion in the last -

FAINE: I’m trying to clarify your -

ROBB: A $1500 co-contribution for low income earners -

SHORTEN: The buzzer just went off, Andrew.

ROBB: And it went back to $500 -

SHORTEN: Yeah -

FAINE: I’m just trying to clarify your policy.

SHORTEN: Jon’s asked a straight question. You’re introducing a 15% tax on the  low paid.

ROBB: Bill, are you going to keep interrupting?

SHORTEN: Just trying to pursue the truth, big fella.

FAINE: It is $960 million -

ROBB: One set of rules for one, and on for the other.

FAINE: Tax on low income earners is being abolished -

SHORTEN: Oh, chin up.

FAINE: That concession is going to be reversed, is that right?

ROBB: What we have said is this is being paid for by borrowed money.

FAINE: Yep.

ROBB: Like a whole series of other initiatives.

FAINE: Yep.

ROBB: This is the political pain you have to take in order to get, in order to live  within your means and get, and get the books back in the black. Alright?



FAINE:  Bill Shorten -

ROBB: And that’s what we’re doing -

SHORTEN: We in the Labor Party -

ROBB: We will, when we get this economy in good shape, it’s like the foreign aid  issue, we will restore these things, once we’ve got sustainable surpluses.

SHORTEN:   Okay, three quick points.

FAINE: No, Bill Shorten, it’s a big rich for the Labor Party to say -

ROBB: $50 million a day.

FAINE: It’s concerned about low income earners when your changes to single  parents’ benefits has probably been the harshest thing that they’ve experienced.

ROBB: Yes.

SHORTEN: Let’s be really clear about - when the Libs say, when the  conservatives say that political pain has to be felt, why is it that they want to hand  the mining tax back to BHP Billiton, Rio Tinto, the richest companies in the world.  So they’re not feeling political pain.

ROBB: There’s no money coming from the mining tax, Bill.

SHORTEN: Three and a half million people -

ROBB: No money.

SHORTEN: You can interrupt, you can shout us down. Three and a half million  people earn less than $37,000 in this country. We scrapped the 15% tax they pay  on their super. The Conservatives are saying if you vote for them, not only will  they pay 15%, it’ll be retrospective - people who have had the saving will have it  taken off them. These guys have never seen a battler they don’t want to slug.

FAINE: Four minutes to nine, very quickly I want to deal with the car industry -

ROBB: No, you’re making it up.

FAINE: Fringe benefits tax -

SHORTEN: I’m not making it up. It’s a retrospective tax, Andrew.



FAINE: Bill Shorten, the car industry -

SHORTEN: It is a retrospective tax.

FAINE: Car industry, your Fringe Benefits Tax changes have clearly hit some  sales. Clearly have hit industry. Was it a mistake?

SHORTEN:   No, we don’t accept that it was a mistake. We certainly believe that  if you care about a car job in Australia, Labor’s your better bet. The conservatives  have said they will cut support for the car industry. And when you look at what  we’re doing in terms of helping people who work in the car industry, they send  their kids to schools. We’ve got a Better Schools policy.

ROBB: He’s - they’re - they’re the masters of spin. It’s just a classic. $1.8 billion.  Three thousand plus jobs. Half a million people affected. Most of them nurses,  doctors - you talk about lower income people.

SHORTEN: Doctors?

ROBB: Nurses.

SHORTEN: Doctors?

ROBB: Policemen, welfare workers, low income workers, 70% are in that  category.

FAINE: Okay, but if you do want to help the car industry -

SHORTEN: Yeah.

FAINE: Okay, but if you do want to help the car industry, Andrew Robb, direct  assistance has worked in the past.

ROBB: Well, we are still continuing with the assistance that was agreed to -

SHORTEN: You’re scrapping it. You’re scrapping -

ROBB: Hang on. We are not going ahead with an additional $500 million that the  Labor Party has promised. But we have retained, and we’re not, we have  retained the $1.8 billion Fringe Benefits Tax benefit. Plus $1.3 billion in the, in the  black in terms of our assistance to the car industry compared with the Labor  Party.

SHORTEN: Guys, you’ve never seen a manufacturing job you will back.



FAINE: One final - one final question for each of you. Bill Shorten, moving to  Kevin Rudd, with hindsight, a mistake?

SHORTEN: No. And in fact, the biggest mistake we’ve made was not holding the  Libs to account on their promises about a budget surplus. You know, on the 21st  of December last year, Tony Abbott said every year the Coalition’s in they’ll have  a surplus. On the 11th of August, he’d slipped to in the first term we’ll have a  surplus.

ROBB:  We were trusting your numbers.

SHORTEN: Yeah, hang on. Numbers? You guys - Andrew -

ROBB: Numbers. Your numbers - you’ve had the five biggest deficits in history.  Give me a break.

SHORTEN: Andrew, you guys are so ambitious now, you’ve said on the 25th of  August at your campaign launch that you’d be at surplus within a decade. And as  of yesterday, you said you won’t even give a date. If we don’t know what you’re  going to cut, if we don’t know what you’re-

ROBB: The budget is collapsing at $3 billion a week over the last ten weeks.

SHORTEN: You don’t know - you’ve got the signature policy of the paid parental  leave which helps some people, but not most. If you don’t know what you’re  going to cut, why on earth would someone vote for you?

FAINE: Andrew Robb, just finally for you - are you taking marching orders still  from the mining industry? And now, Gina Rinehart out saying she wants a  national mining day, and crims should pay if they want to get out of jail?

ROBB: We’re not taking any marching orders from anybody. The mining tax, all  it’s done is defer and stop -

FAINE: Mining tax, the carbon tax, development of Australia -

ROBB: The mining tax is so badly structured, it doesn’t raise any income. And  yet, the Government’s now spending the income - it was proposed it would raise  $44 billion, originally. Now it’s going to raise $4 billion over four years. And it’s  causing enormous -

SHORTEN: So it’s -

ROBB: Enormous disruption and disincentive for investment in Australia.



SHORTEN: So will you put a bigger mining tax on, or a smaller mining tax?

ROBB: No mining tax.

SHORTEN: We know if you’re a multi-national mining company, you’ll vote  Liberal.

ROBB: You’ll pay 45% of royalties and with corporate taxation.

ROBB: You’ve lived off the mining industry for the last six years.

SHORTEN: If you want a better school in Victoria, if you want public transport -

ROBB: Oh, rubbish.

SHORTEN: Vote Labor.

ROBB: This is rubbish, this is rubbish. The thing is, if you want stable  government, you don’t want another hung Parliament, you’ve got to vote for the  Coalition in both the House of Reps and the Senate.

FAINE: We haven’t even touched on the NBN and paid parental leave scheme  and so many other things -

SHORTEN: And if you want the NBN, vote Labor.

ENDS

Communications Unit: T 03 8625 5111   www.alp.org.au

Authorised by G. Wright, Australian Labor Party, 5/9 Sydney Avenue, Barton, ACT, 2600



