THE HON BRENDAN O’CONNOR MP  MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  ABC NEWS 24  TUESDAY, 30 APRIL 2013

SUBJECT: REGIONAL PROCESSING CENTRES

LYNDAL CURTIS: Brendan O’Connor welcome to ABC News 24. If we could start with something  your Opposition counterpart Scott Morrison has been saying this morning, is the Government  considering or has it decided to bring women and children back to Australia from the offshore  processing centres in Manus Island and Nauru?

BRENDAN O’CONNOR: Well we’ve made no decision and primarily these are operational  decisions made by the Department, as you know…

LYNDAL CURTIS: Is it under consideration?

BRENDAN O’CONNOR: As I say, we’ve made no decision on this. I haven’t been contemplating a  change to the composition of those on Manus Province because we made a decision, a difficult  decision, to ensure that we deter people getting on very unseaworthy vessels. I have to weigh  up how we look after people in centres, including in processing centres, against the backdrop of  seeing maritime fatalities. And it’s been advised, that is the Government has been advised by  the expert panel, that we need to put in place a deterrent. And of course one of the deterrents  is ensuring that people cannot, that is people smugglers cannot say that if you get on our vessels  then you’ll be in Australia. That has led to hundreds and hundreds of people dying at sea. It’s  happened now it’s happened in 2001 as well.

LYNDAL CURTIS: So it’s not currently being considered, bringing women and children back?

BRENDAN O’CONNOR: We’ve actually returned - we’ve actually had people come from Manus  Province including women and children when there’s been a need to. The composition will not  change on Manus Province, because if we were to do that we will see an increase of the  composition of people getting on unseaworthy vessels and we will see, therefore more likely an  increase in fatalities of children and women.

LYNDAL CURTIS: And the same for Nauru?

BRENDAN O’CONNOR: The same for both processing centres. In Nauru’s case, currently the  facility is for single adult males, but remembering we are continuing to finish the permanent  facility and that will also have a mix. It’s important to have a mix so that people do not lure  women and children on vessels on the basis that it is easier for them to go that way than access

the actual places that we’ve got, and have in fact increased, so that people can come in a safer  way if they are to be settled because they are a refugee.

LYNDAL CURTIS: What obligations then does Australia have to provide decent living conditions  for those asylum seekers transferred offshore, because we heard last night on 4 Corners from a  doctor who worked at Manus Island late last year saying it was a disaster medically, basic  supplies including oxygen, antibiotics, anaesthetics, sedatives and morphine didn’t arrive.

BRENDAN O’CONNOR: I don’t accept the premise of the assertions made by the person in  question who in fact has not worked there for some time. And some of the allegations or  assertions he made are just completely wrong. There’s no doubt when we were setting up the  temporary facility things had to be improved. And what I can say now - and I was there some  while ago - there have been improvements to the medical provisions, to the facilities there  generally, to the recreational activities. The providers we have there that are specialists in  undertaking care for children, we have health specialists, mental health specialists, we have very  good providers. And can I say in relation to transferring anybody to a processing centre, there is  a pre-screening. We would not send people to a processing centre in Manus Province without  being screened by medical practitioners. Now, I’m happy to take on board criticism or concerns  and look at those issues. We have responded to concerns for example by the Human Rights  Commission, the UNHCR report and we’ve responded to concerns that have been raised by my  own department.

LYNDAL CURTIS: Because the doctor did last night point out a case of a couple of children, one  with anaphylactic problems, one with blood problems, and he said the remoteness of Manus in  a potential problem because he said children get sick very quickly and there can be a 24 hour  delay between calling for a medical evacuation by air and the plane arriving.

BRENDAN O’CONNOR: We’re very, very conscious of that, that’s why there is a pre-screening so  that we would not transfer anybody, particularly children, without a pre-screening. And  secondly, in relation to some of the assertions he made, there is no record of a child that’s had  or needed blood transfusions. There is no record of some of the other assertions he’s made. We  had an issue about a child who may have had an allergy to a food, that was investigated.

There is no person that hasn’t been, in my view, particularly children, that hasn’t been properly  dealt with by medical staff there. And before we would even transfer people we would make  sure that they were able to be placed there. Now I’m not pretending this is an easy decision, it’s  a very difficult decision. But this is off the back of recommendations by three eminent  Australians, Angus Houston, Michael L’Estrange and Paris Aristotle who said we need to find a  way to break the cycle that allows people smugglers to lure children onto vessels.

LYNDAL CURTIS: But are you confident that you are sending them to a place where conditions  are, whether they be medical, whether they be conditions in terms of recreational facilities,  living conditions, are adequate?

BRENDAN O’CONNOR: I’ve described them as adequate and I’m not pretending that it’s a five  star amenity, but I have said that we need to ensure that firstly we have decent amenities, we  have decent food, we have the appropriately skilled staff, both in terms of providing education  to children, providing a decent health standard for children, we have very capable professional  Australian staff dealing with their general needs.

Can I say when I went there I of course examined the issues and I spoke to all the providers - all  of the providers that undertake different types of care for the men, women and children in the  centre. And when I spoke directly to the clients, those that are transferees, through translators  because many wouldn’t be able to speak English, for over one hour, on not one occasion did  they raise issues of amenities. Their biggest concern, and quite understandably so, was when  would their matters be processed. And that’s why I’ve been engaging with the PNG government  to make sure they are processed quickly, as quickly as can be done, so they can know their fate.  One of the biggest problems they’ve had is feeling a sense of an indefinite situation.

LYNDAL CURTIS: In fact it’s not just the people who spoke to 4 Corners, but it’s your own  department raising problems in its own submission to a parliamentary enquiry. The department  said, talking about Manus Island, there was no reliable power supply, limited drinking water,  unsafe power in wet conditions, the site was in a swampy area, there are limited recreational  facilities and boredom which led to a focus on the progress of refugee determination.

BRENDAN O’CONNOR: And that report is three months old, and the Secretary of the department  has written to the Chair of the Public Works Committee to explain what has been done to  attend to those things. And the fact that the department had, quite rightly, identified issues that  need to be addressed, have been addressed as contained in the letter of the Secretary of the  department to the Chair of the Public Works Committee shows that we have responded to that  and we should respond to that.

LYNDAL CURTIS: If you have responded to that and you believe the facilities are adequate now  will you allow the Human Right Commission president Gillian Triggs to visit?

BRENDAN O’CONNOR: Well we’ve never precluded anybody, and just by way of explaining who  is invited, firstly we do have to get the consent of the PNG government. It’s not Australian  sovereignty. But of course UNHCR has visited and have remarked upon the centre. Red Cross  has visited. We have very significant bodies who have very good reputations examining the  centres. And the only issue that there’s been in relation to the Human Rights Commissioner has  been a jurisdictional one, not one I would determine. But I have no problem whatsoever in the  Commissioner visiting. It’s not an issue for me to make that decision as to whether she has  jurisdiction over that centre. Her jurisdiction is primarily that within Australia.

LYNDAL CURTIS: One final question, is there any evidence, any evidence at all, that offshore  processing is providing any deterrence to asylum seekers?

BRENDAN O’CONNOR: That has been the constant and consistent advice from our agencies. It  was the advice of the expert panel, and we have…

LYNDAL CURTIS: But the expert panel was before this policy was implemented. Is there evidence  in the policy being implemented that people are not getting on boats because they might be  processed offshore?

BRENDAN O’CONNOR:  That is the advice. Clearly it hasn’t deterred sufficiently because we have  not implemented the recommendations. We’ve been stymied by the Greens and the Coalition in  preventing all of the recommendations being realised. But the advice I had when I was Home  Affairs Minister and the advice I continue to receive now is if we do not put in deterrents  including having a processing centre, but it can’t be done alone, then if we don’t do that we’ll  see more people seek to get on these unseaworthy vessels on perilous journeys that lead  unfortunately on many occasions to deaths at sea.

LYNDAL CURTIS: Brendan O’Connor thank you very much for your time.

BRENDAN O’CONNOR: Thank you.



