

Julie Bishop MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS



Newsline interview with Jim Middleton

28 May 2013

Subjects: ASIO cyber security scare, border protection, foreign aid

E&OE…

JIM MIDDLETON Julie Bishop is Australia’s shadow Foreign Minister. Julie Bishop, good  to be talking to you.

JULIE BISHOP Thank you Jim, good to be with you.

JIM MIDDLETON How seriously do you think these allegations will damage Australia’s  relations with China?

JULIE BISHOP Well cyber security is a significant issue for all nations including Australia.  Currently these are allegations and we don’t yet have the evidence as to who’s behind it.

I think that if the government does have evidence that it is State sponsored hacking then it  should raise it at the highest possible levels but it would be naive to assume that hacking only  comes from State sponsored sources. There are criminal syndicates, there are terrorist  organisations, there are individuals across the globe who are engaging in hacking activities.  Not all of it is State sponsored by any means. JIM MIDDLETON If these allegations do turn  out to be true do you think that Australia can have the strategic partnership with China which  was agreed when Julia Gillard visited Beijing just a few weeks ago?

JULIE BISHOP Australia must continue to have a good working relationship with China  through good times, through bad times. That’s the nature of diplomatic relations and China is  our largest trading partner. We have deepened the relationship over a number of years. It is  important as China is a rising economy, a rising power, we are both in the same region and

we need to work closely and cooperatively together on a range of issues.

JIM MIDDLETON The initial response to the allegations, do you think the Australia  Government appeared too worried about upsetting Beijing because Australia’s so dependent  on trade with China for its prosperity?

JULIE BISHOP Well I was intrigued that the Attorney-General’s response was ‘no  comment’. I can appreciate there may be security concerns and considerations but ‘no  comment’ didn’t seem to fulfil his responsibilities as the Attorney-General in charge of these  areas but until such time as the government has evidence it is speculation and I hope that if  the government does determine who was behind this hacking attack then they will raise it  with the appropriate authorities.

What it does mean is we have got to be vigilant, to ensure that our security systems and  networks are secure and able to be resistant to hacking activities by a range of entities and  organisations that seem intent on breaking through our systems.

JIM MIDDLETON On a related subject, what would a Coalition Government do if you are  elected in September to ease the pressure on Australia’s intelligent services caused by the big  rise in security assessments required to process asylum seekers arriving in Australia?

JULIE BISHOP Well Jim, as you know we are not taking anything for granted but on the  hypothetical that we were to win the next election the Coalition would put in place its policies  to stop the flow of people coming by boat via the people smuggling trade. That would be one  of our first priorities to work with Indonesia and Sri Lanka and other countries to dismantle  these people smuggling syndicates.

We will put in place temporary protection visas and we will turn boats back where it is safe to  do so.

JIM MIDDLETON Would you remove the efficiency dividend, effectively, the cut in  funding, which the intelligence services says are impeding their ability to do their job. How  can your commitments be taken seriously if you don’t?

JULIE BISHOP Should we be elected to government we will have a very close look at what  has occurred over a number of years in terms of funding for our intelligence agencies. I note  that the Prime Minister in Question Time today focused on the increasing cost to ASIO but I  believe she was focusing on capital costs for the new building rather than operating costs  where the problem lies.

Once we see the final budget figures in the pre-election budget then we will be in a position  to know where we can restore funding and where we can’t.

JIM MIDDLETON Ten thousand boat people have turned up so far this year. To process  them if you do come to power is going to require a restitution of that funding would it not if  what the intelligence agencies say is the case, that is, they cannot do their job properly under  their current financial circumstances.

JULIE BISHOP Well Jim, this is the debacle that the Labor Government have created - all of  its own making. To unpick the laws that were working and have absolutely no solutions at all

to the fact that the people smuggling trade appears to be flourishing in Sri Lanka and  Indonesia and elsewhere and have no plan to stop the boats. In fact the Prime Minister always  falls back on her so called Malaysia Solution but now we are seeing 800 boat arrivals  occurring in just one week it’s quite evident that this Malaysia solution would have been  exhausted in just seven days.

The Prime Minister has to accept reality and drop the pretence that she has a Malaysia  solution and adopt the policies that the Coalition have, that have been proven to work, and  that includes introducing temporary protection visas and turning the boats back, to send a  very strong message to the people smugglers that Australia will not be played for fools by the  people smuggling trade. Of course it’s going to take time to clear the detention networks and  the applications backlog. We have done it before, in fact I seem to recall that when we left  office in 2007 there were only four people who had arrived by boats still in the detention  network. So we can clear it and we will do it again.

JIM MIDDLETON One final subject - you met Bill Gates during his whirlwind visit to  Canberra. He’s express disappointment in the delay yet again in boosting Australia’s foreign  aid to 0.5 per cent of Gross National Income. Would a Coalition government restore that  money if you win office? Did you tell him that?

JULIE BISHOP We have said publicly that we remain committed to 0.5 per cent of Gross  National Income for our foreign aid budget. Labor had committed to reaching that target by  2015 but they pushed it out 12 months in last year’s budget, and in this year’s budget they  pushed it out further again.

They also raided the foreign aid budget to the tune of $375 million dollars to plug a hole in  the blow out in the border protection, the detention network issue that we were speaking  about earlier. They have taken $375 million dollars from the aid budget to deal with onshore  processing of asylum seeker claims and I claim that that is not a proper use of overseas  development assistance. For a start, it’s not overseas and secondly, it’s not development  assistance so I don’t think that it meets that criteria.

I talked about a whole range of issues with Bill Gates. He is passionate about health and  disease prevention, particularly in our region and we talked about his plans for Papua New  Guinea and other countries in our region and I’m sure that should we be elected to  government there are a number of partnerships that we can enter into with the Gates  Foundation and associated organisations to help control disease, Malaria, HIV, TB, other  health issues in our region.

JIM MIDDLETON So I take it that if you regard the use of this money as inappropriate you  would restore that funding to what you say is genuine development assistance.

JULIE BISHOP The government had told us that there was going to be a $1.5 billion dollar  surplus in 2013 and we now find there is a $19 billion deficit so all the budget forecasts and  assumptions have been thrown out the door. We are going to have to start again to find what  money can be spent in what areas. We remain committed to goal of 0.5% of Gross National  Income, we just can’t say when that can be achieved given the damage that has been done to  budget forecasts and the budget surplus, which is now a massive deficit - and a deficit for  years to come it would seem.

JIM MIDDLETON Julie Bishop, thank you very much.

JULIE BISHOP It’s been my pleasure. Thank you Jim.

- Ends -



