





Sky News Australia - AM Agenda

Subject: Kevin Rudd's visit to Indonesia

Transcript, E&OE, proof only

4 July 2013

LAURA JAYES: But I want to turn now to our top story, and that is  Indonesia and Kevin Rudd preparing to go there this afternoon. Our  chief political reporter, Kieran Gilbert, is in Jakarta. He joins me now.

Now, Kieran, the Prime Minister is obviously hoping to get some  progress on asylum seekers, but he's conceding mistakes have been  made in the past. How significant is that?

KIERAN GILBERT: Well, it is significant, Laura, for - he needed to do  two things upon his return to the prime ministership. One is to  explain how we've got here with thousands of asylum seeker arrivals,  and two is to provide some plan to fix it. Well, the first thing he's  done is make this concession, and that is part of the explanation of  this problem. It's not a total concession, as you heard at the start of  the program. What he said was simply not that the original policy of  dismantling the Howard approach was wrong, but that they were too

slow to respond when we saw an influx of asylum seekers from Sri  Lanka in 2009.

The second thing is how do they fix it? Well, this visit is an important  part of that, Laura. He does need something concrete, some progress  to enhance cooperation with this very important neighbour to our  north.

LAURA JAYES: Realistically, though, Kieran, what is Kevin Rudd going  to secure out of these meetings?

KIERAN GILBERT: Laura, it comes at a very interesting time. There  are annual talks, these ones, between the Australian-Indonesian  leadership, but these are unusually significant because they come  just a few months out from the federal election, a week after Mr  Rudd returned to the prime ministership, and that speech were - a  news conference where he warned that the Coalition policy could  lead to conflict.

Now, politically, if the Indonesians were to distance themselves from  that Coalition policy, that would be a win for Mr Rudd, although I  believe President Yudhoyono's far too diplomatic to rebuke Tony  Abbott publicly, but that's the politics of this visit and that contrast  and we wants to contrast that with is some progress, as I say, in  terms of enhanced cooperation. I've heard they're considering tens  of millions of dollars possibly for the Indonesian agencies, maybe  enhanced processing, but either way, it's going to cost a lot more.

I spoke to the Foreign Minister, Bob Carr. He's been here recently in  Jakarta and I spoke to him before his departure from Australia as to  just what we might expect out of these talks.

[Interview with Bob Carr, Minister for Foreign Affairs]

KIERAN GILBERT: Foreign Minister, thanks for your time.

BOB CARR: Pleasure.

KIERAN GILBERT: With this upcoming visit by the Prime Minister,  there are some suggestions that Australia and Indonesia can pursue  enhanced cooperation when it comes to combating people  smuggling. What scope is there for that?

BOB CARR: Well, it's a common problem. You've got people, for  example, from Iran not pretending to be escaping persecution, but  economic migrants who end up in Indonesia. They get there with visa  on arrival and then completing their arrangement with a people  smuggler, they're in a port in Indonesia being boarded for Australian  waters in unseaworthy vessels. Now, this is a problem for Indonesia  as well as being a problem for Australia, so I hope to build a common  perspective of it so that we can enhance our action.

Now, what we - the details of that are something that we'll hammer  out in consultation with our Indonesian friends.

KIERAN GILBERT: Our security agencies have worked in cooperation  with the Indonesians though for many years now. [Audio skips] a  presence in the - in Jakarta. Is it true that those efforts have been  undermined from time to time by some within the Indonesian  security agencies that circumvent the rules, that aid and bet the  smuggler.

BOB CARR: Yeah. Kieran, this is intelligence areas, and as you know,  I'm not going to confirm or deny material that relates to what we  collect through our intelligence efforts, but we acknowledge we  could not be doing the things we do to disrupt people smuggling  without the cooperation of the Indonesians. I just want Australians  to appreciate this is our most important close neighbour. We must  have networks of cooperation and habits of consultation with the

Indonesians. And we're very proud of where we are in this  relationship and we're going to work on this together with them. As I  said at the outset, this is a problem for them as much for us.

KIERAN GILBERT: The Government talks a lot about the need for a  regional solution to this problem. Pivotal to that regional solution, of  course, is that nation, isn't it, is Indonesia and its willingness to  participate in any such regional approach?

BOB CARR: Oh, they're in it. They're in it. I and their Foreign Minister,  Marty Natalegawa, were the joint chairs of the Bali protest. We're  getting other countries in the region to criminalise people smuggling,  to increase the penalties for people smuggling activity, to identify it  and make arrests to get the people who are carrying out this criminal  activity into the prison system. And that's where they belong. They  are bad people. They are risking the lives of others, attempting to  make a profit.

KIERAN GILBERT: With the regional approach that the Government is  pursuing, do you think that the new Prime Minister, the return of Mr  Rudd, will help energise those efforts? Does he bring more clout to  any negotiations on the regional level?

BOB CARR: Oh, no. Look, to give Julia Gillard the credit she deserves,  she set a lot of rethinking in train. When I made my remarks a few  days ago about people smuggling, changing the nature of the asylum  seeker challenge, it was reflecting her views and I think you'll see  announcements from the Government that confirm that and Kevin  Rudd will carry through on this front. I said, and it's Julia Gillard's  view and it will be Kevin Rudd's view, that the nature of the problem  facing us here has changed.

It's not people - desperate people fleeing persecution bundling  together, getting a fishing vessel, and pursuing persecutors. It is  people moving for economic reasons who haven't been persecuted  and who are coming here as a result of paying money to a people  smuggler, and that's a criminal activity.

KIERAN GILBERT: Well, given that trend that you speak of, is there  any hope of slowing, possibly even stopping, the boats in the short to  medium term?

BOB CARR: Well, that's what we're working towards. There are four  million displaced people in the Asian region. That is four million  people who could very well conclude they might as well pay $10,000  to a people smuggler and risk everything to get to a country that  offers them a brighter future. That's the process we're trying to curb.  It is a big challenge. It is a challenge in every country in the world and  Tony Abbott has had to junk his promise of producing an immediate  reduction. He backed a saying there might be a reduction in a year.  He's now saying there'll be - he'll turn back the boats over three  years.

Now, that is a recognition of the reality here and that his simple  slogan turn back the boats was a lie. It was an attempted con of the  Australian people.

KIERAN GILBERT: Did you concede that it was a mistake to dismantle  the Howard era approach, which was successful?

BOB CARR: Well, I wasn't around then, but the problems have got  worse with the sanctions squeezing the living standards of people in  Iran who are then persuaded they can go to a people smuggler and  get into Australian waters. The Howard structure would not have  stood up against that challenge.

KIERAN GILBERT: There was a hiccup in our relationship in 2011 with  the live cattle export suspension. Could that have been handled  better?

BOB CARR: In retrospect, yes. We are very conscious of that and the  Indonesians showed forbearance for that. I think they understood  the domestic political pressures.

KIERAN GILBERT: They didn't appreciate it, though.

BOB CARR: No, they didn't, and their view's reasonably understood  and I think we in Australia can work harder in avoiding any repetition  of that.

KIERAN GILBERT: Foreign Minister, Carr, thanks for your time.

BOB CARR: Thank you, Kieran.

Media enquiries

 Minister's office: (02) 6277 7584

 DFAT Media Liaison: (02) 6261 1555



