

Julie Bishop MP

MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS

Sky News Post Election Sunday Agenda

8 September 2013

E&OE…

PETER VAN ONSELEN You’re watching Australian Agenda. I’m joined here in the Sky  News centre by Sky’s political editor David Speers, senior columnist at The Australian  Newspaper Troy Bramston and editor-at-large at The Australian Paul Kelly and we are joined  now live out of Perth by Julie Bishop, the deputy leader of the Liberal Party.

Welcome to the program.

JULIE BISHOP Good morning.

PETER VAN ONSELEN Congratulations, I guess is the first thing to say. Are you surprised  by the size of the result or did you start to get taken up in this momentum argument that was  there that the Liberal Party might even get close to cracking a 100 seats?

JULIE BISHOP No, I always knew it was going to be close. We said throughout the  campaign that it was very tough to win government from Opposition. It’s only happened on  six previous occasions since the Second World War. So Tony Abbott always used the  analogy it’s like climbing Mt Everest and it certainly was, but I’m delighted with the result.

There are still some seats in doubt but overall we’ve seen a fantastic result and that is  certainly a testament to Tony Abbott’s extraordinary leadership. PETER VAN ONSELEN  We’ll go through some of the seats and some of the policy contests that now you’ll look to  pursue in government but can I just, off the top, ask you about some of the minor parties on  the right that look like they’re going to win some seats in the Senate and Clive Palmer looks  like he’s going to be joining you all there in the House of Representatives.

Tony Abbott came out on the campaign trail late in the campaign urging people not to vote  for minor parties because of the kind of potential problems that that could cause in the  Parliament. It looks like you will have those problems on the right of the Liberal Party.

Are you concerned that, for example, Clive Palmer in the lower house could turn the show  there into a little bit of a circus?

JULIE BISHOP He certainly does have some sort of celebrity status in Queensland and he  would certainly make for an interesting member of Parliament.

The message we were getting out was that after the last three years of a hung Parliament, with  a menagerie of independents and minor parties, for stability and certainty, we believe that a  vote for one of the major parties would deliver much greater stability in the Parliament. We’ll

see who eventually is elected from the minor parties, from the independents and then set to  work with them.

Tony Abbott’s made it quite clear he wants to govern for all Australians. That means working  with all of the people who are elected to the House of Representatives and the Senate. They  are after all the people’s choice.

PAUL KELLY But Julie Bishop, the vote the Palmer Party got certainly doesn’t contribute to  the stability and certainty that Tony Abbott is talking about. This is a populist, break-out to  the right. How much of a problem does this pose for an Abbott Government?

JULIE BISHOP My colleagues in Queensland know Clive Palmer very well and I’m sure  they will find ways to work with him and his party.

We will of course work with the representatives elected by the Australian people and that  includes Clive Palmer and his party should that be the case.

PAUL KELLY Well how confident are you given all the uncertainties we’ve got with this  Senate vote? How confident are you that an Abbott Government will be able to negotiate  legislation successfully through the Senate, relying on the Senate crossbenchers?

JULIE BISHOP As an opposition we could not have been more clear as to our agenda,  should we be fortunate enough to win government, and we’ve made it very clear that agenda  included abolishing the carbon tax, abolishing the mining tax, stopping the boats, building  infrastructure, stopping the waste, getting the budget back into surplus as soon as possible.

So our agenda was very clear and we will seek the support of the parties, the Labor Party, the  Greens and others to enable us to claim that mandate.

The Australian people could not have been in any doubt as to the agenda we were taking to  the election, our policy platform and we were elected upon that.

PETER VAN ONSELEN Julie Bishop, can I take you to your role as incoming foreign  minister which presumably is the role you will keep.

Are we going to see a different foreign policy approach from an Abbott-Government and  from you as foreign minister to the government we’ve just had?

JULIE BISHOP I believe that differences will be apparent, not in the underlying  fundamentals such as our alliance with the United States, our relationship with Asia, but there  will be a deepening, a broadening, and a diversifying of our relationship with some countries.

For example, with China our relationship is seen through the prism of the mining and  resources sector. We want to broaden that relationship and embrace a much wider connection  with China and a much deeper engagement with the region generally.

We’ll also be far more consultative. Tony Abbott has said that our government will be one of  no surprises and he’s given that pledge, as have I, to a number of leaders in our region.

They were taken by surprise on a number of occasions to our country’s detriment under the  previous government and we want to ensure that we have mature, sensible relationships with  our most important partners and beyond.

PETER VAN ONSELEN Is there a diplomatic post you could imagine Kevin Rudd taking in  an Abbott Government?

He was very generous to the Coalition with some of the appointments he made as Prime  Minister shortly after winning the job in 2007, you and him were known to get on pretty well  when you were sparring against each other in the foreign affairs portfolio.

Could you see him representing Australia somewhere if he, you know, chooses to move on  from his political career? He has stepped down as Labor leader.

JULIE BISHOP Nothing springs to mind.

PAUL KELLY On this question of appointments, Julie Bishop, you’re being congratulated  for indicating that Kim Beazley would remain as our Ambassador in Washington but in the  past you’ve expressed doubts about the appointment of former Victorian Premier Steve  Bracks to New York.

You put the government on notice, the outgoing government on notice about this  appointment, can we therefore assume that you will cancel Mr Bracks appointment?

JULIE BISHOP We certainly did put the government on notice that after the election had  been announced by Julia Gillard that we asked to be kept informed of any major  appointments that would take place after the election.

In fact, we asked to be consulted in writing and that was ignored on a number of occasions,  but particularly in relation to the New York post. So we have reserved our position and that’s  something I’ll review when I take up the role.

TROY BRAMSTON Julie Bishop it’s Troy Bramston from The Australian, can I ask you, as  deputy Liberal Party leader and also as deputy leader of the Coalition, when do you expect to  start talking to Tony Abbott about the likely make-up of the new government’s front bench?

And are there any members in particular who are not on the front bench who you would like  to see get a new position when the government is sworn in?

JULIE BISHOP This will be a matter for discussion over the next few days. I’m about to  cough I’m sorry!

TROY BRANSDEN Let me ask while you do Julie Bishop, just as a follow up to that..

JULIE BISHOP It’s been a rather late night.

No, so we’ll discuss this over the following days but obviously there’ll be some briefings that  we’ll need to have over the next week and there’ll be some decisions to be made. But I think  this morning, not 12 hours since Tony Abbott claimed victory, I think these are matters that  are still to be worked through.

PAUL KELLY Well when you reserve an appointment, when you put an appointment such  as the Bracks appointment under formal review, presumably the only logical conclusion to  draw from that is that you won’t be proceeding with it.

Is there any way in which you could be persuaded to proceed with this appointment?

JULIE BISHOP Paul, this is one of a number of matters that we will look at once we are in a  position to talk with the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade.

We did indicate to the government in no uncertain terms that we expected to be consulted on  major appointments that would take effect after the election. Rather arrogantly I must say, I  was told that we had nothing to do with it and they wouldn’t be consulting with us. I think  that’s a rather unfortunate situation.

PAUL KELLY Well that sounds like an insult doesn’t it? I mean do you see that as an insult  to you?

JULIE BISHOP Well I wasn’t contacted by Senator Carr, nor Mr Bracks, nor anyone from  the government about it and I still haven’t been, so it’s a matter that I’ll be considering when  I take up the position.

DAVID SPEERS And Julie Bishop, on I suppose the most pressing foreign policy issue at  the moment, Syria, Australia has now taken up the presidency at the UN Security Council.

Can you just clarify what your approach will be when it comes to the question of potential  military action that President Obama is pursuing? Is that something that you agree with?

JULIE BISHOP I understand that the US Congress will be debating the issue this week.  President Obama will be making a statement to the American people. I spoke with Foreign  Secretary William Hague last evening and we’ve set up another time to discuss it in more  detail early this week.

There’s also to be a debate at the United Nations and clearly the United States will need to  make out a case for military intervention on the basis of a deterrent against the use of  chemical weapons.

DAVID SPEERS So you are not yet convinced yourself?

JULIE BISHOP I’ve not yet been briefed on the evidence the United States says it has to  prove that chemical weapons were used and that…..

DAVID SPEERS Because Kevin Rudd said during the campaign, that Kevin Rudd said he  was convinced that he had seen evidence - that has not been shared with you?

JULIE BISHOP No, no it hasn’t been. I’ve not had that briefing.

PETER VAN ONSELEN Julie Bishop can I ask you about the whole mantra of stopping the  boats? It was mentioned again by Tony Abbott in his victory speech last night, you’ve given  yourselves until the end of the first term to do it, but how quickly do you think that we’ll  actually start to see a change in the numbers, if not a complete stopping of the boats?

Do you think that there’ll be a message sent simply by the change of government or do we  need to start to see some of your policies formally enacted to start to see a trickle effect  potentially on the boat arrivals?

JULIE BISHOP I believe you’ll see a difference immediately.

We will be seeking to introduce polices, of course including Temporary Protection Visas  which was at the core of our policy, but we’ll also be visiting Indonesia and Papua New  Guinea and other countries to discuss the issue.

Should Scott Morrison be appointed the Immigration Minister I am sure he will be out of the  blocks very early on this issue. It is of deep concern to the Australian people that people are  still getting on these rickety boats and taking their lives into their hands trying to get into  Australia.

We must stop that potential disaster from continuing. It has been a disaster. We must prevent  it from occurring anymore and so we’ll be acting as decisively and as quickly as possible to  stop the boats.

TROY BRAMSTON Julie Bishop, Foreign Minister Bob Carr has been at the G20 this past  week. Have you had any discussions with him about matters that have been happening there?  Or his office, or his department and what are your expectations now in this interim period  before the government is sworn in given Australia’s position on the security council. What  kind of contact will you be having with Bob Carr about matters that may be coming up where  Australia would have to indicate a position?

JULIE BISHOP I haven’t heard from Bob Carr, either before or since he went to St  Petersburg but I have certainly been briefed on the G20 meeting in the lead-up to it in quite  some detail, both from the Prime Minister’s office and from the Department of Foreign  Affairs and Trade and I would expect that that briefing will continue.

I’ve been in constant touch with the Secretary of the Department of Foreign Affairs and  Trade over the last couple of weeks.

PAUL KELLY How embarrassed do you feel coming in as foreign minister given the hit to  the foreign aid budget which has been announced by the Abbott-opposition now the Abbott  Government.

This is a very substantial reduction in the rate of increase. How will you explain this and  justify it?

JULIE BISHOP It’s perfectly justifiable. It’s a slowing in the rate of increase so the aid  budget, which is already a substantial aid budget around $4 billion a year, will continue to  increase at the CPI, so the programs won’t be cut, they will continue.

But a number of experts have indicated that the aid budget has grown exponentially and yet  our capacity to deliver it effectively and efficiently has not kept pace and I’ve been deeply  concerned for some time about the evidence of waste and mismanagement, indeed allegations  of corruption surrounding the aid budget.

We want to put in place benchmarks against which the aid budget will be judged, in which  every program will be judged to ensure that the Australian taxpayers, who are very generous  in themselves, that the Australian taxpayers through the Australian government is getting  value for mone,y that is, we get real outcomes in our region where we can make the biggest  difference.

DAVID SPEERS Julie Bishop, earlier in the year, in the May Budget when the government  made similar, or not quite as severe as the cuts you’re proposing, I seem to remember you  described as outrageous and inappropriate at the time?

JULIE BISHOP No, what that was about was moving $375 million out of the aid budget to  be spent onshore in Australia because of the blowout in Labor’s budget and let’s face it we  wouldn’t be having this discussion if Labor hadn’t driven the budget into a deficit and hadn’t  run up $200 billion in net debt.

We are currently borrowing money overseas as record levels, paying interest on it, to send the  money back overseas in the form of foreign aid.

We’re not making a cut to the foreign aid budget, we’re slowing the growth and so it will  continue to grow, but we want to make sure that it is effectively and efficiently delivered.

That will also mean putting more money into NGOs who are on the ground and who can  deliver aid more efficiently than through AusAID or indeed through some of the multilaterals  that we’ve been putting money into in increasing numbers because AusAID cannot handle  the increases in the Budget.

Now there’s this focus on 0.5 per cent of Gross National Income and of course that is  something to which we would aspire but you have to grow the national income and then the  dollars will follow.

Just as a percentage of GNI doesn’t help, if our GNI shrinks, so we need to build the  Australian economy, grow the Australian economy and all will be better off.

PETER VAN ONSELEN Alright stay with us, we’re speaking to Julie Bishop, who will soon  be the foreign affairs minister, also the deputy leader of the Liberal Party.

When we come back we’re going to move on to some domestic issues, talk policy and talk  about some of those economic issues that Ms Bishop was just talking about there in terms of  the economy, the idea of growth as a pathway perhaps to a reduction in debt.

Back in a moment.

(Ad break)

PETER VAN ONSELEN Welcome back, you’re watching Australian Agenda where we’re  speaking to the deputy leader of the Liberal Party live out of Perth, Julie Bishop.

Ms Bishop we’ve been talking a lot about foreign affairs which obviously will be your  portfolio in government but you’ll also be the deputy leader of the Liberal Party.

I wonder what your view is about the philosophical direction of an Abbott-Government  because there has been a lot of discussion about this notion of whether he’s a fiscal  conservative, whether he’s perhaps a bit of a DLP’er in his economic outlook or indeed  whether the economic Liberals within the Liberal Party are going to rise to the occasion and  start to push for a more reformist era.

I’ve been told, at least on background by some pretty senior members from the Howard era  that they are really putting their money on you to be one of the key voices in a cabinet to  make sure that Tony Abbott doesn’t slip too much into the DLP tendencies. How do you  respond to that?

JULIE BISHOP I think there will be a range of views around a cabinet table as one would  expect. We have a number of potential Ministers who have a great deal of experience both as  Ministers in the Howard/Costello Government but also as Shadows in opposition.

I believe it will be a very measured government. Tony Abbott will bring his vast experience  as a cabinet minister and as a Member of Parliament to the table and he was an exceptionally  good Health Minister. He’s very measured, very disciplined.

I also think he’ll be an economic conservative in the sense that he wants our government to  live within its means. He’s determined to pay down Labor’s debt. He’s determined to put the  Budget back into surplus because you can have all the policies in the world but if you don’t  have the money to pay for them they can’t take effect - unless you borrow.

And he’s determined to decrease our borrowings and make sure that we can build the  infrastructure for the future. We can have the significant foreign aid budget but not on  borrowed money.

PETER VAN ONSELEN But can I ask you, to do all of those things we need serious tax  reform. Now that we’ve got the election out of the way and the possibility of a scare  campaign out of the way during the election campaign from Labor on the GST.

I’m not suggesting you’ll do anything in this term. I know you’ve pledged that you won’t.  But can we now talk more seriously about the tax summit and the potential at least for that to  reveal possible adjustments to the GST - equalisation for your home state of WA potentially,  broadening the base out on things like food, or perhaps even increasing the rate? Is all of that  on the table for a potential second term agenda that you will look at in some detail in this  term?

JULIE BISHOP We have already announced that there will be a tax review. A great deal of  work has already been done under the Henry Review and there were significant  recommendations made under that review that were not taken up by the former Labor  Government and so that’s a great starting point for a tax review.

We’ll also be having a commission of audit. These are all things we announced before the  election. We’ll be having a commission of audit to look at government waste and areas where  we can apply our money more frugally, more efficiently, more effectively.

So we will be looking at the tax system. It will be an open, transparent process and hopefully  if there are some significant changes that need to be made we can take them to the next  election.

PAUL KELLY Given the emphasis that you’ve put on economic diplomacy. To what extent  will you be getting involved, not just in external economic policy, but domestic economic  policy given the integration between the two?

JULIE BISHOP Economic diplomacy will be at the base of our foreign policy. Our Coalition  foreign policy is designed to project and protect our reputation as a strong and prosperous  nation and as an open liberal democracy.

Economic diplomacy will be underpinned by our domestic policies and so as a cabinet  minister and as the deputy leader of course I would have some role in it but it will be very  much the responsibility of Joe Hockey, whom I understand will be the next Treasurer.

PAUL KELLY And who will be the next Finance Minister Julie Bishop? Has that been  sorted out?

JULIE BISHOP That’s not a discussion I’ve had with Tony Abbott. In a number of ways  we’ve wanted to wait to see who has been re-elected.

DAVID SPEERS Is that a reference to Arthur Sinodinos because he looks like he may not be  re-elected into the Senate and a lot of speculation was that he could move into that finance  role and Andrew Robb move across into that super portfolio which is going to include trade.

JULIE BISHOP Tony has said that there are a number of positions that he would be able to  announce, mine as Foreign Minister and Joe Hockey as Treasurer but otherwise it’s the  leader’s call so I’ll leave it to the leader.

The Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade portfolio will be interesting. We announced  before the election that Tourism would be brought into the portfolio because we believe that  it’s part of our international engagement to be attracting more international visitors to our  shores so the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade will also have Tourism.

That means Tourism Australia and AusTrade and our other overseas diplomats and  representatives will be under the one head and I think that’s a very sensible, structural move.

DAVID SPEERS Julie Bishop, I appreciate the discussions are yet to be had on the front  bench make-up. I’m just wondering though about female representation. The Liberal Party  does not have a formal quota system but there is the prospect of Sophie Mirabella not getting  back in in her seat of Indi.

How important is it from your perspective to have more than one woman in cabinet?

JULIE BISHOP I’m very keen to have as many women as possible taking up senior positions  with the party. We have many capable women who would be appointed on merit and I hope  that Sophie Mirabella is able to retain the seat of Indi. She’s been a great contributor to the  shadow cabinet and to the Parliament more generally.

We do have other women who are in the Ministry and…..

PETER VAN ONSELEN Are you thinking of someone like Bronwyn Bishop for example,  because John Howard dumped her from the outer Ministry twice? But if she retains her  seniors portfolio at the age of 70 she’ll make her debut in cabinet because that’s a position  that Tony Abbott has pledged to put in cabinet.

JULIE BISHOP Tony hasn’t announced any portfolios beyond me, Joe Hockey and I believe  Warren Truss so I’ll leave those decisions to him.

The point I’m making is there are many talented women in the Liberal Party, in the Coalition  and I would like to see them take up some of the positions that will be available.

TROY BRAMSTON Julie Bishop you just said a moment ago that Tony Abbott has not  made up his mind about who would be the finance minister because he’d be waiting to see  who gets elected.

Now that is basically an acknowledgment isn’t it that Andrew Robb will not be the finance  minister, or at least there’s a big question mark over his name?

JULIE BISHOP No, not necessarily, the point I’m making is that we have a number of, not  just shadow cabinet ministers, but shadow parliamentary secretaries and so we need to see  how many of them have retained their seat or their Senate spot and then ensure that the  portfolios are allocated.

I’m not making any suggestion about any of my colleagues. I’m just saying that the process  of selecting ministers apart from foreign affairs and treasury will take place once we are sure  who has won their seat or their Senate spot.

PETERVAN ONSELEN But you have to acknowledge though for you to say what you did in  terms of you need to wait and see in terms of the results given that Arthur Sinodinos is in that  position. If I was Andrew Robb at home having a cup of coffee this morning I might have  spilt it all over myself because that really does sound like there’s a chance there that Arthur  Sinodinos is very much in the box seat for a finance role.

JULIE BISHOP Well you’re the ones putting forward the names. I mean we could be having  this discussion about the Trade portfolio, we could be having this discussion about any other  portfolio.

The point I’m making and the only point I’m making - and hi Andrew Robb if you’re  watching at home we’ve been chatting throughout the campaign - the point I’m making is  that Tony has only confirmed treasury and foreign affairs but he’s also made it clear that  shadow ministers and parliamentary secretaries can expect to be in similar roles in  government.

PAUL KELLY So are you confident that Andrew Robb will do well as Minister for Trade  and Investment?

JULIE BISHOP Well you’ve pre-empted the appointment process by Tony Abbott! I’ll say it  once more - Tony is yet to confirm the announcements of the portfolios and I don’t think as  deputy leader I should take on that task on Australian Agenda as tempting as it might be.

TROY BRAMSTON Julie Bishop, why hasn’t Tony Abbott confirmed who’ll be the finance  minister? Because before the 2007 election Kevin Rudd made it very clear that Lindsay  Tanner would be the finance minister because it is a very senior economic portfolio.

Now everything that’s been said during the campaign by Tony Abbott and yourself here this  morning does not indicate that Andrew Robb will in fact be the finance minister at all.

JULIE BISHOP Well there are plenty of other portfolios that we could be having this  discussion about and it gets us nowhere. We’re going around and round in circles.

Tony has said that there are two positions - treasury and foreign affairs - and he’s been  saying that for some time. So we’ve got those two positions on Sunday morning, and then  over the next few days he will, no doubt, work out who has been elected, who has not, who  has won their spot, who has not and then in the changes that we’ll be making to some of the  portfolios, he will put the best person that we have available for that job.

Now that will include people who have been doing this task in opposition, they can expect to  move into the role in government but there are other spots that need to be filled.

DAVID SPEERS Julie Bishop can I take you finally away from that, what is becoming a  circular argument, to policy?

JULIE BISHOP Yes, yes it was.

DAVID SPEERS This is to the crossover of your role as foreign affairs minister and the  domestic economic focus that you’ve talked about.

Australia’s economic future, it’s been said for the last decade or so that China has been  growing so fast as our major trade partner, what’s often overlooked is of course the continued  trade role we have with the United States which has been written off over the years but we  are seeing it starting to come back to like in an economic sense.

How do you see Australia’s economic strengths? Our relationships, what should we be  looking to?

JULIE BISHOP Of course the United States has always been an important trading partner.  The Howard Government put in place the US/Australia Free Trade Agreement.

United States’ investment is highly significant in this country and it is one of our most  important trading relationships but so is our relationship with China and we hope to conclude  a Free Trade Agreement with China as soon as possible.

Also Japan, negotiations have commenced but we believe those negotiations can be  concluded. Japan has been one of our longstanding trading partners over 40 years or more.  South Korea likewise, we hope to conclude a Free Trade Agreement with South Korea  because we are losing market share in all of these markets to our competitors.

For example, the United States has concluded a Free Trade Agreement with South Korea and  is now getting US beef into that lucrative market at a lower rate than Australia can. So we’re  losing market share to the United States and South Korea.

We want to put in place a network of regional and bilateral free trade agreements that will  certainly grow our economy and give our exporters, our manufacturers, our agricultural  producers, our service providers new markets and enhance existing markets.

PETER VAN ONSELEN Julie Bishop we know it’s early over there in Perth, you’ve given  us plenty of your time. Thanks so much for coming in and joining us here on Australian  Agenda and congratulations.

JULIE BISHOP Thank you Peter, thank you panel.

- Ends -



