

SENATOR THE HON PENNY WONG

LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION IN THE SENATE

SHADOW MINISTER FOR TRADE AND INVESTMENT



TRANSCRIPT OF INTERVIEW - RADIO NATIONAL WITH FRAN KELLY

SUBJECT: Climate Change, asylum seeker policy, Travel expenses, GrainCorp.

E  & O E - PROOF ONLY

KELLY: Senator Wong, good morning, welcome to Breakfast.

WONG: Good morning Fran, good to be back.

KELLY: Now, Tony Abbott as new Prime Minister says, “the adults are back in  charge of the country”, and he’s promising the new parliament will be respectful and  it will discuss “the issues rather than abused individuals”. Is that the tone and style  that Labor also wants to see in the parliament, especially given the last three years?

WONG: Well if they say they’re the adults, I’ll tell you what, they’re treating all of us  like children. Because they’re refusing to tell Australians what they’re really doing. I  mean, we have a Prime Minister recording an ad effectively, a stunt, that you just  played an excerpt from, but refusing to engage in telling Australians some of the  things that he’s actually doing. For example, they said they’d turn back the boats but  they’re not doing that. They said that they’d reduce debt and deficit but they’re  actually going to blow out the deficit and increase the nation’s credit card limit. This  isn’t the Government they said they’d be. But more importantly, they’re not a  government that tells Australians what they’re really doing.

KELLY: Well I guess that sounds like your message to the public to begin to kick off  this 44th Parliament, which goes to my next question about the style of Labor in  opposition. Opposition leader Bill Shorten says he won’t be modelling himself on  what he calls Tony Abbott’s aggression and negativity. How forceful are you going to  be in those messages? How are you going to kick that point home?

WONG: Well, we will be very strongly and forcefully holding this Government to  account. And the institution of parliament is one which enables governments to be  required to give answers and to have questions asked of them, something that it  appears this Government doesn’t want. Bill is a much more constructive individual  than Tony Abbott will ever be and I think he’s absolutely right to say he’s not going to  be the sort of negative Opposition leader that we saw from Tony Abbott for so long  and which it appears, from that clip that you played, he’s continuing in Government.

KELLY: Not so negative, but what about oppositionist? How’s Labor going to treat  these bills when they come out? How supportive will you be of some and how  judicious will you be when judging what to support and what to oppose?

WONG: You have to look to the national interest and you also have to make sure  that you reflect Labor values in how you approach legislation. It’s not our job to get  legislation from this Government passed, it’s our job to be an effective opposition  and to consider the national interest when bills come forward, and certainly that’s the  approach we’ll be taking.

KELLY: Look, in terms of the national interest, Labor has announced it will oppose  the repeal of a carbon tax. The decision’s already been made by the Labor caucus.  But the Government is very likely to get its way when the new senate is installed in  July given the soundings of those elected Senators, so then that issue will be taken  out of your hands. So you’ll oppose now, really in the knowledge that the carbon tax  will go eventually and direct action will be the policy. Is that how you see this?

WONG: Well, as Senate Leader for the Labor party, my job is to work with my  colleagues, my Labor senate colleagues, and obviously to negotiate with the cross  benchers. But ultimately people will have to make their decisions based on what they  think is important. Can I say one of the things I think is really important, and that is  that Tony Abbott shouldn’t be given this legislation sight unseen. The reality is this is  legislation that’s about his direct action policy. That’s his alternative, that’s what he  told Australians he’d be doing, and yet the Government still has really not gone  beyond that being a slogan. It’s time direct action the Tony Abbott’s signature policy  was properly considered. The Government needs to put out details of it and explain  to Australians how it isn’t simply a blank cheque to Australia’s polluters.

KELLY: How does it feel to you to be, again, preparing to sit in the senate to discuss  a carbon bill? And I wonder, if I can invite you to look in the rear mirror for a moment,  to look back at that senate vote in 2009, the senate vote when the CPRS, the first  version of the emissions trading scheme was voted down, just, really, when you  were the Minister for Climate Change. It must feel like a world away from that  moment.

WONG: Well I think that was a moment in which we walked away, as a nation, from  a sensible, adult, and bi-partisan approach to climate change. You might recall we  actually got Malcolm Turnbull on board for that legislation and that led to Tony Abbott  and the hard right of the Liberal party taking him down. And I think that’s been a real  retrograde step for Australia. This is a policy that has to be dealt with.

Climate change isn’t going to go away, no matter which Prime Minister, no matter  with party has the numbers in the senate. It is a reality. And if you think you have to  deal with it then the question has always been how are you going to deal with it? We  say we shouldn’t have a situation where we have unlimited pollution in this country.  That’s why we want a limit on pollution through an emissions trading scheme.

KELLY: Given all that work you did way back then though, does that moment remain  stuck in your mind about an opportunity missed? Do you wish that you had more  influence, perhaps on your Prime Minister at the time, Kevin Rudd, to get him  negotiating?

WONG: I think the opportunity missed was when the Greens voted with Tony Abbott  to vote down a limit on pollution and the carbon pollution reduction scheme. I think  that was an opportunity missed for the Australian Senate and for the country.

KELLY: Penny Wong, on asylum boats, you mentioned them briefly. The Abbott  Government, we now know, failed to convince Indonesia over the weekend to take  back some asylum seekers that were intercepted off Java. They were, in the end,  taken to Christmas Island, though the Prime Minister is adamant that Australia will  win the test of wills with people smugglers. It does seem to be working, the boats  have undeniably slowed despite this rejection from Jakarta over the weekend.

WONG: Well the boats slowed after the former Labor government put in place its  arrangement with Papua New Guinea. Let’s be clear. But I think what’s really telling  about the recent revelations about asylum seekers is this: Australians are being told  to rely on the Indonesian press, the Jakarta Post, for information about what their  Government is doing, that is what is happening. Australians are looking to the  Jakarta Post to get information about what their Government is doing. I think that is  absurd and this says something very telling about this Prime Minister and this  Government. They are a Government that does not want to tell Australians what  they’re doing.

KELLY: So what are you going to do about that, because the Greens will be moving  a motion this week to compel the Government to release this information regarding  boat turn-arounds and interceptions, will Labor support that?

WONG: Well, we’ll certainly be looking at all the tools of accountability that the  senate and the parliament have, and we certainly will be considering not only that  motion but what else can be done. But what I say is this: we shouldn’t have to do  this. This is the elected Government they told people they would turn back the boats.  That’s not what they’re doing, and we know from the Indonesian press that boats  have been refused. They should be upfront with Australians about what is occurring.

KELLY: A couple of quick questions. Over the weekend, the Government  announced new guidelines for the payment of politicians’ travel, expenses travel  claims. Opposition leader Bill Shorten says he’s not sure they’ll work. What’s your  view? Do you think they go far enough? Will they stop MPs claiming taxpayer funds  that they may not be entitled to?

WONG: Well I think Bill’s right. I’m not sure they will work because they don’t seem  to go to the issue, which is that we’ve seen some poor judgements, unfortunately,  particularly by a substantial portion of Tony Abbott’s cabinet, who appear to think  that weddings and football matches are appropriate uses of entitlement. I think the  point that all politicians have to think through is can you justify this to the people who  elect you and can you justify this on the front page of your local newspaper.

KELLY: Well should the Opposition be calling for tougher changes there? I mean if  they don’t do enough to go to those poor judgements - it has to be said that both  sides have been caught out for exhibiting poor judgement - that these should be  tougher still, these guidelines?

WONG: Well look, we’ll certainly look at the detail of what’s been put forward. And  we’ve said…

KELLY: Well there’s not that much to look at, I’m sure the Opposition’s had a  chance to see it.

WONG: [laughs] Well, we’ll look at the detail of what’s proposed. What we’ve said is  we’re in the cart for a sensible approach, a bipartisan approach to these issues. And,  let’s recall, we’re not the Government. It’s the Government that makes decisions  about the rules associated with entitlements.

KELLY: Yes but an Opposition can be constructive.

WONG: We are being constructive, we’re prepared to look at arrangements which  might improve the way in which MPs use entitlements. But ultimately, as I said to  you, I think there is an issue of judgement here, and I think some of the judgements  which are being made are poor and they don’t reflect well, unfortunately, on any of  us. Because when one politician does the wrong thing, you and your colleagues,  quite rightly, and the people who put us here - I think it reflects badly on all of us.

KELLY: Just finally, one of the toughest decisions facing the new Government is for  the Treasurer and that is the proposed takeover of GrainCorp. Labor supports the  sale of the grain handler to the US-based ADM. You’re the Shadow Minister for  Trade and Investment. Why are you convinced this is in the national interest?

WONG: Well, I haven’t seen anything that’s been put before me that suggests that  this is a deal that should be rejected outright. And I made the point in a speech I  gave last Sunday, that foreign investment, particularly in terms of scaling up our  national production, is in the national interest. You always have to look at the detail  of deals and, obviously, we’re not the Government. We don’t know the detail of  what’s before the Treasurer.

But the point I make, and I make again today, is that this is not a deal that should be  considered through the prism of internal Coalition politics. It’s not a deal where you  should see the Nationals leader and Deputy Prime Minister pre-empting, publicly, the  Treasurer’s decision. And it’s not a deal that should be resolved by considering  Barnaby Joyce spitting the dummy and threatening to walk off the front bench. I  mean, this is not an adult way, to use Prime Minister Abbott’s term, it’s not an adult

way to approach a national interest decision. The Treasurer should make his  decision on the national interest. And my concern is what we might do as a political  way through is approve a deal with so many conditions it actually falls over, which  would be nothing more than a political play.

KELLY: Would the deal approved with some conditions be appropriate?

WONG: Look, I think it’s always open to governments to approve with conditions.  Labor did that. You need to look at the national interest. If you think it does require  some conditions, that’s a reasonable proposition. What’s not reasonable is the  dummy spit we’ve seen from the Nationals ahead of this decision.

KELLY: Penny Wong, thank you very much for joining us.

WONG: Good to be with you.

