

Julie Bishop MP

Shadow   MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS

96FM Perth with Blackers, Carmen and Fitzy

16 April 2013

Subjects: Boston Marathon attacks, Colin Barnett’s rail plan, Federal election date,  Geraldton illegal boat arrival

E&OE…

JOURNALIST Welcome to the show Deputy Leader of the Federal Opposition also Shadow  Foreign Affairs Minister Julie Bishop.

Good morning Julie.

JULIE BISHOP Good morning. How are you all today?

JOURNALIST Very well, thanks for your time this morning.

Now being the Shadow Minister for Foreign Affairs and across that sort of thing, we have  heard there are no casualties as far as we know in Boston after the bomb blast this morning.  Is that still current?

Australian.

Well yeah Australian casualties?

JULIE BISHOP Well it seems that that is the case. There’s been a deadly bombing at the  Boston Marathon. The White House are apparently treating it as an act of terrorism because  there are multiple devices involved.

I understand that at least two have been killed but dozens have been injured and some believe  up to 80 people have been injured. As far as I’m aware no Australians are involved but details  are still coming in and it’s unclear whose behind it, whether it was home grown. I guess that  all we can do is wait to hear the details but I can be assured that the United States will work  very hard to find who was involved in this act. It’s a terrible outcome for what is an otherwise  a magnificent event, the Boston Marathon.

JOURNALIST Julie thinking on behalf of people in Australia who might have family over  that way with your knowledge of the department - just how hard is it for them to get into  Boston and get information out? Phone lines are down, it’s a difficult thing to approach.

JULIE BISHOP We have experts in Washington and New York, we have a diplomatic  network in the United States. Kim Beazley is the ambassador in Washington and I’m sure  that he’ll be deploying all the resources available to him to ascertain whether there are any

Australians involved and provide information to people who want to know where their  friends, family and loved ones are who may have been at the marathon, maybe not taking  part, maybe just observing or there as tourists.

So if people are concerned they should register their interest with the Department of Foreign  Affairs and Trade and then our network of experts, our diplomats will be able to assist  wherever they can.

JOURNALIST We will be speaking with Emma Dallimore from Channel 10 in the next half  hour to get all the latest on that. But to turn our attention if we can Julie to some local politics  for now, it’s not everyday we have you on the phone so we want to take the opportunity to do  that.

I just want to speak about Colin Barnett getting back into power back here in WA. One of his  big promises was of course the local rail network and the upgrade to some of the roads but  mostly the rail network there. A lot of the money needs to come Federally, I know you guys  won’t say you’ve got it in the bag yet, I know most of Australia assumes that the Liberal  Party Federally will be back in in a few months time, if that happens will there be money  coming our way to actually fund this project that was promised by the Liberal Party?

JULIE BISHOP Western Australia certainly deserves its fair share. After all we are the  powerhouse economy and we have in the Colin Barnett Government a pro-development  government that’s pushing our economy and ensuring that standards of living are being raised  in this State and doing a magnificent job, as recognised by the fact that Colin Barnett’s team  were re-elected.

We have to wait to see the state of the Federal budget that’s being handed down in May but  my concern is Labor, as they always do, have blown the budget and run up massive debt.  They’ve gone from zero government debt when they came in in 2007 to $300 billion in debt  and I challenge people to name what we’ve got to show for it. I know there was a $16 billion  splurge on overpriced school halls, there was the pink batts disaster, there’s been a $6 billion  blowout in the border protection/detention network. So we need to see the state of the budget.

What I do know is the Government is heavily in debt to the tune of $300 billion and what will  be available for infrastructure is something we will have to determine when we can get to  have a look at the books.

On the election we’re not taking anything for granted. We have to win the trust and the  confidence of the Australian people and while I agree people are fed up with Federal Labor  we have to win their trust and their respect and their confidence and that’s what we’re  seeking to do.

JOURNALIST Yeah I think the writs for the election are going to be signed next month for  September, do you think, because up until then as far as I know they’ll be able to change the  date of the election won’t they if they felt like it? Do you think that’s possible or do you think  they’ll stick with September?

JULIE BISHOP Well that’s right. Nobody understands why Julia Gillard chose the 14th of  September. There is some suspicion that because there’s a final budget analysis on the 30th of

September that she wanted to go early so that they didn’t have to produce the final budget  position.

It’s in the middle of the football finals for heavens sake so I don’t know why she’s going for  September 14th.

JOURNALIST Because the Bulldogs won’t be there Julie.

JULIE BISHOP Absolutely, just because the Eagles are going to be there! I was in  Melbourne on Saturday and saw the fantastic win over Melbourne so the boys are going well.

JOURNALIST Oh that’s good.

JULIE BISHOP But yes Julia Gillard as the Prime Minister can change the date of the  election whenever she wants to. It’s unlikely that it will be held before July because that  would mean that the Senate and the House of Representatives will be out of kilter so any time  after the 1st of July you’ll have a full House of Representatives election and a half Senate  election.

JOURNALIST Just very quickly before you go, because we’ve run out of time and we’re late  for the 7.30am report, when you heard about the asylum seeker boat landing in Geraldton for  a quick latte at the Dome there what was the first thing that entered your head?

JULIE BISHOP I thought that no place on the West Australian coast is out of reach of the  people smugglers. I mean for border protection command to be overwhelmed with boats  sailing into Geraldton undetected and another one not detected until it’s nearly at Broome it  just goes to show that the entire West Australian coastline is now being targeted by the  people smugglers.

Because as soon as Labor changed the laws it made Australia a target for people smuggling  and now over 35,000 people in over 600 boats have made the journey to Australia. Hundreds  have died at sea and every effort has got to be put in place to stop this journey by sea  including restoring the Liberal Party policies that work, that dismantled the people smuggling  trade and stopped the boats coming by sea.

JOURNALIST Alright. Julie Bishop, Deputy Leader of the Federal Opposition and Shadow  Minister for Foreign Affairs, thanks very much for your time this morning Julie and go the  mighty Eagles!

JULIE BISHOP You bet! Good to talk to you.

- Ends -



