

Julie Bishop MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS



ABC Mid North Coast Mornings

25 July 2013

Subjects: Visit to Mid North Coast, trade policy, Kevin Rudd’s ‘PNG Solution’, Coalition border  protection policy, Pacific Highway

E&OE…

CAMERON MARSHALL Julie Bishop, welcome to ABC Mid North Coast mornings.

JULIE BISHOP Delighted to be here with you.

CAMERON MARSHALL What is the purpose of the visit? You’re on the unofficial campaign trail  today, among other things.

JULIE BISHOP David Gillespie, the Coalition candidate for the seat of Lyne has invited me here to the  Mid North Coast. We have spent some time in Port Macquarie meeting with local people, local  businesses. We’ve been to some manufacturing outlets here and basically talking to people about  what their concerns are and what they’d like to see happen at the next Federal election.

CAMERON MARSHALL What are some of those concerns?

JULIE BISHOP The cost of doing business, labour costs, the cost of electricity. They want to be  reassured that the Coalition will be working to make it easier to do business in Australia, not harder.  We have been talking about the repeal of unnecessary red tape, the repeal of unnecessary  regulation, in fact, Tony Abbott has announced that should we be elected, we’re going to have repeal  days in the Parliament where we do nothing but repeal unnecessary red tape and legislation and  regulation.

CAMERON MARSHALL One of your shadow portfolios is trade. I mean trade includes many things - I  mean primary producers, business owners, many of whom operate out of the mid North Coast.  There’s a lot of concern about cheap imports. What plans does the Coalition have to stem cheap  imports and the adverse impact it has on local business?

JULIE BISHOP Australia is a great trading nation and our standard of living, our economy, our jobs  growth depends on our ability to trade with the rest of the world in new markets and enhancing  established markets. So we have to ensure that we do have access to new markets but it has to be  fair.

We’ve already put out an anti-dumping policy that Sophie Mirabella and Tony Abbott announced  some time ago to ensure that we can deal with any unfair practices, but bearing in mind we want to be  able to get our goods into other countries as well.

That’s what I've been doing with David over the last couple of days. We’ve been talking to  manufacturers and people who are exporting out of Australia in to other countries. There’s been some  great success stories here in Port Macquarie.

CAMERON MARSHALL What have they been saying to you David?

DAVID GILLESPIE Well look, they would love access to more markets. Julie and the Coalition were  keen to get Free Trade Agreements going that have been in negotiations for many years so we can  get improved access to South Korea, China to Japan. New Zealand has got the march on us and  Julie’s been taking up

This afternoon we visited a meat processing company that employees 60 people, Hokubee Australia  Meat Processing, and they’ve got a [inaudible] they export from Wauchope into Asia and they’d like  access on the same level playing field as other countries that have got Free Trade Agreements.

CAMERON MARSHALL Julie Bishop, foreign affairs is another one of your shadow portfolios. What  do you make of Rudd’s PNG solution?

JULIE BISHOP I’m deeply concerned that this was a big announcement but with no detail and like  virtually every other announcement Kevin Rudd’s made they unravel when you get to the detail.

The way to stop boats coming and to dismantle the people smuggling trade is to change the laws in  Australia. It took a change of laws under the Howard Government to stop boats coming. It took a  change of laws by Kevin Rudd in 2008 to reactivate the people smuggling trade.

First you would introduce temporary protection visas, not permanent residency visas so that if you  weren’t determined to be a genuine refugee, you would get a temporary protection visa so that should  the situation in your home country improve, you can go back and be part of the nation building.

For example, Sri Lanka, there was a civil war for 30 years in Sri Lanka. People coming to Australia  fleeing from that civil war should have been given a temporary protection visa. The civil war ended in  2009. People should go back to Sri Lanka and help rebuild that country.

CAMERON MARSHALL But if you make the laws more lenient, isn’t that going to increase the flow of  boats?

JULIE BISHOP No this is not more lenient. The permanent residency visa is more lenient. What Kevin  Rudd did is he weakened the laws that we had in place. He dismantled the Pacific Solution and now  six years later he’s trying to re-establish the Pacific Solution.

CAMERON MARSHALL But you say that you want to stop the boats with tough proven measures.  The boats are still going to come. Refugees have just said in the last week that they would rather stay  on something like Manus Island or Nauru rather than stay in Indonesia.

JULIE BISHOP What we will do is we will introduce temporary protection visas so they don’t get all  the benefits that go with a permanent residency visa. That’s the product that the people smugglers  are selling.

We would have proper offshore processing and we would certainly manage the system a lot better  than Labor has been doing over the last couple of years.

And we would turn boats back around where it’s safe to do so. We’re entitled to do it within our waters  and it only took the turning around of a few boats under John Howard to send the message that we  will not accept people coming to Australia, where they get on a leaky boat, take that terribly  dangerous journey and destroy their documents.

CAMERON MARSHALL Are you concerned that Kevin Rudd has stolen the thunder from the  Coalition on this attempt to stop the boats?

JULIE BISHOP This is not about being concerned with what Kevin Rudd’s done in terms of his  announcement. The question is can it be implemented and already what he’s announced is  unravelling. He said that not one person coming to Australia via the boats will be resettled in Australia.  We now find that’s not the case.

We want to see the detail of the announcement he’s made and I’m afraid this sounds like the East  Timor solution that didn’t work, the Malaysia Solution that was found to be unconstitutional by our own  High Court. Now he thinks he’s got a PNG Solution but he’s refusing to give the detail of it and we  believe that it will unravel like everything else he does.

CAMERON MARSHALL Federal Labor has lost ground in the polls in the last week. It was 50-50 last  week. Does that give you renewed hope? Would you prefer to see an election sooner or later?

JULIE BISHOP I think the Australian people want to see an election as soon as possible. They want  to see a return to stable, credible, competent government. There’s a lack of confidence.

I’ve noticed it here in Port Macquarie - a lack of confidence in business, in investment, in consumer  behaviour because people just don’t know what this government is going to do next.

CAMERON MARSHALL But doesn’t that always happen when there’s an imminent or potential  change of government?

JULIE BISHOP No this has been for a long time. There’s been a lack of confidence in this  government for some time. I think that people are looking for an election as soon as possible.

Julia Gillard did make the 14th of September an election day. I don’t know why we’re not having it on  the 14th of September. If Kevin Rudd’s going to have it the week before or the week after why not have  it on the date that everybody assumed for the last six months was election day? I still don’t know why  he’s refusing to have it on the 14th of September.

CAMERON MARSHALL And Tony Abbott says he’s agreed to debate Kevin Rudd but only when the  election is called. What difference does it really make whether it’s before or after the election? We’re  in unofficial election mode now, aren’t we?

JULIE BISHOP The point is this. If Kevin Rudd wants to govern, he should recall the Parliament and  we can debate all day in the Parliament. That’s what the Parliament is there for. If he’s campaigning,  well then, he should set the election date and then we’ll have the usual campaign debates that you do  during an election.

He’s either governing or he’s campaigning but either way he should either recall Parliament - we're  happy to debate him - or he should set the election debate and then we can start the usual round of  election debates.

CAMERON MARSHALL What about Rudd’s new FBT amendments, would the Coalition reverse  those?

JULIE BISHOP Absolutely. This was another debacle made without consultation, without warning. I  was in Darwin when the announcement was made and within hours a local firm that specialised in  salary packaging and fleet hire announced that it would go out of business.

The trouble with this is they gave no warning, no notice. It’s just like the mining tax, there’s no  consultation. People will be affected by this, not only the nurses and teachers and childcare workers  and police who get this tax benefit as part of their employment, but also the vehicle side of it - the  dealerships, the manufacturers, everybody in this sector is going to be adversely affected.

We would not support these changes. If Kevin Rudd recalled the Parliament and put up this legislation  we would vote against it.

CAMERON MARSHALL David, New South Wales Deputy Premier Andrew Stoner promised to me on  the program this morning that if the Coalition won you would reinstate the 80/20 funding formula for  the Pacific Highway. Can you confirm that?

DAVID GILLESPIE Yes that’s exactly right. We’ve made a rock solid commitment to put another  $5.64 billion into the Pacific Highway so that it’s built a lot sooner than what has been offered by the  Labor Party.

CAMERON MARSHALL What about what the Coalition could offer to support landowners and primary  producers threatened by mining and [inaudible] operations. If I could ask you that question Julie  Bishop?

JULIE BISHOP Yes, there have been a number of studies underway that we’ve certainly supported  and they go to issues like water management, groundwater and also fair compensation for  landowners. I know my colleagues in this area including Barnaby Joyce and David Gillespie have also  been speaking about this.

We’ve got to make sure there’s an appropriate balance between the environmental concerns and  legitimate businesses. So we’ve been supporting many of the studies into this to make sure we can  get that balance right.

DAVID GILLESPIE Yes, that’s exactly right.

CAMERON MARSHALL I just want to do a drop in question as well relating to PNG. Are you  concerned about the change in our relationship with PNG and would you try and set things differently  if the Coalition won government?

JULIE BISHOP I’m concerned that PNG found themselves dragged into a very contentious, domestic,  political debate by Kevin Rudd. PNG is one of our dearest and closest neighbours. I have been  speaking about PNG for a long time now. I would like to reset our relationship so it’s more of an  economic partnership, rather than the ‘aid-donor, aid-recipient relationship’ that it is now.

With this latest announcement of Kevin Rudd’s it will change the nature of the aid arrangement  apparently. Now Kevin Rudd didn’t admit this but PNG has claimed that there’s been a major shift in  the aid arrangements. Australia provides about half a billion dollars, $500 million a year to PNG in the  form of foreign aid. PNG’s claimed that Kevin Rudd agreed that there’d be a change in the  management.

Well I’d like to know what that is. I want to ensure that there’s accountability and openness and  transparency in the management of our aid budget, whether it’s PNG or any other country.

CAMERON MARSHALL Just lastly Julie Bishop there’s a culture of negativity in both parties. It’s been  levelled at both parties. Rudd criticising Tony Abbott, Albanese was criticising the Coalition on my  program two weeks ago and we had some feedback saying that politicians don’t seem to comprehend  that criticising the opposition only turns people off. It has the opposite of the intended effect.

Do you think it’s time to try and sort of step out, over above those boundaries and state what you  stand for, rather than what you oppose with the other party?

JULIE BISHOP It’s not negative politics to say you’ll repeal the carbon tax because it will drive up the  cost of electricity. It’s not negative politics to say that you’ll implement policies that stop the boats. It’s  not negative politics to say that you’ll pay off Labor’s debt and you’ll put the budget back into the  black. These are all things we will do.

But we do have to scrutinise what the government’s been doing over the last six years. We wouldn’t  be doing our job from opposition if we let the government get away with making statements,  grandiose statements without the detail.

Some of the policies that this government have introduced have been nothing short of shocking. The  pink batts scheme that’s actually seen the loss of life, people have been electrocuted. The  Queensland Coroner’s Report was damning of the Federal Government’s involvement in the pink  batts scheme. And Labor think we’re not going to criticise them for it? Of course we have to scrutinise  the Labor Party, the Government and hold them to account.

But we have been rolling out our policies. We have done the hard policy work. We’ve got a whole raft  of policies that we’ll be putting out between now and the election date. We just want that date and I’ll  be happy to come back on your show and talk about some of the details.

CAMERON MARSHALL One last question - what if, and this is a question I would address to both  parties, what if it proves that the boats simply can’t be stopped, there’s too many refugees who want  to get to Australia? Do we need a fundamental shift in thinking to accept them and to accept that the  large majority of them are not a threat to our borders, they are simply genuine refugees and we need  to accept them accordingly?

JULIE BISHOP At the end of the day, the government of Australia has to have control over the  borders and there has to be integrity in our immigration system.

Australia is a very welcoming nation. We have people from all over the world come here and make a  life for themselves. We are in fact an immigrant nation, built on migration.

But what we mustn’t do is allow people smugglers, they are criminal syndicates, determine who  comes to the country so if the government is in control of border protection, border security and  immigration then you can bring more people in.

But they’ve got to come through the proper channels, not by throwing their documents away. Not by  getting on a leaky boat that is life-threatening.

CAMERON MARSHALL Criminal syndicate does not mean that the people who have the money to  pay to come to Australia are criminals.

JULIE BISHOP I didn’t say that. The people smugglers are preying on people who are vulnerable,  who do have the money to pay people smugglers. I’d rather they had a passport, an air ticket and  came to Australia that way and applied for immigration status, either in the country they are coming  from or in one of the transit countries.

The problem with this whole issue is since Kevin Rudd changed the laws back in 2008, 47,000 people  have come by boat. They’ve risked their lives on a dangerous journey. We know 1000 people have  died at sea. The government haven’t released the official figures. That’s what we know of. But other  boats have been unaccounted for. We know that other boats have gone missing. The scale of this  tragedy is horrific.

We’ve got to get border protection under control and the immigration systems in an orderly fashion  and then the Australian people are very welcoming to the people who are in need all over the world.

CAMERON MARSHALL Julie Bishop, thank you for joining me on Mid North Coast Mornings, and  also to you David Gillespie.

JULIE BISHOP It’s been my pleasure.

- Ends -



