

PRIME MINISTER  TRANSCRIPT OF INTERVIEW WITH DAVID SPEERS  SKY NEWS  15 MAY 2013



E & O E - PROOF ONLY

Subjects:      Federal Budget

HOST: Prime Minister, welcome. Now even without this $17 billion revenue  writedown you talk about, this year’s Budget would still be in deficit, wouldn’t it?

PM: The big hit has been from the revenue writedown. What we’re talking about  is $17 billion this year, and then more than $60 billion over five years, so that’s  the substantial factor.

And any government, any prime minister sitting in this chair would have to deal  with that.

The choice is, how do you deal with it.

HOST: Even without that you’d still have a deficit, wouldn’t you? Of about $2.5  billion this year.

PM: David, that’s mathematically true but let’s gets serious here.

Where’s the big issue? The big issue is in the reduction in tax money coming into  the Government compared with what was expected and that issue has happened  because our economy hasn’t performed like this before.

So I know there’s a lot of chiding of forecasters going on from the Liberal Party-

HOST: What I’m trying to get to here is that you made such a big deal about this  emphatic promise of a surplus this financial year and yet even without that  revenue writedown it still would have been a deficit.

PM: Well David, if the only factors we were dealing with, if revenue was still  coming in at the same levels, then obviously we could focus on that slight  difference between deficit figure this year and a surplus figure this year.

What is of course the unbridgeable amount is the revenue writedown.

Now, faced with those revenue writedowns, and anybody sitting in this chair  would be faced with those revenue writedowns, what you’ve got to do is make  some choices.

We’ve made some choices about charting a pathway to surplus, but doing it in a  responsible way and making room for the big investments, the wise investments  that our nation needs, including improving school education for every child and of  course better supporting people with disabilities.

On the expenditure side I know the Liberal Party is running around talking about  expenditure. The growth in expenditure over this Budget is over the forward  estimates, the years of the Budget, is 1.3 per cent.

That’s the lowest average growth of expenditure in 25 years.

HOST: Let’s look at your new spending plans, and the big signature items of  DisabilityCare and school funding. Now the bulk of this new spending won’t come  until not only after this election but after the four year forward estimate period of  this Budget.

So too with the cuts you’re making to pay for it. Now, are you essentially trying to  lock in a future government to these reforms leaving them very little room to do  anything else?

PM: David, I’m doing exactly what I said I would do. I said to the nation that I  wanted to make new big spends - structural spends - things that will be in the  Budget every year.

More money going into schools, more money going into supporting people with  disabilities.

And I said to the nation very clearly in order to make those new big spends, I’d  be asking the nation to make some big structural saves. That’s exactly what  we’ve done in accordance with our values.

So I do believe, for example, that it’s appropriate to have the Medicare levy to  support DisabilityCare, but also appropriate that things like superannuation  changes go to support DisabilityCare, private health insurance changes go to  support DisabilityCare.

I am prepared to stand and argue that getting rid of the Baby Bonus, making  changes in family benefits, making changes in business tax is the right way of  supporting children’s education at the highest possible standard.

HOST: Let me ask you about some of the forecasts now in this Budget.

The mining tax this year is only going to raise $200 million, down from $2 billion  originally forecast, but then you’re saying it will grow to $2.2 billion in four years  even though the peak in the mining boom is coming down.

How is that going to happen?

PM: I think you are getting confused between two phases of the mining boom.

What we’re approaching is the end of the peak investment phase - that’s where  people are out constructing these mining ventures, thousands of workers doing  the construction.

Then the construction workers leave and you go into production and the team is  there dragging the ore out of the ground or getting the gas and selling it.

The tax is actually paid in that phase when you’re getting the minerals, getting  the gas and shipping it off overseas and making money for it.

HOST: And you’re also in this Budget though hitting some of the smaller miners  by ending the immediate deductibility for exploration. How’s that going to impact  on these smaller miners as we go through this change in the mining boom?

PM: What we’re getting rid of there is a rort that has been exploited. So there will  still be-

HOST: Not all rorting it though?

PM: No, no, no they’re not.

There will still be proper deductions for exploration but what we’ve seen happen  is people artificially inflating exploration.

So they explore, then they sell for a huge amount to another company that does  hardly anything but then claims this enormous deduction and gets it very quickly  - that’s a rort and we’re getting rid of it.

HOST: But there will be some smaller miners who suffer here, won’t there?

PM: Well we’ve worked hard to make sure that these changes don’t hit legitimate  business practices and things like - they’re called farm-in farm-out  arrangements, historic arrangements - between smaller miners and bigger  miners are still possible.

And there is a consultation period here where people will be able to put forward  their views.

HOST: On the carbon tax, you’re now saying in 2015 the price will come down to  $12 a tonne when it links in with the European price. The European price  overnight was trading at $4.60 Australian a tonne. Is this another optimistic  forecast?

PM: The is a Treasury forecast and you can’t take one day’s spot price and then  say how will the market be trading in a few years’ time.

You’ve got to look at the trends over time and the way in which-

HOST: This has been the trend for a while now.

PM: And the way in which decision makers will respond to those trends. That’s  what Treasury has done.

So the same professionals who advised Prime Minister Howard are advising me;  advised Treasurer Costello, now advising Treasurer Swan and that’s their best  forecast.

HOST: Do you have confidence in that Treasury advice and indeed your  Treasurer after the forecasts of last year?

PM: I most certainly do. And David, let’s just be very clear: yes, the Liberal Party  is out there trying to criticise both Treasurer Swan and Treasury.

That criticism is that they didn’t foresee an event that has never happened in our  economy before.

HOST: They did forecast the iron ore price and the dollar fairly accurately.

PM: But what wasn’t correctly forecast is the flow through to nominal GDP and  how nominal GDP growth would compare with real GDP growth.

Now I know that that’s incredibly technical, but what it ends up meaning is people  are criticising - particularly the Liberal Party - the Treasurer and the Treasury for  not foreseeing an event that had never happened in our economic history before  over such a period of time.

We’ve had three quarters where nominal GDP growth has been less than real  GDP growth.

Now I think it’s a bit rough, just common sense to say ‘gee, bad forecasting for  not foreseeing something that’s never happened before.’

And when you then move away from this debate about the forecasts; the revenue  is the revenue, you’ve got to make choices against that revenue.



This Budget lays out this Government’s choices, it lays out a future of wise  investments, better schools, better funding for disability.

Now the Opposition is free to make other choices and it seems from the  statements of Mr Robb last night they are very focused on cutting to the bone -  well that’s a matter for them, lay those choices out, people will make their  judgement on 14 September.

HOST: One further area that we have seen a budget blow out in is of course  asylum seeker costs. They’ve gone up I think some $4 billion since last year’s  Budget.

But you are now forecasting there will be a slowdown in boat arrivals next  financial year. How do you see that happening?

PM: We are putting in place the recommendations of the expert panel that’s  guiding government policy.

We’ve been stopped from putting in place some of those recommendations by  the continued negativity of the Opposition - they wanted to see more boats, that  was their political tactic.

One of the things we are certainly following up from the expert panel, and the  Opposition can’t really stop us doing this, is reviewing the refugee status  determination mechanisms.

HOST: So that will slow down boat arrivals?

PM: Well I think the whole package guided by the expert panel will make a  difference.

It is to be regretted that our hands are tied from putting the whole lot in place  because of the negativity of the Opposition.

HOST: But this review that you talk about on determining refugee status, this is  going to see more people turned away and then more people stopped trying to  come?

PM: Well, it will send a message of course about how many people’s claims are  accepted.

We want to look at the way in which claims assessment is done, not by the public  servants who do it, but at the higher levels like the refugee review tribunal.

HOST: But your intention here is to deny more people refugee status.



PM: Our intention is to see Australian acceptance rates converge to the  international norms.

HOST: Finally Prime Minister, what happens if voters don’t reward you for this  Budget? Is there anything left in the bottom drawer that could turn Labor’s  fortunes around in the four months left before the election?

PM: Voters will make their decision on 14 September. This Budget is what’s right  for the nation in my view, guided by my values.

I’ve been around this nation, I’ve met with people with disabilities, I’ve met with  them when they’ve had tears in their eyes about the level of service that they get  now.

I’ve met elderly parents who have struggled to support their child with a disability  for 20, 30, 40 years and the biggest thing they worry about is not what will  happen to me when I go to residential age care.

The biggest thing they worry about is what will happen to my son or daughter  when I’m physically not able to care for them anymore.

I’ve gone to schools where there have been teachers there who have said the  new resources you’ve given me have meant that that boy now reads, that girl can  now count. I want that for every child in every school.

I’ve made some tough decisions to make that possible. People can judge them.  But that’s me, that’s this Labor Government, that’s who we are.

HOST: Prime Minister thank you.

PM: Thank you.

[ENDS]

