



CHRIS BOWEN MP

INTERIM LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  MEMBER FOR MCMAHON

TRANSCRIPT



PRESS CONFERENCE, SYDNEY



FRIDAY, 27 SEPTEMBER 2013







SUBJECTS: Indonesian Foreign Minister Natalegawa’s statement, Abbott’s  ‘passing irritant’ comments, Final Budget Outcome, Labor leadership.

CHRIS BOWEN: (Recording starts)…record of events of the meeting with Minister  Natalegawa and Minister Bishop. Mr Natalegawa felt obliged to issue this release  because of Minister Bishop’s repeated and robotic claims that there was no pressure  on the Australia-Indonesia relationship because of this Government’s policy of  turning back boats and buying boats in Indonesia. This step is an extraordinary one  on behalf of the Indonesian Government. It is unprecedented in its impact, it’s  unprecedented in its scope. This is a measure taken by the Indonesian Foreign  Minister clearly on behalf of the entire Indonesian Government. Now, this has been  made worse this morning by Prime Minister Abbott claiming again that this is simply  a passing irritant in the Indonesia-Australia relationship. This is exactly what the  Labor Party has been warning of for many years in relation to this Government’s  approach, the Liberal Party’s approach for the relationship with Indonesia, our most  important local relationship. One of our most important bilateral relationships across  the globe. To do this, Minister Natalegawa has been forced to correct the record  because Minister Bishop has failed to be upfront with the people of Australia on the  impact of the bilateral relationship with Indo. Now it takes a special effort, to  endanger such an important bilateral relationship in the first week of office. Before  Mr Abbott and President Budiono have even met. This is a clear indication that  Minister Bishop has failed her first foreign policy test as Foreign Minister. Now the  Prime Minister should show leadership here and make it clear what he intends to do  about this threat to one of our important bilateral relationships. This threatens the  bilateral relationship broadly, and it also threatens the very high degree of co-

operation that currently exists between Australia and Indonesia on an operational  level, on a day to day level on managing our borders.

The second issue I want to cover today is the Treasurer and Finance Minister have  just released the updated budget numbers. The Treasurer’s press statement is full of  spin and misleading commentary, which does him no credit at all. You’ll recall that  before the last election, Minister Wong and I released an Economic Statement  updating the figures. That was then updated again in the pre-election economic  forecast by the secretaries of the Department of Treasury and Finance. Treasurer  Hockey today has gone out an said there is a revelation in the figures, in relation to  the 2012-13 budget deficit, there’s one problem with this little equation, he’s  completely ignored the Economic Statement released by then-Minster Wong and  myself before the election. There’s not one dollar of difference in the 12-13 budget  outcome, with a deficit of $18.8 billion, not one dollar of difference between the  Economic Statement released by us before the election and the statement released  by the new Treasurer today.

Mr Hockey should stop misleading the Australian people. He should start being  straight with the Australian people, and he could start with this. He hints that there  is a further deteoriation in the budget position. He should tell us what it is. He could  do that by releasing the mid-year economic forecast. He has not ruled out releasing  it in January, when Australia will not be focused on matter of budgetary and fiscal  stance, he’ll be, he’s indicated that it’s quite likely that he’ll be releasing in the  economic forecast in January when the Australian press gallery is on holidays and  when Australians’ minds are elsewhere. This is not transparency, and it’s part of a  growing and clear culture of secrecy in the Abbott government. Refusing to  announce when boats arrive, refusing to tell us if a boat turn-back has been  attempted and now putting off an economic statement that has always been brought  down in either November of December to January.

Now if there’s a budget emergency in Australia, as Mr Hockey has previously claimed  and Mr Abbott previously claimed, they should be upfront about the situation and  what they intend to do about it. And they can do that by releasing the mid-year  economic forecast according to the usual timetable and not putting it off until  January.

Happy to take some questions.

JOURNALIST: Tony Abbotts says ‘It’s just Alexander being Alexander’. Should the  Prime Minister repudiate such comments?

CHRIS BOWEN: Yes. Yes he should. Mr Downer’s comments were particular  provocative and typically arrogant, but what is more concerning is that they match  very closely Mr Abbott’s comments before the election. You will recall that he said  ‘these are Indonesian vessels disgorging people in Australian waters’. If you look at  Mr Abbott’s comments and Mr Downer’s comments they are very, very similar, so it  would be very difficult for Mr Abbott to distance himself from Mr Downer’s  comments. Nevertheless he should, because he is now the Prime Minister of  Australia and it’s simply not good enough to say that its ‘Alexander being Alexander’.

He is a former respected, on their side of parliament, a foreign minister. He was  often been endorsed by Mr Abbott as ‘Australia’s best ever Foreign Minister’ and so  when Mr Downer says that, the people of Indonesia  are entitled to think that he  may as well be speaking on behalf of the new Australian government.  It would be  incumbent on Mr Abbott to clearly say that this is not the case.

JOURNALIST: What is your response to Mr Hockey’s claims about the net debt  blow out’ three hundred million dollars by Christmas?

CHRIS BOWEN: Well, we made it clear in our economic statement, our updated  economic statement and in PEFO, what the net debt situation was and he should  outline if that has changed further. We did and we have outlined those figures to  show what the net debt situation would be at the end of this calendar year. If he  has got something to say he is entitled to put out a mid-year economic statement.

JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)?

CHRIS BOWEN: Ah look, deficits. Ah I do note that government expenditure has  fallen in relation to the budget statement. What I do point out is the budget position  is exactly as we outlined it would be for tall the reasons we outlined it would be,  upfront and before the election. It wasn’t a necessarily politically sensible thing to do  at that point, but it was necessary to be honest with the Australia people about it  and to say this is what the budget deficit is. So that’s what I take credit for, I take  credit for outlining these figures before an election. Mr Hockey cannot come out and  say the situation is worse than we thought, what he’s done today by trying to paint  this as a deterioration in the budget deficit when it is not, is try to create an alibi for  further cuts to come. What he’s trying to do is paint the scene for his commission of  audit and for further cuts, but he can’t do that because he knew these figures before  the election. He knew these figures. For him to come out today and claim this as a  revelation is dishonest and unacceptable.

JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)?

CHRIS BOWEN: Well again, he could put out a mid-year economic statement  which could deal with the upside and downside risks, that’s what these statements  do. And he should do that and he should do that soon.

JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)?

CHRIS BOWEN: I think it’s going well, I think both Bill Shorten and Anthony  Albanese are putting their case constructively, in a spirit of mutual respect. It’s  energising the Labor party, we’ve been deluged with membership applications. Of  course, people who join the party now won’t get a vote but they’re encouraged by  the fact that the Labor Party’s opening up this decision to the entire Labor family,  and this is exactly how we envisaged this reform working when it was introduced.  Candidates who want to be the alternative Prime Minister of Australia and ultimately  the Prime Minister of Australia, going about the nation and earning their votes, not  from 86 people sitting in a party room, but 40,000 people across a nation. And I  think that’s a very good thing indeed.



Okay, thanks for your time.

