

THE HON RICHARD MARLES MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND  BORDER PROTECTION  MEMBER FOR CORIO



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW  AM, ABC  FRIDAY, 6 DECEMBER 2013

SUBJECT/S: Asylum seeker boat arrivals

TONY EASTLEY: It's a remarkable story - a group of asylum seekers, about 28  of them, arrived undetected on Christmas Island on Monday and then set about  surviving on a remote beach on the island's south-east coast.

The Immigration Minister Scott Morrison says nine of them are still thought to be  lost in dense jungle, and a search resumes for them this morning.

Naomi Woodley reports.

NAOMI WOODLEY: The boat arrived at Christmas Island on Monday. It sank or  foundered on rocks, but no-one is thought to have died.

Christmas Island residents believe the group are Rohingyas, and at least some of  them have been camped at Dolly Beach on the south-east coast.

The Christmas Island Shire president Gordon Thomson says they would have  been able to sustain themselves there.

GORDON THOMSON: It's got two fresh water streams running across the  beach so there's fresh water there, plenty of coconuts and there are robber crabs  which are quite meaty, there are fish in the sea.



NAOMI WOODLEY: Authorities didn't know of the group's existence until  around eight or nine were spotted near a road.

In a statement Scott Morrison says 13 are now in immigration detention or on  their way there, another one is in hospital with minor injuries, five have been  spotted at two different locations on the south-eastern side of the island, and a  further nine are still thought to be in heavy jungle.

Gordon Thomson says some powerful lights have been put up in the area.

GORDON THOMSON: They're missing in a very treacherous area of the island.  There's a cliff face and the cliff face area that they're probably trying to negotiate  is quite treacherous. It's probably the most difficult area of the inland terraces to  negotiate. So if they are lost in that area perhaps the light will attract them and  they'll make their way to that light.

NAOMI WOODLEY: The Opposition's immigration spokesman Richard Marles  spoke to the Minister last night.

RICHARD MARLES: It is an evolving situation and it's one where I think it's  very important that the Government makes information known to the Australian  people. It seems they haven't.

NAOMI WOODLEY: What do you think it says about the Government's border  protection policy that a boat has apparently made it all the way to Christmas  Island undetected?

RICHARD MARLES: They said they would bring to this area of policy the  discipline and focus of a targeted military operation. That was the language that  the Coalition used. I think the question that now has to be answered is: how is it  with that discipline and focus that an asylum seeker vessel has made it to  Christmas Island without being detected?

Scott Morrison has not been hiding from the Australian people that the boat  arrived on Monday because he did not even know.

NAOMI WOODLEY: The Greens Senator Sarah Hanson-Young says the island's  residents are again providing more information than the Government.

SARAH HANSON-YOUNG: Christmas Island residents are seeing this for  themselves. They're counting the boats as they come off the dock. They're the  ones who are there listening to really what's going on. And the fact that we're  getting more information from them than we are our own government just

shows what a sham this whole thing is.

NAOMI WOODLEY: With this particular incident though, it seems like the  Government didn't even know about this group.

SARAH HANSON-YOUNG: You've got to wonder what type of operation are  they running that this boat can arrive and crash or sink, people be there for days  on the eastern side of the island and the Australian authorities didn't know?

NAOMI WOODLEY: The Immigration Minister Scott Morrison says the search  for those missing is continuing this morning. He's due to provide his weekly  briefing today where he'll also be asked about another two boats which are  thought to have also been intercepted in recent days.

TONY EASTLEY: Naomi Woodley reporting.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: SOPHIE ANDREW 0401 443 524

