

THE HON MARK DREYFUS QC MP  Attorney-General  Minister for Emergency Management  Special Minister of State  Minister for the Public Service and Integrity



TRANSCRIPT



25 July 2013



TRANSCRIPT OF INTERVIEW WITH DAVID LIPSON - SKY NEWS

SUBJECT: Regional Resettlement Arrangement with Papua New Guinea.

E & O E - PROOF ONLY

LIPSON: Mark Dreyfus, thanks for your time. Is the Government's PNG plan in tatters?

DREYFUS: Absolutely not. This was announced by the Prime Minister last Friday with the  Prime Minister of Papua New Guinea. And, as the Prime Minister said, as the Minister for  Immigration Tony Burke said, as I said, this is going to take some time before we see  whether it is going to lessen the flow of people arriving by boat with people smugglers, and  lessen the dreadful tragedy of people drowning at sea.

We've had another tragedy. This will continue for some time as people smugglers continue  to test our resolve. That's what's occurring.

LIPSON: Is that what's going on here, because there have been more boats - between five  and seven more boats, 522 asylum seekers, we hear more drownings at sea? And a former  Australian Prime Minister Malcolm Fraser describing the conditions on the camps in Nauru  and Manus as Australian gulags.

DREYFUS: Well, to answer your first question David, that is what is happening. We are  seeing people smugglers test our national resolve, and we are not being assisted in this task,  unfortunately, by the Opposition, which seems to have no understanding of what our  national interest is.

I heard you introducing Scott Morrison before, saying he was chipping away at the  Government's policy. The Opposition said that they supported this policy last Friday, but  they have spent every moment since, trying to say that it won't work, it can't work, pointing

to this, that and the other problem in the policy. That is not the act of an Opposition which  supports policy.

LIPSON: But it seems your message isn't getting through, and boats are continuing to come -  asylum seekers saying that they weren't aware of the policy shift.

DREYFUS: And that's because people smugglers selling their product, their dangerous  product of a trip in an overcrowded, unseaworthy boat to Australia, say that things like the  Australian Government won't carry through with this policy, or are just telling the direct lie  that you will be settled in Australia.

I want to repeat, you will not be settled in Australia - you will not be settled in Australia if  you arrive by boat without a visa. That is the message, that's why we've taken out  advertising in Australian papers to send a message to immigrant communities, so that they  can tell people that they know, in source countries, that that is what will happen if they  arrive by boat. That's why we have got campaigns on social media, we are working with  communities, we are working with the International Organization for Migration in Indonesia  to send that message.

Nothing that the Opposition leader is saying, or that Scott Morrison, or the deputy  Opposition leader, or Joe Hockey - disgracefully - are saying, will help with that message.

And to have the Opposition leader suggesting that people should have been sent to Manus  within 24 hours of arrival at Christmas Island is simply ridiculous. He's a former health  minister, and he ought to know better. We've got people who've never had a vaccination,  people who may be carrying communicable diseases - all of that has to be checked for. And  he should stop this ridiculous undermining, the deliberate undermining of this policy.

LIPSON: Okay, how certain are you that this plan would survive a court challenge, like there  was with the Malaysia Agreement?

DREYFUS: We are confident that this arrangement with Papua New Guinea complies with  our international obligations and complies with our domestic obligations. And by that I  mean Australian law, Australian legislation.

We have the advantage of a previous decision, last year, from the High Court of Australia on  the arrangement that was reached with Malaysia. Striking it down, primarily on the basis  that Malaysia was not a signatory to the Refugees Convention.

In very distinct contrast, Papua New Guinea is a signatory to the Refugees Convention, has  said that it will withdraw its reservations to the convention in relation to people being  transferred from Australia, and that's a very important difference.

LIPSON: Refugees of course are entitled to a certain level of protection and dignity, which  on the claims of whistleblowers this week, they don't seem to be getting on Manus Island.   Are you certain we are meeting those international obligations under the UN Refugee  Convention?



DREYFUS: I'm going to talk to Tony Burke when he gets back from Manus Island on a  planned trip, a trip that he planned a couple of weeks ago. He's there now, today, talking to  officials, looking at the facilities, and as he has said, as Prime Minister Kevin Rudd has said  very, very clearly, we will not be transferring anyone who arrives by boat in Australia to  Papua New Guinea unless the conditions are safe, and unless there is appropriate  accommodation. This is the very important point.

LIPSON: And if they're not safe, that could take some time, couldn't it?

DREYFUS: If it takes time, it takes time. But I want to make it clear, we are not going to send  anybody, unless it's safe, unless there's appropriate accommodation. Those allegations  coming forward are something that we should welcome, just as we welcome inspection by  the UNHCR, we welcome inspection by international teams.

And because those allegations have now come forward - they were first raised, but in a very  vague way, some weeks back as I understand it. Tony Burke then said give me the detail,  that wasn't forthcoming, a bit more detail's come out this week, and he said straight away,  and I say straight away, we'll investigate.

LIPSON: Shouldn't the Government have checked these camps before making the big  announcement on Friday?

DREYFUS: No, we have a process of checking all the time. We are building facilities on  Manus Island, and allegations of this kind alert us to problems. They let us put arrangements  in place to make sure that this kind of problem doesn't occur. It might be that it's something  about the management of this kind of facility where you have to separate particular groups,  certainly that's something that comes to mind for me, but I'm not the Immigration Minister,  I'll be talking to Tony Burke when he gets back from Manus Island.

LIPSON: And if, as you say, the conditions aren't suitable, aren't safe for refugees, that's -  and you need to delay further sending people to Manus Island, that's going to eat away at  your message isn't it?

DREYFUS: Well, I'm confident that we will be in a position to send people who have arrived  by boat in Australia to Papua New Guinea within days, within the next couple of weeks - I'm  not going to put an exact time on it - because we have to complete the health checks, and  because we have to make sure conditions are safe.

But that's what we're working on with the Government of Papua New Guinea now, we are  not being assisted in this task by a disgraceful deliberate undermining by the Opposition,  who have been disrespectful to the Prime Minister of Papua New Guinea, disgracefully - just  as they were disrespectful to the Foreign Minister of Indonesia. They don't seem to have  any idea of how to treat our closest neighbours.

ENDS

