Senator the Hon Mathias Cormann

Minister for Finance

TRANSCRIPTION: PROOF COPY E & OE

DATE: 28/9/13

TITLE: Transcript of Interview - Sky News - Saturday Agenda with David

Lipson

TOPIC: Boat tragedy, budget, asset sales, carbon tax

DAVID LIPSON: G'day, welcome to the program. I'm David Lipson. Another tragedy

at sea and simmering tensions over asylum seeker policy will frame Tony Abbott's

first trip overseas as Prime Minister. He's headed to Jakarta on Monday to meet with

the Indonesia President Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono and no doubt the boats issue

will overshadow his preferred focus on trade and security.

Joining me now to discuss this and the rest of the day's issues, the Finance Minister

Senator Mathias Cormann. Thanks for your time today.

MATHIAS CORMANN: Good to be here.

DAVID LIPSON: This tragedy at sea surely is a terrible milestone, the first deaths at

sea under the Coalition Government.

MATHIAS CORMANN: It is always terribly distressing when people die at sea in

these sorts of circumstances, which of course is why it is so important that we stop

the boats, because while the boats keep coming, sadly people will continue to die.

We do have Operation Sovereign Borders underway. We are working very

constructively with the Indonesian Government and of course it's very important that

our efforts, together with the Indonesian Government's, are going to be successful.

DAVID LIPSON: We understand that there's also been two other rescues by

Australians in the last forty-eight hours or so. One of them saw asylum seekers

returned to Indonesia and the other we understand there are attempts to have the

asylum seekers returned to Indonesia.

Now, I appreciate that this is not your portfolio area and it is a sensitive issue as well,

but are you aware of any hardening on that stance, because even though this was

available under the previous government, it only happened once.

MATHIAS CORMANN: Look, you're right, this is not my area of portfolio

responsibility. Scott Morrison as the Minister for Immigration will of course be

providing a proper and detailed briefing as part of Operation Sovereign Borders at

the appropriate time.

Suffice to say, it is very important that we stop the boats. In order to achieve that it is

very important that we continue to work constructively and positively with Indonesian

authorities and the Indonesian Government and we will continue to do that, from the

highest levels of the Government down.

DAVID LIPSON: But is that really happening? Because this week we saw that

extraordinary step of the release of the account of a private meeting between Julie

Bishop and Marty Natalegawa on Monday in New York. Now, that was released to

the media what is normally private.

It was later sort of retracted as a mistake; it was said to be never intended for a

press release. But does this simmering tension you'd have to say threaten to sideline

some of the issues that Tony Abbott wants to focus on, like trade with Indonesia?

MATHIAS CORMANN: Well I can assure you that we are having very positive and

very constructive engagement with the Indonesian Government in relation to the

important issue of needing to stop the boats.

But of course it is also true to say that while this is an important issue it should not be

the defining issue of our relationship with Indonesia.

Our relationship with Indonesia is clearly one of the most important relationships we

have as a nation and there are many, many facets to it and of course the Prime

Minister will visit Indonesia very soon.

DAVID LIPSON: So you're confident that the focus can remain on trade and on other

issues? You don't believe that the boats issue will overshadow?

MATHIAS CORMANN: I'm confident that while this is one issue that of course we

have to continue to deal with constructively, that all of the other very important parts

of the relationship, in particular our trade relationship of course, will be appropriately

high profile.

DAVID LIPSON: Okay. Well look, on budget matters, we saw the news conference

yesterday by you and the Treasurer Joe Hockey where you really confirmed the

PEFO numbers for the year 2012-2013.

Joe Hockey though yesterday said that the budget was deteriorating further since

then. He wouldn't say by how much, it wasn't a big deterioration but a deterioration

nonetheless. Will the Coalition consider selling assets like Australia Post to bring the

budget back into line?

MATHIAS CORMANN: Well firstly, when the Pre-Election Economic and Fiscal

Outlook was released in August, the 2012-13 financial year for which we released

the final budget outcome yesterday was of course already finished. So you wouldn't

have expected there to be much of a difference in relation to the 2012-13 financial

year.

The point I would make though is that what the final budget outcome did show was

that there was a massive deterioration from the original 12/13 budget which

promised a one-and-a-half billion dollar surplus to the final budget outcome which

showed an eighteen-point-eight billion dollar deficit.

And of course that's been the story under Labor. It's been a story of deteriorating

budget positions. There is no doubt…

DAVID LIPSON: Yeah, but we knew that. As you said, we knew that before the

election and during the election it was confirmed.

MATHIAS CORMANN: Well, we knew before the election and we pointed out before

the election that Labor made a mess of the budget. When Labor won government in

2007 they inherited a position with a twenty billion dollar surplus with no government

net debt, with fifty billion dollars' worth of cash in the bank collecting more than one

billion dollars in net interest payments.

Fast forward to 2013 and of course the position that we've inherited is a thirty billion

dollar deficit this year and growing, two-hundred billion dollars' worth of government

net debt and growing, a gross debt heading for three-hundred billion dollars, and

beyond. So clearly…

DAVID LIPSON: So will you sell off assets to bring it back into line then?

MATHIAS CORMANN: Well, the Government has got a policy to sell Medibank

Private and we'll do that at the right time following proper methodical process. We

are not going to speculate…

DAVID LIPSON: What about Australia Post?

MATHIAS CORMANN: We have a policy to sell Medibank Private, that's it. I'm not

going to speculate about any other potential decisions down the track as was done in

the media today. As far as we're concerned the sole policy that we have in terms

of…

DAVID LIPSON: Can you rule it out though? Can you rule it out for us now?

MATHIAS CORMANN: Well again, we have a policy to sell Medibank Private. We

don't have any plans whatsoever to sell any other assets. Now, the Commission of

Audit will start its work soon.

The Commission of Audit, its job will be to ensure that the operations of government

are as efficient and as cost effective as possible, that taxpayers get maximum value

for their money.

And once we receive the report from the Commission of Audit, not wanting to pre-empt what it may or may not recommend, but once we receive the report from the

Commission of Audit we will consider whatever recommendations they put to the

Government and we'll take action in the appropriate way at that time.

DAVID LIPSON: You've flagged raising the debt ceiling when Parliament returns

before the end of this year. Can you say how much you will raise it by?

MATHIAS CORMANN: Well, we have to raise the debt ceiling as a result of the

mess Labor made of the budget. The truth of the matter is that Labor really should

have raised the debt ceiling before the election was called.

They knew this because when the budget was released in May, Treasury officials

told me in Senate Estimates then that the level of gross debt was expected to reach

two-hundred-and-ninety billion dollars by December this year.

Since then of course just for this financial year the budget position has deteriorated

by a further twelve billion dollars under the previous government, which, you don't

have to be Einstein to add that up. That is three-hundred-and-two billion dollars. The

current debt ceiling is three-hundred billion dollars.

So at this stage, we are on track as a result of Labor's budget mismanagement, to

reach the three-hundred billion dollar debt cap by Christmas.

So obviously we will need to make some decisions here. Yes, we will have to lift the

debt ceiling and we're going through a methodical structured process in order to

make the decision exactly by how much that will be.

I'm not going to make an announcement here today but we will continue to consider

all of the relevant advice from Treasury officials and others and when we've got

something to announce we'll tell you.

DAVID LIPSON: Okay. And just finally, overnight the IPCC has released another

report on climate change which really outlines that it's even more certain than ever

that humans are causing the climate to change, at dangerous levels if the projections

are right.

It really underlines the need for a global deal. Is direct action the right policy to sort of

point us towards a global deal, or was an ETS, which you've promised to get rid of,

more likely to see some sort of global action?

MATHIAS CORMANN: Well, firstly we are not questioning the science. What we

have questioned is - and what we have said is that we should not be hurting our

economy without doing anything to reduce emissions, which is what the carbon tax

and before that the CPRS would have done and which the carbon tax is now still

doing.

You've got to remember the carbon tax pushes up the cost of electricity, which

pushes up the cost of living but also pushes up the cost of doing business here in

Australia making environmentally more efficient businesses in Australia less

competitive than more polluting businesses in other parts of the world.

So arguably not only does it shift emissions to other parts of the world, it actually

leads to increased emissions in other parts of the world. So the carbon tax is a policy

under Labor and the Greens which imposes sacrifices on families and pensioners

and business here in Australia without actually doing anything to reduce emissions.

Whereas direct action and our emissions reduction fund actually will lead to effective

emission reductions in Australia which also then translate into effective reductions,

net reductions in emissions globally.

DAVID LIPSON: Okay. Mathias Cormann, the Finance Minister. Thanks so much for

your time this morning.

MATHIAS CORMANN: Always good to be here.

DAVID LIPSON: After the break we'll speak to the Shadow Parliamentary Secretary

Matt Thistlethwaite and also Professor Will Steffen from the Climate Council for more

on that IPCC report. Don't go away.

ENDS

Back to top



