THE HON BRENDAN O’CONNOR MP  MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RN DRIVE  RADIO NATIONAL  WEDNESDAY, 3 APRIL 2013



SUBJECT: BALI PROCESS



WALEED ALY: Earlier in the program I spoke to the Foreign Minister of Australia Bob Carr about  his negotiations in Indonesia. He is, of course, not the only Australian minister that's there. The  Minister for Immigration and Citizenship Brendan O'Connor was there for the Bali Process  Ministerial Conference, and the issue of asylum seekers is but one of the issues that was tackled.  And it seems that we now have a clearer view of exactly what the game plan in dealing with this  is going to be.

No fewer than 37 countries have agreed to get tougher on people smuggling and human  trafficking. The idea is that that will help stem the flow of asylum-seekers to our shores; that, at  least is what the Government hopes. This process, this forum has been going on since 2002. It's  focused on dealing with transnational crime generally, and people smuggling now fits the bill.

Brendan O'Connor joins me now, thank you very much for your time, Minister.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Very good to be here.

WALEED ALY: You say that Australia alone can't stop the flow of asylum-seekers, so you want  other countries around the region to help. But isn't the problem that actually no other countries  in the region really have an interest in stopping the flow of boats to Australia. It's Australia alone  that has that interest, and Indonesia certainly has no problem with asylum seekers that have  come to their countries in the thousands leaving their shores.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR:  I don't agree with that contention. Firstly, all countries of destination  have a concern, and within the region you're right to say that Australia is the primary country of  destination. But countries of transit do have difficulties, and indeed the more people that seek  to come through and move through their country spend time in locations throughout, for  example Indonesia, is causing disquiet amongst regions and at the national level.

And that was very clear when we met with the Foreign Minister and officials of the Indonesian  Government recently. And it's become apparent that - I mean and let's be honest, they've been

putting in a lot of hard work over years to assist, not only ourselves, but countries of origin to try  to find a better way to ensure people who are accessing protection afforded under the  convention can do so in a more - in a less dangerous way.

WALEED ALY: But let's stay with Indonesia, I mean you make the point that they're not happy  with the current situation; and that is that a lot of asylum-seekers pile into Indonesia, thousands  upon thousands of them do, far more than come here. And they don't like that situation so,  actually, if what we're asking them to do is enhance their law enforcement so that people  smuggling stops, then actually they - that doesn't meet their interests at all. They just have more  and more asylum-seekers piling up, and there's no real outlet.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: No, no. Firstly it's really to reduce the inclination, or the inducement to  come to Indonesia. So, for example, if we can mitigate ways and deter people getting on vessels  then there's less interest in people coming into Jakarta or other ports of Indonesia to take those  journeys.

Secondly, I think it's important to note that if there is not enough done in transit countries then  of course the flow will continue. And if it's - and remembering that, Waleed, that in many cases  people that might be coming in, whether they are entitled to or protection or not, are staying  weeks, months and years, and that is becoming an issue for Indonesia.

I'm very happy to concede that it's never been as high a priority, but it's increasingly - as we see  the collaboration on law enforcement, when we saw the Indonesian Parliament enact very  serious penalties for organisers of such ventures, we are seeing, I think, a different approach  and a tougher approach against the transnational criminals involved in this trade.

WALEED ALY: Let's talk about the people who are in Indonesia, and have been there for a long  period of time, because that seems to me the hub of the problem; you have asylum seekers who  are languishing there, some of whom have been there, you know, eight years, ten years. Some  of whom have even been assessed by the UNHCR and then they don't get resettled.

And this is one of the things that Indonesia has been complaining about with respect to Australia  for a long time; is that we won't resettle them. And we keep saying we're going to resettle them,  even those who have already been assessed by the UNHCR and then we don't. And I understand  now we've agreed to increase our intake of refugees from Indonesia, but we've promised that  before and we've simply failed to deliver. So why would this be any different?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Well look I met the UNHCR in Bali at the conference, spoke with them  about the capacity that they have to process properly applications to be considered, in other  words to determine the status of a person moving through Indonesia. And I've made it very  clear that we want to increase it; we've just made a commitment to increase to 600. There are -  so, we rely...

WALEED ALY: But my point is we've made that commitment before, I think before the 2010  election we went... we promised to go from 50 to 500, and then in the last year or so we ended  up resettling maybe 100, if I'm being generous.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Yeah, and we're certainly doing better now than we were and, as I say to  you, it's not - we don't process them, the UNHCR does. We've spoken with the UNHCR about  that because we think it's important that when we've got an allocation, as we do, of 600 places  per annum we make sure that they're accessed and they're processed, and I would suggest that  you might want talk directly...

WALEED ALY: But are you saying the only reason we haven't resettled then is because they  haven't been processed?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Well, I'm suggesting to you, you might talk directly also to the UNHCR  because they refer the matters to us. We work closely with them, but as you know, because  they are an international body of such standing, we do rely upon them heavily to make those  decisions and make those referrals to us to consider.

Now I think there has been some challenges in the past. I met with UNHCR deliberately to go  through a number of those issues and I'm hoping that we can accelerate not only the processing  time but also ensure that we fill or fulfil the allocation that we provided for Indonesia.

WALEED ALY: Okay. But the picture that you're painting is one of Australia sitting there with  open arms saying, we want to resettle hundreds of people, but you simply have none that  you've processed and so we're just waiting to fill this quota. But that's simply not true. I mean  there are...

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: No, no. I'm not suggesting that. I'm suggesting there's 600 that we want  processed; that's what we've committed too, remembering that we don't look to increase  unduly the allocations of places in Indonesia, because Indonesia knows, as do we, that that may  just act as a magnet to come to the transit country.

I think what we've quite rightly done is allocated more places offshore beyond Indonesia,  further up. So we're not encouraging that movement.

WALEED ALY:  Okay. I understand that, but you either want to increase the intake or  resettlement from Indonesia, or you don't. You either...

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: And we do.

WALEED ALY: ...think that's a good idea that will help or you don't.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: And we do, and there will be an increase. You know, I think there have  been issues...

WALEED ALY: But this is my point. Why should we believe the increase will actually happen  given we've committed to it in the past?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Well, because there's already been more than there was last year, and  there's already more than the year before. So...

WALEED ALY: Yeah, but nowhere near what we've promised. Nowhere near it.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Well, we're promising 600. As I say to you, I think we will...I think we can  get to that target. We want to get to that target. You know, we've made the commitments to  fund those places. I agree with you, Waleed, there's been some issues in Indonesia. I met with  UNHCR to specifically talk about that and other matters and I'm hoping to see the target  realised.

WALEED ALY: I look forward to seeing how this plays out and whether or not this will be  different to things in the past. I know it was not on your watch, Brendan O'Connor, but  nonetheless it is now, so we'll what happens. I appreciate your time, thank you.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Not at all.

WALEED ALY: Brendan O'Connor, Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, speaking to us there  on RN Drive.







