

Transcript

Hon Christopher Pyne MP  2GB Radio  10 July 2013



SUBJECTS:  Labor leadership; Education funding

E&OE...............................



Hon Christopher Pyne MP: Hello Ross.

Ross  Greenwood: Look  here  is  the  interesting  thing  right  now,  is  you  know it  just  seems  as   though the  momentum  has  shifted.  You can see  it  in the  polls.  You can see  it in some  of the  coverage that Kevin Rudd is picking up.  The question is now back on the Coalition as to whether  it has not really adjusted its own strategy accordingly.  Is it something we haven’t seen or is it  something that the Coalition is waiting to see whether Kevin Rudd can effectively fizzle out.

Pyne: Well  Ross  it  was  inevitable  that  there  would  be  a  honeymoon  period  if  Kevin  Rudd   returned as Prime Minister and his strategy is to create as much distraction, froth and bubble, as  possible  from  the  main  issues  that  people  are  concerned  about  which  is  cost  of  living,  job   security,  border  protection  and  economic  management.  Now  he  wants  to  distract  everyone   from those issues, they’re not going to be distracted from those.  That means that the media is  inevitably  more  interested  in  what  Kevin  Rudd  has  to  say  because  they’ve  got  this  shiny  new   toy.  But as I said you can put a shiny new lid on a rubbish bin, it’s still the same ALP rubbish bin  that it was before.  At some point things will settle down and Kevin Rudd will be seen for what  he is: the man who gave us 45,000 boat arrivals, he started the rot in terms of debt and deficit,  who  supported  the  Emissions  Trading  Scheme  and  then  the  carbon  tax  and  then  put  up  the   carbon tax as part of his government and who has been one of the main reasons why there is  anxiousness in the business community about confidence.  One way you can deal with that is to  call an election and get on with it.

Greenwood: Just  one  thing  about  this  also,  and  your  other  business  of  course  is  as  the   Opposition Education Spokesman, the one thing about this is it seems slowly slowly.  They are  making  much  of  the  fact  that  more  states  and  territories  are  signing  up  to  their  education   reforms which they now don’t call the Gonski reforms, they call it their own education reforms.   Bill Shorten today says he has finalised a deal with independent schools to provide extra funding  for that area.  One billion dollars will flow to Australian independent schools over six years for  those that sign up.  Again in this regard, is this something that perhaps many parents listening to

this  who  send  their  kids  to  independent  schools  are  going  to  perhaps  be  attracted  by  that   policy?

Pyne: Bill  Shorten  has  done  no  such  thing  and  you  have  to  be  very  careful  about  what  Bill   Shorten says and what he does. Because let’s not forget he said he was supporting Kevin Rudd  and then he supported Julia Gillard three years ago, then he said he was supporting Julia Gillard  and he supported Kevin Rudd two weeks ago, so Bill Shorten has no credibility when it comes to  keeping his word. Can I say with respect to what happened  today is that  ISCA, the Independent  Schools  Council  of  Australia  has  no  authority  to  sign  any  agreements  with  the  Federal   Government  and  in  fact,  Victoria,  South  Australia  and  Western  Australia  independent  schools  have  all come  out  since  that  Bill Shorten press release  and pointed out  they’d signed no  such  agreement with the Federal Government, that the Federal Government needs to treat with each  independent  school  individually  because  there  is  no  Independent  system  as  such,  it  is  entirely   unlike  the  Catholic  system.  So  since  the  government  changed,  one  state  has  agreed  to  the   Gonski  reforms  which  is  Tasmania,  one  state  does  not  a  spring  make,  or  to  use  the  old   expression one swallow does not a spring make.  They have not got a national agreement on the  Gonski  model,  in  fact  they  now  have  six  different  agreements.  One  for  New  South  Wales,  a   sweetheart deal with South Australia which meant they got more money, sweetheart deal with  the  ACT  they  got  more  money,  Tasmania  got  more  money  and  was  told  they  could  split  it   however they wanted to, they now have negotiations with the Catholics, negotiations with the  Independents, they are far from a national system.

Greenwood: Just one final thing, going back to the current politicking that’s taking place, do you  still believe or does your internal polling perhaps indicate to you that despite what you see in  the newspapers, despite what you see in even some of these Newspolls that have been out this  week that the vast majority of those people who were disaffected in the Gillard government are  still waiting for the baseball bats to come out when the polling date is finally announced.

Pyne: Well there are two things I would say about that Ross. Number one, what I’ve picked up in  my electorate over the last two weeks is that people are relieved that Julia Gillard is not the  Prime Minister anymore and they are hoping we still won’t lose the election but they know it is  a different contest. Now if they don’t want us to lose the election it means they are not voting  for the Labor Party. The other thing I would say is that Tony Abbott has already dispatched Kevin  Rudd once. He did such a good job on Kevin Rudd and his failures that his own party got rid of  Kevin Rudd and if Kevin Rudd is so confident that he is doing so well, why is he scared to name  the election date? Why doesn’t he have the election in August when it’s due? The last election  was August 2010, the next election is due in August 2013. Putting it after August, he is actually  trying to gain extra hours of power and Kevin Rudd should stop running scared of Tony Abbott  and get on with the election.

Greenwood: Christopher Pyne the Shadow Education Minister, the Manager of Opposition  Business in the House of Representatives. Always good to have a chat.

ENDS

