SHADOW IMMIGRATION MINISTER SCOTT MORRISON

ABC INSIDERS 28.7.13

BARRIE CASSIDY, PRESENTER: We'll go to our program guest, this week it's the  Opposition spokesman for immigration, Scott Morrison.

Good morning.

SCOTT MORRISON, OPPOSITION IMMIGRATION SPOKESMAN: Good morning,  Barrie.

BARRIE CASSIDY: Did you ever imagine the Government could come up with a policy on  asylum seekers that would put them ahead of you in opinion polls?

SCOTT MORRISON: It's not about the polls, it's whether it can stop boats or not and  whether it can be implemented over time.

I understand Kevin Rudd's said that on another program this morning, that it's all about  implementation over time. And that's what was the proof in the pudding under the Howard  government.

So I know people want to believe that this thing is the answer, but what the answer is isn't  just something like this.

We will salvage what we can out of this but you need to do all the other things that we've  been saying for many years. And we've held the same position on this for more than a decade,  Barrie, as you know, and the Prime Minister has been for and against every single position in  this debate that you can think of.

BARRIE CASSIDY: But when you say you will salvage what you can, what will that be?

SCOTT MORRISON: At the moment that's not very clear. Because let's be clear about one  thing; this is not an offshore processing policy, this is an offshore settlement policy. They  were doing offshore albeit badly, before.

Offshore settlement requires changes to the law in Papua New Guinea and they may have  withdrawn their reservations with the UNHCR (United Nations High Commissioner on  Refugees).



But as yet we haven't gone through the process of that legislation and whether people can be  settled in the way the Government claims they can. Because certainly the arrangement  between Papua New Guinea and Australia does not support the claim that anyone found to be  a refugee will be resettled in Papua New Guinea. That's not the arrangement.

BARRIE CASSIDY: You won't commit to that fundamental principle of telling asylum  seekers who arrive by boat and found to be refugees that they will be resettled in PNG?

SCOTT MORRISON: If that can be achieved, Barrie, if that can be achieved. What I'm  saying is; as yet it's not clear that can be achieved.

BARRIE CASSIDY: Why wouldn't you give it a try? Kevin Rudd is giving it a try, why  wouldn't you?

SCOTT MORRISON: I'm not saying we're not giving it a try, Barrie. I'm saying at the  moment that's the logistic difficulty you need to work through. And I'm just being upfront  with people.

BARRIE CASSIDY: So you will give it a try?

SCOTT MORRISON: If you can put that in place sure, put it in place. But the Prime Minister  is saying right now it's a done deal, it's all happening. And he can't back that up and that's the  problem.

I know people might want to believe this is all done and dusted, but the truth here is there is a  long way to go both in the implementation and legal issues. Because I've seen it all before,  Barrie. I've seen these things unravel before with Labor, and we always end up in a worse  position with more tragedies, with more people coming on boats, when these things unravel  and fail.

BARRIE CASSIDY: Yes, but you don't know whether it will work and I guess neither does  Kevin Rudd.

SCOTT MORRISON: And neither do you, Barrie.

BARRIE CASSIDY: No, but is it a worth a try, that's the point? Is it worth a try?

SCOTT MORRISON: Of course, everything is worth a try. But this is no replacement. It's no  substitute for turning back boats. It's no substitute for temporary protection visas. It's no  substitute for offshore processing on Nauru as well as Manus Island. It's no substitute for  coordinating 15 agencies and getting them to work together and focus on this task all the way  up the chain.

Because our policy is about implementing not just ideas announced on two-page documents.  You've got to do it all, Barrie, that's my point.

BARRIE CASSIDY: If it works it's a substitute for temporary visas, if it works you won't  need them.

SCOTT MORRISON: Well Barrie you want to take that punt and the Australian people want  to take the punt on Kevin Rudd's silver bullet solution, and he's the one who said there are no  silver bullets in this, and ignore all the other measure you can take and not throw everything  at this problem that you can, and not bring 15 agencies together and work on implementation,  you can choose that.

But we think the best approach is to take everything we can from it and do whatever else we  could.

BARRIE CASSIDY: But you're saying you will take the punt, you will take the punt on this  along with other measures?

SCOTT MORRISON: No we're not saying that, you're saying that. What I'm saying is we  will salvage everything we can from this arrangement and we'll do everything we've said we  can do. And we have the plans and operational arrangements to implement. Because at the  end of the day it's implementation of policies that counts not big, bold announcements.

BARRIE CASSIDY: So it's a maybe?

SCOTT MORRISON: What's your question? What's the answer - you're apparently  answering your own questioning to me, Barrie.

BARRIE CASSIDY: The question is whether you adopt that principal that you send asylum  seekers to Papua New Guinea and you make it clear to these people that if they're found to be  refugees they will be resettled in Papua New Guinea? Your answer to that is maybe.

SCOTT MORRISON: If that can be achieved, of course we will do that. But the Prime  Minister can't actually say that can be achieved at the moment and he hasn't got an agreement  for it and he hasn't got any legislation in Papua New Guinea to back it up.

So at the moment it's just a pledge from the Prime Minister. It's not a done deal. It's just not in  that situation. So the claim he's making at the moment is not one that he can substantiate.

BARRIE CASSIDY: Do you accept that every time you criticise this proposal and you talk  about its limitations and the plan unravelling, that you're encouraging asylum seekers and  people smugglers to push on regardless?

SCOTT MORRISON: No. What I accept is, Barrie, is that if the Government wanted to talk  to us about this policy and we could have raised these issues with them in discussions then  they bypassed that opportunity when they chose to turn this into an election announcement  rather than actually trying to get people together on one side and work through the issue.

They chose to do the election announcement, they dropped it on us at that time, so it's our job  to hold the Prime Minister to account. Now he has made claims in that arrangement when he  announced it that are simply not backed up.

Now he can make claims, that's OK; he can make promises, that's OK. But he has to be  judged on his form about whether he can deliver on those promises. And this is the bloke who  started the boats. This is the bloke who now holds the biggest monthly record of arrivals for  any prime minister in our history; he's even surpassed Julia Gillard's history. Almost 4,000  people have turned up on boats since he was made Prime Minister for the second time.

BARRIE CASSIDY: But again the question is, when you say things like that are you not  encouraging asylum seekers and people smugglers not to take Kevin Rudd seriously?

SCOTT MORRISON: Well no, I'm holding the Prime Minister to account. That's my job

BARRIE CASSIDY: But it has that impact.

SCOTT MORRISON: It's also the media's job, Barrie. And I'm surprised that the sort of  questions that we've been raising haven't been raised by others.

But we'll certainly hold this Prime Minister to account. We'll remind Australians of his  record. And this is why, Barrie, this is the key point: because if he's re-elected and it all  unravels later, then we will be in a worse situation on this problem than we are today and I've  seen that happen.

I've been in this portfolio for four years, I've seen four immigration ministers. I've seen all of  them stumble and fall on this issue. The most recent one has still to prove himself. And what  I've seen is every time Labor makes these big promises in this area it unravels because at the  end of the day their heart's not in it and their record of implementation is appalling.

So you can't just judge them on the idea, you've got to judge them on their form of  implementation because that is what stops the boats.

BARRIE CASSIDY: But everybody wants people smugglers to believe that it's not worth the  effort, why would you discourage them - why wouldn't you encourage them?

SCOTT MORRISON: Because I think you've got to have a policy that you can implement  and that sustains over time, Barrie. And I'm not going to allow this con to be put over the  Australian people that the Prime Minister's big bluff is an answer all of its own.

Now we will seek to implement as much of this as we can with the proper policies that we've  outlined and everything else.

I mean why won't Kevin Rudd do this and turn back boats? Why won't he do this and expand  offshore processing on Nauru? Why won't he do this and coordinate 15 agencies that are  trying to work in this area? I mean, that's what we're saying.

We're going to try and do everything that he's got on his policy and we're going to do all the  rest of it as well. So why wouldn't you want to go the extra distance as the Coalition has  always been prepared to do?

BARRIE CASSIDY: If it is a game of bluff surely it's a game of bluff worth playing?

SCOTT MORRISON: Well only if you can back it up, Barrie, and that's the point. The  scrutiny doesn't back it up.

BARRIE CASSIDY: But that's not what a bluff is about.

SCOTT MORRISON: You're suggesting our policy should just be bluffs and there should  just be announcements with nothing to substantiate and everyone should fall in line because  Kevin Rudd says so before an election? If you're not prepared …

BARRIE CASSIDY: Well the announcement to substantiate it …

SCOTT MORRISON: Barrie, if you're not prepared to be cynical about what the Prime  Minister has announced based on his track record on form, I can accept that, that's your view.

But our view is that this Prime Minister has shocking form when it comes to border  protection. He's made a promise here; a promise, that's all it is, he hasn't been able to  substantiate it with changes to legislation and Papua New Guinea because this is about  resettlement.

The test of this is not just whether people actually go for processing in Papua New Guinea,  that's already policy. It's whether they can actually be resettled there. And that is what he has  been unable to substantiate to the Australian people.

BARRIE CASSIDY: Alright, but your policy now, and it's led, of course, by this idea of a  three-star military commander heading up the arrangements. To answer Admiral Chris  Barrie's question, how will that make any difference?

SCOTT MORRISON: In several ways, and I also note Chris Barrie in that same interview  indicated he actually hadn't fully read the document, and that was clear because we're  bringing four different areas, not just border protection command.

So there are four task groups: One that looks at disruption and deterrence up through the  chain and the AFP (Australian Federal Police) would lead that; then you have what happens  at sea with interceptions, and that's led by border protection command, which currently has a  two-star admiral; and then you've got the areas of detention and other processing issues, and  then transfers as well and those two areas are led by DIAC.

All of those four areas, Barrie, have been disconnected. And that's been one of the learnings  from Labor's failures in terms of why they haven't been able to implement policy effectively.

We will bring all that together, and we will have assets and people assigned formally by their  ministers including the Defence Minister, through the CDF (Chief of the Defence Force), to  put in place on top of that an operational command and headquarters, which is what the  military is very good at. They're very good at getting people together and focus on a mission  and focus on a task. And that's why we'd have the assignment of a three-star military  commander and a headquarters to run that operation.

BARRIE CASSIDY: I get the idea about it being better organised and better coordinated, but  why a three-star General rather than a two, what difference does that make?

SCOTT MORRISON: As General Molan advised us on this, having a three-star you have  someone who has the greater experience and capacity to work not just in the military space  but also in the civil space at a high level of experience. Now there are many people who  could step up to that job or could be assigned directly across. That's a decision for the CDF.

This is a level of experience and command capacity that we believe is necessary to bring all  this together because it's a very tough job. And we saw with Captain Emad, three agencies all  working on the same bloke. He kept pushing his trolley around a Canberra shopping centre  and then he left the country.

Now if Kevin Rudd wants to stay with a Captain Emad solution for coordination then that's  fine, we don't think that's the way to go.

BARRIE CASSIDY: What are the solders in Afghanistan supposed to make of that though.  When they're led, you send a two-star general to take care of them and fighting a war in  Afghanistan, and you send a three-star general to take on asylum seekers?

SCOTT MORRISON: Because the chain of command up through of what's happening in  Afghanistan continues, that's a military operation so at the end of the day that's commanded,  at the end of the day up through the CDF. What this is doing is someone is assigned across to  lead both a civil and military activity.

Now the only additional military people that are involved, as opposed to what's happening  now with our proposal, is the commander and the headquarters. That's the only - everyone  else who is currently involved from the military in this operation more generally remains the  same. What the difference is here is the coordination and the mission, the sense of urgency  and the focus and the ability to respond.

See, one of the problems the Government has had is that as things escalate you need the  capacity to respond. And having static policies under static ministers, all not talking to each  other, is a recipe for disaster.

Under Operation Sovereign Borders we could implement Kevin Rudd's announcement last  Friday better than he can.

BARRIE CASSIDY: And how widely did you consult within the armed forces about these  arrangements?

SCOTT MORRISON: Extensively. This is a product of years, Barrie, not even months.

BARRIE CASSIDY: Who did you talk to among the Defence chiefs?

SCOTT MORRISON: I'm not about to divulge the identities of those who have consulted  privately with us, Barrie, and I’m sure you would understand that, Barrie.

BARRIE CASSIDY: Because the Defence Force Chief General David Hurley made it clear  he provided no advice?

SCOTT MORRISON: Well that would be - and that is entirely appropriate. I mean he's the  CDF, he advises the Government. And that's why he was given the courtesy of being  informed the nature of the announcement on the morning. We've never claimed he was  consulted, it would be inappropriate to do so.

BARRIE CASSIDY: But when does it become appropriate? How far down the chain before it  becomes appropriate?

SCOTT MORRISON: The CDF has particular responsibilities. Others have been talking to us  for many, many years, Barrie. I've been approached by people in the military for years over  this. And their frustration, whether it's in Customs or the military or even DIAC and other  places, is it's an uncoordinated effort. You've got to have people who have their hands on all  the levers to be able to attack this problem. And this is the best way to do it in our view.

If the Government has a different view… Kevin Rudd dismissed this without even looking at  it. This just shows he's all about the election, Barrie, not trying to solve the problem. He had  his announcement, he thinks that's enough. He thinks people just want to believe that and  they'll be satisfied with that. I'm only going to be satisfied with a policy that will get the  outcome, and that requires doing this over a long period of time.

BARRIE CASSIDY: Well, you mentioned the election, is that another game of bluff going  on here? Do you think August 31 is definitely ruled out?

SCOTT MORRISON: Well I don't know. Only the Prime Minister would know.

But what I know is this: he's got to stop playing games with the Australian people over this.  This is a very important decision that he has to make and he should make it and not just have  businesses and others constantly dealing with the uncertainty around this issue. I mean he  seems to be enjoying the speculation and the hysteria around this. I don't think that's a very  responsible thing.

On the 21st of August or thereabouts it's three years since this last Government was put in  place. Now, after that date passing this Prime Minister, I don't think is on borrowed time, he's  on stolen time. And he should take this decision to the Australian people and we should get  on with this and he should stop playing games and running around having selfies taken of  him.

BARRIE CASSIDY: Thanks for your time this morning.

SCOTT MORRISON: Thanks a lot Barrie.



