1





T h e  H o n .  S i d  S i d e b o t t o m  M P





P a r l i a m e n t a r y  S e c r e t a r y  f o r  A g r i c u l t u r e ,  F i s h e r i e s  a n d  F o r e s t r y

F e d e r a l  M e m b e r  f o r  B r a d d o n



ABC Mornings Tasmania   With Leon Compton  Tuesday 23 July



Subjects: Election date, Tasmanian Economy, Shree Minerals’ Nelson Bay  River mine, Regional Resettlement Arrangement



LEON COMPTON: Sid Sidebottom is the ALP Member for Braddon. He's also  Parliamentary Secretary for Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry joins us this morning.  Mr Sidebottom, good morning to you.  SID SIDEBOTTOM: Good morning Leon.  LEON COMPTON: Why not an election now? What are you waiting for, as a party?  SID SIDEBOTTOM: Well, I think it's important that we bed down a number of policies  and policy changes that the Prime Minister deems to be necessary, but - and, of  course, as you know, the Prime Minister will determine when the election happens.  All I know is that the Labor Party is ready for that election and we look forward to it.  LEON COMPTON: What do you still need to do? What does the Prime Minister  deem to be necessary?  SID SIDEBOTTOM: Well, I think most recently policy changes in terms of moving  towards a floating price for the emissions trading scheme was a policy development  of the Prime Minister. And most recently the regional resettlement arrangement in  relation to asylum seekers, so that's just two policy areas that needed to be  reinforced, bedded down and, of course, we also need to be able to articulate them.  LEON COMPTON: Changing the timeframes on the emissions trading scheme and  the carbon tax in the short term is going to have financial implications for Tasmania.  Did you fight against it?  SID SIDEBOTTOM: Well, we certainly raised that issue and, of course, that meant  that it's going to affect Tasmanian forecasts for the future in terms of the budget.  That's been taken into account by the Tasmanian Government. There will be  foregone revenue lost on that, but it wasn't revenue that's necessarily - that's been  allocated in advance.  LEON COMPTON: The CommSec report on the State of the States yesterday  indicated that Tasmania came eighth in all of the - or came last, rather, in all of the  survey areas that it looked at in terms of economic performance. To what extent do  you think people will vote on that at the upcoming election?  SID SIDEBOTTOM: Well, again, I can't account for every person's individual vote. I  do know that the Federal Government has worked with the State Government and  will continue to do that, in very challenging times, and is investing a great deal in  terms of finances and programs into Tasmania to try and help the Tasmanian  economy restructure itself and try to deal with the challenges that we are. No one's

T R A N S C R I P T

2



denying that these are challenging times. The Federal Government is assisting in as  many ways as possible to assist our state to tackle these.  LEON COMPTON: And the Labor Party have put themselves behind proposals like  the Shree Minerals operation that would potentially exist in the Tarkine. I mean, are  you embarrassed by the snag that that has hit and the delay if, in fact, it doesn't  mean a complete stopping of that project?  SID SIDEBOTTOM: Well, I was disappointed by it and have immediately moved to  see how we can deal with that and to get it moving again, so hopefully we'll have  something to say about that in the short term.  LEON COMPTON: It sounds like you've got something brewing. Can you give us a  hint as to what that might be?  SID SIDEBOTTOM: Well, I'm not a lawyer, Leon, and my interpretation of the judge's  ruling in that case was - I interpreted it as a technicality that we can overcome fairly  quickly. That's my expectation, and if that's the case then I wanted to act on it as  soon as.  LEON COMPTON: And do you have legal advice that suggests that that will  happen?  SID SIDEBOTTOM: I think the Minister, of course, will be taking that. I don't have the  legal advice per se, but I - my interpretation, I think, is generally correct.  LEON COMPTON: On ABC local radio our guest this morning, Sid Sidebottom, the  Member for Braddon. Can we talk about asylum seeker policy and the changes in  the last 72 hours or so?  SID SIDEBOTTOM: Sure.  LEON COMPTON: We heard the Anglican Bishop for Tasmania, Harrower,  suggesting that the policy was, in his words, reprehensible yesterday. I mean, how  are you feeling about the changes that your party's announced?  SID SIDEBOTTOM: Leon, you and I had this conversation I think 12 months ago I  pointed out then this a very difficult area both emotionally and ethically and of course  in terms of trying to determine public policy. And I can understand why people are  very upset about this and it does leave you with knot in your stomach. The issue is  that we have an industry that's developed about putting people on boats, very unsafe  boats, and people are losing their lives. How do we attempt to stop that? And the  best way to try and do that, if it's at all possible, is to try to develop a regional  solution.  We've sought to do that over a number of years. The Malaysian solution, if I can use  that term, it's not appropriate, but that regional approach, was knocked back by the  Liberals and the Greens. We are continuing to seek a regional solution and that's  what the Papua New Guinea settlement agreement is seeking to do. We have to  stop the boats. Many people are losing their lives at sea. We have to send a  message and the message basically has to be if you sell a package or you traffic  someone to come to Australia, right, and those boats arrive, the message will be -  the actuality has to be you will not be settled in Australia.  LEON COMPTON: Some people will be coming here not as economic refugees, but  fleeing persecution. They will be sent to Port Moresby, a place that it is extremely  dangerous to walk around at night and where we know Australian expats live in  compounds behind fences and razor wire with armed guards. That's where we would  send refugees?  SID SIDEBOTTOM: Well, your description of that is emotive and I know others have  said that and it is really casting a reflection on Papua New Guinea, the community,  and its society.  LEON COMPTON: But we know that Port Moresby's dangerous. I mean, that's just  how it can be.

3



SID SIDEBOTTOM: Well, the settlement is and the arrangements will be that we will  provide a safe place for those people to settle. Now, that's the arrangement and  that's what our obligation is and that's what we will seek to do. The other issue is  that, and I think that's lost, is that Australia will continue to take a humanitarian intake  into the future. The issue we have at the moment is those arriving by boat lessen the  number of people that are in camps and transit camps throughout the world seeking  to enter Australia. If we can reduce these numbers and it begins to do what we  believe it should do, then we'll be able to take more people in the humanitarian  intake and increase it to 27,0000.  LEON COMPTON: There's…  SID SIDEBOTTOM: It's not as if we're abandoning people.  LEON COMPTON: There's a political element to this, no doubt. You want to be seen  to have been able to solve this problem. How confident are you that this will work  and will stop people seeking asylum here by boat.  SID SIDEBOTTOM: Well, it's really important that we develop a regional solution.  Working with Indonesia, working with our near neighbours, working with Papua New  Guinea, it's very important. We're also working on a global level to try and deal with  this and we do certainly thank the President of Indonesia for looking to create a  summit or a forum in the near future to try and tackle this. So it's very important.  The other thing is we need some form of bipartisanship in Australia, and I have to  say Tony Abbott's reaction to this unfortunately really does question his fitness to be  Prime Minister. He seems to have accepted it in principle earlier on and I know  others like Malcolm Turnbull and, indeed, even Will Hodgman in Tasmania have  accepted it in principle. Now he's undermining it, so the message going out to the  people smugglers - and remember, this is the industry that looks at every nuance  that happens in terms of policy - Tony Abbott's message out there is look, don't think  that we're going to support this. So immediately put people on boats.  It's very unfortunate. We need a bipartisan approach so that we can try to make this  work, work it regionally, at the same time continue to increase our humanitarian  intake.  LEON COMPTON: Why has it taken your party so long to come to this position do  you think?  SID SIDEBOTTOM: Well, we've really struggled with this, like everybody struggles  with it, Leon, throughout the world. And I said what we've tried to do, and this  happened under Julia Gillard and earlier, is seek a regional approach. Well, that's  what we're trying to do and in this one, it's effectively the message will be if you send  people on unsafe boats and they arrive in this country without a visa, you will not  settle in Australia.  Now, we have to consolidate that. We have to make it clear we need bipartisanship  in terms of this. Tony Abbott must declare his support for this, otherwise he  undermines it and in doing so undermines his fitness to be Prime Minister.  LEON COMPTON: Good to talk to you this morning.  SID SIDEBOTTOM: It's a pleasure. Thanks, Leon.  LEON COMPTON: Sid Sidebottom, the Member for Braddon.

