

Families at the Curtin Alternative Place of  Detention  Wednesday, 29 May 2013

Interview with The Project, Network Ten

Question: The Minister for Immigration and Citizenship is Brendan O'Connor.  Minister, under Australian law children are only supposed to be placed in detention  as a last resort. Last year Amnesty found that Curtin wasn't appropriate to house  adults, let alone children. Why are you ignoring both the law and the advice of  experts?

Brendan O'Connor: We believe we're doing the right thing here in accordance with  the law and in accordance with how we deal with people who've come in this  manner. We need to make sure we keep families together and we want to make sure  they're in not too long, so we assess them for their identity, health and security and  then, as I announced recently, when I announced Curtin, we would be looking to  release people either into community detention or on bridging visas so they won't be  in detention for longer than 120 days.

Question: Brendan I'm a little bit confused. What is the difference between the  alternative place of detention at Curtin and the detention centre?

Brendan O'Connor: The alternative place of detention is just a designated term for  families. We are doing what wasn't done in the past - teachers, recreational  activities, cabins that are configured for families - and that's why the name Curtin is  seen in terms of the detention facility of a decade ago as a pejorative.It's not like that  now, we do take into account the needs and I think we do a reasonable job. But at  the same time we have to be vigilant to make assessments about security, health  and identity.

Question: We've just had stories from refugees who've mental health problems after  having long stays at Curtin. Given 90 per cent of asylum seekers who come here are  found to be valid refugees, aren't we just creating a large number of new Australians  who as well as having to adapt to a new country, have to deal with mental health  issues as a result of their detention?

Brendan O'Connor: It would be the case if you keep people indefinitely or for very  long periods of time you can see that, but look, I've spoken to child psychologists  and other psychologists and they say to me that if they understand that they're on  pathway to a different form of accommodation then the chances of them having any  long term issues is negligible. It would be different I think if there was indefinite

detention or the period went too long. I accept that would be a problem, but we have  to balance these competing interests between the care of people, which we are  concerned about - on one hand - and indeed at the same time, security and health  issues.



See: Index of Speeches

URL: http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/bo/2013/bo203743.htm  Last update: Thursday, 30 May 2013 at 09:18 AEST



