

MINISTER FOR TRADE AND INVESTMENT  The Hon Andrew Robb AO MP   12 November 2013  NEWSLINE, AUSTRALIA NETWORK

INTERVIEW WITH JIM MIDDLETON

Subjects: Trade and investment relationship with Indonesia; FTA negotiations; Foreign  investment   E&OE…  JIM MIDDLETON: Minister, very good to be talking to you.  ANDREW ROBB: Nice to see you, Jim.  JIM MIDDLETON: We'll talk about your impending trip in a moment, but first of all I'd like to ask  you this: you have made it clear both by word and deed that you'd like to see the trade  relationship between Australia and Indonesia reach its full potential.   How much though does all the to-ing and fro-ing recently over asylum seekers and espionage  complicate matters?  ANDREW ROBB: I don't think it's going to make a huge material difference. The thing is that with  all of the free trade agreements that we're currently looking to bring to a conclusion, there is great  complementarity - in other words, Indonesia needs us and we need Indonesia. The same can be  said for Korea, and Japan and China.   So, there is an imperative on both sides, even though there are things that are going to occur, I  suspect, with all four of them during the course of the negotiations which might be a distraction.  JIM MIDDLETON: It can't help your task to have Australian ministers describing Indonesia's  attitudes as ‘very frustrating’ and ‘without rhyme or reason’?  ANDREW ROBB: Well, as I say, I'm finding in my negotiations and discussions with Ministers  that I'm dealing with, that they're under pressure to identify opportunities and food sources and all  the rest that are very important to Indonesia and the other countries. And similarly, I'm looking for  trade investment opportunities to help us grow the economy here, which is under a fair bit of  pressure, right?   So there is an imperative, and you do find that people can separate these things. I think it's the  same in the Parliament here - you can be having a raging debate with your opposite number on  something or other, and then walk outside and engage productively and constructively on another  issue. So, you know, we're all adults, and I think we're all getting on with business.  JIM MIDDLETON: Indonesia’s the world's fourth most populous nation, it's Australia's biggest  close neighbour, and yet it's only Australia's twelfth largest trading partner. What's Australian  business been doing wrong?  ANDREW ROBB: It's, you know, it's a part of history in a way. And Australian business in many  respects has seen immediate opportunities, more obvious opportunities in other parts of the  region in the recent decade at least, and so the absolute explosion of trade with China. I mean 50  per cent of all of our exports now go to China, Japan and Korea.   But having said that, Indonesia has really, I think, in a business sense, got its act together over  the last ten to twelve years in particular. And there is now a lot of interest, there's a lot of  foundations being laid - just like business people did 20 years ago, laid foundations in China -  which are only in recent years starting to really bear fruit. I think the same can be said of  Indonesia, and I think you'll find in the years ahead if we persist, we will start to see some very  significant growth in trade with Indonesia.  JIM MIDDLETON: The head of Indonesia's Chamber of Commerce, Suryo Sulisto, told me  recently that Australian business could miss the boat in Indonesia, that there are plenty of other  countries lining up to invest and do business, to trade. This does suggest that Australian business  does need to be more adventurous, does it not?

ANDREW ROBB: Well I can't speak for Australian business. We can try and aid and abet their  access, they've got to make their own commercial decisions. But you think back just to the  delegation the Prime Minister took after the election, there were some very serious players from  Australia. Now nearly all of them have got a strong toehold already in Indonesia. Now, the  capacity to grow those businesses, I think, is very significant. I spent a lot of time on the live cattle  trade, to restore that, I think the capacity there is enormous as well.

So, we can move quickly on a number of fronts, and you know, I know that there's a lot of other  competition for their business, but there is a great complementarity as I said. We've got to look  over the long haul, we've got to position ourselves, it is our closest large neighbour, very  important to us in all sorts of ways, as the Prime Minister has said, it is our most important  relationship, is Indonesia. We intend to act accordingly.  JIM MIDDLETON: You're off to China, Japan, Korea very shortly indeed, three of Australia's four  biggest trading partners. The Prime Minister has pledged to have a free trade agreement with  China concluded within 12 months. He's set you quite a challenge, hasn't he, given that  negotiations on this have been languishing for the best part of a decade?  ANDREW ROBB: Well, I think he set me a target for all three for within 12 months, but be that as  it may, there has been a lot of negotiation go on in all three of these free trade agreements, but  they have stalled. They have reached a point where they were going nowhere…  JIM MIDDLETON: What was the problem?  ANDREW ROBB: Well there were issues there which, in many respects, there were no-go areas  for the previous Government. And there were no-go areas in regards to China, Japan and Korea  from their end. And they got to a point where there was no movement, and they stalled.   Now, bringing a new perspective to it, some of the issues that were seen as no-go areas - which I  can't really expand on because that means I'm putting my cards all on the table, to be honest, so  it's not very smart in a card game - but those no-go areas I think we're able to break through  some of those things in a way which does give me hope that we can in fact complete all of these  three sometime in the next 12 months.  JIM MIDDLETON: Is the fact of the matter that for Australia, the playing field has in fact  changed? In China for example, we had much of the playing field to ourselves. Now China’s  concluded FTAs with a number of countries including New Zealand for example, and it’s the case  that Australia does not have the leverage that it once had. It’s not a matter of defending  Australia’s interests rather than going in as aggressively as we might have in the past.  ANDREW ROBB: Well, I do think it's in our interest to complete these negotiations as quickly and  as effectively as possible and not hang out for necessarily 110 per cent. But we need quality, we  need quality agreements.   But I just say to you it's in our interest to quickly conclude it, but I have discovered that  enthusiasm and eagerness amongst the trade ministers in each of those three countries, and the  Prime Minister has met with the leaders of all three countries and has found also there is a sense  from all three that they want to quickly complete these negotiations.  So I find that there is an understanding, and I've seen it more broadly. I've met now 18 of my  counterparts, trade ministers around the world. There does seem to be a sense of despondency  about the way in which interventionist policies have not led to further growth, have not taken the  world back out of the malaise that it struck with the global financial crisis, and they are looking for  trade and growth, for trade to grow growth, for trade and investment.  And you finally get it in many places around the world and all of a sudden they're looking for new  policy tools, I think, and that has given them new impetus, not just for these three agreements,  but for the so-called TPP, the Trans-Pacific Partnership, and the Services Agreement, and the  WTO negotiations in a narrow sense.  So we're seeing a new phenomenon, I think, in trade around the world, a new impetus, if you like,  and we've got to ride that wave. That wave may not last. So if we can ride that wave, I think we'll  get, you know, a common interest in all of these countries with ourselves, and we've got some  real prospect I think of reaching a conclusion.  JIM MIDDLETON: Former Australian Ambassador to China, Geoff Raby, who was involved in the  Chinese FTA negotiations, told me recently that Australia would have to be more accommodating  on the question of Chinese investment in Australia to get a deal done. Do you accept that that is  the case?

ANDREW ROBB: Well, we've been through all this. I've got, I think, what is an attractive  investment package to put to the Chinese while still respecting some of the sensitivities here. I  don't want to, again, put all the detail on the page, but you're absolutely right, investment is  important to them. It's important to us. We need that investment. We need that investment if we

are to grow the economy and to realise the opportunities that are out there.  So it is an important part of this deal and it will be an important part of what I put to them.  JIM MIDDLETON: One final subject, the first big test of this government's free trade credentials is  not that far away. Do you accept that the proposed American takeover of GrainCorp is a serious  test of the Prime Minister's statement, which he's made several times since the election, that  Australia is open for business again?  ANDREW ROBB: Well, it's a very important deal that's on the table. It's over $3 billion. I don't  accept the test side of it.  JIM MIDDLETON: Well, I do know that a lot of people in a lot of countries, business executives,  governments too, are watching this very closely and they do regard it as a test.  ANDREW ROBB: Well, I know a lot of them are looking at it because I've been around the world  since the election and there is a lot of interest in it. I accept that. But at the same time, we have  got thresholds on investment, which are very large in the case of the U.S., $1 billion. Anything  above that has to go to the Foreign Investment Review Board to look at the national interest.  Now, there is a reason for that. Every country around the world, you know, reserves the  prerogative to protect their national interest. So we've got that there for a reason.   So if the Foreign Investment Review Board find reasons to object to it, well, that's part of our  longstanding policy position on both sides of politics, for that matter, and we are here in the end  to look after the national interest.  So I think we can be open for business. Already I think you'll find enormous clearage of, you  know, environmental prospects that were not concluded, projects right across the board already  Greg Hunt has dealt with. A lot of business has already been encouraged.   We are very much open for business. I don't know which way it will go, but I wouldn't hold that out  as the be all and end all.  JIM MIDDLETON: Minister, thank you very much.  ANDREW ROBB: Thanks very much, Jim.

- Ends -



