PRIME MINISTER

CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY                             EMBARGOED UNTIL DELIVERY

FOREIGN CORRESPONDENTS' ASSOCIATION NEWSMAKER LUNCH  SYDNEY  4 APRIL 2013

[ACKNOWLEDGMENTS OMITTED]

2013 is a decisive year for our nation.

So today, I want to speak about two things - the facts and the future.

Where we are - and where we need to be.

First, the facts.

We have more jobs and stronger growth than any of our peers in any of the major  developed nations.

Over 900,000 jobs created since we came to office, while millions have been added  to jobless queues around the world.

Unemployment at 5.4 per cent, less than half the rate in Europe at 12 per cent.

We have lower interest rates than we’ve had since 1996.

They’re much lower than when Labor came to Government, saving $100 a week for  the average family.

We have the highest median wealth in the world.

That is, we’re not just good at creating wealth - we’re also good at sharing it.

We have low inflation.

Annual underlying inflation has been at or under 2.4 per cent for the whole of the last  year, the first time this has happened since 1999.

We have a triple, triple-A credit rating.

By that I mean we are for the first time ever triple-A rated with a stable outlook by all  three major ratings agencies.

We have joined a very exclusive club with only 7 other countries as members.

The fact the club is so exclusive proves the difficulty of being triple, triple-A rated.

We have a strong record of economic growth.

We're now the 12th biggest economy in the world, up from 15th when we came to  office.

Over the same period, our economy has grown more than five times faster than  Germany and the United States.

And even on productivity and industrial disputation, which has seen more barrels of  ink spilled and trees felled than any other economic topic, the facts tell their own  story.

Labour productivity growth for the market sector through the year to December 2012  is significantly above its 10-year average annual growth rate.

Industrial disputations are, on average, about a third of rate under the previous  Government - which included the draconian Work Choices regime.

Enterprise bargaining is doing its job and, as a result, there hasn't been even a whiff  of a wages breakout from the mining sector into the wider economy - like there was  in the last mining boom of the early 1980s.

It’s hard to reconcile this Australia with either the economic cringe which discounts  our national economic achievements - or the political negativity which denies them.

I know foreign correspondents and your home bureaus aren’t strangers to this  conundrum.

It seems hardly a week passes when a respected overseas journal or international  organisation doesn’t point out Australia’s good fortune and puzzle over our fractious  politics.

The UN Human Development Index puts Australia in second place; the OECD Better  Life index puts us first.

The Economist recently ranked countries according to the “best place to be born”,  and Australia came second after Switzerland, up from 18th place in 1988.

The UK Guardian recently noted that as “the world lurches from crisis to economic  crisis, the land of Oz is powering ahead”.

And even the stern conservatives at the Heritage Foundation have praised our  “impressive economic resilience.”

I don’t mean that our nation should be boastful.

Things can always be improved - and improving them is my mission, my driving  purpose.

But all Australians are entitled to be quietly proud of what we have achieved  together.

In a loud and clamorous political marketplace where bad news sells and crazy fear  campaigns abound, the facts don’t always get to speak for themselves.

In the nature of politics, no one has entirely clean hands, and we can all do more to  lift the standard of debate.

But make no mistake; ignoring the facts is not just an insult to the quality of political  debate.

It is an insult to the Australian people because those facts are the result of hard work  and unremitting reform by the Australian community.

So my first point today is to urge everyone involved in the political process - elected  leaders, commentators, business and civil society - to argue on the facts.

Anything less is a disservice to our people and our democracy.

A consideration of the facts then takes us to the future.

The future that will, in so many ways, be decided on September 14.

One thing this will not be is a contest about some “lost golden age”.

This is not a time for cosy bed-time stories.

There should be no false nostalgia for the days that preceded the global financial  crisis: the days when our household savings ratio hit zero, when easy credit and  rapidly rising terms of trade created a sugar hit that could never be sustained.

Even then, with rivers of gold flowing into federal coffers, a priceless opportunity was  squandered.

Taxation receipts as a share of GDP were higher in the entire period between 2002-03 to 2007-08 than in every year since and every year before bar one.

Had the Howard Government collected the same amount of revenue as a unit of  GDP as we currently do, the last seven years of the Howard Government would  have been in deficit.

But rather than invest it in the future, this revenue was spent on quick fixes, at the  same time bequeathing a legacy of declining productivity, rising inflation and skills  shortages.

Not days we want to bring back.

We can only become a stronger nation, a nation of prosperity for all, if we correctly  diagnose today’s challenges and enable our nation to seize tomorrow’s  opportunities.

This means we must document and explain our plans for the future at a level of  detail and financial costing which honours the intelligence of the Australian voters.

Bluff and bravado may have served our opponents well to date, but they are no  answer now.

No answer this close to an election.

No answer now the carbon pricing fear campaign has been exposed as nonsense.

No answer now my own side of politics has resolved its leadership debate.

Now, the times demand better.

The times require deeper thought about the nature of our economic growth today  and our economic opportunity tomorrow.

Our economic growth today is creating jobs.

But that growth has not been generating government revenue in the way in which it  has in the past.

Most federal taxes are aligned with nominal GDP, the actual dollar price we receive  for our exports and our economic production.

But, unusually, nominal GDP is growing more slowly than real GDP simply because  while production volumes have continued to grow, the prices they command have  moderated.

This unusual divergence between nominal and real GDP growth has happened only  a handful of times in the half century since the Bureau of Statistics began producing  quarterly national accounts.

It means government revenues are lower than our experts reasonably predicted  them to be.

This revenue challenge puts an even greater focus on the need to ensure that future  Budget expenditure is matched with responsible and targeted savings.

This is the discipline with which we all must live - every politician, every  commentator, every advocacy group.

This discipline should not be obscured by a false debate about debt and deficit.

Our net debt is at ten per cent of GDP, the equivalent of a person earning $100,000  a year having a mortgage of $10,000.



To keep this in perspective, our net debt as a percentage of GDP is around one  tenth of the expected peak across major advanced economies.

This net debt is obviously manageable and exists, not because of ongoing  expenditure decisions, but because of the huge revenue hit we’ve seen due to the  GFC and the unusual global economic conditions we've seen since.

Anyone who pretends this debt should not exist is effectively denying the GFC  happened.

Anyone who pretends the GFC didn’t happen should be treated as the same kind of  amusing curiosity as those who believe the earth is flat.

Certainly, it is impossible for such a person to play any role in the hard decision-making necessary in our nation’s life.

Similarly, it is impossible for any person of reason to deny the revenue effects  associated with today’s particular economic circumstances.

As a government, we will show through our May Budget our continued focus on  fiscal discipline.

As a government, we will also continue to describe and prepare for what we have  called the “Asian Century”.

The economic order of the world is changing, in turn the strategic order of the world  is changing, and we are on the frontline of the challenges and the opportunities that  those changes bring.

By 2030 there will be more than 3 billion middle class consumers in the region to our  north.

Thanks to the relationships and capabilities we’ve built over four decades, Australia  is pushing on an open door as we enter the Asian Century.

But once we enter, everything that follows depends on our skill and ingenuity.

Nothing is guaranteed to us - success is not pre-ordained.

Asia has the wealth and the demand.

Whether we meet that demand is entirely up to us.

And let’s not imagine we have the field to ourselves.

Europe and the Americas are eyeing the same opportunities as we are.

As are Asian countries - they are selling more goods and services to each other  than ever before.



The Asian Century will also involve difficult adjustments, and the high dollar is a clear  example of this.

It's painful to many sectors.

But like Germany under the towering deutschmark in the days before the Euro, a  high currency need not be a barrier to making products and services of such quality  that our partners still want to buy them.

The sustained strength of our dollar is now a feature of the economic landscape - on  a trade weighted basis, it recently rose to its highest level since 1985.

And it may persist for some time given Australia’s status increasingly as something  of a safe haven currency - Australian dollar to US dollar exchanges are now  estimated to be the fifth highest traded currencies in the world.

While the high dollar has put significant competitive pressure on many industries, the  answer to this is not low wages; in a high-skill advanced economy, it should never  be.

It takes a more sophisticated approach - policy-rich, detailed, comprehensive.

That’s why my Government has a plan for Australian jobs which has just those  features.

A plan that means we will be seizing the opportunity in our region as well as the  opportunities at home.

It's a plan to make sure that we have many diverse sources of strength in our  economy.

The next election must be a referendum on policy.

It must be a test of who has a blueprint for our nation’s future in the Asian Century.

And it is only Labor that has that plan.

A plan for the future that rests upon five pillars which I’ve described many times:

Skills and education:

It’s not only about uplifting the horizons of every individual.

Independent modelling in 2010 showed that our reforms could provide an overall  benefit to the national economy of around $4,000 per person per year.

We cannot win prosperity or create opportunity in this Asian Century if these reforms  are stopped.

High speed broadband for all Australians:

Each 10 percentage point increase in broadband penetration is estimated to add  around $20 billion to Australia's GDP.

Without fibre to the premises, a vision only Labor will realise, we will be left in the  horse and buggy lane while other nations zoom past us in formula one cars.

Clean energy and innovation:

In the first six months since our carbon price was implemented, electricity emissions  went down by 8.6 per cent compared to the same six month period the previous  year.

And the volume of energy from renewable sources increased by almost 30 per cent,  creating new jobs, and helping to save the planet along the way.

Our nation can’t afford the costs of trying to repeal carbon pricing.

Competition and deregulation:

A Productivity Commission analysis of 17 of our Seamless National Economy  reforms estimated that business costs would be cut by $4 billion a year.

Our energy market reforms announced last December will alleviate the burden of  future household electricity bills by around $250 a year.

This major reform cannot be delivered if the problem the reform is directed at is  denied.

Tax reform:

We’ve increased by six and a half times the tax write-off that small businesses get on  new asset purchases - an investment injection of nearly $1 billion into the job-creating sector of our economy.

We've delivered three rounds of tax cuts. And we've tripled the tax free threshold  so that 1 million people no longer lodge any tax return at all.

This means that a worker on $50,000 is paying $2,000 less in tax than they did in  2007.

Small businesses and families can’t afford the tax hikes being promised by the other  side of politics.

These are the five pillars this Government has identified as key to increasing jobs,  prosperity and productivity.

These support our plan for Australian jobs.

A plan to back Australian firms to win more work at home so that large projects will  need to engage in Australian Industry Participation Plans, creating new local jobs on  existing projects.

A plan to support Australian industry to increase exports and win new business  abroad.

A plan to invest in up to 10 Industry Innovation Precincts which will bring together  researchers, innovators, sources of new knowledge and link them with businesses.

Transforming this new knowledge into new products, new ways of doing things,  seizing innovation, creating the jobs of the future.

A plan to grow small businesses, creating new mid-sized businesses and helping  them to access and prosper on world markets.

This is a serious plan for our nation; a serious plan for our future.

That’s what I meant when I said at the Press Club back in January that we needed to  put policies and plans back at the centre of our national discourse.

That time is here.

This is how Labor always governs - this is the modern Labor model.

Doing the things needed for a mature, high wage economy to succeed in a dynamic,  emerging region like Asia.

Competing on skills and quality.

Playing to our strengths.

Diversifying our economic base.

Building a culture of innovation.

And perhaps most importantly, leveraging our relationships with Asia as the region  grows and rises.

It’s no accident that tomorrow I will leave for a visit to China - a visit long planned  and prepared for.

It's my second visit to China and follows my many visits to the key nations in our  region - India, Japan, Indonesia, Korea, Malaysia, Vietnam, Singapore.

Appropriately, 2013 is the 40th anniversary year of the first visit by an Australian  Prime Minister to the People's Republic.

I’ll be leading the most senior Australian political delegation ever to visit China.

I will be among the first Western leaders to meet the new leadership.

I’ll be promoting our trade and economic interests and sharing perspectives on  global and regional economic and security challenges.

But I'm not just going to celebrate our existing strong relationship and its  underpinnings.

But to look ahead to how we can build the comprehensive relationship envisioned in  our Asian Century White Paper, including how leaders can help deliver a relationship  of greater depth and durability in a more complex future.

The timing of this visit so soon after the new leadership has entered into office is  deliberate and reflects the importance of our rapidly evolving relationship with China  and our high-level political oversight of that relationship.

And more broadly, it reflects the centrality of Asia in the story of our nation for the  21st century.

Nothing in our destiny as a nation is certain.

We saw that a decade ago when the mining boom hit and the then-Government had  no plan for skills, no plan for infrastructure, and no plan for broadband.

I won’t leave our nation similarly unprepared.

As a result, we will win in the Asian Century.

[ENDS]

PRIME MINISTER  TRANSCRIPT OF Q AND A SESSION  FOREIGN CORRESPONDENTS' ASSOCIATION NEWSMAKER LUNCH  SYDNEY

4 APRIL 2013

E & O E - PROOF ONLY

Subjects:      Asylum seekers and immigration; China; Japan; Trade; Fiji;  Federal election; First female Prime Minister; New Zealand

HOST: Thank you very much, Prime Minister. I might kick off the Q and A session  with the first question. You mentioned several of the economic indicators of the  Australian economy. There is this 21 years of constant growth, relatively  low unemployment rate, very low public debt level.

There are, as always, several factors that led to this success and I guess there was  also some luck in it, but I would like to focus on one factor that Australia can  influence and that is population growth, mainly fuelled by immigration.

So I'm wondering what you think - how dependent the Australian economy is on  future population growth and thus immigration, and I guess you also have some idea  how big Australia can get?

PM: Thank you. Thank you for that first question.

We are, of course, a nation of migrants, and we very successfully managed a very,  very sizable post-war migration program.

I am one of the products of that post-war migration program and if we took a walk  down any of the streets of Sydney today, we would meet so many other Australians  whose family story is about migrating here, either in recent years or the  earlier generation of their family migrating in the post-Second World War period.

So we will continue in the years to come, in my view, to be a nation that welcomes  migrants and particularly welcomes skilled migrants, and we continue to operate  quite a sizeable immigration program.

We have put the focus on skilled migration and I think that that is appropriate.  It's appropriate for our economic needs.

And our focus too is on permanent migration; on having people come to Australia  and join our nation.

We have very good rates of having people come, become permanent residents and  then become citizens.

I think one of the ways in which we offer citizenship, the citizenship ceremonies we  have around the country, are a special way that we mark the entry of people into  being full members of the Australian nation.

So, we will continue to see immigration, it will be important to our economic growth.

It won't, of course, be the dominant part of our economic growth. We will have an  economy with many sources of strength, but migration will still play a role.

In terms of estimating population numbers for the future, I'm not one that says you  need to set a target.

I think what you've got to do is manage your migration program in line with your  nation's needs, which means that there will always be some year-by-year  adjustments.

What I've always thought was important was to have a sense of settlement patterns  and one of the things that I think particularly the NBN will do and the focus we've  brought to regional Australia is we will see more diffuse settlement patterns than  we have in the past, where overwhelmingly migrants have come to our biggest cities  and indeed for some migrant groups they've overwhelmingly settled in one part of  those cities.

QUESTION: How do you view Australia's strategic position in the trying of China, US  and Australia? You have allowed US marines to be stationed in Darwin.  More marines are coming to Australia.

Will that be a big part of your discussion in China, and I know China looked quite  critically at that situation last year.

Will that be important in the view of the North Korean tensions as well at the  moment?

PM: The stationing of the marines in Darwin is not news, certainly not news to China,  and I've attended international meetings with Chinese leaders since  that announcement was made. Indeed, I've attended a number of them.

I don't view us as being in a position where the strong relationship we have  with China, the strong and growing relationship we have with China, is somehow in  contest or in contrast to the relationship we have with the United States of America  where we have both the bonds of history and today's friendship and our outlook  for the future.

I think to put Australia in that position misunderstands our position, but I think it  actually misdiagnoses the nature of the relationship between the US and China.

And one would say for very different nations with very different cultural outlooks and  very different political systems, that the US and China have shown the maturity to  manage their relationship and manage it well.

Inevitably there is some strategic competition but overwhelmingly this relationship  between the US and China has been managed well and my view is that it will  continue to be managed well in the future.

In those circumstances, for us, we will continue to do what we've done for some  period of time, to tend to our friendship and alliance with the United States whilst  growing our relationship with China.

On the deployment of the marines in Darwin, this is a decision that I took as part of  taking a new step forward in our ongoing alliance with America.

We made sure that we briefed our regional partners about it. Overwhelmingly it was  well received in our region of the world.

People do understand that having those marines there means that we can engage in  joint exercising and work on things like humanitarian relief. And all too often in our  region we are called to each other's aid for humanitarian relief.

So I think the perspective on those marines is not as dramatic as sometimes the  media reporting would lead you to believe.

We're talking about exercising for six months of the year in what is a  good environment to exercise in, that it is a very hard environment so when you're  trying to breed up very tough marines, it is a good place to go exercising, and so it  suits the United States and we were happy to accommodate them.

QUESTION: You have talked about deepening the relationship with Asia and Japan  has expressed to enter the TPP and going strengthen the tie with United States  and Australia and other Asian countries.

How do you relate your policy towards China and TPP negotiations as  Australia hasn't given consent to Japanese entry to the negotiation? And what would  be the obstacle for you?

PM: Sure, we are involved in a wide range of trade discussions and we take the view  that we would have liked to have seen more progress in the Doha round in the global  trade discussions.

Our Minister for Trade, in an intrepid and determined way, continues to press for  that. But of course there have been some major obstacles with pressing the Doha  round to conclusion.

We therefore pursue trade talks in a variety of multilateral and bilateral settings.

We continue to have discussions with Japan about a bilateral FTA. We continue  to have discussions with China about a bilateral FTA.

We have signalled that we want to be involved in the Trans-Pacific Partnership and  we are involved in those discussions.

We've welcomed the expression of interest from Japan.

We think that this has to be an ambitious, high level agreement, so we want to  see every nation that expresses a wish to join meeting that aspiration of an  ambitious, high level agreement.

And if Japan is entering these talks with that aspiration, then we will be very  welcoming of Japan's involvement.

Of course this is something that needs to get the consent of all TPP countries in the  same way that the entry of Canada and Mexico required that consent.

QUESTION: Thank you Prime Minister. Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe  recently revealed his views on national security in East Asia. He said the Japanese  need to be part of the democratic security dialogue which is Australia, India, Japan,  United States and Hawaii in a form of diamond shape of the security cooperation that  can contain China's military expansion in the region.

So what do you think of this idea and have you discussed it with Mr Abe?

And also there is some ongoing dispute between China and Japan, such as the  territorial row over a group of small islands in the East China Sea. Are you going to  discuss this particular issue with President Xi Jinping while you are in Beijing?

PM: Thank you for the question. I have had the opportunity to speak to  Prime Minister Abe by telephone and to congratulate him on his election and we did  briefly, as you can in a telephone call, canvass a range of matters.

The strength of our friendship with Japan is of long standing and certainly as Prime  Minister I have sought to nurture that.

And I think the fact I was the first foreign leader to visit Japan after the  devastating tsunami was noted in Japan.

Certainly an amazing experience for me to see the stoicism and bravery of the  Japanese people in those circumstances, and I was pleased that a visit at that time  was so welcomed when of course there was so much concern about the people  of Japan but also the aftermath of the nuclear incident, that by being physically  present, I could show that it was possible for people to visit Japan and that I was  more than happy to do so.

On security perspectives, we do not believe in a containment policy in relation to  China. That is not our outlook. That is not the outlook of the United States  of America.

What we want to see is a prosperous China, increasingly engaged in our region and  in the world. We think that that is good for China, it’s good for the region, it’s good for  the world.

We have a dialogue with China on security questions, military-to-military dialogue,  and of course we have ongoing defence dialogues with Japan as well. And so we  will continue to nurture both of those very important relationships to us.

On tensions, the tensions that there have been around the islands - the tensions  involving Japan and China - our view is that peace and security in North Asia is  pivotal to all of us, it's pivotal to Australia.

Not only do we have big economic ties to China and Japan and of course to  other parts of North Asia, we've literally got tens of thousands of Australians who live  in that part of the world.

So peace and security in North Asia is of pivotal importance to us.

We don't take a view on the contending territorial claims, but we do, and in all of  our dialogues, we will advocate for peaceful resolution and for the work of diplomacy  to ease these tensions.

QUESTION: I would like to ask a question on a slight change of tack on Fiji.

The Australian Government seems to have been relatively quiet on the dumping of a  constitution drawn up by an independent expert in favour of one written by the Prime  Minister and his Attorney-General, unelected military ruler, arguably.

What is Australia's position on this new constitution under which some people say  a constitutional coup has gone on and no free and fair election could ever be held?

And is Australia's sway in that part of the world waning a little as China ups its  investment right across the Pacific?

PM: On the constitution, we understand that there were some civil society concerns  about the draft of the constitution; that's a dialogue for the people of Fiji to have

Though of course, the way in which the constitution was discarded was concerning  to us, but we did understand that there was civil society concerns with its contents.

For us, we continue on Fiji to have the same outlook that we've had for a long period  of time, which is that we must see a return to free and fair elections, and we stand  ready to assist with preparations for those elections, for the conduct of those  elections.

We believe that Commodore Bainimarama needs to be held to his promises and  accountabilities about having those elections, and that they need to be held on time  and properly done.

So we will continue to press for that and to raise our voice in forums, including the  Pacific Island Forum on those matters.

In terms of China's engagement in the Pacific, as China's role, China's weight and  power continues to rise, then of course it will have stronger and more diverse  relationships around the world, including in the Pacific.

We want to see countries around the world working for aid and development in the  Pacific. There is a lot to be done.

We believe that that aid and development money needs to be the subject of proper  accountability and transparency, so people can see the work that is being done.

So once again we think that there are ways of working together, working together  in the Pacific, to see much needed economic development, and we believe our focus  has to stay on seeing a return to true democracy in Fiji.

QUESTION: Prime Minister, thank you very much for coming. We have just realised  that you are the first serving Prime Minister since Bob Hawke talking to us, so this is  a truly historical moment.

Prime Minister, in your past career you had a reputation as being a compassionate  lawyer with a high level of empathy and humanity. These days you govern over what  some describe as one of the harshest and most inhumane asylum seeker policies in  the western world.

Looking at your political, current political situation, one could say that you were at  best moderately successful in appealing to the racists in the suburbs of Australia,  and to those people who believe what's actually written in The Daily Telegraph.

But one could argue that you certainly, that with your policy of being even tougher  than John Howard, that you certainly alienated even your staunchest supporters on  the more progressive side of politics. In retrospect do you think that was a  smart strategy, a smart move?

PM: The only thing that our asylum seeker and refugee policies are about is  deterring people from risking their lives by getting on boats, combatting  people smuggling which is a transnational crime; trying to profit on human need and  human misery, in the same way in which the international drug trade seeks to profit  from human misery, in the same way in which human trafficking seeks to profit from  human misery. And honouring our obligations under the Refugee Convention of  which we are a proud signatory.

So these are the things that drive our policy settings: the Refugee Convention,  stopping people getting on boats and risking their lives, combatting a transnational  crime.

This is not an easy policy area and if one looks around the world, whether you turn  your eyes towards Europe or whether you turn your eyes towards Canada or  other countries, you see nation states are struggling to work out the best set of  policies in asylum seeker and refugee policy area.

And I think that's because there are contending considerations. People want to be  compassionate. We are a very compassionate country. We settle large numbers  of refugees. Per head of population we settle them in extraordinarily large numbers.

So we can very much hold our heads up high in the world as a compassionate  country.

But we don't want to see anything in our domestic policies which would facilitate bad  people making money, or cause people to believe that they will get a better future if  they risk their lives on a boat.

And for all of us in Australia, including some of our nation's most progressive  elements, I think that there has been a recognition about the real dangers and real  tragedies that come when people do get on boats.

So in those circumstances, we turn to the best experts for advice: to a former head  of our Defence Force, to a foreign policy expert, to a refugee expert. And we said as  a Government we would enact their policies in full.

And when you strip their policies right down to their underlying essence, it is that you  should get no advantage for having paid a people smuggler and having got on a  boat, and I think that is a compassionate underpinning.

I think it's morally right. I think it's practically right to say that you should not give  people an advantage because they've got on a boat.

So that is how we're operating our policy now. I think that stands very well alongside  Australian values and Labor Party values.

We've been stopped from enacting some of it by the cycle of negativity in Australian  politics, but I think the report we received was good advice and the right policy way  forward and that's why we're determined to keep trying to implement it all.

QUESTION: Prime Minister, I will ask a follow-up on that. Australia is getting a very  good international press at the moment, but this issue around boat people gets you  very negative press.

Reputational damage is being done to Australia and the national debate seems to  be very ugly at times.

You hear it on talkback radio; you hear it on the streets when you go out and vox-pop people.

Do you take a measure of responsibility for that, for when you said at the Lowy  Institute in 2010 that political correctness should not constrain this debate?

PM: I think if you walked out on the streets of London and asked people what they’ve  thought about the various waves of asylum seekers coming through into the UK;  you’ve seen numbers of Albanians and people of other ethnicities come through into  the UK.



I think if you stood and vox-popped on the streets of London, if you did it in France, if  you did it in much of Europe, you would get a variety of views expressed, some of  them quite harsh views about the people who are seeking asylum.

I think that is the nature of the debate is democracies about refugee and asylum  seeker issues so I don't think that that is an Australian phenomenon, I just don't.

QUESTION: [Inaudible]

PM: Well, what leaders can do and what I have always done in this area is not  focus on or seek to demonise the people who are looking for asylum, but to deal with  the policy principles. And the policy principles, I think, very clear.

You should not get an advantage from having engaged in forward movement  and forward movement.

It is not right or defensible that someone who can pay a people smuggler gets an  advantage over a person who cannot pay a people smuggler.

Now, to get those policy settings right, in our new neighbours, whether it's Indonesia  or Malaysia, there are many people with legitimate refugee claims, we have made  available more places because we do think people with legitimate refugee  claims should find a re-settlement opportunity in the world and Australia can step  forward and offer more of those re-settlement opportunities.

But we don't want there to be any level of encouragement for people to get on  boats.

QUESTION: Prime Minister, when you took the very unusual step of announcing the  elections nearly eight months before the poll date, you promised at the time not to  test Australians' patience in 2013 after a bruising 2012 and you said that the  elections, this cycle "would give shape and order to the year rather than devolving  into constant campaigning".

Firstly, do you feel that you and your Government have lived up to those promises?  And in light of what's gone on since that announcement, do you feel it was a mistake  to announce the election so early?

PM: No I don't. I think it was important that Australians knew what the shape of this  year would be.

People, when they're thinking about these issues, often don't, in my view, correctly  war-game what the alternative would be.

The alternative to us having fixed the election date, in my view, would have been  fevered speculation day after day about when the election was going to be with shrill  calls every second day for the election to be now.

I think I would have found it quite hard to jump in a car and go to work without people  chasing me down the street to see whether or not I was going to the Governor-General's.

So, we would have seen pages and pages of newspaper coverage, hours and hours  and hours of TV and radio time devoted to what ultimately is a futile pursuit which is  trying to predict the election date.

We've cleared that out of the way.

What I want to fill the space is what I've talked about today, and what I've talked  about in January, which is the genuine contest of policy that the election in  September should be about.

Who has got the better blueprint for this nation's future; who’s got the best personal  capacity to deliver that blueprint for the nation's future. That should be what  the contest is about.

Now, I freely admit that some of the space that was vacated because it wasn't full of  election coverage has been filled with other unproductive things.

I very frankly said that my political party put in an appalling performance in the last  sitting fortnight and unfortunately that took a lot of space.

But as I've said in this speech, now we are beyond that leadership debate.

Now we are beyond the crazy nonsense people have had to listen to in the anti-carbon pricing campaign.

Now we've got the time between here and the election day to have that genuine  policy dialogue.

As that time works through, I will be doing what I need to do properly as Prime  Minister.

I will go to China tomorrow. I will come back from China and endeavour to wrangle  premiers and chief ministers into important positions about the long-term future of  education in our country at the Commonwealth Heads of Government meeting.

We are preparing a Budget. We are preparing a Budget in difficult circumstances in  terms of the revenue challenge, but we are doing that with our eyes firmly on the  capacities our nation will need to seize the best of opportunities for the future.

So that's how I should be using the time. That's how I will use the time.

QUESTION: Prime Minister, some of the Australian media and some of your  parliamentary colleagues to me seem to be extremely or incredibly hostile to you as  a person when I watch the discussions.

How much do you think of this is based on misogyny?



PM: I don't know whether, if you can deal with that in generalisation. I'm not sure that  you can.

I've been very clear as Prime Minister that when I see old-fashioned attitudes, close-minded attitudes, when I see sexism, when I see misogyny I’ll be very clear about  calling it out and naming it for what it is.

I think what I would say about being the first woman to do this job is a broader  point, which is it's not been ever the norm in our nation before for people to wake up  in the morning and look at the news and see a female leader doing this job.

For all of the years before, you would see a man in a suit. I am not a man in a suit,  and I think that that has taken the nation some time to get used to.

I think it's probably still taking the nation a bit of time to get used to. I think it's the  same sort of journey that many other nations around the world are on, and it speaks  really to the changing nature of our times, and the forward progress for women in  societies like ours.

But it's got some uncomfortable moment as long the way, there is no doubt about  that, and I feel one of the things that will certainly happen, having had the first female  Prime Minister is it’s going to be easier for the second and then it’s going to be  easier again for the third, and then everybody will get over it and forget about it and  no-one will even bother to comment anymore whether the images of leadership in  our nation that particular year are images of female leadership or male leadership.

QUESTION; Prime Minister, my question is about the energy trade between  Australia and China. Australia is regarded as a stable supplier of LNG, for example,  and steaming coal.

The global supply situation is evolving, for example, the United States will possibly  be an LNG supplier from 2015 into the Asian market. And in Russia, for example, the  first visit by President Xi overseas was to Russia where he oversaw the signing of  some strategic, what they call, breakthrough energy agreements between the  Russian oil and gas companies and their Chinese counterparts.

Given that context, are you concerned about the competitive threat posed to  Australian LNG exports, and is greater energy cooperation on your agenda  in China?

PM: It’s a competitive world and you're right, the amount of competition in the energy  sector is getting stronger and stronger and more and more acute.

So what that means is that you've got to be very good at what you do.

I am very confident that we can be very good at what we do. I think we're very good  now and we are always going to have to look for the innovations that make us an  even better quality supplier.

One of the things that I think in images of mining, if you ask people their images of  mining, I think there would be two common misunderstandings people would make  about the Australian mining situation.

Number one, people would tend to think it is a far bigger share of our economy.

People would think it's sort of 30 per cent or 40 per cent of employment. Of course  it's not.

Mining is, employment-wise, a smaller share of our economy; obviously a big share  of our exports.

So we are a diversified economy, but mining is going to continue to be important to  us.

The other image issue I think people would get wrong is they would get an old-fashioned image about men in hard hats and blasts and dirt and all the rest of it.

Of course, some of those images hold true today, but people would  underestimate the degree of technological innovation that has revolutionised mining,  that you can have someone staring at a computer screen in Perth controlling a huge  piece of equipment in the north-west.

What that means is we can always get better and better and better at what you do,  and that is going to be a challenge for us in being competitive in what is going to be I  think an increasingly contested and crowded marketplace.

QUESTION: [Inaudible]

PM: Certainly, whenever I go overseas, one of the topics we talk about is energy and  our status, really given the size of our country as an energy superpower.

QUESTION: Hi, Prime Minister. As you say, the Australian dollar high, becoming a  problem for Australian trade into Asia or into the globe.

Obviously, we believe The Australian published you agreeing to Shanghai in April to  sign agreement between China and Australia currency agreement and we've heard  that that agreement has been postponed. Would you please confirm with me?

PM: There was story in The Australian newspaper, that’s true, speculating about  what I may or may not do when I am in Shanghai.

I know I’m going to give the answer that frustrates journalists more than any other  and that answer is; you are going to have to wait until I am in Shanghai.

JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, a lot of the jobs that Labor has created have been  taken up by New Zealanders, yet they still complain that they are being treated like  second-class citizens here because of certain rules that were changed in 2001 which  I'm sure you are across.

In your eyes, what contribution do New Zealanders make to the Australian  economy? And secondly, what's stopping repealing the legislation that John Howard  introduced in 2001?

PM: Our relationship with New Zealand is one of family. It's ANZAC for a reason and  that does tell you something about our relationship with New Zealand.

And as a result because of the relationship between Australia and New Zealand,  New Zealanders have more access, better access to the Australian labour  market, and better access to Australian benefits and supports than any other  nationality.

That will continue for the future, but unfortunately the answer to your question is  we've got no plans to extend it for the future.

These are issues that continue to be the subject of discussion between us and  New Zealand, but I'm not in a position to say we've got any immediate plans for  change.

We think the benefits that are provided do support New Zealand people in Australia.

There were some issues when former Prime Minister John Howard and former Prime  Minister Helen Clark entered into that agreement.

We think many of those issues would still be relevant to considerations about  repealing that agreement and repealing that legislation, so I've had this conversation  many times with Prime Minister Key and I will see him again, actually he will be at  the Bo’ao Forum, too, so I will have the opportunity to say hello to him there.

And I’m sure he will continue the case for change, but I'm not in a position to say that  we are going to move on that area.

JOURNALIST: Would you agree that New Zealanders contribute more to the  economy than what they [inaudible]?

PM: Well certainly New Zealanders, the New Zealand contribution to the Australian  economy, it’s individuals who come here, who work hard who build much of their  lives here and many of them do go on to become Australian citizens. Not always,  many of stay as permanent residents and then take the opportunity to go back and  forth a fair bit.

There’s a huge contribution from New Zealanders into our economy and there’s a  huge benefit bestowed by Australia on New Zealanders by giving them that  preferential access to our labour market and to our social security system.

[ENDS]

