

Julie Bishop MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS





Territory FM 104.1 Darwin with Natasha Griggs

17 July 2013

E&OE…

PETER PERRIN The Honourable Julie Bishop, Deputy Leader of the Opposition. Welcome.

JULIE BISHOP Good morning Pete.

PETER PERRIN Yes. Good to see you again.

JULIE BISHOP I’m delighted to be back in Darwin. I love this place, love it.

PETER PERRIN Well you’ve come up at the right time of the year.

JULIE BISHOP Well, that too. Last night we were at a function on the shores of Fannie Bay  and I was looking out over that glorious sunset and I thought, I know why so many people  want to live in Darwin, it’s such a beautiful place and this is perfect weather.

PETER PERRIN Oh it is. And Natasha you’re looking splendid today.

NATASHA GRIGGS Thank you Pete. PETER PERRIN Now you’re going to be remaining  tidy today I hope.

NATASHA GRIGGS I’m always tidy. You should know that.

JULIE BISHOP My dear friend Natasha Griggs has invited me along to Ladies’ Day. It’s my  second time at Ladies’ Day. I was here two years ago. It was a fabulous day. So we will be  there chatting to the ladies and checking out the outfits.

PETER PERRIN I’m trying to work out where the race is. Is the race to look the best on the  catwalk? Or is the race on the actual track?

JULIE BISHOP I don’t actually get to see the one on the track usually.

NATASHA GRIGGS There’s lots of humming and…

JULIE BISHOP …a lot of activity.

PETER PERRIN Julie I believe it’s your birthday today, so many happy returns.

JULIE BISHOP Natasha! That was meant to be a secret between the girls.

NATASHA GRIGGS Happy birthday Julie.

JULIE BISHOP Would you sing for me Pete?

PETER PERRIN No, no, no.

NATASHA GRIGGS Go on.

PETER PERRIN One, two, three. Happy birthday to you.

JULIE BISHOP Ok that’s enough. Cut.

PETER PERRIN Certainly not going to make it on The Voice am I? Thank goodness you’re  not a judge. I used to crawl under the table when I was a kid when people started to sing  because I get embarrassed.

NATASHA GRIGGS Really?

JULIE BISHOP I don’t mind people singing happy birthday to me. I’m not sure about live on  radio to your Darwin listeners but anyway thank you for the very sweet thought.

PETER PERRIN Julie, it’s an interesting time again. I heard this morning that we’ve lost  more people coming to this country through illegal means which just goes to show how  dangerous it is and that the system is broken. It’s not working. It’s gotten worse.

The thing that really annoys me, and I don’t care what people say about which side of the  fence I’m sitting, the man who dismantled what was working is now saying I’m going to fix  it. Why should people believe him?

JULIE BISHOP Well they have no reason to believe him. They have to judge him on his  record. Kevin Rudd was Prime Minister in 2008 and dismantled the laws, the framework, that  John Howard put in place to stop the people smuggling trade and we stopped it. There’s no  question.

Boats were coming and we changed the laws to introduce temporary protection visas so that  anybody who did have a genuine claim for refugee status didn’t get permanent residency,  they got a temporary protection visa, so that when the situation in their home country  improved they could be sent back.

We also put in place the offshore processing the so-called Pacific Solution and that worked  and we turned boats back where it was safe to do so and it’s an inescapable fact that these are  Indonesian boats, under Indonesian flags, registered in Indonesia with Indonesian crews. Of  course Australia is entitled to turn them around and send them back to an Indonesian port.

But Kevin Rudd has lost the battle with the people smuggling trade. These are criminal  syndicates. They are trading on misery. They are charging people a lot of money to get on a  leaky boat and come to Australia. It is a dangerous journey. Over a thousand people have  died at sea under Labor’s policy and we’ve seen a billion dollar and more, billions and  billions of dollars blowout in the budget because of the thousands of people who have come  here.

Over 47,000 people have made that journey to Australia and Kevin Rudd has no answers  now. He has got absolutely no answers and I ask him: what action will he take today? What  laws will he change? What decisions will he make today to stop the people coming by boat to  Australia? He’s got no answers at all. The Coalition does. We will reinstate the laws that  worked.

PETER PERRIN Good, because it’s tragic. I go out by the airport to run my dogs and I look  at all these people who are just wasting their lives away behind a cyclone fence with barbed  wire. The only difference each time I go out that way is the security guards are either sitting  out on the footpath or they’re sitting inside the fence and these people, they are just playing  soccer. They’ve got nothing else to do.

JULIE BISHOP They’re not contributing to the economy, they don’t get work rights.

PETER PERRIN They’re contributing to their own misery too.

JULIE BISHOP Indeed and it’s a bad outcome all round. There is absolutely no upside to  what Kevin Rudd did in 2008. He’s refused to take responsibility for it. We need the  Coalition in power to put back in place the kind of measures that worked in the past and they  will work again.

We will work cooperatively with Indonesia. We will work with Sri Lanka and other countries  where people are coming from and we will stop them either coming into the countries on  their way to Australia or we’ll stop them leaving Indonesia or Sri Lanka as the case may be.

NATASHA GRIGGS Do you know Pete, that when I’ve been out doorknocking in the  Northern Suburbs and Palmerston, this is the biggest issue that is raised in the Northern  Suburbs?

PETER PERRIN It doesn’t surprise me.

JULIE BISHOP It’s the biggest policy failure in a generation. It’s the biggest policy failure I  can think of - thousands of people, 47,000 people coming by boat, over 1000 dying at sea,  and a multi-billion dollar blowout in our detention network. You’re right Natasha.

NATASHA GRIGGS People want to have a solution and they do trust us to fix this problem  because we’ve done it before and we’ll do it again.

PETER PERRIN Everybody seems to think it’s a case of stick and carrot but talking to you  personally Julie and Natasha there is a lot of emotion association with this and I can see it. It  was time this was depoliticised and turned into the human crisis it is and is addressed for  those reasons as humanists more than anything else.

JULIE BISHOP Absolutely. Australians are shocked to see these deaths out there in the  ocean. Little children, people who are getting on a boat, who’ve paid money to get on a boat,  and we’ve got to stop this trade.

Our navy and customs personnel put their lives at risk. They go out and try and save the boats  and rescue them. They’re not doing what the navy and customs and border protection should  be doing. They’re going to the rescue of boats that should never be on the seas in the first  place.

So all round it’s a complete and utter disaster and it’s so dispiriting to hear Kevin Rudd say  last weekend ‘well I think we now need to treat this matter urgently’. Now? We now have to  treat it urgently? Heaven’s sake, he should have been doing that in 2008, he should never  have changed the laws that worked.

PETER PERRIN Yeah, absolutely. Let’s move on to another one which I find mind boggling  and that’s the NBN. Now the NBN’s been rolled out. I think it’s been turned on here in  Darwin this week.

NATASHA GRIGGS Darwin CBD.

JOURNALIST But Tash one of the thing that gets me, they turned it on in Perth now, I think  as they ran the cable out, nine out of 10 homes are not able to connect to it. So this thing has  just gone from bad to worse and I mean, the boss quit the other day. He’s resigned.

I mean I’m a bit of a tech head I love being able to look at the idea of getting stuff fairly  instantly. In fact the other night because of all this I think, internet services in the Darwin  area are pretty sluggish at the moment I don’t know what’s going on. But I rang up to find out  what was going on and they were saying oh there’s changes happening it’s being traced to the  exchanges and all this sort of thing. If it’s a good thing, it’s going to be judged to that if it  works. It’s not exactly a shining example, it’s not been stellar so far.

JULIE BISHOP Before I hand over to Natasha, I just remind you that this National  Broadband Network was a promise of Kevin Rudd at the 2007 election. It was going to cost  $4 billion remember? And then he drew this plan up on the back of a drinks coaster, on the  VIP plane with Stephen Conroy. They did no cost-benefit analysis, no detailed work at all,  once more and this is the result.

NATASHA GRIGGS We had Malcolm Turnbull here last week when..

PETER PERRIN Is he a nerd or what? I’m sorry!

JULIE BISHOP He knows more about National Broadband Networks than the Labor Party  could dream of knowing. He knows more about it than anybody in the Parliament. That’s  why his plan for a National Broadband Network will work. It will be affordable, accessible  and it will be rolled out before Labor’s could ever be.

PETER PERRIN One of the things I like about what you guys have done, Turnbull in  particular the other day, he’s turned around, and I just thought it was the best repost that you  could possibly come out with when he was asked about his popularity. He said ‘if you  support me, you support my values which are those of the Liberal Party and when we all sit  around the table with Tony Abbott he is but the first amongst equals’, and I thought that’s  such a great line.

JULIE BISHOP I think of Tony as our coach, he’s like our footy coach. He’s a great team  leader. He brings people together. We’ve got the National Party, the Liberal Party, we’ve got  people from completely different backgrounds, different walks of life, different life  experiences and Tony’s able to meld us together as a team. I’m a director of the West Coast  Eagles in Western Australia. Don’t roll your eyes Pete.

PETER PERRIN We beat you the other day.

JULIE BISHOP Alright, alright, anyway and the coach is so important. And that’s what  Tony’s like, he’s like the coach. But as we sit around our Shadow Cabinet, Malcolm Turnbull  is part of our team. He’s an outstanding performer, as is Joe Hockey, as is Greg Hunt, as is  Christopher Pyne and Tony keeps us united and keeps us inspired.

That’s why the team is working and the contrast between the Tony Abbott-led Coalition and  the Labor Party. When a third of the Cabinet refused to serve under Kevin Rudd, and we all  know what they think of him. These are the people who’ve worked with him, the people who  know him best have given him a pretty free character assessment over the years and their best  Ministers are leaving - the Greg Combets, Simon Creans, Martin Fergusons, they’re all  going.

PETER PERRIN Why is it though? Why is it when Rudd is, I know everybody is saying  popstar Prime Minister and all this sort of thing.

JULIE BISHOP Yeah, like Kim Kardashian’s popular.

PETER PERRIN Yes, I know.

JULIE BISHOP When you go into a shopping centre and bring along all of the TV cameras,  you can get crowds and crowds and crowds of people around you. People love being on TV.

NATASHA GRIGGS Julie that’s what happened when you were here the week…

JULIE BISHOP I can even get a crowd at a shopping centre Pete! As long as I bring the TV  cameras with me.

NATASHA GRIGGS A fortnight ago, before Kevin Rudd came here, we were in Casuarina  Shopping Centre because we were meeting some people and there was a huge crowd there for  Julie. But can I say we didn’t ring anyone and say ‘hey come down and see Julie Bishop’ as  someone on the other side might have done. It was all natural.

JULIE BISHOP Yes authentic. We just walked through the shopping centre and people came  up to talk to us.

NATASHA GRIGGS I think that’s a real contrast. People can see when you’re being  authentic and when it’s fake.

PETER PERRIN Now, we’ve got to get back to you Tash. We’re talking about the NBN.

NATASHA GRIGGS So with Malcolm being here last week we had a forum and it was  raised with us by a number of constituents the fact that Trish Crossin has put out a false  brochure saying that the NBN under Labor will be free and that under the Liberals it will be  $5000.

JULIE BISHOP Not true.

NATASHA GRIGGS That’s exactly right. People were so concerned because people do  listen to Trish. They were very concerned that it was going to be costing them $5000,  particularly some people in Darwin where the NBN’s been switched on.

One of the cases that was raised with me was an 80-year-old woman who has been told she  can have the NBN. She doesn’t have a computer or anything. She only has a telephone. She  was petrified that she was going to be hit up for $5000 if we’re in government. I mean that  sort of propaganda..

PETER PERRIN People have got to realise though, the NBN is simply a service provider to  the Telcos. The Telcos are going to charge you. There’s no two ways about it.

NATASHA GRIGGS That’s correct and there’s no way this is going to be free under Labor.  So there’s a lot of mistruths being put out there. I mean this is a marginal seat and we know  that Kevin Rudd is focussed on this seat.

JULIE BISHOP That’s why I’m here to convince people to vote for Natasha Griggs for the  seat of Solomon.

PETER PERRIN I mean the proofs in the pudding and Tash, without being over the top on it,  you’ve done a great job up here and you’ve got to keep at it. That’s the thing. That’s the  challenge.

NATASHA GRIGGS Thank you. Well it is the challenge, particularly that this seat has never  been in opposition. It’s always been with the government so that makes it a little bit trickier  because you can’t always deliver things when you’re in opposition but I can say, we were  talking about this on the way in Julie, that my proudest moment is making sure that we now  have the 19th of February every year recognised nationally as Bombing of Darwin Day.

JULIE BISHOP Natasha did that in the Parliament. I know, I was there, I listened to her  speech and it was a great effort on behalf of the diggers who defended Darwin. My Dad came  up this year for the commemoration day because he was in the 10th/48 in Darwin during the  war and I couldn’t get him out of Darwin once he came back. He wanted to stay and he was  so grateful to you Natasha for ensuring that this day was commemorated,every year, and  Diggers came from all over Australia.

PETER PERRIN And so they should. It’s fantastic.

JULIE BISHOP It was very special for my Dad and he came back and caught up with people  that he hadn’t seen since the war. It was beautiful.

PETER PERRIN Well they kept it a big secret during the war and it remained as such until  Natasha made it hit the headlines, you know a little earlier on.

JULIE BISHOP Dad was part of a battalion that was specifically put together to defend the  City of Darwin and he was telling stories during that week he was here that I’d never heard  before in all my... I won’t tell you how many years... I had never heard these stories before.  I’d never heard these stories from my Dad but being back here it brought it all back to him  and he started to talk about it. It was very real and he was very emotional about it. I hadn’t  quite expected to see my Dad.. and he’s 90 so it was a very special time. So thank you  Natasha.

NATASHA GRIGGS Thanks Julie.

PETER PERRIN It would be remiss of me not to ask this Julie while we have the  opportunity, but this change, there’s been huge headlines about how things are going to be  great now because the carbon tax is going. Is it?

JULIE BISHOP Absolutely not. This is a con. All Kevin Rudd has done is announce that if  he gets back into government and if he can get the support of the Greens he will bring  forward the floating price for a carbon tax by 12 months.

PETER PERRIN Doesn’t it mean we’re being dictated to by Europe?

JULIE BISHOP Absolutely because Labor have linked the carbon price in Australia to the  Europeans and the European scheme is a shambles. It’s absolutely wracked by corruption.  The price is volatile and why would you want to link a carbon price in Australia to the  European price?

But on Labor’s own figures they expect European price to skyrocket and so therefore this  isn’t about lowering the carbon tax at all. Under Labor’s plan it’s going to double. It’s still  going up and up, year on year, ultimately to $350 a tonne on their own forecasts.

So this is not going to take away the pressure on families, cost of living, it’s still a tax on  electricity, it’s still going to cost manufacturing, cost jobs and be a drain on our economy.

PETER PERRIN If the Libs get in Tash what are they going to do?

NATASHA GRIGGS Well Pete I think that it’s really important that your listeners remember  that at the last election, 2010, the Labor Prime Minister was saying there will be no carbon  tax under the government I lead and then introduced a carbon tax. In 2013 we have a Labor  Prime Minister effectively saying there will be no carbon tax.

JULIE BISHOP You just can’t believe it. There will be a price on carbon. They can change  the name. It’s a price on carbon and it’s linked to the European price so it’s not even going to  be set in Australia, taking into account Australian conditions, but under the Coalition we will  repeal the carbon tax. We will have no carbon tax.

NATASHA GRIGGS And the mining tax.

PETER PERRIN Well that’s another issue, that’s particularly relevant to the Northern  Territory isn’t it?

JULIE BISHOP Absolutely.

PETER PERRIN Julie lovely to see you. Many happy returns again. Enjoy your day at the  ladies races this afternoon at Fanny Bay. Tash you’re going to turn heads again. Thank you  very much.

JULIE BISHOP Always great to be with you Pete.

Thank you.

- Ends -



