THE HON BRENDAN O’CONNOR MP  MINISTER FOR EMPLOYMENT  MINISTER FOR SKILLS AND TRAINING

ABC 774 MELBOURNE  DRIVE - FIGHT CLUB DEBATE  WEDNESDAY, 24 JULY 2013

TOPICS: Asylum Seeker Policy

RAFAEL EPSTEIN:Pleased to say in the studio with me, Brendan O'Connor. He's the Minister for  Employment, Skills and Training, a former Immigration Minister as well on Julia Gillard's front bench.  Now he's part of Kevin Rudd's front bench. Brendan O'Connor thanks for coming in.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Good afternoon.

RAFAEL EPSTEIN: In the Sydney studio we'll be joined by Joe Hockey, the Shadow Treasurer. But I  wanted to start with the Government of the day if I can, Brendan O'Connor.

You used to be an Immigration Minister, you will have seen the allegations overnight of pretty  horrific claims made about what goes on in Manus Island, sexual assault amongst the people who  are held in the processing centre there. If you haven't got that right as a government in eighteen  months - and that's the reason the current immigration Minister doesn't want to send people there  straight away - if you haven't got it right in eighteen months, why should we believe that the  Government can get it right in Manus Island?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Well it hasn't been quite that long. But you're right, it's been - the temporary  facility's been there for some time and there is already the area allocated for a permanent facility.  And in terms of the oversight, we certainly have encouraged, and there has been an array of very  eminent international organisations visit Manus.

RAFAEL EPSTEIN: Yes, and they're pretty critical?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: And we've responded to much of the concerns that have been raised by the  UNHCR, by Red Cross, by Parliamentary inquiries. Indeed, we've had the Opposition Shadow  Minister and Senator Hanson-Young visit.

We want an open, transparent arrangement. PNG Government has facilitated that. And we do need  to respond to those criticisms and concerns and in most cases we have done so. But of course we  require the permanent facilities for the longer - for those that are there longer. But I mean…

RAFAEL EPSTEIN: But it has been, it's been open for a while Manus Island. I thought it was reopened  in November 2011, which by my count is nineteen months. But either way, I've seen photographs of  people cooking over open fires for those people.

There's only capacity for a couple of hundred. The security guard who worked there for a month  who spoke to SBS last night is talking about sexual assaults being perpetrated by people, and you  also have a significant issue where people in PNG who've never worked in detention centres or  prisons are expected to look after people to a degree of professionalism that we would expect here.  It's just too hard to achieve in any short space of time.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Look, this is a very difficult area, no one's pretending this can be dealt with -  and including the administration. It's a challenging area for any government. And for that reason of  course we need to look to improve facilities. I wouldn't accept by the way some of the assertions  made by quite often people who leave their employment on grounds that aren't perfect…

RAFAEL EPSTEIN: Well the Immigration Minister's taken them seriously enough to speak to…

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Oh we should take… We should take all matter - look, I take, and I did take  as Minister, all accusations, allegations, assertions, seriously. But I make the point, I don't see them  as fact because they've been asserted.

I think they have to be substantiated, and there are times when people have actually misled the  public by making public comments in relation to the conduct or behaviour in these centres. So we  need to get to the bottom of those allegations and do so properly and openly.

RAFAEL EPSTEIN:Are you comfortable with sending people - everyone who comes here by boat not  being allowed to be settled here, being forced to resettle in Papua New Guinea? Are you  comfortable with that?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: I think the word comfortable is one that doesn't necessarily come to mind  when you're dealing with the most diabolical public policy area known to any Federal Government.  Here you are dealing with a situation where people are dying at sea.

You're looking at a way to deter people from doing that by being enticed on unseaworthy vessels.  You're looking at the same time an attempt to break the model that's been applied by these  transnational criminals, and that's what people smugglers are. They have no regard for the people  that they're placing on these vessels.

They don't care whether there's any life jackets, they don't care if the boats sink, except it affects  their business. And quite frankly, in that context we have to look at ways to prevent people, as I say,  drowning at sea. And we have to look at a more broader debate, I feel, about how are we going to  deal with the tens of millions of people displaced around the world.

And that's why the Prime Minister's view that we need to have firstly a regional debate involving and  co-led by Indonesia is absolutely critical to working out what we do over the longer term.

RAFAEL EPSTEIN: Look I want to bring in Joe Hockey the Shadow Treasurer who is joining us from  Sydney. But thirteen hundred, triple two-seven-seven-four is the phone number. You can ask  questions or make a comment yourself in a moment. Joe Hockey, welcome.

JOE HOCKEY: G'day.

RAFAEL EPSTEIN:Look, you're really perturbed by Kevin Rudd's proposal last Friday, aren't you? He's  sort of stolen a lot of your thunder on asylum seekers.

JOE HOCKEY: Well I mean that's a very subjective comment. I don't know about stealing thunder. It's  not something that you celebrate.

RAFAEL EPSTEIN:Well this is - no…

JOE HOCKEY: Stealing thunder…

RAFAEL EPSTEIN:…this is an idea you would have liked to have proposed yourself, isn't it?

JOE HOCKEY: Well no, we actually started offshore processing of applications for asylum. So we  actually started that. And when we heard the announcement we welcomed it, we welcomed it.

What's become apparent is that, predictably, what Kevin Rudd said and what it actually means are  two different things. And that's what we keep hearing from the Prime Minister.

I mean we start to peel back like an onion what's really there, and it's not what Kevin Rudd claims at  the press conference and gets the headlines for.

RAFAEL EPSTEIN: But if you're - if you back the idea, it's the same public servants, the same security  guards, the same staff in PNG, it's all the same people implementing the policy. What difference  does it make who's making a decision in Canberra?

Surely what matters is the public servants and the people who are hired in PNG. It's a bit harsh and a  bit hypocritical isn't it to criticise the solution that you endorse just because the person at the top of  the tree isn't wearing Liberal Party colours?

JOE HOCKEY: No, no, it's more than that. The Prime Minister said that there will be no people  coming to Australia, and he's been advertising to that affect. Millions of dollars on advertising, which  is quite bizarre because he doesn't have a budget for the program but he has a budget for the  advertising.

But leave that aside. The agreement with Papua New Guinea is not in any way binding. It's not even  worth the memorandum of understanding. It's as I understand it, two page statement from both  governments that they're going to proceed down this path.

From what we've heard from Papua New Guinea it's not what Kevin Rudd said it was going to be in  the press conference. And quite frankly, the logistics, like everything else Labor does, just don't add  up.

RAFAEL EPSTEIN:But is it going to - but I'll go back to the question. The logistics, an agreement with  PNG, I mean you're making a lot of points. Still it's the same people implementing the policy…

JOE HOCKEY: Yeah but…

RAFAEL EPSTEIN:…whether or not someone's for or against the policy, its public servants and people  in PNG. What's the difference under a Coalition, why would…

JOE HOCKEY: The difference is you don't announce it as fact and state it as a policy to take effect  immediately unless you know exactly how you're going to deliver it, what the outcomes are going to  be, what the processes are, and what the cost is.

Now normally, you have all of that worked out before you make an announcement. But Kevin Rudd  makes announcements before he's worked out any of the detail, and what happens is it's the detail  that always undermines all his big words.

RAFAEL EPSTEIN: Well let me ask Brendan O'Connor about detail. I mean he's got a very good point,  Joe Hockey. There's ads again in my newspaper today, Brendan O'Connor. And he has a point, there

is no dollar figure in that two page document and there's nothing about the rights of the people who  might be sent to Papua New Guinea. It looks like government by press release.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Oh look, the first thing to note is this is not an old idea, this is the first  attempt to settle people in a country in the region outside Australia. What we've done in the past is  refer people to other countries outside of our region - other than New Zealand.

So that in itself is unique and I think that's going to send a very strong message. Secondly, I think a  two page undertaking between two…

JOE HOCKEY: How does it send…

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Look Joe let me - you've had a go mate, just let me finish.

A two page undertaking between two sovereign nations is more than a three word slogan. And what  you've had here is you've got Tony Abbott with no…

RAFAEL EPSTEIN: Well it is more than three words, but…

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: And…

RAFAEL EPSTEIN: …it is very short on detail.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: …thirdly, I'll tell you, if you want to start going into how comprehensive -  part of this - part of the way in which we're going to deal with transnational criminals that people  smugglers are is send a very powerful message.

Now I know the first response by the Opposition was to support it in principal. The second was to say  we wouldn't implement it, and the third now is to unpick it.

And the reason why they're looking to unpick is not only because they're seeking to send a message  to the constituency of Australia saying we've got a better idea, more concerning for me is this is  sending a message to people smugglers to say this is not an agreement, so keep sending the boats.

And that in my view is an irresponsible approach taken by the Opposition.

RAFAEL EPSTEIN: Joe Hockey, let me turn that point around a little bit. Wouldn't it be better if you  were both reading from the same page? I mean the Government says you're encouraging people  smuggling, which I'm not sure I'd go that far. But it would be better if we had a unified policy. That  would be significant wouldn't it?

JOE HOCKEY: Oh yeah, yeah, well it would be. And you know what, Labor's had about six or seven  different policies in six years.

And only today I was just reminded that Kevin Rudd, when he unwound what we had in place, when  he got rid of temporary protection visas and closed offshore processing, he said, a stain was  removed from the soul of Australia today.

When he turned around and changed offshore processing, closed down offshore, he said that, a  stain was removed from the soul of the Australian people today. And he's just infected it.

He - I mean he's just done the complete opposite. He's the one that said you shouldn't lurch to the  right, and then he came in and said you shouldn't lurch to the left. Now God knows where he's  lurching.

But from my perspective - and just going back to what Brendan was just saying, you know what, it's  not about the message it's about the outcome. That's what matters…

RAFAEL EPSTEIN: But it is about the message isn't it?

JOE HOCKEY: Well message, messaging…

RAFAEL EPSTEIN:Because you want people to…

JOE HOCKEY: …comes second, right?

RAFAEL EPSTEIN: But isn't - from both sides of politics, the message is…

JOE HOCKEY: Can I tell you…

RAFAEL EPSTEIN:…important, isn't it? Because you want…

JOE HOCKEY: No.

RAFAEL EPSTEIN:…people to…

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Let me tell you, this is about what people…

RAFAEL EPSTEIN:Just let Joe finish.

JOE HOCKEY: …perceive, you know for crying out loud.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: No but this is important…

JOE HOCKEY: This…

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: …it controls behaviour, it actually has a bearing on behaviour Joe.

JOE HOCKEY: But you've got to have an outcome Brendan, do you understand?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: We had an outcome announced… …by the two countries just a week ago.

RAFAEL EPSTEIN: Joe Hockey?

JOE HOCKEY: Messaging means nothing, zero, spin means nothing if you can't back it up with fact.  And what we find is that the Government's so preoccupied with messaging that the outcome, the  outcome is what ends in tears.

Now we discover, no they're not sending men, women and children to Manus Island, they're just  sending men. And what we're discovering is they're moving people from Manus Island to Australia  now. So the outcome is very different to what the message is.

RAFAEL EPSTEIN: Look I want to give a few callers a chance, and we'll bring you a traffic update soon.  Let's just go to Steve who's called from Gisborne I think. Hi Steve. Steve are you there? I can hear  your indicators. Last chance Steve. No, hang on let's try Blair who's called from Box Hill. Hey Blair.

STEVE: Hello?

RAFAEL EPSTEIN: Hello is that - sorry, is that Steve?

STEVE: That's me, yes.

RAFAEL EPSTEIN: Go for it Steve.

STEVE: Yeah I'd just like to ask Mr O'Connor, has anyone ever actually lived in New Guinea?

BRENDAN O’CONNOR: Yeah, the people from PNG live there.

STEVE: Well yeah, but expatriates, not just Australians, people from other countries live in  compounds with electric fences and security guards to remain safe. This happens in Moresby, Lae,  Madang.

RAFAEL EPSTEIN: So what's your point Steve, that we shouldn't send people to live there? Or?

STEVE: We're going to send refugees there, and if they are ever released into the population, what  are they going to be - how are they going to exist there? I mean I don't believe anyone's even looked  at the environment that you're taking them to. I mean, Lorengau on Manus Island is a town of five  thousand people...

RAFAEL EPSTEIN: Okay…

STEVE: …you're going to put three thousand refugees there, what a laugh.

RAFAEL EPSTEIN: Okay, two points there Brendan O'Connor. There aren't many people on Manus,  and also you're sending people…

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Firstly, Manus is not an Island, Manus is actually a series of islands, and  there's fifty thousand locals that live actually in the Manus Province. And they do pretty well in what  are obviously - we know that they're not in first world standards. But I think this really brings in to  the discussion a broader question about what we do about people that languish in camps around  the world, sometimes for a generation.

RAFAEL EPSTEIN: But…

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: But this is all connected Raf and I'll explain why. The fact is we have tens of  millions of people who are displaced.

We have many that sit in camps for decades. We have the first world - certain first world countries  that are involved in resettlement.

But even if all of those first world nations were to redouble again the places that they were willing to  settle people, we would still have millions and millions of people who are - now if these are - if we're  to deal with genuine refugees throughout the world, then we have to have a broader debate about

how do signatories to the refugee convention that may not be first world countries assist in doing  that.

If we're going to prevent people being persecuted and we're not going to be able to take them all,  even though I think Australia's place - numbers - are quite generous.

How do we deal with that? Well one of the ways of course is to engage with other countries that  haven't traditionally placed people, but with the assistance of countries like Australia.

RAFAEL EPSTEIN: Look I will return with Brendan O'Connor and Joe Hockey in just a moment.

RAFAEL EPSTEIN: Joe Hockey and Brendan O'Connor with me.  Let me read just a few of the texts.   Joe, you used to be worthy of some respect, now you've lost your soul.

I will give Joe Hockey a chance to respond in a moment.  Greg has this text; this is actually making  me feel even worse about this sad, horrible plan.  And great point by Steve, sending refugees to a  third world country when Australia had plenty of resources and generosity in NGOs to house them.

I want to - both Joe Hockey and Brendan O'Connor, have a quick listen to MartynNamorong.

He's a blogger and TV presenter from Papua New Guinea, who spoke to me about the fact that  maybe PNG don't want to be those who are dealing with Australia's outsourced problem.

MARTYNNAMORONG: Well like many Australians, we don't want to see the boat people.  I suppose  Papua New Guineans too also do not want to see what we refer to as Australia's problem being  sorted out in our country.

It's rather ironic that this country that's viewed as this problematic place is now being seen as a  solution to a problem that's an Australian problem essentially.

RAFAEL EPSTEIN: Joe Hockey, I want to start with you with a clarification and a question.  If the  Coalition wins, you'll endorse the idea of - that no one who comes in a boat would be sent to PNG.   Is that policy yet, or not?

JOE HOCKEY: Sorry?  We would endorse…

RAFAEL EPSTEIN:So Labor's idea that if you come here by boat you'll be resettled in PNG, you will not  be resettled here.  Is that officially the position that you've adopted, or are you still looking at it?

JOE HOCKEY: No, no, well, we have been very blunt about supporting the processing of applications  for asylum from boat people, people coming on boats offshore.  We've said that, we've been  consistent about that.

RAFAEL EPSTEIN:Sure.

JOE HOCKEY: I mean, for crying out loud, if people don't know that…

RAFAEL EPSTEIN:No, I'm not doubting that, I'm just wondering if people would be settled in PNG.

JOE HOCKEY: But we're trying to get to the bottom of this.  This is what we're trying to do and for  example - and maybe Brendan can answer this for me - I assume what happens to these people, we  have a duty of care, don't we?  I think we have a legal duty of care to these people.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Yes.

JOE HOCKEY: I'm assuming that.  Therefore, unless we want to face a class action from these people  sometime in the future that is going to be of a monstrous scale, I expect we'll have to provide them  with Centrelink and Medicare benefits for the rest of their lives if they're settled in Papua New  Guinea, we have to provide them with education and health care and housing and security.  Now…

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Well…

JOE HOCKEY: …that is - just let me finish.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Yeah.

JOE HOCKEY: That is something that, you know, the Government hasn't explained - maybe Brendan  can - but I assume that is exactly what's going to happen, that's why the Government hasn't told us  how much this is going to cost.  Because you are looking at billions, billions and billions of dollars for  as far as you can see in basically setting up an Australian colony in Papua New Guinea.

RAFAEL EPSTEIN:Okay, let me put that to…

JOE HOCKEY: If I'm wrong, tell me I'm wrong.

RAFAEL EPSTEIN:And Brendan O'Connor, I mean, you've had this portfolio, you've been to PNG, I've  tried to look at it.  I think you need to be a resident of PNG for eight years before you become a  citizen.  I don't know if you can tell me…

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: I'm not aware of that.

RAFAEL EPSTEIN: Okay, so how long are we obliged to look after these…

JOE HOCKEY: And you need to speak the local language and a range of other things to become a  citizen of Papua…

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Well, many people coming to Australia of course may not, you know - I think  the first thing we have to say is our obligation is to stop the vessels coming in such a dangerous  fashion.

RAFAEL EPSTEIN: Sure and you've covered that but…

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: No, but this is very important.

RAFAEL EPSTEIN: What's the financial obligation…

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Insofar…

RAFAEL EPSTEIN: …and the legal obligation to people who are sent there?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: …and of course we've entered into an arrangement with PNG, the  traditional or conventional manner in which settlement countries operate of course means that the  obligations between - insofar as looking after these people has to be shared and - but to that extent,  for example, when we've settled and referred people to other countries, there has been that co-obligation, it's not just a one-way street.

I think we have to be mindful though, as a first world country engaged with our neighbour and  friend, a close neighbour and friend, that we do obviously contribute to that…

RAFAEL EPSTEIN: None of that's a specific answer.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR:  But I think the notion of talking…

RAFAEL EPSTEIN: Is there a specific answer?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Well we're talking about what might happen in six years, seven years, I think  these things…

JOE HOCKEY: No, it happens now, mate, now.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: I think the key here is not to see an ongoing flow of vessels to PNG, we know  that.

RAFAEL EPSTEIN:Sure but…

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Hold on…

RAFAEL EPSTEIN:…isn't it reasonable to ask if someone, let's say…

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: No, what's reasonable to ask is do I think this will work?

RAFAEL EPSTEIN:…let's say someone comes in six months they are sent to PNG.  From six months  from now, for how much longer is there an obligation to that person, and has that question been  settled with the Government of PNG?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: I think there's far more important conclusions to draw.  The first one is - or  for questions to pose. The first one is will this work?  My view is if we…

JOE HOCKEY: No, you've got to answer the questions, you're not asking them.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: My view is if the vessels slow, then the hypothetical that's being put forward  by Joe Hockey doesn't exist.

That is thousands of people over years going to be settled in PNG.  I think this will see a cessation  over time of vessels, which will mean that the cohort we're talking about is relatively small.

JOE HOCKEY: Well…

RAFAEL EPSTEIN:Look, Joe Hockey, let me…

JOE HOCKEY: Hang on, it is a - sorry…



RAFAEL EPSTEIN:I think I agree with you that he hasn't answered the question, but I want to give  another caller a chance.

JOE HOCKEY: Yeah, but it's more than that, it's more than that, but it is more than that.  It is basically  about what is the policy they've announced, and it comes back to the fact they're more focused on  the messaging than they are on the policy…

RAFAEL EPSTEIN: Okay, let me just…

JOE HOCKEY: …and this is where it comes undone, because the people traffickers know that if this  policy does not work, if the outcomes are not there, it doesn't matter what the ads say, it doesn't  matter what Kevin Rudd's messaging is, it's not going to stop the boats over the long term.

RAFAEL EPSTEIN:Can I just ask Nicholas in Geelong, who's been waiting patiently as many have,  Nicholas, if you can make your question or comment brief, that'd be good.

NICHOLAS: Yes, Raf.  I drove taxis for ten years and I picked up an African gentleman, he spoke three  languages, was university educated.  He'd spent five years in a refugee camp on the edge of a war  zone with his wife and three children and it took him five years to come over here.  Now, under the  Coalition all of our refugees used to come from the worst circumstances.

Under Kevin Rudd and Julia Gillard we've now got people with tens of thousands of dollars choosing  to leave their country in a relatively safe situation and then come over on boats and have  international criminals make millions of dollars and the Coalition is spending billions of dollars out of  our foreign aid budget to be able to cover their political backsides.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: The Labor Party, it's not us.

CALLER NICHOLAS:[Indistinct] keep a straight face.

RAFAEL EPSTEIN: Okay, look Nicholas, I can see you're aiming guns at both sides so I'll give a quick…

JOE HOCKEY: No, no, no, he didn't aim it at us.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: He didn't, he accidentally said Coalition.

RAFAEL EPSTEIN: Whoa, whoa, gentlemen, gentlemen, let me give one more caller a chance.  Tom's  called from Laverton.  Hey Tom.

CALLER TOM: Hi Raf, how are you?  My question to Brendan O'Connor, why is the Labor Party taking  working people and taxpayers of Australia as mugs, right?  You're creating a problem for us.  Maybe  you sit there with your suits and…

RAFAEL EPSTEIN:Tom, make it quick if you can…

CALLER TOM: No, no…

RAFAEL EPSTEIN:I'm not sure what your point is.

CALLER TOM: I will, I will, Raf, but you know, give us a fair go too, Raf.  The thing is that it's us  working people that are going to foot the bills indefinitely for all this, right?

Sending them over to PNG, tell me how much we are going to get in return from what we give those  people.  Absolutely zero.

When the migrants came here in the '50s and the '60s and the '40s, they came here with no welfare  given to them, with no handouts given to them.  They worked to make their own life better.

RAFAEL EPSTEIN: Okay Tom, let me…

CALLER TOM: What are you doing…

RAFAEL EPSTEIN: …put that to Brendan O'Connor.  Let me put that to him.  Brendan?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Well clearly what we're wanting to do is to prevent these dangerous  journeys.  We don't want to see people arriving in that fashion, it's dangerous to them.

It also undermines the efficacy of our border protection immigration system, that's why we've  proposed this PNG agreement.

RAFAEL EPSTEIN:Joe Hockey, if you can respond in about 20 seconds so I can get people…

JOE HOCKEY: Yeah, look, if I take Brendan - and I do - in good faith and he says well we do want to  stop the boats, which is different to what they said, you know, five years ago…

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: I've always said that, I've always…

JOE HOCKEY: That's a different - Kevin Rudd.  Sorry, that was Kevin Rudd, one point zero.

RAFAEL EPSTEIN:Quickly Joe, if you can.

JOE HOCKEY: But if that's the case, I'd just say to you the policy will fail if you haven't got the details  right and clearly, as evidenced by Brendan today…

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Well what's your details, Joe?

JOE HOCKEY: …they don't know what their policies are.  They don't know what it's going to cost, they  don't know how it's going to work…

RAFAEL EPSTEIN: Okay, Joe.

JOE HOCKEY: …and it's a blank cheque at the taxpayers' expense.

RAFAEL EPSTEIN:Okay, Brendan O'Connor, you've got ten seconds.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR:Well, I don't know the details of their turn back the boats policy, but Indonesia  opposes it.

RAFAEL EPSTEIN: Okay, look gentlemen, thank you.  I was going to raise some other questions, I  thought I'd try and extract detail.  I don't know how the listeners feel about that.  I'm sorry I didn't  get to all of your calls. Brendan O'Connor, Joe Hockey, thank you very much.



JOE HOCKEY: Thank you.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Thanks Raf, see you, Joe.

Media contact: Glen Atwell 0439 437 218

