





Transcript

Scott Morrison MP  Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship  Shadow Minister for Productivity and Population  Coalition Campaign Spokesman

Sunday 18 August 2013

Interview with Barrie Cassidy  ABC “Insiders”





EO&E..........................................................................................................................................

.





BARRIE CASSIDY:  Scott Morrison, good morning, welcome.

SCOTT MORRISON:  G'day Barrie, good to be in Melbourne.

BARRIE CASSIDY:   It's not the first time someone's made that allegation that you want to keep the boats coming  because you get some sort of political advantage out of it.

SCOTT MORRISON:   Well when people run out of arguments and they've got no case to make, they resort to  personal attacks; and I think that's what Minister Burke has done. I'll leave that to him, we'll  stay focused on the policy.

BARRIE CASSIDY:   Let's talk about a couple of those overnight stories. If the Indonesians do scatter these asylum  seekers away from this central location in this highland town, do you think that would make a  difference?



SCOTT MORRISON:   Well I think it's a good thing to do. Djoko Suyanto, the coordinating minister, one of three  that report into the president, has been picking up for some time some local unrest about the  impact it's having in villages and places across Indonesia where asylum seekers are gathering.   And what I'd describe this as is some positive unilateral action from Indonesia, and I think  that's a good thing. I hope to see more of it and certainly if we are elected at this election then  that's the sort of thing we'd be focussing on supporting them doing.

BARRIE CASSIDY:   And what about this idea of setting them a higher price but giving them a fake visa and flying  people in?

SCOTT MORRISON:  Well David Marr may fall over, but I agree with the comments he just made, and I think that  that assessment, if people could do it now then they would be. We have very strong controls  on who can get on planes and who can get into the country, and that's why people get on  boats and pay people smugglers many times over what they would pay to get on an airfare to  come to Australia.

So, look, I don't think you take any of that lightly. I think you make sure that you're always  ready to respond to what the smugglers might try and do. And that's what our Operation  Sovereign Borders plan is all about. It gives us the capacity to respond and adapt and change  as times change.

BARRIE CASSIDY:   But the fact that they're looking at something like this now, doesn't that suggest the  Government has broken the old business model and they're looking for a new business  model?

SCOTT MORRISON:   I think you've predicted every success on the Government's every failure in this issue in the  past, whether it's Malaysian people swap or others. Look we'll see what happens with this  one. If there's an announcement effect we'll see, whether it's to do with the weather, whether  it's to do with Ramadan, whether it's to do with the announcement impact of this.   But what  we saw yesterday is the prime minister of Papua New Guinea actually bill the cap on what  we've been saying for a month and that is the actual arrangement between Papua New Guinea  and Australia does not commit the Papua New Guinean government to resettlement in Papua  New Guinea for everyone who's sent there.   It just simply doesn't. It never did and that's the problem with this claim that the Prime  Minister's making. It's another overstatement. He just should say what it is. He doesn't have  to hype everything up.

BARRIE CASSIDY:   But he said he made a phone call to Papua New Guinean prime minister yesterday and had it  reaffirmed to him that that is the situation, that none will be re settled in Australia?

SCOTT MORRISON:

Well look, that's not what it says in the arrangement. It's not what the Papua New Guinean  prime minister said yesterday. He's said he's got a working limit of around 3,000 in terms of  who will be offshore processed there.   But look, we'll see how this all plays out, Barrie. We saw how it played out with the  Malaysian people swap. We saw how it played out with the East Timor election fix; that was  the election fix at the last election. We've said we'll salvage what we can from this, but there  are real questions about the ability to settle people in Papua New Guinea.   They've been said by people in Papua New Guinea including people like Dame Carol Kidu  who is, as you know, a well respected person there, and Somare and others. So we haven't  seen any detail on the resettlement arrangements, and there is certainly no commitment on  PNG to resettle everybody who's sent there.

BARRIE CASSIDY:   But having said that though, you are on the same page with the Government, aren't you, in  the sense that you would like a situation where no asylum seekers are processed in Australia  that none will have the opportunity to resettle here?

SCOTT MORRISON:   It is our policy that people who are processed offshore would wait offshore and seek  resettlement in a country other than Australia. And frankly, I think that's what the  Government's PNG arrangement is.   The suggestion that no-one will come back to Australia, the suggestion that there's no  boomerang back to Australia, the PNG prime minister's made it pretty clear that that's not in  the deal, it never was in the deal and the Prime Minister has hyped that up, like he always  hypes these things up.

BARRIE CASSIDY:   So you accept under your policy as well there will be the boomerang thing as well, there will  be some people resettling in Australia?

SCOTT MORRISON:   Well, no-one should have that expectation and I'm fine for the Government to say no-one  should have that expectation if they go to Papua New Guinea.

BARRIE CASSIDY:   But it will happen, otherwise you wouldn't have put out the policy that you did on Friday,  otherwise why would you be changing visa arrangements because they would be irrelevant?

SCOTT MORRISON:   Well the policy on Friday was important because it deals with the other big challenge we're  facing. We have to stop with the boats coming to Australia. But we also have to deal with the  legacy caseload of 30,000 people who are already here. And if you're going to be consistent  about these things, which we always have, it's always been our policy to have temporary  protection visas.   So no-one who is here in the country today, if they're found to be a refugee on the other side  of the election, they'll get a permanent visa from Kevin Rudd. That's what he's said, and that's  what the  Minister Burke and that's what the Attorney General have said. Under the Coalition  it has always been our policy for temporary protection visas, and that's the best they can hope  for.

BARRIE CASSIDY:   And once you've processed the 32,000 or whatever, does it then become irrelevant to talk  about the status of the visa because your intention would be that nobody resettles in  Australia? So the whole visa question would be irrelevant.

SCOTT MORRISON:   That's certainly the intention. But all of these measures always work together, Barrie. It's not  just about PNG, which the Prime Minister wants you to believe. You've got to have all the  measures, you've got to have the measures up through the system. That's why I welcome the  Indonesians taking the step they hopefully will be taking.  But what we know in Indonesia, Denis Nihill is the operations of the chief up - for the IOM  (International Organization for Migration) in Indonesia was reported yesterday as saying he's  seen no change up there yet about people seeking to go back home.   Now look, we'll see where it all ends up. But what I've noticed, because I've been in the  portfolio a time, big announcements are made, several months down the track they all tend to  fall over. So the question for the Australian people is this: who do you think on the other side  of election is best going to follow through when it comes to border protection? Tony Abbott  and myself or Kevin Rudd and Minister Burke? It's a simple question.

BARRIE CASSIDY:  To say there's been no evidence, though, there's been a lot of evidence in the media quoting  people on the ground up there saying that it's now of concern to them and they're looking for  other strategies?

SCOTT MORRISON:   You said the same thing to me in this interview about the Malaysian people swap, Barrie,  when we were talking about that arrangement.

BARRIE CASSIDY:   But that never got an opportunity to be tested.

SCOTT MORRISON:   No but Barrie, you were making the point at the time that it was already working on the  announcement effect. And I remember saying to you at the time that this is going to run the  very real risk of falling foul of Section 198 of the Migration Act, and it did.   See, on every occasion the Government has accused me of being negative about these things.  I said the asylum freeze would lead to chaos in our detention centres and it did, they burnt  down. I said the East Timor solution was an election fix and it was. The Malaysian people  swap, I said it would fall foul of the High Court, and it did. Now this is their form. So I'm  only judging them on their form. I always point out the issues with implementation, they  always ignore me, and it always falls over.

BARRIE CASSIDY:   So basically you're saying they should see these legal hurdles before they hit them. You said  yourself this week there are complex legal issues that have to be worked through. Why do  you make an announcement before you work through the complex legal issues?

SCOTT MORRISON:   Because it's very important if we're elected that we give our officials very clear instructions  about what we think needs to happen. Now I understand there are complicated issues here.

If we go back to the court case in November of 2010 which dealt with the issue of appeals,  what was found there was that it was the way that the Government was practising the non-statutory process that gave rise to the jurisdictional issue that was found through the High  Court.   Now, what I want to give my department, if I'm elected, very clear instructions about what I  want them to achieve. Now I'm not going to just roll over to the advocates or the taxpayer-funded lawyers or the media or anyone else who wants to try and intimidate the Coalition out  of our policies.

BARRIE CASSIDY:   But you do have to roll over to the law.

SCOTT MORRISON:   We will be subject to the law, but the advocates and the taxpayer-funded lawyers and the  media are not the law, Barrie. They're entitled to their opinion, but what I'm making crystal  clear is we are going to seek to return to that non-statutory process, which is the same process  the UNHCR (United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees) follows all around the world,  and was in operation when we were last in government and had not been successfully  challenged when we were in government. What occurred under the Labor Party is they  changed how they did it, they changed how they practised and they fell foul of the law.

BARRIE CASSIDY:   What you are saying is that there will be no appeal mechanism for asylum seekers against the  decision of a Commonwealth official?

SCOTT MORRISON:   What I've said is that there will be a case officer decision and a review by a second case  officer, and that's the practice around the world. Now the UNHCR …

BARRIE CASSIDY:  But no appeal.

SCOTT MORRISON:   There is a review of the initial decision by a second case officer, and that is the practice by  the UNHCR all around the world. The UNHCR Executive Committee, Barrie, says you can  have an administrative process or a judicial process. It doesn't say you have to have both.  Now…

BARRIE CASSIDY:   No, no, but that's one level. As I understand the laws in this country that people have a right  to appeal to a court?

SCOTT MORRISON:   To the High Court they do. We're not changing the Constitution here, Barrie. We're not  suggesting a referendum.

BARRIE CASSIDY:   It's not limited to the High Court. This is what you're trying to do.

SCOTT MORRISON:

Barrie, you can have a non-statutory process, we had one when we were last in government,  it wasn't successfully challenged in the courts. The way the Government sought to change it  and practice it under the Labor Party led to that appeal into the courts and the system fell over

under how the Labor Party ran it. Now I'm going to give our department very clear  instructions about what I want them to achieve, and we'll set about working through those  difficult issues together.

BARRIE CASSIDY:   So if you're right that the appeal can only be to the High Court what will that do in terms of  the backlog of cases?

SCOTT MORRISON:   Once we get to a position of no, we'll immediately move to removal.

BARRIE CASSIDY:   What impact would that have?

SCOTT MORRISON:  Well the purpose is to clear the backlog, Barrie. So the purpose is to get to a decision as  quickly as possible. And once we get to a position, if it is a no, as experienced in the UK, and  this is the system in part which this is modelled on. They have the detained fast track system.  And what they've been able to do by getting to that decision quickly is get people removed  from the country far more readily.   I mean they're getting removal rates of 73 per cent of people who have had negative  decisions; 63 per cent of them within three months. And they're getting twice the rate of  removals of people being held in detention while they're awaiting removal than in the  community.   Now that's our plan. We have to clear a backlog of 30,000 people, which Kevin Rudd wants  to just sweep under the carpet and pretend are not there. They are here and we will have to  work through that case load.

BARRIE CASSIDY:   But that's the backlog of people here, what about the backlog of cases in the High Court? And  it just seems to me if the High Court is the only Court of Appeal it becomes a very expensive  exercise.

SCOTT MORRISON:   We'll see what happens, Barrie, but what I'm saying is this is our intention, this is our policy,  this is what we will work through, and if people want to test our resolve they can but the  Coalition has…   The people have sought to intimidate the Coalition out of our policies on turning back boats  and offshore processing and the issue of changing the appeals system and all of these issues  over time, and we've held firm. We've held firm for over a decade. So those who want to  challenge us, they can bring it on.   But what they will find in Tony Abbott and myself and our team is the resolve to follow this  through as you saw with John Howard and with Phillip Ruddock and with Alexander Downer  and that team. That is the resolve you need to deal with both of these issues, those seeking to  come and those who are already here.

BARRIE CASSIDY:

OK, the two weeks down, three weeks to go. Are you comfortable with this idea that your  costings won't be detailed until the last week of the campaign?

SCOTT MORRISON:   Well you can't detail all your costings until all your policies are out, Barrie.

BARRIE CASSIDY:   But you know what they are.

SCOTT MORRISON:   Well we haven't finished announcing our policies. We've announced another policy today as  you know, and the costings elements are addressed there. And Joe Hockey has brought  together this eminent group of people to run the ruler over that, so I'm comfortable with how  that's going.

BARRIE CASSIDY:   They might satisfy that arithmetic question, but it doesn't explain why you're holding it up  until the last minute; what is the problem?

SCOTT MORRISON:   Well Barrie, we haven't announced all of our policies. When we've announced all of our  policies then we can provide the reconciliation of the cost of all of our policies. That's how it  works.

BARRIE CASSIDY:   But you know what are in those policies, know what they cost, so you know the figure at this  point.

SCOTT MORRISON:   As each policy is released and you'll see it …

BARRIE CASSIDY:  You know the extent to which you have to cut …

SCOTT MORRISON:   … there is a section on costings on each individual policy. And the sum total of all that and  the impact on the bottom line of all of that is the final decision that you'd make before an  election.

BARRIE CASSIDY:   Do you know where the cuts are going to be made?

SCOTT MORRISON:   Well I'm the shadow immigration minister, so I can tell you what's happening in my portfolio,  Barrie, and I'm sure you will have the opportunity to talk to my colleagues about these issues.

BARRIE CASSIDY:   And this close to polling day how do you feel it's going?

SCOTT MORRISON:

Well, I think Tony Abbott, as Gerard was saying before, is running a very strong campaign. I  think what we're seeing from Kevin Rudd is a fairly chaotic episode. And that's what we've  always known about Kevin Rudd, and I think what is happening in the campaign is people  are being reminded of his record when he was there the first time around. And they're seeing  all the same things now echoed in this second time around.

And frankly, it is getting a bit Captain Chaotic out there. And as things unravel for him I  think we're seeing the old Kevin Rudd come back every single day. And I think that is  reminding people of what's at stake.   And if they want another three years like the last six, I mean the Greens and Labor are now  tied at the hip again as the preference arrangement shows, and the risk of a Labor/Green  minority government again. I think that's something that no Australian would be looking  forward to.

BARRIE CASSIDY:   Thanks for your time this morning.

SCOTT MORRISON:   Thanks a lot Barrie.



