

SENATOR CLAIRE MOORE  SHADOW MINISTER FOR COMMUNITIES  SENATOR FOR QUEENSLAND

MEDIA RELEASE

SENATOR CLAIRE MOORE WELCOMES THE 2013 MISSION AUSTRALIA  YOUTH SURVEY

Senator Clare Moore, Shadow Minister for Communities welcomed the Mission  Australia 2013 youth survey released today.

Unemployment and the economy are listed as the greatest concern for young people  today. The report highlights the importance of hearing the voice of youth at a time  when youth unemployment is three times greater than the national average.

Senator Moore said that while the report gives many reasons for hope, greater  attention to youth is still required.

“Since 2011 mental health, alcohol and drugs have diminished as sources of anxiety  for young people”.

“However young people are worried about their future employment prospects,  emphasising the need for greater attention from the Government to ensure young  people have access to meaningful employment.”

14,461 young people between 15 and 19 were surveyed for the report.

Three quarters of young people indicated that there were enough opportunities for  study after high school available in their local area.

“Although these responses are encouraging it’s important to remember that at least  a quarter of the kids surveyed did not believe there were enough opportunities  available,” said Senator Moore.

Mission Australia advocates community development policies that target not only  young people but disadvantaged communities as a whole in order to produce a long  term solution.

They also suggest streamlining apprenticeship support services to assist employers  in taking on and managing apprentices.

The report suggests that work experience should be provided in real and relevant  work situations with personal support and training, given the unmet demand in  some locations.

“Mission Australia provide some interesting and positive policy responses to the  issues affecting young people and they deserve serious consideration by  Governments and oppositions in Australia,” said Senator Moore.

Coping with stress, school and study problems were other serious concerns  addressed by the survey. Body image was another prominent issue.

Almost 30 per cent of respondents were either extremely concerned or very  concerned about these issues. Males and females reported the same concerns,  however levels of concern felt by females were significantly higher than that of  males.

Senator Moore said “I find the issue of body image particularly concerning. We need  to regroup our efforts to help young people cope with the barrage of images they  encounter in the media that cause them to question their image and self-confidence.”

The report highlights the media’s influence on everyday life and its effects on young  people. The way the media reports on issues such as the role of gender in politics,  asylum seekers and discussions of marriage equality greatly influences the opinions  of young people.



TUESDAY, 3 DECEMBER 2013

MEDIA CONTACT: PATRICK KEANE 07 3252 7101

