Trade Minister Richard Marles

Radio National

Transcript, E&OE

Subjects: Trade with Papua New Guinea, PNG LNG Project, Manus Island

15 July 2013

MARK COLVIN: The Trade Minister Richard Marles brief in Port Moresby is to help  nurture Australia's two-way trade with PNG. It's presently worth about $7 billion a  year, but with the major PNG liquified natural gas project underway in the nation's  southern highlands, Australia thinks it could be higher. The Minister spoke to Lexi  Metherell.

LEXI METHERELL: Australia's export credit agency, the Export Finance and  Insurance Corporation, has given a loan of $350 million to the multi-billion dollar  PNG LNG project. This project involves a sub-sea pipeline - will that pipeline deliver  gas to Australia eventually? Or will Australia import gas from that project?

RICHARD MARLES: At this point I don't understand that is what's planned, but I do  stand to be corrected on that. The sale of the gas coming out of the LNG project, I  understand, is largely elsewhere. But there are Australian companies that are  involved in the project, it's a really important project from the point of view of  Australian investment here in PNG, and it's obviously a very important project for the  future of this country. It is easily the largest resources project which has been  developed today in Papua New Guinea, and its success goes a long way to the  development and the success of Papua New Guinea over the next decade and  beyond.

LEXI METHERELL: Asylum policy is also one of the items on your agenda in Port  Moresby. Is PNG's role in Australia's approach to asylum seekers likely to be  expanded, and how?

RICHARD MARLES: Well firstly we are very grateful for the role that PNG has  played to this point in time in the provision of the processing centre on Manus Island.  I'm not going to go into the details of the specifics of the conversation, but the  important point is we've seen PNG playing a really significant role through this  processing, we're very grateful for the role that they've played to date, and we do  want to see a further strengthening of the way in which we can work together to deal  with what is a very significant regional issue, and one which they acknowledge is a  significant regional issue, and we're grateful for that.

Media enquiries

 Minister's Office: (02) 6277 4330

 DFAT Media Liaison: (02) 6261 1555



