

Terrorism, Asylum Seekers  Sunday, 26 May 2013

Interview with Chris Kenny, SKY, Viewpoint

Chris Kenny: The man with perhaps the toughest job outside the Prime Ministership  in Australian politics at the moment is the current Immigration Minister, Brendan  O'Connor, and he joins me now from Canberra. Thanks for joining us, Minister.

Brendan O'Connor: Good evening, Chris.

Chris Kenny: Just before we get onto areas of your direct responsibility, I wanted to  ask you about this horrendous slaughter of the British soldier Lee Rigby in the  streets of London during the week. Does this highlight to you the ongoing dangers of  Islamic extremism in Western countries, and is there a warning here for Australia?  Obviously we are vigilant, but we cannot afford to be complacent.

Brendan O'Connor: Well, any horrific incident like the one we witnessed on our  television screens that occurred in London reminds us how vigilant we must be - how  we need to ensure we dedicate sufficient effort to mitigate the chances of that  happening. I mean, we've been fortunate to a large extent but, of course, we don't  have to go far back to remember the horrific Bali bombings, to remember how many  Australians died in a terrorist attack. And we don't have to go much further back than  that, of course, to remember that Australians were victims when the towers in New  York fell. So...

Chris Kenny: And, of course, we've had terrorist arrests, people arrested, dozens of  people arrested...

Brendan O'Connor: Hang on, I was about to say… You know I was Home Affairs  Minister when, of course, we had to arrest, and ultimately these people were  charged and convicted with conspiring to commit terrorist offences. So it is  something that we have to be forever vigilant. We have to work very closely with our  agencies and our agencies in other countries, in countries in the region and beyond,  but we also have to really mitigate the chances of home grown terrorism.

That's why it's so important to engage with communities and make sure that we  stamp out the chances of that happening because, as you've seen, whether it's been  the bombings of London or Spain, whether it's been others, whether there's been an  extremist element - which, of course, there has been. In many instances it's been  home grown and that, I think, is the most disturbing of all for our law enforcement  and intelligence agencies.

Chris Kenny: Yeah, I couldn't agree with you more, Minister. I want to go onto your  Border Protection portfolio now, and I wonder if we could start off by asking you  whether you know, whether you can share with us, just how many asylum seekers  have arrived in Australia by boat this year?

Brendan O'Connor: Well, it's a very significant number, unfortunately, because  we've seen a significant increase in the last few months. What we've noticed, Chris,  is that we saw a good decline when we introduced the screening process in Sri  Lanka. That's been, I think, very important, and what we need to do is replicate that.

But what we've got at the moment is a significant challenge because we've had other  areas open up, so what I'd like to see happen is what we've managed to do with Sri  Lanka where, as a result of the screening process and return of over 1100 people,  we've seen a very significant decline in arrivals directly from Sri Lanka. We need to  replicate those things elsewhere wherever we can, and also we need to continue to  work with our transit countries, Indonesia and Malaysia...

Chris Kenny: Do you know the...

Brendan O'Connor: ...in order to...

Chris Kenny: Do you know the current number for the year, though? Do you keep  up to date with the numbers?

Brendan O'Connor: The calendar year - look, it's - for the calendar year is  scheduled - is now in excess of 20 000, and of course I get updates each and every  week.

Chris Kenny: I think - just to correct you there, I think you're talking about the  financial year, there, when you...

Brendan O'Connor: Correct, correct...

Chris Kenny: When you talk about the calendar year, we can just bring up the  numbers on screen, the - it's just ticked over this weekend into the 10 000...

Brendan O'Connor: That's right.

Chris Kenny: ...in this calendar year.

Brendan O'Connor: Sorry, I thought you were referring to because we're coming  up, of course, to the end of this financial year, and we've had a very significant  number this calendar year too, and we've got a long way to play out. But, as I say,  I'm optimistic that we've seen - we can do more. We've seen what happens when we  put in place an arrangement, for example, that we've put in place with Sri Lanka.

We need to do more of that under the auspices of the Bali Process, but honestly,  Chris, unless we start embracing the recommendations of the Houston panel and  actually have a return to transit country, because now we have a return to source  country, I don't think we're going to see the vessels, you know, falling fast enough.

And that's why we want the Parliament to realise and embrace the Houston panel  recommendations.

Chris Kenny: I'll come back to some of those measures in a moment. I just want to  update further numbers there, and we could put up on the screen the number of  boats and arrivals since June 2010, that is since Julia Gillard took over and made  this a priority area, over 550 boats and now over 35 000 people. You're talking in  very optimistic terms, Brendan O'Connor, but don't you have to admit, three years  on, that you've failed - that is, the government has failed, in this undertaking, to  protect our borders. Julia Gillard said she would stop the boats.

Brendan O'Connor: Well, I think this is - look, this is a problem that confronts all first  world nations. We, of course, have about two per cent of people seeking asylum  and, of course, we want to see the end of people endangering their lives. The last  thing I want to see is people giving money to people smugglers, endangering their  own lives and, of course, causing this problem.

What we do need to see is a reduction, so that's why I've said you - we can point to  areas of success, but what we do need also, Chris, is we do need the support of the  Opposition, who've done everything they can to prevent firstly offshore processing  and secondly the returns to a transit country. I mean, Tony Abbott...

Chris Kenny: [Talks over] The only thing [indistinct] doing now is the Malaysia  Solution, which...

Brendan O'Connor: Well, let's just talk about that...

Chris Kenny: ...which looked after 800...

Brendan O'Connor: No, no, but that yes...

Chris Kenny: ...would take care of 800 asylum seekers...

Brendan O'Connor: No, no, but you say that...

Chris Kenny: ...which would be like one week...

Brendan O'Connor: No, but you say that, but let's just see what that would look -  firstly, what's happened is the Opposition have said no to the country that says yes,  Malaysia, and has said yes to the country that says no, Indonesia. Why would they  do that? Well, they do that because they don't want to see any success at all.

Now, the reason I say that your comments, in relation to the number for Malaysia,  are not correct is because we've seen a return of 1100 to Sri Lanka, we've seen a 90  per cent decline since that occurred. Why have we seen that? Because it's the most  powerful message of all, to return people to a country of source. Now, we've got that  in place, we do not have a return country - return to country of transit. That would be  a very important part of a number of important reforms we could put in place.

Chris Kenny: I agree with you that...

Brendan O'Connor: It's been stymied by the Parliament and, I mean, the fact that  it's not even been tried. We've got Angus Houston, an eminent Australian, former  Australian Defence Force chief, appointed by the Howard Government, and indeed  this government along with Michael L'Estrange, no strong Labor association there, a  former secretary of the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade and, of course,  Paris Aristotle, 25 years of refugee settlement, putting together some  recommendations that we can't realise because of the Opposition.

Chris Kenny: We've heard - we understand those arguments, and we've heard  them often, but I want to talk to you too about turning back boats, because we know  that's the same principle, effectively, and we know it has been affected in the past.  You're saying that you won't turn back boats. Now...

Brendan O'Connor: No, we don't say that. We say it's not possible to do that.

Chris Kenny: But what - hang on, it has been possible in the past. Now, are you  saying that if our Navy personnel intercept a boat in the international waters, an  Indonesian boat with Indonesian crew, they don't even attempt to tell them - call their  bluff and tell them to return to their home port? Do we not even try that?

Brendan O'Connor: Well, the most recent example, I think, the potential devastation  and indeed some terrible deaths when SIEV 36 caught - there was a problem where  they believed they were to be turned around, that boat was sabotaged. Five people  died, our own Customs and Navy personnel on that vessel could have been killed as  well. Now, the head of the Navy say it's not workable. If, Chris, you're right in saying  that we could have an arrangement with Indonesia, can you answer why the  Opposition leader chose not to raise it on two occasions when he met with the  President of Indonesia?

Chris Kenny: I don't really want to talk about the Opposition. I want to talk about the  government and how you...

Brendan O'Connor: Well, the...

Chris Kenny: ...are solving this.

[Both talking, indistinct]

Chris Kenny: Isn't the key point here that you don't need an arrangement with  Indonesia because if it's an Indonesian boat with an Indonesian crew and it's sent  back to an Indonesian home port, then there is no argument? Indonesia cannot  argue with it?

Brendan O'Connor: No, no, of course not, and the reason why the Navy and people  who know a lot more about it than you and certainly others, that is the head of the  Navy, don't believe it's possible without any cooperation is because the boat will be  sabotaged or possibly sabotaged. There'll be a safety of life at sea situation, which  will...

Chris Kenny: I agree with that risk, and we've all seen tragic consequences, but  what I wanted to get from you is whether we're actually even trying anymore,  whether we actually contact the boats and ask them to turn around.

Brendan O'Connor: But here we have...

Chris Kenny: Do we not even try to enforce our waters?

Brendan O'Connor: But Chris, we have a safer approach that has the same impact,  which is that we collect these people and fly them directly back to Malaysia, and the  only reason we cannot do that, to see whether that works, the only reason we cannot  do that is because the Parliament - we have not been able to get that through the  Parliament. Now, I would have thought we would try the safest route rather than  endanger the Customs and Naval personnel, potentially endanger men, women and  children. It would be far better that we took that approach.

Now, that is the safer option that's there on the table with Malaysia saying yes,  Indonesia saying no, and so the Opposition goes to the country that says no, but  doesn't go to the country that says yes. I think we should give that a go. You've got  experts. It really seems to me incumbent on them doing that. Now, the Opposition, of  course, are walking away from this stop the boats mantra and, as I know, the  shadow minister is already pleading the Opposition leader to get him out of that  portfolio if they're elected, because the claim that they can stop boats in the manner  they're suggesting is entirely fanciful.

Chris Kenny: Alright. Immigration Minister Brendan O'Connor, thanks very much for  joining us tonight on Viewpoint.

Brendan O'Connor: Thanks very much, Chris.



See: Index of Speeches

URL: http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/bo/2013/bo203599.htm  Last update: Tuesday, 28 May 2013 at 09:41 AEST



