

SENATOR THE HON PENNY WONG

LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION IN THE SENATE

SHADOW MINISTER FOR TRADE AND INVESTMENT



TRANSCRIPT OF INTERVIEW - SKY AM AGENDA WITH KIERAN GILBERT

SUBJECT: Climate Change, asylum seeker policy, GrainCorp.

E  & O E - PROOF ONLY

GILBERT: The carbon tax will be introduced first thing on Wednesday, the repeal  legislation. The Abbott Government will maintain pressure on Labor on this issue. Do  you accept there will be some tough political times ahead for Labor on this issue,  given your stance?

WONG: Well, I think the Government’s approach to this issue can be demonstrated  by the clip you just showed. I mean Australians do expect more from a Prime  Minister than that kind of stunt, than that kind of election ad being filmed in the Prime  Minister’s office. They expect explanations.

Perhaps what was most interesting is what wasn’t in the video, what wasn’t in the  clip. He didn’t say, well, look, I know we said we’d turn back the boats but we’re not  really doing that. He didn’t say I told you we’d reduce debt but, actually, we’re  blowing out the deficit and massively increasing the nation’s credit limit. He didn’t say  all of those things. It was just another stunt from Tony Abbott. It’s about time he  started behaving like a Prime Minister.

GILBERT: We’ll get to the issue of border protection in a moment. But he did say,  day-in-day-out, this would be the first bill put to parliament. It will be. He’s been true  to his word. On Wednesday morning the Carbon Tax Repeal Bill will be put to the  parliament. Now isn’t Labor simply creating uncertainty for business, delaying the  repeal, when there’s every likelihood that it will be repealed anyway come July?

WONG: Well Tony Abbott didn’t have a mandate to set no limit on pollution at all.  What he told Australians is that his direct action policy would reduce emissions.

Now, what he’s asking the parliament to do is to vote on that legislation essentially  sight unseen. Because the Government still hasn’t released details of their direct  action policy which they say will reduce emissions. I mean it isn’t anything more than  a slogan and I think Australians deserve the parliament considering the legislation  properly. And considering …

GILBERT: But the direct action is going to be done not through legislation.

WONG: And that is precisely the point: that this is legislation which essentially says  we’re going to remove any limit on pollution and we’re going to go to direct action,  without the Government being upfront about what direct action includes. We think  they should be upfront about that and we also think, consistent with what we’ve said  before the election, we do need a limit on pollution in this country. That’s the position  Labor has.

GILBERT: Getting back to that original question, though, do you accept there will be  some tough political times for Labor given you’ve taken this stance in the face of  what is a clear mandate to get rid of the carbon tax?

WONG: Well, as I said, I don’t think he had a mandate for there to be no limit on  pollution. And what we’re saying is we’re prepared to move to an emissions trading  system, scheme, which puts a limit on pollution. What we’re not prepared to do is  simply roll over because Tony Abbott wants the Labor party too. I don’t think anyone  who voted for Labor people expects us to do anything other than fight for the right  policy, which is to put a limit on pollution.

GILBERT: On the international climate talks which continue this week in Warsaw,  more indications that this Government is going to be in the mainstream of  international negotiations. It will consider an agreement beyond 2015, but only if  other major economies are on board. Isn’t that a fair benchmark?

WONG: Kieran, how can you be in the mainstream when you don’t turn up?

GILBERT: They are turning up, through the ambassador.

WONG: Well let me tell you, there is no international discussion where bureaucrats  are able to resolve matters. Ultimately, you have to have elected people turning up,  elected representatives. You can’t be in the mainstream if you’re sitting on the  sidelines.

GILBERT: Is it fair enough to say that we will wait for other major economies to sign  on before we do?

WONG: Well my observation is that many more economies are seeking to put a limit  on pollution and are pricing carbon. But the point that you made is that the  Government says they are part of the mainstream. They’re not even turning up. Now  if you think climate change is something that it’s in Australia’s national interest to act

upon, surely you’d want to be in the discussion to try and encourage other countries  to do more.

GILBERT: Didn’t Labor suffer for getting ahead of the rest of the world?

WONG: Look, my view about it, the Labor party’s view, is that climate change is  something that Australia has to act on. Now, we’re prepared to end the carbon tax  and move to an emissions trading scheme, something John Howard supported in  2006.

GILBERT: On the issue of asylum seeker arrivals, Tony Abbott mentioned in his  video statement there, on the eve of the opening of the parliament, that boat arrivals  are down 90 per cent since mid-year, the peak under the Labor government. That’s  the record, isn’t it, so far?

WONG: Well let’s remember a few things. The first is boat arrivals started to drop as  a result of the former Labor government’s arrangement with Papua New Guinea.  That’s the reality. But I think the more important point is this…

GILBERT: So they’ve continued to increasingly under the Coalition.

WONG: The important point is this. We are in the absurd situation where the  Australian people and the Australian media are getting their information about what’s  happening in relation to asylum seekers from the Jakarta Post. That’s who we’re  getting information from. That is the extent that this Government is going too, to hide  information. This is not the government that they said they’d be, and they are a  government that is not telling Australians what they’re doing.

GILBERT: The Minister did make a statement yesterday clarifying the facts though,  didn’t he?

WONG: After the story had been broken by the Indonesian media. I mean, I assume  you’ve watched or been to Mr Morrison’s press conferences? I mean, they are an  exercise in absurdity. We have a Minister who has been elected, who holds the  office of Minister, who doesn’t want to tell Australians what’s happening. And we  have to get information from the Indonesians.

GILBERT: You’re also the Shadow Investment Minister, Trade and Investment; I  want to ask you about GrainCorp. The Opposition to this point have said you support  it in principle, what are the doubts here that you’ve got around that proposal by  Archer Daniels Midland.

WONG: Last Sunday I gave a speech where I made clear that foreign investment is  good for the country, creates jobs. You always have to look to the national interest.  But there is a lot of benefit to Australians in foreign investment. I also make the point  that the Opposition on this is all over the place. I mean, we’ve had an extraordinary

week in terms of the internal divisions in the Opposition. You have the Deputy Prime  Minister…

GILBERT: Divisions or debate?

WONG: Divisions. You have the Deputy Prime Minister …

GILBERT: All governments have debates on matters like this.

WONG: No, you don’t have a Deputy Prime Minister of the country pre-empting the  Treasurer’s decision, which is what happened last Sunday. And you don’t have a  Minister, a National Party Minister, floating the possibility of resignation publicly,  which is what Mr Joyce has done this week, if the treasurer doesn’t do what he

wants. I mean it’s a dummy spit before the event. Then there should be a national  interest focus on this, but what we see is the Liberals and Nationals at war when it  comes to this particular deal.

GILBERT: Opposition Senate leader, Penny Wong, thanks for your time.

WONG: Good to be with you, Kieran.

ENDS



