

Julie Bishop MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS



Channel 7 News with Melissa Doyle

3 August 2013

Subjects: GST, marriage equality, aged care, Abbott women, asylum seekers, PNG solution.

MELISSA DOYLE Federal Deputy Opposition Leader Julie Bishop joins me now live from Melbourne.

Julie. Hi, nice to see you.

JULIE BISHOP Good evening Mel.

MELISSA DOYLE

A lot of talk last night, this ‘GST scare campaign’, has it given the Coalition a bit of a problem?

JULIE BISHOP No, not at all. This is just another Labor lie; there is no change to the GST.

It’s not our policy and Labor should focus on their own record over the last 6 years, and quite frankly I  think the Australian people can see that we can’t afford another 3 years like the last 3 years.

MELISSA DOYLE So no one is walking away thinking “where there is smoke there is fire”, a little  suspicious? JULIE BISHOP No, we’ve said straight out that there is no change to the GST, it’s not our  policy, we are not taking it to this election. It’s just Labor spinning another yarn, but I don’t think the  Australian people will fall for this one.

MELISSA DOYLE Marriage equality took everyone by surprise last night when Kevin Rudd brought it  up at towards the end of the debate. Tony Abbott says the issue is ‘done and dusted’, but if our  Facebook results are anything to go by clearly voters don’t think so. Do you think it needs to be  revisited?

JULIE BISHOP The Parliament looked at that issue last year and there was a vote, debate and a vote  on it, and there was a decisive vote against marriage equality.

Our position has been consistent throughout that we don’t support a change to the Marriage Act and  that’s what we took to the last election, to be consistent that’s what we’ll take to this election.

As Tony Abbott said, if the matter is raised again, having been voted on not so long ago, then it’s a  matter for our party-room and I think that’s an appropriate approach to take.

MELISSA DOYLE The other issue that came up last night was aged care, firmly back on the agenda.  A lot of people are worried about it. Do you think this issue is getting enough attention?

JULIE BISHOP The Productivity Commission did provide a very detailed report about funding models  for aged care, but the point Tony Abbott made in the debate last night is a real one. That is, that  nurses and carers in aged care homes tell us that they are just overwhelmed by the amount of

paperwork and red tape that they have to deal with. They’re filling in forms and spending time  providing details to bureaucrats in Canberra when they should be spending time nursing and caring.

That’s a real issue and that’s why Tony Abbott said we will cut the unnecessary red-tape and  regulation out of aged care and across the economy so the people can do what they do best; nurse  and care for people in aged care homes.

MELISSA DOYLE There are a lot of families who will listen to that and keep their fingers crossed that  it will improve. I want to ask you about Tony Abbott’s daughters who are travelling with him. Does  internal polling show that that is a big ‘plus’ for the Coalition?

JULIE BISHOP They are absolutely gorgeous girls as the photos and videos will show. They’re a part  of Tony’s team and having the family around is very reassuring when you’re on the campaign trail.  Otherwise you’re away for such a long time. 33 days without being with you family would be pretty  tough so Tony has got his girls and his wife Margie with him.

Last night his mum and dad were at the debate, in fact the whole family was there. I took a picture of  all the Abbott women, with his dad, and put it on Twitter. I think it’s wonderful to have his family able  to travel with him during this campaign.

MELISSA DOYLE Can I ask you about asylum seekers? Having them land in Queensland from  Papua New Guinea, the Queensland Premier says that this is the next big problem that we’re going to  face. Do you agree?

JULIE BISHOP We are deeply concerned about this new channel that’s being opened up for people  smugglers. Campbell Newman quite rightly pointed this out when Kevin Rudd announced his ‘PNG  Solution’ and said that it could mean that people will come through PNG into northern Australia. Now  we’ve seen evidence of that.

It looks like a new front, we are exposed, and this is a result of the announcements that Kevin Rudd  has made. You can’t trust Kevin Rudd on border protection. Every time he comes up with what he  thinks is a solution, another problem arises.

We need to focus on ensuring that our borders are secure in northern Australia, as well as elsewhere,  and stop people arriving by boat. It’s a dangerous journey and we know that so many people have  died. A thousand people that we know of have died since Kevin Rudd changed the laws and  weakened our border protection position.

We have to stop the boats and stop people coming on this journey and it is deeply worrying that we’ve  now found that people are coming into northern Queensland.

MELISSA DOYLE Can I ask you a quick question to finish; the Coalition policy on the Deputy Prime  Minister. Will you be acting PM when Tony Abbott is away or will that be the National Party Leader?

JULIE BISHOP The tradition has always been in Coalition that the leader of the National Party is the  Deputy Prime Minister. I’d get to be acting Prime Minister only if Warren Truss was away, but these  are issues that we’re not even thinking about! We have to win an election. We have to win the respect  and trust of the Australian people. We're not taking anything for granted.

MELISSA DOYLE Julie Bishop thank you so much for joining me from Melbourne tonight.

JULIE BISHOP It has been my pleasure.

- Ends -



