MEET THE PRESS

7 JULY 2013

INTERVIEW WITH JASON CLARE

KATHRYN ROBINSON, PRESENTER: The Opposition has said today, Scott Morrison in  fact, that Labor’s “no doc” policy for asylum seekers is a pale imitation of Liberal policy  released three years ago. Is this a re-badged Liberal policy?

JASON CLARE: Well, they’re different. This is a pretty straightforward measure, that says if  you’ve destroyed your documents, and you don’t cooperate with Australian authorities, then  we’ll process you last. The Liberal policy says if you don’t have the documents, then we’re  just going to presume, or have a presumption, that you don’t have the right to asylum. I think  that’s a too-simple approach to this, because as we all know, a lot of people lose their  documents, and in that case, there shouldn’t be a presumption that they can’t seek asylum or  receive asylum. But where people destroy the documents, and they don’t cooperate with  authorities, provide the necessary information that we need to contact their embassy or their  consulate to confirm identity, then we’ll process those people after we’ve processed the  people that do have documents, or are willing to assist and cooperate with authorities.

CLAIRE HARVEY: The practicalities of this throw up a couple of humanitarian questions.  One is what do you do with this presumably not very happy population of people, who are  waiting a long time to be processed without documents? The other is - the Government’s  talking about releasing children immediately from detention. How do you make both of those  things work? Who’s going to look after those children, for example? And what about work  rights for the others?

JASON CLARE: Well, just on - just to complete this first point, cooperation is the key. So  the individual concerned, that’s seeking asylum, needs to give us the information we need to  contact their embassy, to get the necessary information we need to confirm their identity.  That’s important as part of the asylum seeker process. We don’t want children in detention.  We want to get them out of detention as quickly as we can, and Minister Burke has made that  point this week. But we need to be very systematic about how you do it, because if you’re  going to put a young person into foster care, you need to make sure that you can give them  the sort of care and support that they need. So you can’t do it straightaway. It does take some  time. But Minister Burke has said that this is one of his priorities.

LANAI SCARR: Is this a concession that the Malaysian solution is now dead? And also, is  this policy a lurch to the right?

JASON CLARE: Well, let me take the second point first. This is not about right or left. It’s  about what’s going to work. Now, the Malaysian agreement is a good start, but we need more  than that. It’s about flying people back, and what we’ve found over the course of the last few  years is that the fear of dying, and drowning at sea, hasn’t stopped people wanting to get onto  a boat - people still getting onto boats, even though so many people have died. The fear of  being flown off to Nauru, or to Manus Island, hasn’t stopped people getting onto boats. But  one thing that has had a big effect is flying people back home. We had thousands of people  come from Sri Lanka to Australia last year. Then we started flying people back, that were  economic refugees - people looking for a job - and that’s had a big impact on the number of

people coming by boat from Sri Lanka to Australia. Now what I’ve said, what the  Government’s said, is that we need to expand that. Fly people back. A lot of people are  coming to Australia from Iran at the moment, and Iran refuses to take people back unless they  voluntarily want to go back to Iran. So what I’ve said is let’s fly them halfway back - fly  them halfway back, to Malaysia, and that’ll remove the incentive to get onto a boat in the first  place. But we need to do more than just Malaysia, we need to set up that sort of agreement  with other countries of the region.

LANAI SCARR: So the Malaysia solution is not dead?

JASON CLARE: No, not at all. What I’m saying is we need that, plus more. Remember,  Lanai, almost 40 years ago, after the Vietnam War, Saigon fell. Lots of people got onto boats,  and they went to places like Malaysia, the Philippines and Thailand. And the solution there  was refugee camps, run by the UN, in Malaysia, the Philippines and Thailand. And the UN  ended up winning a Nobel Peace Prize for the work they did. What we need to do is the same  thing. The countries of the region - countries where people are coming from, as well as  transiting through, like Indonesia, Malaysia, Thailand, the UAE - working together with  countries like Australia, to set up a similar type of solution that worked 40 years ago, after the  Vietnam War.

KATHRYN ROBINSON: This idea, though, I guess would involve a number of countries  coming to the party to make a deal on this. We’ve seen Kevin Rudd in Jakarta this week.  Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono has announced this multilateral summit, if you like. The  Opposition has said why does it take the President of another country to determine our border  protection policy? Is that a fair point?

JASON CLARE: No, well I think we should congratulate the President of Indonesia for  putting his hand up and saying we’ve got to work together on this. The idea that Australia can  just make a policy in Canberra and it can stop the boats is ludicrous. This is a big problem for  all countries of the region. People are moving from Iran, Iraq, Afghanistan, through UAE,  then to Malaysia, sometimes Thailand, then to Indonesia, and then getting on a boat to come  to Australia.

KATHRYN ROBINSON: But is it embarrassing -

JASON CLARE: We’re not going to fix it unless we all work together on a solution, like the  one I’ve been talking about.

KATHRYN ROBINSON: Is it embarrassing that President Yudhoyono took the front step on  this, though, and the Australian Government didn’t?

JASON CLARE: Oh, the Australian Government has been saying for a long time we need a  regional solution to this, and I’m sensing, now, a greater level of urgency and attention from  other countries of the region, saying yes, we need to do something about this as well. That’s  the way to fix it, not the idea that Mr Abbott’s talking about, that you can just push a boat  back to Indonesia, and that’ll solve the problems. The President of Indonesia was pretty clear  last week - he said Indonesia is not going to tolerate or support that.

CLAIRE HARVEY: Labor’s come a long way, ideologically, since 2007, when, to great  acclaim, the Howard Government’s policies were unravelled, and the left celebrated. Do you

feel that Australians who think of themselves as Labor voters have come with you yet, or is  there more persuasion to do?

JASON CLARE: When I talk to people about it, most people will say there’s too many  people dying - stop this happening. If Australia wasn’t an island, then you might be able to  deal with this issue in a different way. But we are an island - people are getting on boats, and  they’re drowning. We’ve had hundreds of people drown. Keynes used to say when the facts  change, you change your mind, and that’s what the Labor Party’s done. We’ve seen people  getting onto boats and drown, and in the face of all of that, you’ve got to implement whatever  policies you think will work to stop people dying at sea. Now, from what I can tell, analysing  this issue, it’s flying people back. That’s what’s going to remove the incentive for people  getting on a boat in the first place.

KATHRYN ROBINSON: Minister, you’ve announced these, a raft of reforms, during the  week. In a nutshell, what are they?

JASON CLARE: Well, they tackle three of things. First, corruption - you’ll remember, in  December I announced that a number of people had been arrested for trying to get drugs into  the country, including customs officers that were trying to break the system. And I’ve put  together reforms with Justice James Wood, the man who headed up the NSW Royal  Commission into the Police Force, including things like drug and alcohol testing, as well as  integrity testing, so the next time you take a bribe, it might be from a police officer. Things as  basic as banning the use of personal mobile phones in the customs-controlled areas at  international airports, but also restricting the amount of time that you spend in any given job.  What we found in NSW with the police is that if you work in one place for too long, like  Kings Cross, you can become susceptible to corruption. The same problem has emerged here,  so these reforms are designed to tackle that. But on top of that, as you said in your  introduction, we’re going to see a big increase in the amount of cargo coming to Australia,  driven in part by people buying things online, and a big increase in the number of  international passengers, driven in part by the Asian Century - more Chinese tourists than  ever before, and we need to use technology to target the right packages, that might have drugs  in them, and also make it easier for passengers, when they get off a plane, to speed through  customs, and get onto a train, or into a taxi, and out for their holiday.

LANAI SCARR: Those corrupt customs officials that have been caught - they have been  linked to bikie gangs. Do you think there is a need for a blanket ban on all people who have  been linked, or in some way have some ties to bikie gangs, being able to apply for jobs in  customs?

JASON CLARE: First thing I should say is that the overwhelming majority of customs  officers are good, honest, hard-working people, and they’re the people that have said “Go get  them.” They wear a blue uniform with pride, and they often say they bleed blue, and they’re  then men and women that have said “We want you to implement these reforms.” I had one  bloke ring my office after I announced these arrests, and he said, “I’ve been in the service for  20 years, and I always wear my uniform when I get a cup of coffee in the morning”, but that  morning, back in December, he put a jacket over his uniform, he was that embarrassed and  that disgusted with what somebody else, that swore the same oath, had done. So they want us  to get this done, and that’s why we’re doing it. On that point, I think it is right that we need to  lift the standards for recruitment - something equivalent to what the Federal Police do - and  I’ve said to customs I want to implement the same reform there.



CLAIRE HARVEY: We’re 12 days into the new Rudd Government. Has the Prime Minister  changed? Is he a changed man? Is this is a more consultative, less angry, Government than it  was the last time around?

JASON CLARE: Oh, I’ve seen evidence of that already, just with the conversations that I’ve  had with the Prime Minister on these big issues - the sort of things that we’ve been talking  about today. And I think Australia’s changed, too. They’re giving us a second look, and  they’re looking harder at what Tony Abbott stands for, and they’re seeing that the Liberal  Party don’t have any policies. I think the big change that I’ve noticed, just talking to people  in western Sydney, where I represent people, is people have said to me - a bloke said to me  the other day “I’m glad Kevin Rudd’s back, now I don’t have to vote for Tony Abbott.” And  it seems strange, but a lot of people have felt like they didn’t have a choice, that they had to  vote for the Liberal Party. Now they don’t. And there’s a real competition between the two  parties.

CLAIRE HARVEY: And is there a mind shift for people like you, for Labor people who  were staring down the barrel of unemployment not so long ago? You know, does Labor have  to start believing that it can win again now?

JASON CLARE: Yeah, I think there’s a real boost of enthusiasm within the Labor Party. And  the Liberal Party is a bit rattled - they thought they could coast to victory with just a few  slogans. Now they realise they’re going to have to come up with some policies if they want to  win the next election.

LANAI SCARR: One of the other key areas of your portfolio is the drugs in sport, ASADA  investigations. Do you think that Australian sport is dirty?

JASON CLARE: Well, no-one wants drugs in sport, and that investigation showed there was  links between organised crime and organised sport. And we’ve been talking about this for a  long time. People have been talking about it in dark corners, but not enough has been done to  get rid of drugs in sport, and that’s what this investigation’s all about. The Tour de France is  on our TVs right now, and I suspect a lot of fans of the Tour de France would say, “I wish  they did this 15 years ago.”

