THE HON BRENDAN O’CONNOR MP  MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP

E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RN BREAKFAST  RADIO NATIONAL  THURSDAY, 11 APRIL 2013

SUBJECT: ASYLUM SEEKERS

ALISON CARABINE: Brendan O'Connor, good morning.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Good morning Alison.

ALISON CARABINE: Minister, the Government ordered an inquiry into how the fishing vessel made it  all the way to Geraldton Harbour undetected. Have you been given any preliminary answers?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: No, the Minister for Home Affairs has asked Customs and Border Protection  for a review of the posturing of the vessels, which I think is a very reasonable response. It's a very  exceptional case where a vessel arrives on the mainland - the second time in five years. And you  compare that with the Howard years where there were 19 undetected arrivals on the mainland.

So the fact that it happened, it should be examined, but I think it's, as I say, a rare occurrence and  we'll engage with that agency to determine why that happened.

ALISON CARABINE: A rare occurrence maybe, but when will you have some answers?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Well, once we've engaged with the agency. I mean the fact is, as I say, our  men and women of our Customs and Naval agency do a remarkable job…

ALISON CARABINE: Well Minister…

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Well, let me just finish the sentence. In really difficult and challenging  circumstances, going to the rescue of people, intercepting vessels. They've got a remarkable record  given the square kilometres of - thousands of square kilometres of water on the coastline that we  have and, yeah, this was a rare occurrence. And as I've said before, we would be, of course, looking  to send the people on that vessel to Christmas Island for processing.

ALISON CARABINE: Overall the record is good, could it be then, Minister, that it wasn't necessarily a  failure of surveillance and interception, but rather a failure of intelligence? Did the authorities have  any knowledge at all that this boat was leaving Sri Lanka for Australia?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Look we receive, of course, intelligence all the time, and we deal with those  issues, but it is huge - you know, we've got thousands of square kilometres of water, they're wood  hulled vessels, there are times when they're not immediately detected, but - and of course the  journey was rather unusual, further south than usual. A very dangerous journey I might add, they're  very lucky to have reached land at all.

But - well, look, we'll asses that but as I say, over the last ten years you've seen a remarkable effort  to prevent undetected arrivals on the mainland, two in five years, as opposed to almost one in ten  vessels during the Howard Government years.

ALISON CARABINE: Geraldton is more than 2000 kilometres south of where most asylum seekers are  intercepted off Christmas Island, presumably the crew have been interview by now, did the  accidentally drift off course or are we seeing a new strategy to reach the mainland?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: I don't think this is a new strategy but I need that to be confirmed by the  agency. I think this vessel is, as I say, an exceptional case. But if you want to talk about how far south  it was, I mean, we've had in the past vessels arrive in Port Kembla, New South Wales, in Broome, in  Cairns, in Darwin. So this, again, is on the west coast of Australia - is the most likely place that there  might be an undetected arrival. In the past there was in the east and the north and the west, that  doesn't happen now, I'm glad to say. But in this case we'll examine the reasons this has occurred,  we'll certainly explain that publicly once we've confirmed that.

But in relation to those on the vessel themselves, we'll be looking to process them and, of course, if  they're not to be afforded the protection pursuant to the refugee convention they'll be sent home to  Sri Lanka as almost 1000 have in the last few months.

ALISON CARABINE: Have these asylum seekers claimed asylum here in Australia? There were  indications when they turned up in Geraldton that they wanted to get all the way to New Zealand.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: As I say, they're being - currently they're in custody, they'll be processed  where we can determine all of these matters. We do things according to the law, we have  professionals that are dedicated to that task, we will make sure the department and other agencies  resolve that through that proper processing, after which I will explain that publicly.

ALISON CARABINE: You are promising proper processing, but refugee advocates have complained  that many Sri Lankans are being sent home before their claims are properly considered. They are  being screened out. Some of those deported reportedly arrested on their return to Sri Lanka. Can  you guarantee…

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: I beg your pardon? What was that last point you made?

ALISON CARABINE: That some of the Sri Lankans who are deported are reportedly being arrested on  their return to Sri Lanka…

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Well that's not true.

ALISON CARABINE: Well that's according to refugee advocates…

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Well it's not true.

ALISON CARABINE: Can you guarantee that this group of 66 Sri Lankans will have their claims  properly assessed and processed?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Of course. We will always fulfil our obligations under the law, but people who  are making wild claims about matters should provide evidence. As I'm advised, we have returned  people pursuant to our obligations.

We are a very generous nation, we have 20,000 places under the humanitarian program, we seek to  provide settlement for people who are fleeing persecution. What we will not do is use those places  for people who are not afforded that protection. That would mean that people that are, are missing  out, and that's why we are very clear here that we do the right thing, we properly process people,  but those 20,000 places per annum are there for those people that are fleeing persecution, not for  people who are looking to come for other reasons.

ALISON CARABINE: We are in an election year Minister, is it tempting for the Government to try and  make an example of this group?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: We'll treat people equally and fairly under the law, and we're not looking to  make an example of anyone. I sympathise with people who have come on a long and very dangerous  journey. But our policies must deter people getting on these unseaworthy vessels. This vessel was  very lucky to reach land at all, and I can tell you what's a much greater tragedy, if we were salvaging  bodies as a result of a disaster.

We've seen too many maritime fatalities, too many children, women, and men perish at sea. And  our policies, as advised to us by three eminent Australians, are there to deter people getting on  vessels and at the same time we increased the humanitarian program places to ensure that people  take a regular path, a less dangerous path so that they can settle.

That's, I think, a decent policy that is firm, yes, it's tough in many respects. But it is fair, and I think  that's done not because we're in an election year, but because we want policies that are evidence  based, that are informed by experts. To the contrary, the Opposition refuse to listen to experts and  even as late as yesterday, as I understand it, Tony Abbott's now not saying he can stop the boats,  he's saying he might make a difference. They are walking crablike away from their slogan of stopping  the boats because they know they don't have a policy they have a slogan.

ALISON CARABINE: Well Minister, this group of asylum seekers would have been aware that the  mainland is yet to be excised from the migration zone, the Sri Lankan Navy is warning other boats  will be encouraged to try and make it all the way to Australia. Are you aware of any other vessels  trying to make it to the West Australian coast, knowing that their passengers can't be transferred to  Nauru or Manus Island?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: I'm not aware of that, as I say, we'll obviously assess why this has happened.  As I say, a very rare occurrence. But, of course, we're sending the people on this vessel to Christmas  Island and we have every right if they're not to be afforded protection to send them back home, The  most powerful thing is not to send people to a processing centre, but if they're not to be - if they're  not determined to have rights pursuant to the convention, to be sent directly home. And the fact  that we've sent almost 1000 people back to Sri Lanka in the last few months, sends the most  powerful message that you should not waste your money, you should not endanger your life coming  on those vessels. And I think that's the most important thing that we do here.

So these people will be processed pursuant to our obligations under law, if they're not to be  afforded protection, they will be returned to Sri Lanka.

ALISON CARABINE: Minister, thanks very much for your time this morning.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Thanks very much Alison.



