Minister for School Education

Peter Garrett

Doorstop - Parliament House, Canberra - National Plan for School  Improvement legislation

Wednesday 5 June 2013

E & OE - Proof only

Peter Garrett: Thanks for coming out and taking some comments following the  passage of the Australian Education Bill and amendments through the Parliament  today.

We’re now at the threshold of one of the most important reforms in education history  in our nation. It comes about not only as a consequence of this Government’s  continued commitment to both support education, but also to make sure that our  policies are geared to improving the education results of all young Australians, and  also on the back of the most important review into school education funding that this  country has had for nearly 40 years; the Gonski funding review.

And today in the Parliament we enshrine not only the principles of the National Plan  for School Improvement, but put into place the specific recommendations Mr Gonski  and his panel made about a fairer, more effective funding system for schools around  Australia. A Schooling Resource Standard, added to by loadings that address  disadvantage, to provide funding certainty over the long term for students in schools  around Australia. And importantly in this legislation we also are making the same  provision in terms of a funding model for government and non-government schools.

So the days of arguing and the days of real issues of ideology being attached to  funding schools are over. And as we brought this legislation into the Parliament I  think all of those people who have been involved in the many consultations and the  campaign to see a fairer funding model and have an interest in Australian schools in  the future would have cheered with delight.

Unfortunately the only people not cheering with delight were the Opposition, because  today the Liberals said ‘no’ to better schools. Today in the Parliament, they stood up  and said ‘no’ to better schools in our country. They didn’t move a single amendment.  They opposed every one of the amendments that we brought through, and we heard  nothing of substance, either from the Member for Sturt, or from any members who  stood up in Parliament, to suggest that they take education reform seriously.

Now we know that the NSW Premier has laid it out very clearly: this is a funding  model that delivers more to students in NSW. It’s a funding model that would deliver  more to students in the ACT and in other states in the Federation as well. And we’re  really very much looking forward to seeing them come and sit down and  constructively negotiate for the National Plan for School Improvement, but the

architecture in this Bill reflects both the Gonski recommendations and the feedback  we’ve had from stakeholders.

This is the first time that the nation now has a needs-based funding model legislated  in the House of Representatives. It has to go through the Senate, but it is a huge day  for students, and for the Australian school community, and a day of great shame,  because the Liberals said ‘no’ to better schools around Australia.

Journalist: So do you think this will encourage the other states to sign on?

Peter Garrett: I am very hopeful that this will encourage the other states to sign on.  This has been a long journey. Some would say it’s been arduous but there is no  question it’s been a step-by-step process. Today’s step is a very big one. It’s a very  big one.

Journalist: How would it actually help other states to be convinced?

Peter Garrett: Again I think the key thing now is to recognise what we saw in the  parliament today - by the way, just to reflect on the fact that the Coalition in the  Parliament didn’t seek to go for a division on the final passage of this legislation.  Even though Mr Pyne and Mr Abbott will do anything to stop better schools being  delivered around Australia, they clearly weren’t prepared to risk NSW members  being faced with the embarrassment of voting against support for kids in their state.

But on this other question: this means that if states continue with a broken funding  model under Tony Abbott they will see $16 billion nationally less in education over  years to come. If on the other hand, they sign up to the National Plan for School  Improvement will see some $14.5 billion extra in investment coming into the school  system.

And one final thing and again on this: today’s passage of legislation through the  House of Representatives is really important because it’s not only the additional  funding that will be applied through a Schooling Resource Standard model but it is all  funding and that’s what I think makes such a profound difference because it means  that the needs of kids in all our schools can be met by this funding model.

Journalist: Will you consider this reform over the line if Queensland and Western  Australia are still resisting come the election?

Peter Garrett: Well we’ve always said, and I’ve repeated it on many occasions, we  will continue to argue strongly for the commitment of all states because we believe  it’s in the interest of students in all states.

Journalist: But if they haven’t signed up will you consider this over the line. I mean,  it’s a national plan, if they haven’t signed up will you consider it successful?

Peter Garrett: Well again, this is a national plan enshrining principles of school  improvement that apply across states. So without getting into a hypothetical, what I  would say is this: Premier O’Farrell showed the way for Liberal Coalition parties in  their states. Premier Newman over the recent weeks has merely played politics. Now

I know that the Australian community actually want us to lift our heads out of political  debate and argument and do something which is in the best interest of every kid in  every state. And that is what this plan is about and I can say it with confidence  because we have a Liberal Premier and a Labor Prime Minister that have agreed to  it already. It’s now up to other premiers to come on-board.

Journalist: Minister, the amendments to the legislation detailed some pretty big  sticks for the states who don’t sign up. Were those states aware of those details  before you released this publically?

Peter Garrett: We’ve had significant discussion with states over time. I’ve had  discussion with my state education minister counterparts and everybody has been  aware of what’s is at offer for a National Plan for School Improvement and what it  means if states don’t sign up to a National Plan For School Improvement. That’s  been made crystal clear in the past and today it’s embodied in this legislation.

Journalist: Will the government’s approach turn from the carrot for extra funding to  what they will miss out on now as you line up to the election?

Peter Garrett: Well I think it goes without saying that education is a hugely important  issue for every single Australian and today the Liberals said no to better school for  Australians. So it’s clearly going to be an important focus for us as we come out of  parliament but more important than that again is that what is at stake is us actually  doing something really good for schools and students in our country.

Now we’ve seen that legislation pass through the House of Representatives. Of  course it has to go to the Senate, but in the meantime it’s absolutely crucial for state  premiers, now this legislation with a new school funding model has passed through  the lower house of parliament of the Australian Government here in Canberra, to  come into our open door of consultation and negotiation, and make a decision in the  best interest of students in their schools in their individual states.

Journalist: Are you convinced that all stakeholders are satisfied with the deal?  The  independent schools seem to be expressing some concerns.

Peter Garrett: Look I think that we will be in a position to finalise any last minute  issues that have been raised by those sectors. We always work closely and  cooperatively and openly with them. And remember both non- government school  systems, the Catholic system and the independent school system, stand to see  increased investment in their schools as a consequence of this National Plan for  School Improvement. This is a plan for better school for all Australians and crucially  in the amendments in this Australian Education Bill non-government schools and  government schools are effectively treated the same.

Journalist: Are the other states holding out because they believe they will be re-negotiating a new deal with a new Government?

Peter Garrett: Oh look you can throw a few more questions at me like that and the  frisbee will roll around my head and land on the autumn leaves. The fact is that we  will continue to work closely with the states. We know that Premier Giddings and

Premier Weatherill have expressed, I think, pretty positive comments about how  important they see a National Plan for School Improvement to be for their states but  let them make that call as they see fit.

For the meantime this legislation has passed through the lower house. We had a  debate where not a single matter of substance was raised by the opposition. But we  shouldn’t be surprised by that because the Member for Sturt for all of his confection,  for all of his outrage, dismissed the Gonski recommendations here, just about where  I’m standing I suspect, within 20 minutes of their release.

But not only that, he accused the NSW Premier, the NSW Treasurer and Education  Minister of having being conned by this model.

We then had the Education Minister for NSW come here into the parliament and brief  National Party members and state specifically that NSW would be worse off under  the staus quo, which is what Mr Abbott has on offer.

So I’m absolutely certain that if state premiers and education ministers put the  interests of their state first, recognise there’s more funding, which would go to  students on need in their schools, then we will see the next step of this National Plan  for School Improvement come through.

Journalist: [inaudible] but how much scope is there for actual flexibility for dealing  with their individual concerns in the negotiations now that the legislation is pretty  much locked in?

Peter Garrett: Well, have a look at the amendments and you can see the way in  which it works. Clearly, reaching an agreement with states is something which  requires us to acknowledge and work with the issues that they present. But the offer  is on the table and it’s now up to state premiers, treasurers and education ministers  to get on board - after all, the legislation is through the House of Representatives.  I’ve got to finish in a sec folks.

Journalist: Are you concerned that there’s been a breakdown in discipline within  Labor ranks in this [inaudible]?

Peter Garrett: Well it won’t surprise you to hear me say that over the past 48 hours  in particular, I have been focused on nothing - nothing other - than securing one of  the most significant public policy reforms in education that we’ve seen in our nation’s  history.

Now we secured that today. That is something that I think is a mark of the  Government’s capacity to deliver serious policy reforms. That’s what I’m on about,  that’s why I came here, that’s what we’ve done today and we’ll get on with the job  once we’ve stopped taking questions.

Journalist: Laurie Ferguson says that voters in his electorate aren’t listening to the  education and disability reforms that you are making because they are concerned  about the asylum seeker issue.

Peter Garrett: Well I’m not going to be passing commentary on people’s comments,  I’m just not, so that’s the end of that.

Journalist: The COAG reform council reports that numeracy and literacy in  Indigenous communities is sliding. If Gonski is not ratified in the states and territories  that aren’t subscribing at the moment, will this impact on that?

Peter Garrett: I think there’s no doubt that the provision of certainty for Aboriginal  and Torres Strait Islander students, through both the indigenous loading and the low  socioeconomic loading, mean that we can provide targeted resources based on  evidence to do those things we know lift the school attainment of young Indigenous  kids.

There are many things that we need to do - and particularly in this National Plan for  School Improvement, I have insisted not only that the national plan for Aboriginal and  Torres Strait Islander students is a part of it, but more importantly, that we come  back and have another look at that in a year or two’s time, to make sure that those  actions that we’ve identified as necessary for Indigenous kids in schools have been  taken and that if they haven’t, that we re-double our efforts.

There’s no question that all of us need to do more there, but under a National Plan  for School Improvement the funding certainty for the long haul, for us all working  together, would be in place.

Thanks everybody.

ENDS



