

THE HON RICHARD MARLES MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND  BORDER PROTECTION  MEMBER FOR CORIO



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  INTERVIEW WITH MARIUS BENSON, ABC NEWSRADIO  FRIDAY, 6 DECEMBER 2013  CANBERRA  SUBJECT/S: Asylum seekers

MARIUS BENSON: Richard Marles there must be some minor satisfaction, at  least at a superficial level for you and the Labor Party this morning because the  Minister, Scott Morrison, is being held up to ridicule in the Courier Mail and other  tabloids being portrayed as running Morrison Island, a variation on Gilligan’s  Island.

RICHARD MARLES:  There’s no satisfaction Marius, there’s deep concern. Prior  to the election the Coalition said they would bring to bear in this area of policy all  the discipline and focus of a targeted military operation. The question this  morning is with that discipline and focus, how is it that a boat has managed to  arrive at Christmas Island undetected and how is that we’ve had asylum seekers  in Australia for three days before anyone even noticed? I mean, on this occasion  Minister Morrison wasn’t hiding from the Australian people that a boat arrived on  Monday because he didn’t even know.

MARIUS BENSON: It is remarkable but why would it be a matter of deep  concern?

RICHARD MARLES:  Well, it’s a matter of deep concern because we need to  have a sense of security about the way in which border security policy is being  operated. It’s a matter of deep concern because this is a government which prior  to the election said that it would bring to bear all the focus and determination of

a targeted military operation, and this is what we see now. Whatever else is  happening it is clear that the Government and Minister Morrison are not in  control.

MARIUS BENSON: And you have spoken to the Minister since this came to  light?

RICHARD MARLES:  I spoke to the Minister last night. I’ve spoken with other  people including on Christmas Island and it is clear that this is an evolving  situation. We do need to have the Minister and the Government tell the  Australian people, as information comes to hand, what exactly has occurred in  this situation. As we obviously need to hear from the Government about what  other boats have arrived in the last week. My understanding is, and this is not  from the Minister, but my understanding is that there have been four boats,  including this one, which have arrived in the last week. I assume we will hear  about that today, but that in itself isn’t good enough, we need to be hearing  about this as these boats arrive.

MARIUS BENSON: Do you believe that the overall picture that the Minister  paints of a general success in substantial reduction in boats is a valid picture,  and one that goes beyond what was achieved by Labor with the PNG solution?

RICHARD MARLES:  It’s a valid picture but it is not one which goes beyond  what Labor achieved with the PNG arrangement. It’s clear now that the number  of boats arriving in Australia is substantially no different to the number of boats  that were arriving in Australia immediately prior to the election after the PNG  arrangement had had a couple of months to take effect. Once the PNG  arrangement came into effect you really do see a very sharp decline in the boat  arrivals. So there has been a decline, but it doesn’t date from the 7th of  September, it dates from the 19th of July and it dates from a policy that Labor  put in place and that Minister Morrison himself at the time criticised severely.

MARIUS BENSON: Apart from arguing over who originated the policy and  when it became most effective -

RICHARD MARLES:  Well there’s no argument about that Marius

MARIUS BENSON: Sure -

RICHARD MARLES:  That policy was put in place by Labor and Minister  Morrison at the time, obviously accepts that, but criticised it heavily. The one  good thing that Minister Morrison has done is continue to put in place the PNG  arrangement. Now, despite all the criticism, he went to PNG in the last few  weeks, not a clause of the PNG arrangement has been changed, not one clause.

So it is the Labor Government’s, former Labor Government’s policy, which is now  being prosecuted by this government and that’s what’s making a difference

MARIUS BENSON: So it’s a unity ticket on asylum seekers?

RICHARD MARLES:  Not entirely, but it is important that we do try and stop  the boats coming to Australia from both Sri Lanka and Indonesia.  The significant  piece of policy which has been put in place to ensure that that occurs is the PNG  arrangement. We are glad that this government has continued to prosecute that  policy.

MARIUS BENSON: Richard Marles, thank you very much.

RICHARD MARLES:  Thank you Marius.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: SOPHIE ANDREW 0401 443 524



