





SBS - World News Australia

Transcript, E&OE, proof only

Subjects: Australia's top coptic cleric calling on Australia to use  their position on the UN Security Council to stand up for the  religious minority in Egypt.

23 June 2013

NEWSREADER: Coptic Christians have been a part of Egyptian society  since ancient times, but they've never felt more endangered. Since  the revolution in 2011, thousands have fled to escape increasing  sectarian violence. Now, Australia's top Coptic cleric has called on  the Government here to use its position on the UN Security Council  to stand up for Egypt's largest religious minority.

REPORTER: Australia's Coptic Christians are on edge. The largely  Egyptian community is worried about sectarian violence sweeping  their country. The Arab Spring brought with it a new government led  by the Muslim Brotherhood. Now they feel minorities are becoming  increasingly unwelcome in their homeland. In April four Copts were  shot dead by an angry Muslim mob, another two were killed during  protests after the funerals. The Coptic Pope lashed out at President

Mohamed Morsi after the violence saying it was the President's  negligence that caused it.

ANBA SURIEL: The Coptic community in Australia, which is 80,000  strong, are very very concerned for their family and friends back in  Egypt.

REPORTER: Australia's most senior Coptic cleric urging the  Government to use its new-found position in the United Nations to  make a stand.

ANBA SURIEL: Since we have a position in the UN Security Council to  utilise this, to bring the plight of the Copts to the attention of the  world.

REPORTER: The Foreign Minister says he is following the situation in  Egypt very closely. He says the first phone call he made when he was  appointed last year was to Australia's ambassador in Cairo, urging  him to get in touch with Coptic leaders.

BOB CARR: I wanted them to know that Australia was taking a keen  interest in their affairs and I raised with President Morsi when I was  in Egypt our concern with the treatment of the Copts.

REPORTER: Coptic leaders would like members of their community  to have better access to Australia's refugee program, but Bob Carr  says that's not the answer.

BOB CARR: The real solution - given the restraint on the numbers,  anyone in the world can take - the real solution is to get a  recognition of religious diversity in Egypt and see that minorities are  protected in Egypt.

REPORTER: Despite reassurances from a number of world leaders,  Egypt's Coptic Christians feel abandoned. Those that oppose them

are growing in strength every day. They face violence and  intimidation on a daily basis and to make matters worse it's a  situation that doesn't look like improving at least in the short term.

Ramy Tadros recently wrote a boot about the plight of the Copts in  Egypt. He says the new government controlled by the Muslim  Brotherhood is allowing the oppression to happen.

RAMY TADROS: Government has definitely abandoned the Copts. It's  been increasing since the revolution.

REPORTER: Coptic advocates say Australian officials can help the  situation by simply talking about it.

RAMY TADROS: Whenever we can talk about it and raise awareness,  I think is always the first step. As long the Muslim Brotherhood are in  power it's going to be bleak.

REPORTER: He says the only thing that will improve life for minorities  in Egypt is the separation of religion in state, a prospect that at this  stage at least seems unlikely.

Sam Ikin, World News Australia.

Media enquiries

 Minister's office: (02) 6277 7584

 DFAT Media Liaison: (02) 6261 1555



