MEET THE PRESS

25 AUGUST 2013

INTERVIEW WITH CHRISTINE MILNE

KATHRYN ROBINSON, PRESENTER: Can you paint a picture for me? Post-September 7,  what the future will hold for the Greens?

CHRISTINE MILNE: Well the Greens are going to go from strength to strength. It’s a - well,  of course there’ll be ebb and flows in the political system, but this is the century where the  overwhelming challenge is to move to the low-carbon economy, to roll out renewable energy,  to look after the environment, in the face of accelerating global warming. So the Greens are  going to come into their own with the challenges of this century, but it will ebb and flow. At  this election, Australia is moving towards the conservatives, that’s pretty clear. It’s been clear  as a trend with State elections in recent times, and so this is going to be a tough election for  us. I don’t deny that, but I’m confident we can hold all our seats, and pick up at least one  other Senate seat around the country.

STEVE LEWIS: Senator Milne, as you say, it looks as if Tony Abbott is at this stage headed  for victory. He said that day one he will repeal the carbon tax. How do the Greens respond to  that?

CHRISTINE MILNE: Well, day one we won’t be repealing the carbon price, that’s for sure.  And that’s why the Greens are needed in the Senate as never before, because Tony Abbott’s  only three seats away from effective control of the Senate, and so long as the Greens are  there, we will not repeal carbon pricing, because it is absolutely critical to bringing down  emissions, and to transforming the economy. It’s the best way of doing that. Business  acknowledges that. Nobody supports direct action.

STEVE LEWIS: Do you think Labor would also be likely to oppose the repeal of the carbon  tax, which of course they introduced with the Greens’ support?

CHRISTINE MILNE: Yes, I think they’ll oppose it as well. I think-

STEVE LEWIS: Which means we’re likely headed towards a double dissolution election.

CHRISTINE MILNE: Well, that’s where I don’t think that is the case, and I say that because  business around the country does not want to see the carbon price abolished. They know full-well emissions trading is the right way to go. They know full-well that the Clean Energy  Finance Corporation is doing a brilliant job at rolling out large-scale renewables. They are  saying it quietly, behind the scenes. They support an Abbott government, but they don’t  support an Abbott government repealing emissions trading, and so I think after the election  you will see an increasing number of business voices saying back off. Just like Nick Minchin  was out this week, saying, oh, there’d have to be compromise in the Senate on paid parental  leave. He - and some of the Liberals are relying on the Greens holding balance of power in  the Senate to stop the excesses of Tony Abbott.

CLAIRE HARVEY: Senator, you’ve often been one of the few voices speaking out against  mining, or raising concerns about mining. Why then have the Greens done a preference deal  with Clive Palmer?

CHRISTINE MILNE: Well, and that is absolutely right, I am opposed to the Bowen Basin  and Galilee Basin proposed mega coal mines and exports and what it will do to the Great  Barrier Reef for example, and we have preferenced Clive Palmer. And the reason for that is  Liberal, Labor and Clive Palmer all support massive expansion of coal and coal-seam gas.  They don’t have a different position on that, but Clive Palmer has a position on refugees -  accepting Australia’s international responsibilities and wanting to treat people like people,  and his policy is much closer to ours.

CLAIRE HARVEY: Isn’t there - isn’t there a lesson, though, this week from the WikiLeaks  party, which has spectacularly imploded over preference deals, really. Don’t your voters  expect you to display the same principles on - on the flow of preferences as they do in your  own policies?

CHRISTINE MILNE: Ah, well as much as we can, yes, but when you have got a situation -  you’ve got both the majors wanting massive increase in coal exports, and so does Clive  Palmer, what are you to do in those circumstances? And the other thing is of course the law  requires that you lodge a Senate ticket. So it is not as if you can opt out of the process. But I  always say to people, vote for the Greens first and then vote for whoever you like regardless  of what the tickets say.

CLAIRE HARVEY: How do you feel about what has happened to the WikiLeaks party this  week?

CHRISTINE MILNE: Oh, I think it is sad that any new political party on the block, whoever  they are, get themselves into such a mess and implode, but that is their issue. What I am  pleased about is the recognition that Scott Ludlam has as the most outstanding campaigner  for digital rights, and everywhere around the country what it has done is highlighted just what  a good job he is doing, and that is why we need him back from WA.

STEVE LEWIS: Christine Milne, if Tony Abbott wins on September 7, what position will the  Greens take in terms of negotiating with the Coalition, particularly in the Senate? I mean  things like paid parental leave - would you see yourself as basically putting a brake on the  excesses of the Coalition or will you basically just putting your hands up and say no, we are  going to oppose, oppose, oppose?

CHRISTINE MILNE: Well, unlike Tony Abbott, who has spent the last three years opposing  everything, the Greens try to work with everyone and improve legislation. And we will  improve it with whichever political party we can improve it with. Both the Coalition and the  Greens believe that paid parental leave is a workplace right, and I think that is a really good  shift in principle that we’ve got to that point. We think his scheme is too generous and so we  would work to amend his scheme, to rein it back in-

STEVE LEWIS: To bring it back in from $150,000-

CHRISTINE MILNE: $100,000 - I think $100,000 is a much more reasonable figure and I  say that-



STEVE LEWIS: You would probably have quite a lot of support within the Liberal Party for  that.

CHRISTINE MILNE: Well, I think so. That’s what I’m saying. I think Nick Minchin will be  very pleased when I move for that, because what it means is more than 90% of people would  be covered by it and because a substantial sum of it has to come from raising revenue  elsewhere, it’s not all going to be paid for with the levy, it is more reasonable, I think, to  bring it back to $100,000.

