THE HON BRENDAN O’CONNOR MP  MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP

E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO NATIONAL  RN BREAKFAST  MONDAY, 22 APRIL 2013

SUBJECT: ASYLUM SEEKERS, RETURNING IRREGULAR MARITIME ARRIVALS TO SRI LANKA

FRAN KELLY: Brendan O'Connor is the Minister for Immigration. Minister, welcome back to  Breakfast.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Thanks, Fran.

FRAN KELLY: This - before I get to this issue, there's a story today that suggests the Government's  planning to house families at Curtin Detention Centre again. I thought Australia was done with  putting children in an isolated compound behind wire fences.



BRENDAN O'CONNOR: We haven't made any decisions in relation to Curtin and we'll explore options  that I think ensure that we treat detainees with dignity, respect and provide the services they need.  So, there's no decision made.

FRAN KELLY: Do you rule out putting children and families in isolated compounds behind wire  fences?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: What we will do is make decisions about what's the best way to look after  those that are in our care. And I can assure you, Fran, that that decision will be made ensuring that  we protect the interests of those kids.

FRAN KELLY: I'm not sure that's an answer but we'll move on.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Well, I'm not going to get into a…

FRAN KELLY: [Talks over] Well, I don't know why a government wouldn't rule out putting kids behind  wire fences.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Let me tell you something - I've been to the Curtin Centre, as I've been to  many centres and I have to tell you the sort of perceptions that you may have as someone who  doesn't understand centres around the country as much as I would, because I visit them, I think  sometimes leads people to conclude erroneously that things are appropriate or inappropriate. I  receive advice from the department. I make decisions based on the advice insofar as ensuring that  we care for families, care for those detained. And I think for that reason, I'm not going to get into  that argy-bargy with you today.

FRAN KELLY: Okay, fair enough. But what you're saying is, you have visited all these places and  you're saying that Curtin is an appropriate place these days.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: I'm certainly saying that the centres that we decide to detain people will be  appropriate and the standards we apply are as good as anywhere in the world.

FRAN KELLY: On this other issue of the Sri Lankan asylum seekers, 38 of those people who arrived in  Geraldton early this month have now been sent back to Sri Lanka. That group includes women and  children. Were they screened out and sent home before their claims were properly assessed?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Well, there were 66 on the vessel of which 38 have been screened out and  returned to Sri Lanka. And I'm firmly of the view, Fran, that the enhanced screening process is both  rigorous and robust. And it means...

FRAN KELLY: [Talks over] What does that mean? Because refugee advocates say they were denied  phone-calls and a lawyer.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Well, of course they will say that. And lawyers will...

FRAN KELLY: Well, were they?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: ... always argue for greater levels of litigation. But let me make it very clear  that it's rigorous and robust. It meets our obligations, our human rights obligations. In particular, its  non-refoulement obligations and for that reason, of course I've received advice about the extent to  which we provide safeguards. And after fully apprising myself of the advice I received I'm confident  that what we do is in keeping with our obligations under international law. What we've had here,  Fran, in the last several months is a massive increase in irregular maritime arrivals from Sri Lanka  that did not fit and it was not in accordance with our information of that country. Both the  composition of the arrivals changed insofar as having a very, significant high number of Sinhalese  along with Tamils.

The claims that were being made altered fundamentally insofar as including economic motivation  alone, and there was evidence of pattern claims. Now as a result, we've put in place a process that  we believe ensure we can delineate between those that do not exercise our obligations under  international law and they're not to be afforded protection, that is, they are not potential refugees  on one hand and potential refugees on the other. And I can assure you, Fran, we screen in those that  have a potential. Not that are refugees but that could be potentially, are determined to be refugees.

FRAN KELLY: Because this is what people are questioning. Yes, you have a process in place. They say  that process is not fair and just and it's outside the process we have built up in this country over a  long time. For instance, Gillian Triggs, the Human Rights Commission, says she's profoundly  concerned and is warning the Government could be in breach of our non-refoulement obligations if  the asylum claims are not properly assessed?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: I appreciate that and I appreciate the Human Rights Commissioner writing to  me and raising those concerns and as a result, I've examined again the extent to which we place in  safeguards. For example, Fran, the officers involved in enhanced screening are drawn from pool of  suitably experienced officers including highly experienced protection decision-makers.

The interview process is supported by guidelines that provide instruction as to how the interview  should be conducted. I mean the process uses the most relevant and up to date country of origin

information. And the interview preamble, for example, ensures that the person understands the  context of the interview and that the purpose of the interview is to understand why they've come to  Australia to assist in making the decision as to whether they should be removed to be allowed to  remain in Australia.

We have a very rigorous, prescriptive approach including a number of officers and if there's any  doubt whatsoever, a senior officer then reviews that decision. This is not an injudicious process. This  is a fair and reasonable approach responding to a massive spike in arrivals that did not fit with the  circumstances of that country. I mean we have people making claims that they want to come here to  get better jobs. Now I understand all that and we can sympathise with that but we have, Fran,  20,000 places per annum - the greatest number of places that we've ever had in this country. We  have millions of people displaced around the world. I'm not going to allow those places to be filled  by people who are not fleeing persecution. It would be unfair to those that are waiting for a country  like Australia to assist them.

FRAN KELLY: It's 11 minutes to 8 on Breakfast. Our guest this morning is the Immigration Minister,  Brendan O'Connor. Minister, there's been a lot of coverage of the hunger strike, the 10-day hunger  strike that ended late last week. All 27 of those people have negative ASIO assessments against them  even though they've been judged to be refugees. What are you going to do with these people?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Well, this is a very difficult situation for the Government, or for any  government. On one hand of course we have - our responsibility is to provide care for those people  but our responsibility is to ensure the safety of the Australian public. So on one hand, it's been  deemed that they are - they should be afforded our protection and as a result we would never  return to country of origin. So if you like, we extend our protection to them to not return them, to  place them in danger, which is entirely proper. On the other hand we have a significant agency -  ASIO - that has given them adverse security assessments which means we have to make decisions  about how we deal with these people and we do not endanger the public.

FRAN KELLY: So what are you going to do with them?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Well, at this point as you know, we've detained these people and I think most  reasonable Australians would assume that that was the proper thing to do. But because of this  dilemma that we're placed in, we did make a decision to have Justice Stone review the process and  review the decisions and provide conclusions to the Director-General of ASIO - for the Director-General to consider what could be done. I'm very sympathetic to the circumstances but we will  always place national security first and the safety of the Australian public.

But we are examining as a result of the review, what may be done but you have to understand, Fran,  we will never place the Australian public at risk and so we're being very cautious about how we  proceed and the advice we receive will have to include of course advice from the Director-General of  ASIO.

FRAN KELLY: Okay. On that question, on the weekend the West Australian newspaper reported an  Egyptian asylum seeker is in the detention centre here, in the system here, and is the subject of an  INTERPOL Red Notice on suspicion of terrorism. Can you confirm that?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Look I'm waiting advice on that. Of course we hear all sorts of information but  these things need to be confirmed by agencies. You know, we had a speculation there was a vessel  north-east of Darwin the other day, but it wasn't the case. I continue to get misinformation. I need  to confirm that and until I do, Fran, it would be best that I don't speak to you directly about that.

FRAN KELLY: Because this article does say the AFP advised immigration.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Look as I say, I'm receiving - I like to read the briefs myself. I can - I'm seeking  that advice and I'm happy to talk to you more about that once it's confirmed or otherwise, Fran.

FRAN KELLY: Brendan O'Connor, thank you very much for joining us.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Not at all.

FRAN KELLY: Brendan O'Connor is the Federal Immigration Minister.



