THE HON BRENDAN O’CONNOR MP  MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  MORNINGS  ABC 774  WEDNESDAY, 10 APRIL 2013



SUBJECT: ASYLUM SEEKERS, 457 VISAS



JON FAINE: The Immigration Minister Brendan O'Connor has inherited a portfolio that just  continues to surprise, astonish and at times maybe even dismay the incumbent minister. Mr  O'Connor, good morning to you.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Good morning Jon.

JON FAINE: Never in your worst nightmare would you have expected to have to deal with  something like this I'm sure, but is this not the greatest failure of Australian border security in  living memory?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: No, I don't think so unless people have got very short memories.

JON FAINE: Well when has there been a more glaring example?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Well under the Howard Government there were 19 undetected mainland  arrivals in places such as Broome, Cairns, Port Hedland, and as far east and south as Port Kembla  in New South Wales. So in fact there were 19 - almost one in every ten vessels  - under the  Howard Government years arriving on the mainland undetected.

JON FAINE: And that's why Coastwatch was created, and on your watch Coastwatch haven't  watched anything.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: No, no. That's really unfair to the men and women who actually make up  Customs and Border Protection. In fact…

JON FAINE: In what way is it unfair?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: It's very  - well this is such an exceptional case, that you would have a  vessel arrive. What I'm saying is two in the last five years have arrived on the mainland, 19  during the Howard Government when there was of course still border protection vessels  deployed.

My point is they do a remarkable job, not only with responding to people who are at risk at sea,  but also protecting the mainland. So this is an exceptional case, and of course as I think the  Minister for Home Affairs has already said publicly, these people will be cared for, but then sent  to Christmas Island as soon as possible for processing. And of course if they don't exercise the  international obligations to be afforded protection, they'll be sent home.

JON FAINE: We'll come to their fate in a moment, but it's your fate that needs to be considered  first, surely. Yes politicians aren't out there with binoculars, keeping an eye offshore for every  arrival, but politicians are responsible and accountable for Australian border security.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Well, as I'm saying to you, if you were looking at any benchmark then  every immigration minister during the Howard years should have resigned, because they had 19  undetected mainland arrivals. The difference is, the then Opposition was not acting hysterically  and calling this a “surrender”, as the leader of the Opposition has.

I mean, last week we had Tony Abbott talking about our economy, and comparing it with  Cyprus. Today he's talking about surrendering. He is not fit for Prime Ministership because he  cannot use precise words, and he cannot work with the Government. In fact, he ties one hand  behind the Government's back by preventing us implementing the expert panel's  recommendation.

JON FAINE: Okay, well it's not so much about Tony Abbott though, surely Minister…

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Well it is when it comes…

JON FAINE: It's about the Gillard Government and the capacity of the Gillard Government to  properly and adequately resource and synchronise the people responsible for securing  Australia's borders.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Absolutely. And what I'm - that's right…

JON FAINE: And here it's failed.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: It's in the national interest - usually the Government and the Opposition  work together in the national interest to deal with things like border protection. But what we've  had for now some years is an Opposition stymieing every effort of the Government…

JON FAINE:         [Talks over] It's not about the Opposition with respect Minister.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: …and then attacking the Government for not implementing its policies.

JON FAINE: It's not about the Opposition.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Well you can't have it both ways, Jon. You cannot actually attack the  Government for not implementing its policies and then preventing them implementing them in  Parliament. And that's what's happening here.

JON FAINE: What will you be doing then to strengthen border surveillance in order to ensure  that whoever wants to can't, 60 or so at a time, wander in and find themselves on the Australian  mainland wherever they so decide to land?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Well, as I say, we've got - our men and women of our naval and Customs  and Border Protection vessels do a remarkable job.

JON FAINE: Well they didn't here.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: No, well, that…

JON FAINE: What happened to Radar, what happened to surveillance flights?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: That's right - and this is a very rare occurrence, and I have to say in the  last five years they've done a remarkable job in dealing with what is of course a complex issue  for all first world nations in dealing with people seeking asylum.

JON FAINE: Are we so - is the navy so preoccupied with Christmas Island that we've neglected  other avenues of arrival?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: No well look, I think it's just reasonable to compare how they operate  now, than what was going on a decade ago. And if you're going to use a benchmark let's use  one, they have done a remarkable job in dealing with what is, of course, a challenging issue. This  is an exceptional case. It is one which, of course, we will now deal with.

But as I say, their record over the last five years has been quite simply remarkable in dealing  with safety of life at sea issues, dealing with these matters, I think, professionally, dedicating  themselves, and bravely in many cases in going to the aid of others. And they deal, I think, with  these issues very, very well, and in fact there's been a marked improvement than ten years ago  where we had, as I say, almost one in ten vessels arriving on the mainland undetected.

JON FAINE: Alright now I understand Jason Clare on AM this…

BRENDAN O'CONNOR:  And not just in WA, in New South Wales and Queensland.

JON FAINE: Jason Clare on AM this morning announced there would be an inquiry into how  there was a lapse. Let's move on from that.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Sure.

JON FAINE: He also said, and I presume you're in agreement on this, that these 66 or so people  will be moved to Christmas Island. Why would they be going to Christmas Island when they've  already arrived on the Australian mainland? Why aren't they processed onshore when they've  arrived onshore?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Well the department will make those decisions, most of the process…

JON FAINE: Yes, the department will do what the politicians tell them to do, which is why I'm  asking you…

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: And I have no problem whatsoever in the department making the  decision to process people on Christmas Island.

JON FAINE: Why?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Well, for a variety of reasons, including of course the translators, and  others, that will be already on that island, because that's where most of the processing occurs.  The fact that we will send the message that just because you reach…

JON FAINE: [Talks over] It's easier to bring one translator from Christmas Island to Geraldton  than the other way round.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: …the mainland, Jon. Just because a vessel reaches the mainland does not  mean we won't send those people to Christmas Island. That is an operational decision, I agree  with that decision. It sends a strong message and, of course, if they're not to be afforded  protection because they do not exercise our international obligations pursuant to the Refugee  Convention, they will be sent home.

JON FAINE: And if they do? What…

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: And of course we have sent almost 1000 Sri Lankans home since August  last year because they were not to be afforded protection pursuant to our obligations.

JON FAINE: But if they do, isn't it a remarkable waste of money? Instead of flying one interpreter  into Geraldton, you're flying 66 people out to Christmas Island.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: No - we're talking about a chartered flight, and we're talking about, of  course, also a detention centre that's purpose built to detain people for security, identity, and  health purposes. So no I don't think that is the issue here.

JON FAINE: But we have similar facilities, indeed, there's one slightly up the road at Port  Hedland already.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Yes but, in the end you have a purpose built centre and also alternative…

JON FAINE: At Port Hedland, Minister.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: …accommodation on Christmas Island.

JON FAINE: At Port Hedland in your portfolio, that's what it was built for, and that's why it's  already there.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: And I make the point again, I totally support the department determining  that they be processed on Christmas Island to send a very clear message that anyone who thinks  that they arrive on the mainland are going to stay on the mainland for processing are wrong.

JON FAINE: So the only reason why you will, in fact, take them possibly right past the Port  Hedland facility, to drive them to an airport from which they will then go further away, is to  make it look good to the Australian public who might be panicked by the tabloids and others  into thinking that this is a Government that's getting tough on people seeking asylum.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: No, no. When I say send the message to people smugglers, send the  message to those who endanger their lives getting on these vessels - in fact this journey would  have been one of the most dangerous journeys. They're lucky to have arrived on the mainland.  I'm glad that we've managed to rescue - managed to find them, because they could have quite  easily been lost at sea. But in order to send the message to people smugglers that if you think  that you're going to get a vessel out to the mainland and those people be processed on the  mainland, that is wrong. That is one of the reasons.

But the other reason is we have a purpose-built centre on the island, and it's entirely  appropriate, and I agree with the department's decision.

JON FAINE: Separately, you've got something more than, I believe - a number greater than 20 or  so of Tamils who have been in indefinite detention, most of them here in Melbourne, because of  adverse ASIO assessments. They've been assessed as meeting international refugee criteria, but  because of an adverse ASIO assessment, they're indefinitely detained. These are people who are  in limbo.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: This is of course a very difficult situation, as you can understand. On one  hand we will certainly not return people if they're going to a place that may well be a place of  potential persecution for them. We'd never do that. We would never offend our own  obligations.

JON FAINE: Would you allow them now to see their ASIO assessments so they know why they're  not being released?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: But secondly - but, Jon, let me - Well, Jon, if you let me finish. Secondly,  of course, there are - at the same time national security is front and centre of our decision  making. And of course when an agency like ASIO does not provide a clearance, we will not  endanger the public in that manner.

So we have a situation now we're reviewing. We're reviewing that and that review and its  recommendations will be referred to the director of ASIO upon which we will then look at what  we might be able to do. But we will always put national security first as I think the Australian  public expect.

JON FAINE: We do, but it has to be done in a way that is fair to people.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: That's why the former Attorney General and my predecessor agreed to a  review of the process. Jon, I am sympathetic to this situation, but as you can understand we -  that this is a dilemma but ultimately national security will prevail. But because of the situation,  we've engaged a former judge to review this and make recommendations. The director of ASIO  will look at those recommendations, as will the government.

JON FAINE: Yes.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: But in the end, our decisions will always be based on what is in the  national interest. We are concerned about the situation. We are engaged and reviewing it. But  we will put national security first.

JON FAINE: Alright. And finally and briefly, Minister.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Yes.

JON FAINE: At fourteen minutes to nine. We heard earlier this week when we first invited you to  join us long before we knew a boat was on its way, people who are advertising jobs for 457 visa  applicants only. Now, the whole premise of a 457 is that you can fill a job that no local can do by  bringing someone in on a 457.

Now we're finding ads, and we heard about them on Monday, where only people under 457s  are allowed to apply. And we heard from one man - Sam, an engineer who's been here for 20  years, an Australian citizen, and he applies for jobs - if he says he's a citizen he doesn't get an  interview, if he says he's on a 457 he does.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Which is exactly why need to bring about the reforms that we've  announced. They're being opposed in the parliament but the government wants to ensure that  the 457 scheme, which is an important scheme, is used for the purposes it was intended, which  is temporary skilled labour.

What's happening too often is some employers, not the majority, but some employers are using  this scheme improperly which is unfair to the applicant, unfair to those local workers who are  missing out. Now, any advertisements that are suggesting you can say 457 applicants only is  offending the current arrangements but we need stronger laws, greater levels of oversight and  protection. That's why brought in the Fair Work Inspectors to oversight this.

We've increased, if you like, the inspectors almost tenfold to oversight this issue. Now, we have  not got support from the Opposition but we are determined to bring about changes so that the  457 visa class is used for temporary skilled labour and that means that Australian citizens and  permanent residents get the chance first and then if that we do not local skills in a given area,  yes, the 457 visa class should be used.

JON FAINE: Well, again, a system that, well, it seems to be leaky, this boat.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Well, look, we inherit - we made some reforms in 2009. We want to  strengthen those reforms. Conversely, Tony Abbott says he wants to remove the protections we  put in place and use this 457 class as a mainstay of immigration. We think that's the wrong path.  We think it's unfair for local workers. We think it's unfair.

I'm going down to Geelong today. We've got the Victorian Government asking to have a regional  migration agreement where you can have a massive spike in 457 applications. And at the same  time of course they've cut TAFE funding in Geelong, reducing the chances of young people  getting the skills to get skilled jobs.

Now that is a recipe for disaster. It's a lethal cocktail. And we don't think that's the right  approach. I've actually asked Premier Napthine to confirm or - whether he still wants to pursue  this regional migration agreement which will affect many people in Geelong.

JON FAINE: Alright.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: And of course we've yet to hear back from him.

JON FAINE: Thank you for your time this morning.

The Immigration Minister in the Gillard Government, Brendan O'Connor.





