

7.30 REPORT INTERVIEW WITH CHRIS UHLMANN

MONDAY, 22 JULY 2013





CHRIS UHLMANN: The Immigration Minster is Tony Burke, he has been busy

constructing and selling the Government’s harsh new plan for asylum seekers and he

joins me now - welcome.

TONY BURKE: Good to be with you.

CHRIS UHLMANN: When will the first asylum seekers be sent to Papua New Guinea?

TONY BURKE: Once health checks are complete for the people who’ve arrived. So

we’ve now had, as I understand it, four boats intercepted who have been caught by

the new rules. They go through their health checks, health checks take longer for

some than for others, it’s in the order of about two weeks before you start being

able to send people across, and a lot of those health checks are not just checking

people’s state of health, it’s also inoculations and things like that, that you need to

provide before people go to Manus.

CHRIS UHLMANN: So how many are we talking about, and how many people could

you possible send to Manus at the moment, because you’ve been taking people off

that island, haven’t you?

TONY BURKE: That’s right, we were taking people off, well right at the moment the

people who were there, we were also starting to get them off to make sure that the

capacity that we have on Manus becomes entirely for people affected by the new

rules. But we can boost capacity, and we will be boosting capacity on Manus very

rapidly. You don’t need to go through the bricks and mortar of permanent structures.

The first step will be using tents and marquees to…

CHRIS UHLMANN: So using the army again?

TONY BURKE: That’s one of the options, there’s also some companies that are used

to putting together mining camps very quickly that we’re also having conversations

with. But once you start that process, you can increase capacity very quickly.

CHRIS UHLMANN: So days, weeks, months, before we see the first people there?

TONY BURKE: Well as I say, the health checks take in the order of about two weeks,

and around that time we’ll start sending people across.

CHRIS UHLMANN: Do you really think that you can put 3,000 people there over time,

with such a small population? And how would that work?

TONY BURKE: What I believe we can do is ensure that however many people arrive

under this new system, they will be able to be sent for processing, and if their claims

are valid, ultimately settlement within Papua New Guinea.

Manus Island is the first place we are looking at. There will be potentially  a number

of other places throughout Papua New Guinea that at least come under

consideration. It ends up being driven by how many people want to test our resolve.

A lot of people have said, you know, where’s the cap, where’s the limit? People

smugglers would love us to put down a limit, because then they just fill it and go back

to business as usual. Whatever capacity is required, we will deliver.

CHRIS UHLMANN: Well Ronnie Knight, who is the MP for Manus Island, says he

doesn’t believe that people will be resettled in Papua New Guinea if they’re found to

be refugees.

TONY BURKE: Well, the agreement says they will be.

CHRIS UHLMANN: How can you be certain of that if people in Papua New Guinea

start to arc up against it? There’s only a one year at time agreement, isn’t there? It

could be torn up tomorrow in fact?

TONY BURKE: Well look I was with Ronnie earlier in the week, Ronnie takes a lot of

care about his area as the local member there for Manus Island.

But the settlement principle is one that can apply to many different parts of Papua

New Guinea, it need not be Manus Island. And I think when Prime Minister Peter

O’Neill is saying resettlement is going to be available, and when the name of the

agreement is the regional resettlement arrangement, that’s what it’s called, it’s not

too…

CHRIS UHLMANN: … have you got plans though, have you got plans though to build a

3,000 person centre on Manus Island, or somewhere near Manus Island?

TONY BURKE: We’ve worked through what would be required if we have to do to

that, but it will be driven by how many we need to provide capacity for. But when

you’re dealing with rapid expansion through tents and marquees, you can expand

that capacity very quickly.

CHRIS UHLMANN: And what about people who might be found not to refugees, who

will then stay in indefinite detention. How many of those do you think that Manus

Island could cope with before they have a problem like we’ve seen on Nauru?

TONY BURKE: The agreement says that there are three options for people who are

found not to be refugees.

Either they remain in Papua New Guinea in detention, or they return to their country

of origin, or they go to a third country where they have a right of residence. Now

don’t forget, a lot of people who in Australia we’ve had trouble getting to return, and

some countries won’t take forced returns, when faced with the option of remaining

in detention in Papua New Guinea, or returning to a home country, in having been

found that they don’t have a well found fear of persecution,  I think it’s a bit of a long

bow to say they’ll all prefer to remain in detention…

CHRIS UHLMANN: You think that, but it might not happen, and if they stayed there,

they could stay there indefinitely…

TONY BURKE: Well no…

CHRIS UHLMANN: But the potential is there for them to stay in indefinite detention

in Papua New Guinea, that’s part of this plan, isn’t it, that’s the deterrent?

TONY BURKE: But what you’re talking about, not indefinite detention. What you’re

talking about there, I really think, I really think is logically a really long bow. You’re

talking about somebody who is found to not be a refugee, who doesn’t a well found

fear of persecution, who would then rather remain in detention for the rest of their

life than return home when they can be assisted to return home.

CHRIS UHLMANN: There is a difference between a person who has been found by a

court not to have a well-founded fear of persecution but they might have that fear

themselves and might not want to return home, in which case they would stay in

indefinite detention wouldn’t they?

TONY BURKE: Or be returned to a third country where they have a right of residence.

CHRIS UHLMANN: How many people have that? Do you have a right of residence to

anywhere but Australia? How many people have that?

TONY BURKE: No I don’t, but actually for some of the countries, and we have seen

through things like the visa on arrival rules, which are now being changed in some

countries, but it is not unusual for there to be third countries that people are able to

voluntarily go to. But forced returns are a different issue.

CHRIS UHLMANN: How long will Australia be liable for welfare and other payments

for these people?

TONY BURKE: We will make sure that there is not a hit to the bottom line for Papua

New Guinea on that, but don’t forget, if it had been under the old rules, and people

found to be refugees had ended up being settled in Australia, or continue to be held

in Australia, then there would be similar bills that would apply. But there is not an

additional hit to the budget in that respect.

CHRIS UHLMANN: So what’s the cost to Australia though because there were two

deals signed, one of them was this convention, if you like, or this agreement with

Papua New Guinea, another one was to work on a whole lot of claims that Papua

New Guinea wants us to fill. That must all cost money. What is the total cost of this

plan?

TONY BURKE: Those figures that will come from within the foreign aid budget, so it

won’t be an additional hit to the tax payer it will be a reorganisation of the foreign

aid budget.

CHRIS UHLMANN: Well billions?

TONY BURKE: If you let me finish, because I will be completely up front that I don’t

have those figures to be able to give you. They will be run out of Bob Carr’s

department within the foreign aid budget, there won’t be an additional hit to the tax

payer as a result.

CHRIS UHLMANN: Tony Burke, was this what you imagined you would be doing

when you joined the Labor Party.

TONY BURKE: In what respect?

CHRIS UHLMANN: That you would be the minister responsible for the harshest

asylum seeker program that Australia has ever instituted - is this what you signed up

for when you signed up for the Labor Party?

TONY BURKE: I will tell you what I signed up for. Because the one thing I won’t

accept is an argument that people have wanted to run that this is somehow a lurch

to the right and want to see it within a left-right political spectrum. The principals

that I joined the Labor Party on did involve making sure that you don’t see the sorts

of horrors that we have seen in the Indian Ocean.

I haven’t been minister for this portfolio for very long, but already there have been a

number of people who have died on my watch and the first of them was two and a

half months old. I won’t accept that there is any conflict between the principles of

me joining the Labor Party and believing in a party that doesn’t leave people behind,

and making sure that we have a policy aimed at stopping the loss of life at sea. And it

is beyond that.

I want to see a humanitarian program where we chose to is coming with the United

Nations, not self-selected by people smugglers. I also want to make sure that we can

increase the number of refugees who we are helping. We have already gone from

13,000 to 20,000 this now contemplates the proposal where we would be able to

consider going through to 27,000, more than double where we started.

CHRIS UHLMANN: Tony Burke, we will have to leave it there, thank you.

TONY BURKE: Good to be with you.



