





Lateline

Transcript, E&OE, proof only

19 March 2013

Subjects: North Korea, China, Syria

EMMA ALBERICI, PRESENTER: As we've already seen, the Foreign  Minister, Bob Carr, has met the US Secretary of State John Kerry in  Washington. The two men spoke about how Australia could best use  its seat on the UN Security Council.

BOB CARR, FOREIGN MINISTER: We discussed Syria with a view to  Australia's membership and the decisions, the persuasion it can  deliver as a member of the Security Council.

JOHN KERRY, US SECRETARY OF STATE: We believe that their  membership on the council will allow for an even closer working  relationship and particularly for a collaboration on pressing global  issues including Syria, the Middle East peace process and North  Korea.

EMMA ALBERICI: Mr Kerry and Senator Carr also discussed how to  increase cooperation between the US and Australia in the Asia  Pacific.

And joining us now live from New York is the Foreign Minister,  Senator Bob Carr.

Senator Carr, thanks so much for joining us.

BOB CARR: My pleasure, Emma.

So as we've seen, you've met with the new US Secretary of State  John Kerry. Given just how much he has on his plate did you get a  sense of what his top order priority is in foreign policy?

BOB CARR: Well, two things, I think the immediate challenge of the  Middle East peace process, there is the Obama Administration  believes an opening for a fresh initiative in the Middle East or at least  the exploration of one. I think the exploration of opportunities is  behind Senator Kerry and President Obama's visit to the Palestinian  territories and to Israel. But the other, the other preoccupying  concern, preoccupying concern in Washington is, of course, North  Korea.

EMMA ALBERICI: With regards to North Korea and America's  strategy to contain its aggression, what is Australia's role there?

BOB CARR: We have a role. I said on the weekend that we  understood and supported America's attention to its own defence by  upgrading its capacity to intercept ballistic missiles, given that the  leader of North Korea promised to turn Washington into a sea of fire,  it's entirely reasonable for America to intensify its anti-ballistic  missile defences. So we understand that and we support it. We share  America's concern with the destabilising effect of the actions and the  comments out of the North Korean polit bureau. We stand in  solidarity with our long term friends, South Korea and Japan, who  have got every reason to be deeply concerned by the trend of events  in North Korea.

EMMA ALBERICI: And has Australia indicated any particular support  for South Korea and Japan in the event of an eruption over this  crisis?

BOB CARR: We contacted both of them to say that when it comes to  applying sanctions even beyond those implied by the Security  Council, the Americans know this as well, we're ready to move. We  want a vigorous enforcement of what the Security Council has  decided on and that means the thorough searching proper  investigation of all shipping bound for North Korea or coming from  North Korea. We want a particular focus on denying them any  capacity to enhance the militarisation, the nuclearisation of the  Korean peninsula. One can't talk about this without acknowledging  China's role which has been constructive and forward leaning. We  know that China is deeply alarmed by what its ally has been saying  and doing. China has a commitment and a deep interest in peace and  stability in North-East Asia.

EMMA ALBERICI: But realistically Australia and the US would require  China to do more on that front I imagine?

BOB CARR: Indeed we do, given that China is the one source of  influence on this regime which might be described as soux generous.  You have a Marxist type dictatorship with a inherited leadership. The  most oppressive version of Marxism and Leninism we've seen.  You've got the State in possession of nuclear weapons, working on  the militarisation of nuclear weapons which gives it the capacity to  send those nuclear weapons on missiles, missiles we expect over  time will become more accurate and therefore more formidable. This  is a very, very special case. It could be the first time a truly erratic or  irrational leader or leadership is in possession of weapons since the  death of Stalin in 1953.

EMMA ALBERICI: Could Australians, could Australia's support for  South Korea and Japan extend to military aid?

BOB CARR: That's a hypothetical possibility. The ANZUS treaty  obliges us to consult the United States. That would be a decision  we'd have to make even independently of that treaty if the  circumstances were to arise. One doesn't speculate, Emma, about  those possibilities but I think it is very important that South Korea  and Japan know they have our support, know that as a member of  the Security Council we are giving the highest priority to containing  what is a serious threat out of North Korea.

EMMA ALBERICI: On the issue of China's cyber attacks against the  US, what is the administration actually planning to do to combat that  threat?

BOB CARR: I'm not sure I'd want to discuss that but the  administration gives the highest priority to this. It has an increasing  focus in Washington. I acknowledge what the Chinese have said.  They've made allegations about cyber attacks on their own  infrastructure. All of this points to the inevitability of the nations of  the world reaching what might be described as a nonaggression pact  treaty that says we will not interfere with, we will not launch attacks  on the communications systems of other global citizens.

It is too devastating to contemplate that one party or the other could  wipe out the banking records of a nation State that would be  destabilising for the whole world. This needs to be covered by the  same architecture that you've got for restraint in other areas of  warfare which would isolate, leave exposed those rogue States that  would not want to join a pact that restrains countries from engaging  in cyber warfare.

EMMA ALBERICI: Let's talk about Syria, Minister. John Kerry says the  Obama Administration doesn't oppose moves by Britain and France  to arm opponents of President Bashar al Assad. What's Australia's  position on that?

BOB CARR: Well I think you've got to say that the onus is now  shifting to those people in Europe or the United States who oppose  the arming of rebels. For our part we would continue to provide  humanitarian aid to reach those retched desperate Syrians in refugee  camps in Jordan, in Turkey and in Lebanon. There are no  circumstances I can see where Australia would provide military  assistance to the rebels. The one matter that would confront us  down the track would be the provision of non lethal aid to those  forces, non lethal aid represents a range of possibilities. There is, for  example, under that category, under that heading the provision of  training in local government. For those people in Syria who end up  administering without any preparation, without any machinery of  government, areas that have been liberated from the Assad forces.  Both the United Kingdom and France have made contributions to  assisting people set up governance in areas where the government  machinery has been leached away or blasted off the face of the  Earth. We will continue to take a keen interest but our approach will  be in humanitarian assistance.

EMMA ALBERICI: So it's fair to say you do oppose the moves by  Britain and France to arm the rebels?

BOB CARR: No, we don't oppose it. That's a decision we can  understand. But for us to support it without making a commitment  ourselves might appear to be somewhat hypocritical. So I don't want  to go into that space. Our contribution is a very real one. We are the  sixth largest national contributor to humanitarian support. So when I

was in a refugee camp in Jordan talking to refugees last year I was  able to see tents, child protection workers, a range of other  humanitarian assistance provided by Australia for these desperate  and suffering people driven from their homes and villages and  suburbs in Syria by this appalling war conducted on its own people  by the Assad Government in Damascus.

EMMA ALBERICI: In October last year you quoted the view of an  Arab foreign minister on our program and you said that he had said  to you that if you could show him the name, address and CV of the  people who will end up with those weapons you might consider  giving them. It seems that your view was vindicated with the  discovery of al Nusra now listed by Australia as a terrorist  organisation?

BOB CARR: Well, certainly we've got to be concerned about the  rising influence of jihadists, violent jihadist elements in the Syrian  Opposition. When I spoke to the head of the Syrian Opposition I  made it very clear that we were alarmed by this and we thought one  of the challenges they face is making clear to the world that they will,  that they need to isolate and to boycott such elements.

I think without a doubt Europeans have weighed this as a valid risk as  they move their stance to one of arming the Syrian Opposition. They  have received assurances from the Syrian Opposition that this will  not be the case. I think they would be the first to concede, I think  Britain and France would be the first to concede that this will be an  ever present risk. One of the many lessons out of Afghanistan is that  American support given to jihadist elements that were engaged in  fighting the Russians before the Russian withdrawal ended up arming  a formidable force that ended up directing hostility towards the  brave Democrats in Afghanistan and American forces.

EMMA ALBERICI: Turning back home there's been quite some  frustration, particularly among the cross benchers about the rushed  timetable for passage of the media reform legislation. In your view  could Senator Conroy have done a better job in building his case?

BOB CARR: Emma, I think Senator Conroy performed very well in  Parliament today your time in drawing a link between the media  reforms he's advancing in the Australian Parliament and what has  been endorsed by a Coalition Government with the conservative  Prime Minister in the United Kingdom.

EMMA ALBERICI: Some of your senior Labor colleagues, including  cabinet minister Simon Crean, are expressing concerns about the  process around this. What's the urgency? Why did these six bills  need to be dealt with this week as Senator Conroy has demanded?

BOB CARR: Emma, I'm going to disappoint you on this, I'm not in a  position to comment with any authority on the parliamentary  timetable, I'm not there. I'm going to the UN to speak in the Security  Council on behalf of Australia today in a debate about Afghanistan in  which we've got a big stake. I think I will leave it to my, if you don't  mind, I'll leave it to my colleagues in Australia who are in a better  position to analyse the parliamentary timetable for you.

EMMA ALBERICI: I'm curious to know whether you think it was wise  for the Prime Minister to pick a fight with the media just six months  out from an election, especially with the Government doing so  poorly in the polls?

BOB CARR: I'm sure you are, Emma, but I operate within the world of  cabinet solidarity and I believe that there is a desire in the  community to see that the self regulation that governs the media is  reinforced. Beyond that I won't venture into that space.

EMMA ALBERICI: Well, I did want to ask you these questions  because you are a former journalist of some standing, having worked  for ABC current affairs and in the commercial media as well. I'm  curious more broadly to know what you think of the proposal that  the Government appoint a Public Interest Media Advocate?

BOB CARR: There's my ticket in the journalists union, you're right,  Emma, I am proud of that. It's a worthwhile investment, it gets me  concessions all over the place. I'm proud to be a journalist. I see  nothing, nothing that a working journalist could live with and live  with happily in what the Government's advancing. Beyond that I  don't want to comment, I don't want to comment on the timetable  in particular because I'm not in Parliament in week.

EMMA ALBERICI: Okay, well you've already denied reports in this  morning's 'Sydney Morning Herald' that you'd lost confidence in Julia  Gillard. Today the journalists who wrote that particular story are  standing by it. Where does the truth lie?

BOB CARR: I rest with what I said yesterday, in particular that that  story could not have been printed if I or more office had been asked  whether it was true because I would have denied it and I support  Julia Gillard. I think there's a challenge for the media here, and a  challenge for my party because there are people in my party who  talk about this but I think they've got to understand this is a  challenging time for social democratic parties around the world,  especially in Australia where we face the challenges of minority  government. We must direct public attention and our own attention  back to the agenda of policy reform.

What we're doing in work towards the national disability scheme so  desired by so many Australians and what we're doing about a huge  public investment in education to see the benefits of the resources

boom in the Australian economy are shared by all Australians and  invested in this country's future and the future of its people. It would  be healthy if both the media and my own party allowed the focus of  attention on Australian politics to gravitate again to policy substance.

EMMA ALBERICI: Minister, the truth is you had no choice but to deny  these reports, to confirm them would mean immediate resignation  or sacking, wouldn't it?

BOB CARR: I'm not going to go further with this, Emma. I said  yesterday on ABC television, no less, what I thought of the reports. I  expressed my loyalty to Julia Gillard and now I'm adding to that.  There's interesting and novel thought, it would be good for the  political system, good for my party if we directed our attention to a  challenging policy agenda, one being pursued by Julia Gillard and my  ministerial colleagues and not to this cliche of Australian politics.  Whenever we're looking for a story out of Canberra it's too easy to  reach into the barrel and bring out commentary on opinion polls,  early election speculation or leadership challenges as a journal ist a  card carrying journalist, I think it would be good if we left those  cliches behind us.

EMMA ALBERICI: So these anxieties being raised in the media,  stories of leadership tension, they're a figment of the media's  imagination?

BOB CARR: I said earlier that it's an obligation on my colleagues, as  well as on the media, to yank the public debate back to policy  substance and away from this cycle, this rather excitable cycle of  leadership speculation, which is one of the great cliches of political  journalism.

EMMA ALBERICI: I'm going to ask you one more question, I want you  to confirm to us that you've never spoken to your colleagues  expressing your concerns about the direction of this government or  whether Labor can win under Julia Gillard.

BOB CARR: I can confirm that absolutely and thank you for asking the  question, giving me an opportunity to do it.

EMMA ALBERICI: Bob Carr, thank you so much for joining us.

BOB CARR: My pleasure.

Media enquiries

 Minister's office: (02) 6277 7584

 DFAT Media Liaison: (02) 6261 1555



