

Julie Bishop MP

Shadow   MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS

Lunchtime Agenda with David Lipson

16 April 2013

Subjects: Boston Marathon attacks, education funding, Geraldton illegal boat arrival

E&OE…

DAVID LIPSON For more reaction from the Opposition I’m joined by the Shadow Foreign  Minister Julie Bishop. Thanks for your time this afternoon.

You lived in Boston for a time. What’s your reaction?

JULIE BISHOP The Coalition utterly condemns these horrifying attacks on the participants  and spectators at the Boston Marathon. We extend our deepest sympathies to the families of  those who have been killed and our thoughts are with those who’ve been injured.

There are so many people who gather for this magnificent event and I recall the course, the  route of the marathon exceedingly well. There would have been about 30,000 participants,  probably about half a million spectators and our thoughts are with the people of Boston, the  people of the United States who are having to endure this horrifying, sickening event.

I know that President Obama has said that those responsible will be tracked down and they  will be held accountable and while it’s too early to determine who was responsible we must  give the United States every support, moral or any other support that we can provide, so that  they are able to track down those responsible and allow the law enforcement agencies to do  their work and to ascertain who was behind this.

To focus and target an attack on the Boston Marathon is despicable. It’s the oldest annual  marathon in the world, it’s always held on Patriots Day which is a public holiday in  Massachusetts, so you can be guaranteed that there would be hundreds of thousands of people  in Boston, particularly at the finishing line where these bombs were detonated. It’s horrifying,  it’s sickening. We utterly and absolutely condemn it.

DAVID LIPSON Have you had a chance to speak to any friends or others in the United  States and gauge the mood, particularly in Boston?

JULIE BISHOP I’ve not yet been able to make contact with any of the friends that I had in  Boston. I lived there in 1996,that was in fact the year of the centenary, the 100th running of  the annual marathon and it was a huge event at that time, probably about a million people  were lining the route. I have many friends in Boston and I will be making contact with them  but I know there are a number of Australians that would be there, in fact I was told this  morning that there was a runner from Perth.

The marathon is quite a magnificent community event, they have about 30,000 participants  including a wheelchair division, a disability division, so a lot of people there and spectators  lining the route. I believe that all Australians have been accounted for but it’s too early to  know precisely the details. But let’s hope and pray that all Australians that were either there  as participants or as spectators, tourists, we have a lot of students who are studying at  colleges and universities in Boston, let’s hope and pray they are all safe.

DAVID LIPSON Intelligence agencies in the United States have had a deal of success over  the past decade or so thwarting attacks, the most memorable one being the car bomb in Times  Square, but can this be seen as anything other than a failure of intelligence communities  today?

JULIE BISHOP It’s far too early to say what went on. I’m sure that given the size of the  Boston Marathon there would have been extraordinary security surrounding it. So we don’t  know how or why this has occurred but I have no doubt about the resolve of the United States  to find out who is responsible and to subject them to the full weight of the law.

The United States has not had an attack on its home soil since September 11 and I’m sure that  many Americans would be feeling sickened and heartbroken by the fact that another event  has occurred and that people have died. That’s why we must provide the United States with  as much support as we’re able and most certainly our hearts go out to the people of the  United States who have to endure yet another horrifying spectacle like this. Mind you there  would be many other participants and spectators from around the world that would have been  present on this public holiday in Boston for the running of the Boston Marathon.

DAVID LIPSON Ok well certainly our thoughts do go out to all of the victims and the  families in Boston but I do want to grab you on a couple of other issues if we could change  tact?

Firstly on Gonski, the education reforms, if Julia Gillard does a deal with a number of states,  it doesn’t look like WA is too keen on this at the moment, would the Coalition - what would  the Coalition do? Would it unwind a deal with some of the States and not the others? Is that  palatable?

JULIE BISHOP David what’s so disappointing about this announcement is that it was clearly  designed to grab a headline. It’s not a genuine effort to lift educational standards across the  country. At this stage there’s so little detail, there’s been no negotiation with the States, no  consultation, no release of information involving the underlying assumptions. Western  Australia by the look of things has been dealt a very severe blow in terms of the allocation of  funding.

Until the State Premiers meet on Friday and get all the details from the Government as to  how this is meant to work we’re not in a position to say what we would do. What we do  know is the Government has run out of money, that every spending initiative is on borrowed  money and we’re expecting a massive budget deficit, a fifth budget deficit in a row in the  upcoming budget. The gross debt of this Government is now nearing $300 billion and so  given the state of the budget and given the lack of detail surrounding this announcement,  which was more about positioning Julia Gillard in the lead up to the election than it was  about increasing educational standards or improving teacher quality or professional

development amongst our teachers, then it’s difficult for us to be able to give any detail. But  once we have the detail then we’ll be able to release our policy.

DAVID LIPSON So you don’t really know, or you can’t say at this point whether the  Coalition would actually undo a deal that would involve some of the States and not others.

JULIE BISHOP Well David at this stage we don’t know what the State Premiers will do.  They may sign up to it. Who knows what Julia Gillard will offer them. She comes out with  these grandiose statements and says ‘take it or leave it’, just like she did with the media laws  and then the negotiations saw the collapse of those media laws, the negotiations with the  Independents.

Anything can happen with this Government. Just because they’ve made an announcement  doesn’t mean that that’s what they’ll stick to and so we need to see what is presented to the  State premiers at their meeting on Friday, the kind of detail they have been provided with and  whether or not a deal can be negotiated.

But I have to say from Western Australia’s point of view the Government here is taking  exception to the fact that this State is being punished for having higher educational standards  than other States. It seems that the more you invest in education, the higher the educational  standards, the more the Labor Federal Government will punish you. No wonder Colin Barnett  is very loathe to sign up to this.

DAVID LIPSON If you can’t actually state a position for the Coalition because you want to  see more detail how can you criticise Labor and the funding arrangement that’s been put  forward?

JULIE BISHOP But David, we don’t have the detail. The Government hasn’t released the  detail. Surely you’re not expecting me to sign the Coalition up to an arrangement that hasn’t  yet been agreed to by the States?

Now some States might agree to it and others not, therefore it’s not a national funding  scheme. It would be ridiculous in the extreme for Julia Gillard to claim some sort of victory  for national funding if she’s only got some States onside that she’s been able to provide  greater amounts of money to and she’s ignored other States or in fact reduced the funding for  other States.

This kind of divisive approach to a national schools program is very unhelpful and we wish  the Government would be more honest, more upfront, put out the detail. But when the State  Premiers themselves only hear about the detail through the media the Coalition’s in an even  worse position. We only hear about it from the media and we’re not going to be present at the  COAG meeting on Friday. So we’re hardly in a position, in fact it would be reckless for us to  sign up to a deal that is at this stage only hypothetical.

DAVID LIPSON Ok, and just quickly on asylum seekers. We heard from the Immigration  Minister this morning who said an announcement was imminent on whether any of those 66  asylum seekers that arrived in Geraldton over the last couple of weeks would actually be sent  home. Surely you would welcome any of those Sri Lankans being sent back to their home?

JULIE BISHOP David, the Government has lost all credibility on the issue of border  protection. The fact that asylum seeker boats can now sail right up to the West Australian  coastline shows that Border Protection Command has lost control of the borders. That’s  because of a lack of political will, a lack of funding and a lack of focus and also the fact that  the Labor Government changed the policies that were working and now the people smuggling  trade is well and truly back in business and targeting the West Australian coastline.

The Government had the opportunity to put legislation through the Senate which would have  prevented people arriving directly on the mainland having their applications processed  onshore, but no they couldn’t do that. They couldn’t even get their own legislation through  the Senate even though it had Coalition backing.

So what’s happening at present is the entire West Australian coastline is a target for people  smugglers. Those coming from Sri Lanka would be very unlikely to have a genuine claim for  asylum seeker status, for refugee status. I’ve been to Sri Lanka, I can see what’s been going  on there and the Government should be sending back people from Sri Lanka. They are very  unlikely to have a claim that would stack up in terms of refugee status.

DAVID LIPSON Ok Julie Bishop, thanks so much for your time.

- Ends -



