

Julie Bishop MP

Shadow   MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS

3AW with Steve Vizard

7 January 2013

Subjects: IVF, Peta Credlin Gillard Australian of the Year candidate, government advertising  and research, UN Security Council committee

E&OE…

JULIE BISHOP Good afternoon Steve.

STEVE VIZARD You are about to get on a plane I understand.

JULIE BISHOP Yes I’m heading over to the West Coast of the US to do the  Australian/United States Leadership Dialogue that’s being held at Stanford University but  I’m happy to spend a few moments talking to you and your listeners.

STEVE VIZARD I really appreciate it. If anything goes off as you’re going through the  testing machine we’ll know what’s happening.

Julie this interview that was given yesterday, is it part of a softening up of Tony Abbott’s  image?

JULIE BISHOP Peta Credlin has spoken about her very personal and very difficult  experiences of going through IVF treatment and it’s an experience that other couples have  shared. It can be heart-wrenching - this process of trying and failing to conceive using IVF.

Peta has talked about it in the context of holding down what is a high profile and very  demanding job but she also spoke of the support that her boss, Tony Abbott, had given her  and he has been highly supportive of her. He’s backed her all the way and he’s made what  has been a very difficult experience for her a lot easier by being so understanding.

But what I find so reprehensible is that Labor ministers, instead of showing respect to a  senior woman involved in politics and her story, are now attacking Tony Abbott again.  Nicola Roxon has come out to try and turn this into a political issue, the often deeply  traumatic issue of infertility, just so she can continue her personal attack on Tony Abbott.

STEVE VIZARD One of the things I found surprising about yesterday’s interview with Ms  Credlin was that she herself was unclear about her future boss’s position and she’s a Liberal  stalwart, on things like abortion and IVF. Do you find it surprising that someone who’s close  to politics and who is thinking of taking that job was so unclear about key issues? Can you  understand why the electorate’s unclear if someone who’s about to work with Tony Abbott is  unclear about his position on those issues?



JULIE BISHOP I don’t believe she was unclear on his position, she was concerned about the  stories that circulate about Tony’s attitude and there’s no doubt about it, Labor has for many  years been on this myth-making exercise of suggesting that Tony Abbott is anti-women.

I worked closely with him as his junior minister when he was the Health Minister and I found  him to be a strong advocate for improving women’s health. It was Tony Abbott who ensured  that drugs for the treatment of breast cancer including early stage breast cancer were put on  the Pharmaceutical Benefits list, Tony Abbott increased funding for screening programs for  cervical cancer, it was Tony who allocated money for research into gynaecological cancers  and the like. He didn’t seek to change any federal laws in relation to abortion or IVF yet  Labor have persisted in their campaign against Tony Abbott. So I’m not surprised that she  asked him the questions.

STEVE VIZARD But just to be clear on that Julie, she was unclear on what his position was  because she says [inaudible] on abortion to which he says, according to the report says, “well  what do you think my position on abortion is?”, to which she says “well I think you’re  opposed to it and you’d like to see it restricted”, to which he says “well that’s just bullshit I  believe it should be safe, legal and rare”, she didn’t understand his position at all.

JULIE BISHOP Well it’s interesting because I knew that Tony’s public and private position -  because I’ve worked with him in the health area a was that abortion should be safe, legal and  rare. That’s a phrase that’s been used by other people, I think it’s a Bill Clinton phrase as  well. It’s a view shared by Labor members of parliament but there were persistent stories that  Tony Abbott was against abortion and Peta hadn’t worked for him before and so presumably  she was concerned by these versions of what Tony Abbott is alleged to have said.

STEVE VIZARD But how can it be that there are such versions out there? I mean he’s a  politician he has the ear of the media. How can it be so unclear?

JULIE BISHOP Steve come on! Have you ever seen such concerted effort by senior Labor  women as we’ve seen against Tony Abbott? When Tanya Plibersek keeps raising questions  about Tony Abbott’s attitude to abortion and he comes back and says his public and his  private position is that abortion is 'safe, legal and rare' that’s a view shared by Labor members  of parliament. But Tanya Plibersek continues to attack Tony Abbott and put in his mouth  words that he’s never said. Is she surely not suggesting that more abortions take place than  are absolutely necessary? I mean is that what Tanya Plibersek is saying?

Tony Abbott’s position - 'safe, legal and rare' - is a perfectly respectable position held by a  number of people within the Labor Party.

So this continual attack on Abbott? Of course it rubs off and people who’ve not worked for  him closely before are perfectly entitled to say, ‘Ok we read so much about it Tony, we hear  so much from Labor, tell me your position’. And Tony did and Peta has continued to work  for him.



STEVE VIZARD Can I talk to you about the Australian newspaper suggestion this morning  for potential Australian of the Year that Julia Gillard should be nominated for her resilience,  endurance and determination in the face of adversity as a potential candidate for the  Australian of the Year? Can I get your comments about that suggestion?



JULIE BISHOP Well I think that the opinion polls give us a better indication of Julia  Gillard’s standing in the eyes of the public. I think she’s been a dreadful disappointment for  particularly women across Australia. as the number one politician in this country she has  been a deeply disappointing figure and I’m very surprised that The Australian put that  forward, although they do often put forward the name of the Prime Minister as a matter of  course.

We’ll see whether or not Julia Gillard receives the necessary support to be put in that position  but I don’t think it would equate with most people’s view of her performance over the last 12  months. She has been mired in scandal. She has been a incompetent Prime Minister in so  many ways. Under her watch we’ve seen a blowout in the border protection costs, we’ve seen  record numbers of asylum seekers coming to our shores because of the weak Labor laws, the  school halls debacle was her own work. The pink batts program? Julia Gillard was involved  in that. So I think as a Prime Minister she’s been deeply disappointing and that’s reflected in  her standing in the opinion polls.



STEVE VIZARD Julie one thing I think troubles most Australians, most tax payers is seeing  their money wasted on government advertising, telling us about programs that are being  implemented by government, advertising stuff that were already problematic from our point  of view and also research, government paid research that just supports that sort of material.

We read today that the Gillard Government has spent a record $35 million on market research  in the last financial year. Can I get your response to that?



JULIE BISHOP All governments spend money on research but the question for Labor is  whether this is just Labor party research, disguised as government research. The report today  indicates that the research was using taxpayer funds to help Labor’s message drafting. So  they were trying to draft Labor’s messages, it sounds to be more for political purposes than  policy purposes and that’s certainly borne out by the number of spin doctors now employed  by the Labor Government.



I think the government should be spending more time on developing decent policies and less  time on potential messaging and spin. Likewise the government should try to properly  implement the policies that they do have and the debacle over pink batts and school halls,  border protection and the blowout in the budget for example are all examples of that.

Good policies based on sound principles can always be sold to the Australian people but bad  policies need spin and manipulation and that pretty much defines what we’ve seen from the  Gillard Government.



STEVE VIZARD Very quickly Julie Bishop otherwise you’ll miss out on your special meal  on the plane, let me ask you about Australia’s appointment as the chair of the Security  Council committee imposing and enforcing sanctions against Al Qaeda and the Taliban and  overseeing the sanctions against Iran. Good or bad for Australia?



JULIE BISHOP I would expect Australia to share the responsibility of chairing committees  now that it is a temporary member of the Security Council. All of the countries elected to the  Security Council have responsibilities so I expected Australia to shoulder its fair share.

STEVE VIZARD Julie Bishop great to talk to you. Have a great flight. I’d love to speak to  you from America if that’s alright?



JULIE BISHOP Of course, thanks Steve.

- Ends



