THE HON BRENDAN O’CONNOR MP  MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP

E&OE TRANSCRIPT  PM  ABC RADIO  THURSDAY, 28 FEBRUARY 2013  6.15PM

SUBJECTS: OPPOSITION DEMONISATION OF ASYLUM SEEKERS

HOST: Immigration Minister Brendan O’Connor has called Scott Morrison’s call for a suspension of  bridging visas hypocritical and opportunistic. He spoke to Alexandra Kirk in Canberra.

BRENDAN O’CONNOR: Under the Howard Government, those that were on Temporary Protection  Visas had the same forms of accommodation with probably less support, but no difference insofar as  the conditions were concerned. So you can’t have an opposition lecturing the government about  doing what the Howard government did and then contradict themselves to score a political point.

ALEXANDRA KIRK: What about his comments that police and residents should be alerted when  asylum seekers are released into a community?

BRENDAN O’CONNOR: They have to notify the Department where they are. I think there needs to be  engagement with the community when there are large numbers of people going anywhere if it  particularly is going to have an impact on services and so on.

The Opposition introduced a Bill into the House two weeks ago to resurrect TPVs which is what? It’s  placing people in the community - no further regulation, no police notice. This is just a stunt by an  Opposition who are I guess going the low road.

ALEXANDRA KIRK: And can you just specify - will you alert police and residents when asylum seekers  are released to live in the community and as the Opposition suggests -

BRENDAN O’CONNOR: No, as I just said to you, we think the existing policy is correct. We think that  this is entirely consistent with the way in which the Howard Government undertook the matter. I  mean, you can’t have it both ways. You’ve got an Opposition saying ‘do it the Howard way’ and now  they’re saying ‘don’t do it the Howard government way’. This is just a try-on. That’s why the Liberal  Party are divided, that’s why you have Liberal Party members attacking the Shadow Minister.

And today you’ve had Senator Abetz doctoring his transcript because he compared people seeking  asylum with paedophiles. Now this sort of low road approach - I haven’t seen it any lower, this is the  most despicable way to deal with such a complex area of public policy. And Tony Abbott has to  explain - does he actually authorise the Shadow Minister for Industrial Relations and the Shadow  Minister for Immigration to take such a low road?

ALEXANDRA KIRK: Senator Abetz didn’t raise the issue of paedophiles - he was asked a question and  in response says: “There is a register in relation to sex offenders and the community has spoken in  relation to that and communities do want to be notified.” And then he goes on to say: “And if I might  say, I wouldn’t put the two in the same category.”

BRENDAN O’CONNOR: No, he didn’t say that. You’re wrong, Alex, he actually said - he doctored his  transcript and took out the word “necessarily” because he knew by the way in which he expressed it  that he compared paedophiles, that is, sex offenders, with people who are seeking asylum. And then  when his office released the transcript, they’ve doctored the transcript.

ALEXANDRA KIRK: What difference do you say that omitting the word “necessarily” means?

BRENDAN O’CONNOR: We all know what he was looking to do, we all know what he was looking to  do - he was talking about a register and what he did was he drew upon, by an analogy, sex offenders  and people seeking asylum that are in the community. Now I don’t think you have to be a brain  surgeon to know what Senator Abetz was doing. And Tony Abbott should consider sacking Senator  Abetz for that behaviour.

ALEXANDRA KIRK: Former Liberal moderate MP Bruce Baird has accused both sides of politics of a  race to the bottom when it comes to your attitude towards asylum seekers.

BRENDAN O’CONNOR: No, I don’t agree at all. I’ve always and certainly the Government’s always  spoken about people seeking asylum respectfully. I’d like anyone to try and point to an area where  I’ve sought to demonise people for seeking asylum. We’re a fair country, we’re a firm country when  we need to be. I’m offended by the suggestion that we’ve acted in that manner. That is not true.

ALEXANDRA KIRK: Are you worried that Mr Morrison’s comments may increase community anxiety  or antipathy towards asylum seekers?

BRENDAN O’CONNOR: Yes I am. I think as a Minister or Shadow Minister, you have a responsibility to  the community not to heighten fear and not to scaremonger, not to create anxiety in such a manner.  Now our democracy is robust and oppositions have the right to criticise governments. That I think is  entirely fair.

But it’s another thing to try to scare people and try to create bogeymen where they don’t exist.

HOST: Brendan O’Connor, the Immigration Minister, speaking to Alexandra Kirk.

ENDS



