SHADOW IMMIGRATION MINISTER SCOTT MORRISON

Transcript - Sky News

Tuesday 30th July 2013

Subjects: Coalition’s plan to increase offshore processing capacity at Nauru,  Operation Sovereign Borders, riots on Nauru

E and OE

GILBERT:

The Shadow Immigration Minister Scott Morrison has spent the last day in Nauru on  that tiny Pacific Island inspecting the damage done by a recent riot there.  That’s  where the new detail of this Coalition policy has emerged and Mr Morrison joins me  live now from Nauru.  Scott Morrison thanks for speaking to us this morning.  Can  you give us the detail of what you’re announcing when it comes to the expanded  Nauru option?

MORRISON:  Well what we’re talking about here is a 5 year plan that deals with immediate  accommodation and medium term accommodation.  So first of all ramping up the  capacity, there’s at least the capacity for an additional 2000, we think quite a lot  more, based on the sites that are already available plus additional sites that can  become available.  In addition to that, it’s about providing post assessment  accommodation here on Nauru.  Of course, the facilities need to be rebuilt after the  centre that was burnt down and the family facilities are yet to be rebuilt as well,  there’s about 1500 capacity in addition of that.  But then there are the places where  people will live after their refugee status assessment is completed and that is what  we’ve begun talking to the Government about here and I have meetings with the  President again today about this, is a redevelopment of a very large and significant  site called The Location which is currently just terribly run down slum dwellings.   What that will do is provide a real legacy, I think, for the people of Nauru as well as in  the future when hopefully at some point, as we all know, these facilities wouldn’t be  needed for that purpose but will be put to good use here in Nauru by the local  people.

GILBERT:  Those people who would remain in those dwellings post their refugee application,  they’d be on a bridging visa.  Isn’t that very similar to what the government had been

doing, in terms of its ‘no advantage test’, putting people on a bridging visa pending  resettlement?

MORRISON:  Well, that’s what we did when we were last here, Kieran, and it was that type of an  arrangement because there’s no guarantee of resettlement.  But I want to stress one  thing, what we’re proposing here on Nauru is in addition to what the capacity is being  increased on Manus Island as well, it’s not an either or, it’s both.  And our point to  the Government is is why are they so focussed on just one silver bullet solution here,  with PNG, rather than embracing the full suite of measures, which includes the  expanded off shore capacity here on Nauru, which has always been our preferred  prime site, but in addition to that, turn-backs and temporary protection visas and the  whole suite of policies working up through the region and better coordination  amongst 15 agencies.  I mean, that’s our full package.  The Government has really  just got one shot in the locker here and that’s proving pretty shaky.

GILBERT:  Well we’ll get to that in a moment.  I do want to compare though your commitment.   You say there’s no guarantee of resettlement under your arrangements.  The  Government says flat out there will be no settlement.  Don’t they have the stronger  message to the people smugglers here?

MORRISON:

But it’s not real, Kieran, that’s the problem.  It’s not true, that’s the problem.  The  Government has no agreement for resettling absolutely everybody in Papua New  Guinea.  The Government’s idea would be great if it was true and if it were real.  We  are talking about real solutions here up on Nauru as well as real increases with  supported capacity for offshore processing in Manus Island.   The Government has a  5 week plan for Papua New Guinea to get them to the election.  We’ve got a 5 year  plan here on Nauru which would involve dealing with this problem over that time  frame.

It’s working in concert with all the other measures that we’ve announced.   We’ve  always said that there’s not one thing, you’ve got to do all of it.  The Government just  wants to do one element of one part of offshore processing and we don’t think that’s  anywhere near enough.

GILBERT:  Those under your plan though, they could end up being processed and settled in  Australia, couldn’t they?

MORRISON:  Well, that’s the same as the Government’s plan, that’s the same thing, Kieran, and  for the Government to suggest otherwise is just complete bunkum.

GILBERT:  Alright.  Let’s look at the results of the PNG deal though, Scott Morrison.  If you look  at the arrivals, they seem to have slowed up over the last couple of days.  Do you  concede that - maybe what we have seen is a rush in the wake of the announcement  as people smugglers try to rush their clients on board, but then it has seemed to  have slowed up in the last couple of days, do you think that this might be working?

MORRISON:  I don’t think you want to overanalyse things here, Kieran.  These things have to be  stopped over time.  It’s all about the implementation at the end of the day.  And the  Government has not got a deal that they can implement for resettlement.   And they  are putting all their bets on one item here.  And that’s the issue.  People won’t know  whether that thing will work until after the election and that’s Kevin Rudd’s point.   He  wants people to take him on trust.  What we find with all of Labor’s things is they  make big announcements, they kick up dust for about four or five weeks and then it  all unravels.  The problem is this time on the other side of an election is that’s when  people will find out whether it’s been yet another Labor disaster.

GILBERT:  Finally, before I let you go, Scott Morrison, you’ve inspected the damage there.   What went on?  Obviously this looks very coordinated and planned by the group that  conducted this riot, what have you made of it?

MORRISON:  Well, very much that point.  This thing was well orchestrated, well planned.  A lot of  people would have known about it to the extent that intelligence was there about this  and that is yet to be confirmed I understand by an inquiry that the Minister has set up  and that’s the appropriate thing to do.  But it’s also what you do with intelligence and  that’s why Operation Sovereign Borders is so important because it actually  integrates all these agencies together.  It’s one thing knowing something, it’s not  clear how much we actually knew.  But clearly, hundreds of people were involved in  knowing about this incident up here in Nauru that were in the centre but then you’ve  got to respond to that information and that means working across many agencies to  ensure the security is in place as it needs to be.  So it is an absolutely shocking  disgrace what has happened up here and I look forward and am quite confident  based on my meetings with the Nauruan Government yesterday that they will apply

the full force of the law here in Nauru to those who have trashed that place and so  they should.

GILBERT:  Shadow Immigration Minister Scott Morrison thanks for joining us this morning from  Nauru, appreciate it.

MORRISON:  Thanks Kieran, good to be with you.

Ends





