Minister for Immigration and Border Protection

Scott Morrison

Operation Sovereign Borders; relationship with Indonesia; illegal maritime  arrival mother and baby

Monday, 25 November 2013

Interview with Fran Kelly, ABC Radio National Breakfast

Fran Kelly: Prime Minister Tony Abbott has replied to the letter he received from the  Indonesian President, Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono, which demanded a full  explanation of Australia's phone tapping operations in 2009. And while we may never  know the contents of Tony Abbott's response, the Australian Government will be  hoping it's enough to placate Jakarta and guarantee the speedy restoration of  cooperation between the two countries, particularly in the area of people smuggling.  But the news out of Indonesia late last week was far from encouraging, Foreign  Minister Marty Natalegawa announcing all ground level cooperation has ended  without exception.

Immigration Minister Scott Morrison joins me in the Breakfast studio.

Minister, welcome again to Breakfast.

Scott Morrison: G'day, Fran.

Fran Kelly: Before we get to some of the issues in your portfolio, Minister, today's  Nielsen poll, the Coalition has fallen behind Labor in the latest opinion poll and Labor  has shot to a lead of 52-48 two party preferred. Is that due to Bill Shorten's  leadership or Tony Abbott's?

Scott Morrison: Well, I'll let others commentate on these things, Fran. The  government is focused on delivering the results that we were elected to deliver and  we are very early in our government and the focus at the moment is implementing  the policies that we took to the election and whether it's the carbon tax or whether it's  in border protection or other areas, we're getting on and putting in place the policies  that we know will get the results and it's the results that will be judged upon at any  subsequent election.

Fran Kelly: Well, it seems that people are judging particularly some of the things you  did promise and your implementation of them. For instance, not very impressed with  the policy of secrecy when it comes to asylum seeker boats. Fifty per cent of  Australians think that's misguided.

Scott Morrison: Well, Fran, before the election I made it very clear that the way we  would handle information under Operation Sovereign Borders would be determined  by the Joint Agency Task Force and that's what we are doing and how you handle

information is an important way about how you conduct in operations such as this  and the results we're getting in this operation we're very pleased with [indistinct]...

Fran Kelly: [Interrupts] All I'm saying is...

Scott Morrison: ...had almost an 80 per cent fall, Fran, in illegal arrivals by boat to  Australia and that's the measure that we use to judge our success and that is are we  stopping the boats.

Fran Kelly: The take out from this poll, and admittedly it's an early poll, but is that  people don't like that policy of secrecy. How much responsibility do you take for the  decline in - the government's decline in this poll?

Scott Morrison: All of our policies, Fran, in border protection are designed to stop  these boats coming, and that's my single minded focus. That's what I'm seeking to  achieve for the Australian people and I believe that's what our government will be  judged on when it comes time for the next election. And that is our absolute focus.

Fran Kelly: How much harder has that job become then because of the fallout with  Indonesia over the spying allegations?

Scott Morrison: Undoubtedly it's a challenging time, Fran, and that's why we're all  very keen to work through this issue constructively, courteously, respectfully, and  pragmatically, and I think that's exactly what's occurring and we all hope that we'll be  in a much better position soon and I think the Indonesian Government also would  like to see that happen and I think the leader to leader exchanges that we're seeing  are all designed to that end.

Fran Kelly: Do you expect more asylum seeker boats to arrive now because of this  fallout with Indonesia?\

Scott Morrison: Well, people smugglers will always try and try things on, Fran, and I  said on many occasions in my briefings that at this time of the year it is an area and  a time of high tempo activity. I mean, over 2600 people turned up last November.  This November so far, less than 200 people have turned up. But that - we're not  being complacent about that. We're standing at the ready to ensure that we can do  all we can all the way up through the chain to disrupt and deter that activity.

Fran Kelly: But that's been interrupted by this ban on cooperation, hasn't it, quite  clearly. I mean, the Foreign Minister said on Friday that without exception all  information exchanges in joint operations between the two countries are embargoed.

Scott Morrison: Well, as I said on Friday, Fran, our operations extend from  destination all the way through to source. Indonesia have been and will be in the  future, I believe, a very important partner in what we do on account of people  smuggling operations, but we're also working with Malaysia, we're working right up  the chain. The people smuggling ambassador has been in the Middle East talking to  source countries there about what we can do. The envoy was in Malaysia last week  where 60 per cent of people come through and we're lifting the tempo of operations  there, offshore processing has been putting place.

Now, that is not to say that our - the work we do with Indonesia is not important. Of  course it is, but I not this, what the - was said in Indonesia over the weekend, I  mean, people smuggling remains a crime in Indonesia and so I have no doubt that  the Indonesian Government will continue to do things to prevent crimes being  committed in Indonesia.

Fran Kelly: Oh yeah, but just to quote the head of immigration in Sumatra, for  instance, who says we have no business with Australia. Let boat people head there.  No surveillance is necessary.

Scott Morrison: And other Imigrasi officials have said they've had no such direction  to cease what they are already doing in terms of operating under their own laws. I  mean, there is joint activity that takes place between Australia and Indonesia, but  there is a large amount of activity that Indonesia does as its own sovereign nation  enforcing their own laws and criminal people smuggling is exactly that, it's a criminal  offence, and the Indonesian Government have said nothing about not implementing  their own laws.

Fran Kelly: Have there been any boats intercepted since last Wednesday when  Indonesia withdrew cooperation?

Scott Morrison: Well, there was the one of the previous Friday, but that was  reported in our operation report on Friday. This was a week previous.

Fran Kelly: Since the breakdown in relations and since the ban by - in cooperation?

Scott Morrison: Well, I'll just refer you to our briefing last Friday, Fran, and there  were no boats that have been intercepted that we reported last Friday, which is the  schedule for reporting those things, by the previous week, and so it has been a quiet  period.

Fran Kelly: It's been a quiet period. So even though it's the pre-monsoon period, we  expect a rush, and even though there seems to be this ban on cooperation, you're  not expecting any extra boats?

Scott Morrison: Well, I'm always expecting people smugglers to try things on, Fran,  always, every single day, and that's why we are putting pressure all the way up  through the chain, and...

Fran Kelly: But not all the way up through the chain because it's now stopped at  Indonesia, which is such a key part of the chain.

Scott Morrison: Well, Fran, you're assuming the Indonesian Government won't do  anything to enforce their own laws on their own wicket on their own initiative.

Fran Kelly: I'm just quoting here again from that...

Scott Morrison: Fran, you're referring to cooperative activity. What I'm referring to is  the things that Indonesia - the Indonesian Government does of its own volition any  day of the week.

Fran Kelly: This says now there is no need to waste energy arresting the boat  people who use Indonesia as a transit...

Scott Morrison: Well, that's one comment from one person in Medan, I understand,  Fran, but the broader behaviour of Indonesia, I understand, is that they enforce their  own laws. Now, the level of cooperation that may exist and the flow of information  that may exist during this challenging period will be one thing, but the Indonesian  Government is a sovereign country that believes in its own laws and they're good at  enforcing them.

Fran Kelly: Just before I move on from this then, can I ask you has - have the  Australian AFP officers on the ground there who have been involved with those  disruption activities you've talked about in the past, are they still doing their job and if  not, will they be coming home?

Scott Morrison: They're always doing their job Fran. That's what…

Fran Kelly: No but they won't…

Scott Morrison: …they're there to do and they're always…

Fran Kelly: But how can they do it if they can't cooperate with the Indonesians?

Scott Morrison: …there are always things there for them to do Fran and I think what  we need to focus on is as we continue to work through these very challenging times  which everyone wants to see resolved, that we continue to build for the cooperation  that hopefully will be there in the future as it has been in the past. It's important that  we just have cool heads here Fran, that we continue to engage in the way that we  have and we get this thing back on track and I'm confident that we can do that and  particularly the way the Prime Minister has been addressing it.

Fran Kelly: Have you tried to speak to your counterpart yet?

Scott Morrison: Well I don't think they're the sorts of conversations that are needed  at the moment Fran. What the conversations that are needed at the moment and the  engagement is between leaders- operational level dialogue has continued all the  way through as you would expect it to. And I should stress that is where particularly  in my area of operations where the dialogue is preferred by the Indonesian  Government. The dialogue is between operational level people who are doing things  on a daily basis and that is something that has been very cooperative and very  productive in the past.

Fran Kelly: It's five to eight on Breakfast. Our guest is Immigration Minister Scott  Morrison. Minister, to a couple of elements within your portfolio now, refugee groups  say a group of unaccompanied minors have been transferred from Nauru to  Brisbane amid concerns for their mental health because the Nauruan Government  particularly was concerned for their mental health. Can you confirm that?

Scott Morrison: Yes three unaccompanied minors were transferred off Nauru to  Australia in accordance with our standard health procedures and that is where we

have health reports which require a response then we act on them. It doesn't matter  what that health need might be, whether it's a physical or mental health whichever it  happens to be then the appropriate steps are taken.

But let me just stress this Fran. No unaccompanied minors were sent by this  government to Nauru or Manus for that matter. But the persons we're talking about  were either - went as family groups and then subsequently asked to be separated  from their family groups and as a result became an unaccompanied minor in that  circumstance. And the other two were believed to be over the age of 18 at the time  of transfer. Now they were subsequently found not to be over the age of 18 and one  of them had actually claimed to be over the age of 18 before they were sent and they  were then found to be unaccompanied minors and they have now been returned to  Australia. Now we are working…

Fran Kelly: Is that the policy now for the government to bring home unaccompanied  minors from Nauru?

Scott Morrison: No it's the policy - they were the only three unaccompanied minors  who were on Nauru I should stress Fran, so we have been working to put in place  the facilities for unaccompanied minors on Nauru because there are no exceptions to  this policy and when those facilities are in place then we expect those transfers to go  the other way.

Fran Kelly: Might you rethink that now? I mean it's believed that one of the girls in  this group had only been sent to Nauru last week, she'd been previously detained…

Scott Morrison: That's not true.

Fran Kelly: It's not true?

Scott Morrison: No.

Fran Kelly: So this is the girl we're talking about who's apparently self-harmed -  attempted self-harm?

Scott Morrison: No, the three that were transferred back to Australia have been  transferred to Manus Island in September - sorry, to Nauru in September.

Fran Kelly: Okay. And that includes the girl who it's understood has attempted self-harm?

Scott Morrison: Yes.

Fran Kelly: Okay. The case of the asylum seeker Latifar and her baby Farus back in  Federal Court in Brisbane tomorrow. Lawyers for the mother and son are seeking  injunction to stop the government sending the family back to Nauru. Are you going to  keep on trying to return them to Nauru or somewhere offshore?

Scott Morrison: Well people go back - all family groups as you know are subject to  offshore processing and when their appropriate medical clearance is for that to take

place and that's what would take place. There is no suggestion that that medical  clearance is going to be there at any time soon, but when it is then people would  return to Nauru.

Fran Kelly: Well, when it is I guess that's a judgement. The Refugee Action Coalition  says they need special care these two because the mother is still recovering from a  c-section, she suffers diabetes and the two-week old baby is still weak and having  trouble breast feeding. Maybe there's some who…

Scott Morrison: Well Fran we're not transferring them at the moment so if there is  an appropriate medical clearance in place that people could be taken back there  then that's what would take place.

Fran Kelly: Are conditions appropriate for mother and a new baby?

Scott Morrison: Well that's what we'll be ensuring if people are sent back there in  that condition, but there would be an appropriate medical clearance for someone to  be transferred. Now, what I think is happening here Fran, we've seen all this before. I  remember back under the Howard Government there were massive campaigns run  by advocates to try and put pressure on the government to walk away from offshore  processing. Now, the Labor Government was elected in 2007 taking on that position.  They abolished offshore processing and over 1100 people died at sea. Now, this  government is going to run offshore processing properly. We're going to make sure  the right protections and safeguards are in place. There will be criticisms of the  policy I have no doubt, and we will make sure that we take the proper precautions to  ensure people's welfare is attended to. But offshore processing's here to stay Fran.

Fran Kelly: And even though, I mean you can have a hard line policy but you can  have sensitivities within it. Do you think it's ever going to be for instance on Nauru  easy for a woman to prepare formula, sterilise bottles, all that kind of thing?

Scott Morrison: Well I think all of that can be achieved Fran and it's the  government's policy to ensure there are the appropriate sensitivities in place for  offshore processing in Nauru. But offshore processing whether it be at Nauru or  Manus works when there are no exceptions and the previous government I don't  think really understood that. They had a year of offshore processing, they didn't put  these facilities in place and we are now working to do that so that we can make sure  the policy works as it should.

Fran Kelly: Minister thank you very much for joining us.

Scott Morrison: Thanks very much Fran.

Fran Kelly: Scott Morrison is the Federal Government Immigration Minister.





