THE HON BRENDAN O’CONNOR MP  MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  SKY  AM AGENDA  WEDNESDAY, 24 APRIL 2013

SUBJECT: ECONOMY, EDUCATION, ASYLUM SEEKERS



KIERAN GILBERT: Let's go to Brisbane now and the Immigration Minister, Brendan O'Connor  standing by. Joe Hockey says he's going to hold you to account on spending but it's not just him,  Standard & Poor's as well, giving a very clear indication, Minister, that the Government can't be  just all talk when it comes to getting rid of the deficit.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Kieran, this country has Triple-A status from three rating agencies for the  first time ever. It was never achieved under the Howard Government. It's a confirmation of our  efforts to respond to the global financial crisis. We've gone from 15th to the 12th largest  economy since we were elected, in the world. We are one of only eight countries that have the  Triple-A status from three agencies. That's because our economy's growing, 926,000 jobs, low  unemployment and very low debt compared to the developed world.

That's really a sign of optimism and growth and of course the only thing that really threatens our  economy is the negative talking-down of our economy by the Opposition, as we've just heard  from Mr Hockey.

KIERAN GILBERT: We saw the deal yesterday - Barry O'Farrell signing on, but immediately the  Federal Government used that as a stick to the other states. If you really want a deal, should you  be playing politics with this?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: This is really important, this reform. This is going to provide opportunities  for our children into the future. And I applaud the efforts by the New South Wales Government  for seeing how important this reform is to fix a broken education model. To ensure the 1.1  million students in New South Wales get a fair deal and have a great future and it really is now  incumbent upon the other State Premiers and Chief Ministers to sign on to what will be historic  reforms to ensure this country is one of the top five - has one of the top five education systems  in the world.

We cannot afford not to do this, Kieran. We are in of course a very significant region in the  world. It's growing exponentially but we must keep up and we must ensure through this  investment and through these reforms in terms of the way in which we teach kids that we do

our very best and I'm really delighted by the efforts of the New South Wales Government joining  with us on this matter.

KIERAN GILBERT: I want to go to your portfolio and there were - there've been some security  concerns relating to a couple of asylum seekers that have arrived in recent times. The Coalition  raised those with you - have your pursued them and what's the latest? I understand it was  relating to some individuals from various nationalities. What's the latest advice you've got for us  on that?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Look. We deal with all of these matters very, very well. Our agencies are  second to none when it comes to ensuring our security and I've got a high regard and  confidence for those agencies. Now in relation to the people in question, they are in detention  and of course we'll examine the circumstances but I can assure you, Kieran, that the  Government's well aware of these matters, well before the Opposition. And for the Opposition  in the case of Mr Keenan as Shadow Minister to write to me but send the letter to the media  before sending it to me, on matters of national security, really underline that this Opposition is  not fit for office.

You do not play infantile politics with national security and for me to find out about a letter...

KIERAN GILBERT: How many individuals are you talking about? How many individuals and from  what nations?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: There were three - there's been three - well in relation to this matter,  there's been a number, there was of course a person - an Egyptian, and someone from Iran and  someone from Sri Lanka but we of course examined all of these. The first thing that's important  to note, Kieran, is these people are in detention, they're not going to cause concern for the  public. Secondly, that we'll examine the allegations and I can assure you we will treat these  people appropriately. But what we cannot have in this country is the Opposition broadcasting  matters of sensitive national security in the way in which Mr Keenan did because that is infantile  politics and is not in the country's interests and that's why I said to them that if you want to  have a genuine conversation, a bipartisan conversation, then we're happy to do that.

I will happily brief the Opposition on all of these matters and I think that's appropriate. But I  can't do that if they're seeking to play politics with such sensitive matters.

KIERAN GILBERT: Mr O'Connor, I appreciate your time as always. Thanks a lot for that.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Thanks Kieran.





