



ANDREW LEIGH MP  SHADOW ASSISTANT TREASURER  SHADOW MINISTER FOR COMPETITION  MEMBER FOR FRASER



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  ONLINE INTERVIEW   BREAKING POLITICS - FAIRFAX VIDEO  MONDAY, 25 NOVEMBER 2013  CANBERRA

SUBJECT/S: Israeli settlements, Nielsen Poll, GST and online  purchases, carbon pricing, pension age.

TIM LESTER: The Abbott Government appears to have made a contentious, but  largely unreported change in a critical foreign policy stance in recent days. Has it  reduced Australia's opposition to some of the most contentious of Israeli

activities in the West Bank, including the construction of settlements? Every  Monday Breaking Politics is joined by Labor MP from Canberra, Andrew Leigh.  Welcome in Andrew.

ANDREW LEIGH: Thanks Tim.

LESTER: Tell me, what worries you about Australia's foreign policy approach to  Israel and the Palestinians at the moment?

LEIGH: As a good friend of Israel's, I believe Australia should be committed to a  two-state solution. That means that we need to ensure that Israel maintains the  adherence to international norms which are so vital in bringing about a two state  solution. There's a thing called the Geneva Convention, we've had it for more  than 60 years, that says that if you're an occupying power, you shouldn't deport  people out of the territories you occupy or transfer new people into it. But we've  seen occupied settlements going up 70 per cent in the first half of this year,  compared to the first half of last year. That was deplored under Labor, sitting  with the vast consensus in the international community as being illegal against  international law. But now the Coalition has back-flipped on that and voted with

just eleven countries against 160 countries that believe that Israel should adhere  to international law.

LESTER: Now we know the Jewish lobby in Australia has a deal of political  influence. It works for that influence. What does this tell you about what  pressure they may or may not be putting on the new Government?

LEIGH: I think this is very much about adhering to Israel's long-term interests  as Ben Gurion put it, Israel can be a Jewish state, it can be a democratic state or  it can be a state covering all of greater Israel, but it cannot be all three. For a  two-state solution to work, Israel needs to adhere to international norms. I think  Australia's position in international arenas should always be encouraging Israel to  abide by international norms and looking at that two-state solution down the  track.

LESTER: The state and federal treasurers meet this Wednesday and on their  agenda, among other things, will be a lowering of the GST threshold well down  below the $1000 for things we purchase online and whether they should attract  the Goods and Services Tax. What position do you take on whether we need a  far greater application of GST to what we buy online?

LEIGH: Labor's always up for a sensible conversation about tax reform, but the  threshold was set at $1000 because the cost of collection for low value parcels  tends to be pretty high. I think it's also vital that we don't just think about the  cost of collection on the public servants collecting the tax, but also as individuals  forced to inconvenience of phoning up and giving credit card details, or having to  personally go in an collect a package that would otherwise have been delivered  to them. If we don't put any value on that, we can end up raising taxes which  are smaller than the inconvenience to which we're putting citizens. That's not  good economics.

LESTER: And is that a real danger here?

LEIGH: The estimates I've seen suggest, for example, that if you lower the  threshold from $1000 dollars to $500 you might increase total revenue by  something in the order of $20 million. There's debates around this, but that's an  estimate that doesn't even take into account the cost to the additional time  wastage of you and me having to go and pick up a parcel that we might have  otherwise had delivered to our home.

LESTER: What about the position of the retailers who want us to still go out and  visit the shops and buy in the traditional way and are disadvantaged they feel in  this regard?

LEIGH: I think the threshold is simply a function of the fact that the cost of  collection to customs officials and individuals isn't zero. If there was no hassle in  collecting it, well you wouldn't have a low value threshold. But the situation  retailers find themselves in isn't just driven by the low value threshold, it's also  driven by the high Australian dollar and by new retailers setting up online selling  things, for example, like shoes which 10 years ago we would have said were the  kind of thing that could never be effectively sold over the Internet.

LESTER: Okay, the post-election time is never a completely happy time for the  party that lost, but today's opinion poll is surely a bit of a boost for Labor's  morale?

LEIGH: I've got to say Tim, there's days when I'm tempted to breach my  regular rule of saying that opinion polls don't have much predictive power, but I  should hold fast to what I believe which is that good parliamentarians spend  their time talking about issues, not about polls. A bit like a first Ashes win in a  five game series, this is a bit of a fillip to the team, but it's a long series we're  playing and certainly we will need to maintain that sense of discipline that we've  had over the last few weeks. It's entirely possible the government will get its act  together, will manage to repair the problems in the relationship with Indonesia,  will find somebody better suited to run the immigration portfolio, will begin to lift  the veil of secrecy. They've had, let's be honest, a lot of stumbles over these last  few weeks, but Tony Abbott's a formidable parliamentarian and could easily right  his ship.

LESTER: Okay, what does this say for Bill Shorten and the early indications on  how the public are going to take him as a leader and a potential prime minister?

LEIGH: I think Mr Shorten is engaging very effectively with Australians, talking  about the issues that matter not just in the here and now, but for the long term.  The debate we have around carbon pricing for example saw Bill talking in the  House of Representatives about getting this issue right for our children. I think  that's the sort of leader he is. I think he's somebody who thinks long-term, who  wants to engage with people effectively and somebody who I think enjoys a lot  of respect, not just from Labor people, but in the broader community.

LESTER: The poll tells us that the public believes Labor ought to get out of the  way in terms of the carbon tax, and allow the government to rescind it.

LEIGH: But as you, yourself pointed out, talking on NewsRadio this morning  Tim, there are swings and roundabouts in that poll. There's certainly a  recognition among Australians that we need to take serious action on climate  change and an acceptance that Mr Abbott's soil magic scheme just won't cut it,  that what we need is the most effective and efficient way of dealing with climate

change and that's an Emissions Trading Scheme. That's why you've got the  Australian Industry Group backing an Emissions Trading Scheme, thirty countries  around the world, California moving to emissions trading. Even the Chinese, a  nominally Communist country, are more in favour of using the market to tackle  climate change than the nominally free-market Liberal and National parties.

LESTER: And you remain quite firm, quite convinced that Labor will hold to its  line of a price on carbon and not back the scrapping of the scheme in total?

LEIGH: It just wouldn't make any sense to do that Tim. It wouldn't be in the  interests of this generation, and certainly not the interests of future generations  who'll pay a higher cost if Australia doesn't do anything now on emissions. It' s  pretty embarrassing to me to see our negotiators playing a blocking role in the  international debates, where previously they played a positive, constructive role.  It's a ‘little Australia’ vision that I think the Abbott Government is projecting to  the world with cuts to the refugee intakes, the cuts to foreign aid, the boat turn  back policy and the shutting down of climate change talks. I don't think it's in  accord with the big heart of Australia that Mr Abbott should represent.

LESTER: Andrew Leigh, this possibility of shifting the retirement and  superannuation eligibility ages out to maybe 70 or even beyond, do we really  need to work till we're 70 plus?

LEIGH: One of the things that surprised me Tim about the Productivity  Commission report on the pension age was how little attention it gave to the fact  that the poor live for fewer years than the rich. Some of the work when I was an  academic economist I did with Philip Clarke estimated that the richest fifth of the  population lives six years longer than the poorest fifth. So that means if you push  out the pension age to 70, effectively you're telling poor people that they can get  the pension later, knowing full well that they're going to die earlier. As Paul  Krugman put this in the context of the US social security debate, it's a bit like  telling janitors they have to wait till 70 to get the pension because lawyers are  living longer. We have to recognise the equity issues inherent in this, and I'm  frankly surprised that a high calibre institution like the Productivity Commission  hasn't focused on that aspect.

LESTER: They've botched this, in a sense, if they didn't factor in that difference  have they?

LEIGH: That's too hard a critique. Our Productivity Commission is a high calibre  outfit, and I've got great respect for the lead author on this project. But I do  think that if you miss the equity dimension on this, then fundamentally you're  not doing your constituents a good service. If there is a six year difference in life  expectancy between the rich and the poor then taking the safety net and moving

it up three years just doesn't make a whole lot of sense, particularly in a world in  which the superannuation preservation age is stuck at 60.

LESTER: So does the retirement age need to stay put? Stay where it is?

LEIGH: I think that would be the sensible proposal Tim. I think 67 for the social  safety net makes a lot of sense. You know, if you're a lawyer and you're going to  live a long life, then your job isn't particularly physically demanding, maybe you  might retire at 70 but if you've been working as a cleaner doing back-breaking  work, then telling you that you have to continue to do that job until 70, knowing  that on average you'll die at a younger age, doesn't seem good policy to me.

LESTER: Andrew Leigh, thank you for coming into Breaking Politics today.

LEIGH: Thank you Tim.

MEDIA CONTACT: TONI HASSAN 0426 207 726

