1

Dawson, James (LNG - AUS)

From: Williams, Annie [Annie.Williams@ag.gov.au]

Sent: Saturday, 16 March 2013 4:14 PM

To: Media Releases

Subject: MARK DREYFUS - SPEECH - VICTORIAN BAR THIRD ANNUAL CPD CONFERENCE -  16 MARCH 2013 [SEC=UNCLASSIFIED]

UNCLASSIFIED



THE HON MARK DREYFUS QC MP  Attorney-General  Minister for Emergency Management

SPEECH



Pro Bono - An Ethical Obligation or a sign of Market Failure?  VICTORIAN BAR THIRD ANNUAL CPD CONFERENCE  MELBOURNE  16 MARCH 2013





I’d like to acknowledge the traditional owners of the land upon which we meet today, and to pay my  respects to their elders, past and present.

I’d like to thank the Victorian Bar for organising this conference and giving me the opportunity to address  this assembly of the Bar I have been proud to belong to since 1987.

And I’d like to thank all of you for attending today to discuss the key role pro bono legal services play in  Australia in enabling people to access justice, and to talk about how we can achieve even more in this  critical area.

I am sure that everyone here today appreciates the social good that we can all achieve as legal  professionals through participating in pro bono work. And I want to commence my remarks today by  acknowledging the significant pro bono work that the Australian legal profession already contributes to  our community.

I do, however, want to explore ways we can further promote pro bono work, and to discuss with you the  things that the government is doing, and thinking about doing, in this area.

The rule of law is a cornerstone of modern civilisation, and an essential component of any liberal-democratic society.

2

And just as every Australian should be able to exercise their democratic rights, regardless of their  economic circumstances, I believe that every Australian should also be able to exercise their legal rights,  regardless of their financial circumstances.

I know this idea of universal access to justice is an ideal.  And it’s an ideal that neither we, nor any other  society I know of, has fully realised.  But it’s an ideal that we should be working toward. The Australian  Government is doing what it can to promote greater access to justice by providing funding for a range of  innovative programs and initiatives. And it is my heartfelt view that the legal community also have a vital  role to play in contributing to this lofty ambition, by giving your time and your skills to those who are in  need of your help.

The conference program records me having said that I gained more satisfaction from my pro bono work  than any other work as a barrister. In part I think that is because I chose the cases I worked on pro bono,  rather than the case and client choosing me.  A lot of the pro bono work I chose was in the environmental  area, and a lot was Freedom of Information work. Some was for unions and some was for my political  party.  Sometimes it was simply individuals in a dispute with a deep-pocketed corporation.  But you will be  relieved to know I didn’t come to tell you war stories of past triumphs and past disasters.

Let me go back a step now by talking about the concept of “access to justice”.

Access to justice is broader than simply the ability of individuals - and in some cases institutions such as  non-government organisations - to enforce legal rights.

Access to justice is about how the justice system as a whole works to give all Australians - and the  institutions that constitute our civil society - the opportunity to access the ‘everyday justice’ necessary to  ensure a high quality of social, civic and economic engagement.

As I’ve indicated, in theory all Australians have access to justice by way of their basic entitlements under  our Constitution and our liberal-democratic traditions as a society subject to the rule of law.

However, the reality is that there are many in our society who do not enjoy such access, whether due to a  lack of money, capability or information.  This is why government funded legal assistance and other  services play a vital role in enhancing access to justice for disadvantaged Australians.

It is generally accepted that pro bono work encompasses activities aimed at providing legal services to  persons who are unable to afford to pay for those services.

In this way, pro bono work tangibly contributes to improving access to justice for Australians who cannot  otherwise get the help they need to enforce their legal rights and to resolve their problems.

This is not to say that pro bono work should be used as a substitute for government funded legal services.   Rather, pro bono legal services form one essential element of a mix of services that the government and  the legal profession provide to enhance access to justice within the Australian community.

In addition to the provision of legal aid, other elements of government funded legal assistance include  programs geared towards early intervention and prevention, such as programs of referral and integrated  services - which I will discuss later - and methods of alternative dispute resolution such as mediation and  conciliation, which aim to divert disputes, where appropriate, from going down the long, arduous and  often very expensive path of litigation.

3

However, there are times when alternative dispute resolution is inappropriate, or unsuccessful, and  litigation becomes the most appropriate course.  There are Australians who, despite their difficulties and  their need to appear in court, may not qualify for legal aid.

Sometimes there are issues of great legal complexity, and even greater public interest, that require  significant resources to deal with and the assistance of the legal community’s most gifted minds. In these  and other situations, the importance of pro bono contributions from the legal profession become clear, as  pro bono services often provide vital assistance where no other avenue is available.

It is my firm and passionate belief that legal services should be available to every Australian on the basis of  need, not their ability to pay.  That an Australian suffers from some form of disability or disadvantage, or  lacks the financial means to pay for legal assistance, should not diminish their ability to access legal help.

To this end, this Government has injected $1.35 billion over four years into legal assistance programs.  The  Government is also undertaking and exploring a number of initiatives to ensure legal assistance is  delivered in a targeted and effective manner.

Legal assistance has undergone something of a transition in recent years, both in Australia and overseas.

Whilst developing countries are seeking to expand access to assistance, western countries have faced the  need to look at options for delivering services more efficiently and effectively given the global financial  situation.  For example, in England and Wales, legal assistance services have undergone a considerable  process of reform, against the backdrop of a shrinking welfare state and ever tightening fiscal  circumstances.

While Australia has weathered the international financial storm remarkably well, there is no doubt that we  have been impacted by the financial contraction now affecting much of the world, and so we must also  look to run our programs in a fiscally constrained environment.

At the same time, studies are finding that legal problems are just as pervasive and complex as they have  ever been.  The recent Legal Australia-Wide (or LAW) survey, conducted by the NSW Law and Justice  Foundation, found that half of the 20,000 respondents reported experiencing at least one legal problem in  the preceding 12 months, and just over one-fifth experienced three or more legal problems in that period.

My Department is currently overseeing the Review of the National Partnership Agreement on Legal  Assistance Services, which seeks to evaluate the efficiency, effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of the four  legal assistance programs supported by the Australian Government - legal aid commissions, community  legal centres, Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Legal Services and Family Violence Prevention Legal  Services.

As part of its remit, the Review is looking at the appropriateness of the National Partnership Agreement as  a mechanism for future funding of legal assistance services, and considering alternative funding models  and mechanisms.

It is of the utmost importance that funding is used efficiently and effectively to deliver access to justice for  the most disadvantaged Australians.  Legal assistance programs must be effectively targeted and  appropriately calibrated to ensure that those who cannot afford to pay get the legal help they need.

The Review will assist the Government in making sure that our investment is having the biggest impact  that it can, and I very much look forward to seeing the results of this Review later this year.

4

But funding is only one part of the picture.  Assisting people to access justice is also about finding  innovative solutions to long term structural problems. It is a mistake to presume that justice is dispensed  only by the courts. To the contrary, access to justice can be improved by finding ways to facilitate the  resolution of legal matters before they become intractable and expensive court battles.

In the field of health care it is now well understood that ‘prevention is better than cure’. For example, few  would now question that healthy eating and regular exercise are infinitely preferable to surgery to clear  arterial blockages following a heart attack. In a similar way, as lawyers we understand better than most  that litigation - while sometimes necessary - should generally be the last, rather than the first resort.

Of course, as barristers your contributions will often be in the context of litigation, and I’ll say more about  that shortly.

But governments will always be looking for new approaches to the provision of justice in the broadest  sense.  In particular, this Government is currently exploring options to match the right services to the  complex problems that many Australians face, and to encourage innovative service delivery to address

these problems.

One option my department is currently exploring is the co-location or integration of legal services with  other essential services, like health or welfare services, which also have a part to play in improving access  to justice.

Examples of where this integration has successfully occurred overseas include the legal and healthcare  oriented medico-legal partnership in Boston, Massachusetts, and also “one stop” legal shops such as  Community Legal Advice Centres and Networks in England and Wales.

Similar models of co-location and integrated services can be seen in the West Heidelberg Community Legal  Service and Banyule Community Health, and more recently, the Loddon Campaspe Community Legal  Centre and Bendigo Health Outreach programme.

Closer to home is the Victorian Public Interest Law Clearing House’s Homeless Persons’ Legal Clinic and  Seniors’ Rights Legal Clinic, which receive strong support, through pro bono work, from the Victorian Bar.

These models typify multi-disciplinary collaboration to address unmet legal need in a regional context.  It is  my intention that the idea of integrated services will be explored further.  However, these kinds of services  will struggle to prosper and expand without the ongoing support of the legal service profession and their

commitment to pro bono work.

I want to now discuss in a little more detail my views about the role of lawyers - and in particular  barristers - in carrying out pro bono work.

Most of us here today would agree that pro bono work is critically important in supporting the rule of law  and enhancing access to justice, both here in Australia and in our region.  Lawyers are the guardians of the  rule of law and have a clear interest in ensuring that all have access to justice.

They also have a monopoly on the commercial use of legal knowledge and skills, the exercise of which  greatly affects the lives of their clients. And as so many of you here will have experienced first hand, a case  can have an impact that goes well beyond the lives of the individual litigants, with the capacity to  significantly affect the wider Australian community.

And I think most of us accept that being a legal professional is a privilege. Many of us worked very hard to  earn the positions that we hold, but these are nevertheless privileged positions in our society.

5

Many lawyers who undertake pro bono work believe they have a social responsibility, a sense of duty or a  professional obligation to society.  They share an underlying belief that lawyers have a responsibility to  protect the most disadvantaged, affording them the access to justice they not only deserve, but have a  right to.

Many lawyers also have a genuine belief in the law as a vehicle for social change.  These lawyers push the  boundaries of the law where there are principles of justice involved or law reform needed

A frequently cited example of this, that has lost none of its resonance with the passage of time, is the  Mabo Case.

That case, which overturned two centuries of legal fiction, succeeded only with the enormous support of  barristers from the Melbourne Bar, in particular the late Ron Castan QC and Bryan Keon-Cohen QC, acting  pro bono.

The repercussions of this decision are still being felt in the Australian community, as the law and practice  of native title develops, and Aboriginal communities around the country are transformed.

I think there could be few better examples of the way in which barristers can, through engaging in pro  bono work, exercise their skills and knowledge not only for personal benefit, but for the benefit of the  community in which we live.

More recently, significant outcomes have been achieved through pro bono work performed in the Bushfire  Legal Help and the Plaintiff M61 and M70 cases.

In particular I would like to acknowledge the significant work provided by members of the Victorian Bar in  assisting asylum seekers following the M61 case, and the Victorian Public Interest Law Clearing House’s  assistance in employing the coordinator of Bushfire Legal Help.

In addition to fulfilling a lawyer’s professional responsibility and giving back to the community, there are  other reasons for the profession to engage in pro bono work.  Pro bono work exposes lawyers to a broader  range of clients and social justice issues, helping them achieve personal satisfaction in contributing to the  welfare of the community, while at the same time building their legal skills and expertise.

I am encouraged by the fact that there seems to be a real desire by so many in the profession to make a  contribution towards achieving a more just and equal society.  In particular, I have been greatly heartened  and impressed by the extent of pro bono work being undertaken by the legal profession, and the  profession’s willingness to work with government to promote the culture of pro bono work.

Governments clearly have a role to play in encouraging pro bono work, particularly by providing incentives  for those engaged in it. Most of you will be aware of the initiative by the former Labor Government of  Victoria to integrate a requirement of pro bono work in its tender process for legal work.

The Commonwealth has also commitment to ‘take into account the provision of pro bono hours when  awarding a tender’ for legal services, which I will discuss in a little more detail shortly.  Both of these  initiatives provide world-leading examples of how governments and the profession can support the  ongoing development of a pro bono culture.

Another option that I want to further explore, in collaboration with the profession, is the establishment of  “cross-subsidised” practices, like Salvos Legal, where the commercial, profit-making arm of a legal practice  directs funds to subsidise pro bono services for those individuals who cannot afford legal help otherwise.

6

I acknowledge that many in the legal profession are already providing high quality pro bono assistance. I  was very pleased to hear of the findings from the recent survey conducted by the National Pro Bono  Resource Centre, showing that the amount of pro bono work performed by the Australian legal profession  is increasing.

However, while the Australian legal profession can hold its head high when it comes to willingness to  engage in pro bono work, there is always room to do more to ensure that disadvantaged Australians are  not passed over when it comes to accessing justice.

For example, a comparison can be drawn between our National Pro Bono Aspirational Target, which is set  at 35 hours of pro bono work per lawyer per year, and the situation for lawyers in the United States, who  are encouraged under American Bar Association ethical rules to contribute at least 50 hours of pro bono  service per year.

I strongly believe we should also be fostering awareness of social equity and access to justice issues in our  law students, through encouraging universities to establish legal clinics and provide more clinical legal  education.  I note that 19 Australian universities currently offer some kind of clinical component as part of  their law degree programs.

I believe these initiatives are a great way for our developing legal minds to see how the principles and  content of law learnt at university affect Australians in their everyday lives.

The experience provides valuable perspective and context to the doctrines that students are taught at  university, and will help students engage critically and constructively with issues around access to justice  that challenge our society.

At the same time, having more legal clinics open at institutions such as universities is an innovative way to  provide more accessible legal advice or referrals for the wider Australian public, without the burden of  prohibitive costs.

A further innovation could be including pro bono work as a condition of law graduates’ practical legal  training, and as a prerequisite to being admitted to legal practice.

This practice already occurs in Belgium, where a requirement exists that every trainee lawyer provide legal  assistance pro bono during their “apprentice” period, with services overseen by the trainee's supervisor  and an official of the legal aid commission in that court district.  I understand that the New York Bar has  also recently adopted a similar rule.

I feel very strongly that innovations such as these would enhance the sense of social justice in aspiring  lawyers in universities around Australia, and help foster a pro bono culture, whilst also providing very  valuable and practical legal experience.

In terms of volunteering, most of us recognise Australia enjoys a strong culture of volunteerism.

Volunteers play a critical role in community life and contribute significantly to social and economic  wellbeing.  Volunteering not only encourages connections to local, national and international  communities, it improves personal growth.

In this context, I’d like to single out the contributions that members of the legal profession have made as  volunteers to various legal aid bodies and pro bono organisations, such as the Public Interest Legal  Clearing House here in Victoria, which administers the Victorian Bar Pro Bono Scheme, chaired by Jane  Dixon SC.

7

The work of these legal aid bodies, in providing legal help to disadvantaged Australians, is of considerable  value, and it is largely due to the selfless efforts of staff and volunteers.  I encourage you all to consider  how we can continue to support organisations like the Public Interest Legal Clearing Houses and advocate  for greater volunteering from within the legal profession.

The Australian Government is committed to working together with the legal profession to enable and  encourage pro bono legal work, both in Australia and internationally in our region.

The Australian Government is sponsoring the National Access to Justice and Pro Bono Conference which  will be held next week.  This conference will bring together the private legal profession, the legal  assistance sector and government and will cover a range of current and emerging issues facing the sector.   It will also provide a valuable opportunity to promote and share approaches to access to justice and pro  bono best practice.

To be truly effective in this area, pro bono work requires a vehicle for sharing best practice.  The Australian  Government facilitates this by, for example, funding the National Pro Bono Resource Centre - an  independent, non-profit organisation that works to support and promote pro bono work by the legal  profession in Australia (approx. $280,000 per annum).  The Centre has developed the current national  target for pro bono work, regularly surveys the pro bono work undertaken by the sector, and develops  best practice guidance material.  The Centre also offers a free consultancy service to firms setting up a pro  bono practice.

As a significant purchaser of legal services, the Commonwealth Government recognises that it is uniquely  placed to encourage legal service providers to engage in pro bono work.

One way the Commonwealth is realising this potential is through the Legal Services Multi-Use List, which  lists service providers who have been prequalified to deliver legal services to federal government    departments and agencies.

To be considered for inclusion on the Legal Services Multi-Use List, a service provider must meet certain  conditions including ‘commitment to pro bono legal work’.  This means either subscribing to the National  Pro Bono Resource Centre’s aspirational target of 35 hours of pro bono work per lawyer per year, or  nominating a target value of pro bono work over a financial year.  Service providers who are successfully  appointed to the Legal Services Multi-Use List must execute a deed which provides that they will ‘use their  best endeavours to meet the target value of pro bono work provided in their application for inclusion’.

Service providers are held accountable to the Department through an annual reporting process, whereby  they must report on the hours of pro bono work per lawyer undertaken over the preceding financial year.   These figures are also made publicly available.

As at 1 March 2013, there were over 100 signatories to the national pro bono aspirational target.  These  firms aspire to undertake at least 35 hours of pro bono legal work per lawyer per year.  The aspirational  target confirms the shared professional responsibility of lawyers to provide pro bono assistance.

Since 2007, when the aspirational target was established, the number of lawyers covered by this target  has now trebled to over 8,000 lawyers nationally.

In 2011-12 the number of hours of pro bono legal work undertaken was 262,662, or on average, 34 hours  per lawyer.  In the same year there were 24 new signatories to the aspirational target, which is a record  number of new signatories.

8

These figures demonstrate that the legal profession is moving towards a world where pro bono is an  integral part of a firm’s culture.

Some of you may also be aware that from 1 July 2012 a new Commonwealth legal financial assistance  scheme, the disbursement support scheme, was established.  This scheme expands eligibility for funding of  disbursements in Commonwealth matters to provide assistance to people who, for example, need  assistance paying for a medical expert to give evidence.

The cost of disbursements can present a real barrier to access to justice, and this scheme gives support to  lawyers wishing to undertake pro bono work who may have otherwise been discouraged by the expense of disbursements.  This new scheme is exciting as it shows that small changes can go a long way to

encouraging pro bono legal work.

The Australian Government is also committed to promoting the rule of law and building capacity through  pro bono work in the Asia-Pacific region.  I acknowledge the significant contribution of the legal profession  in delivering quality pro bono legal services overseas.  This has, in part, been aided by the establishment of  the Centre for Asia-Pacific Pro Bono and the International Pro Bono Advisory Group.

The government-funded Centre for Asia-Pacific Pro Bono coordinates pro bono requests from the Asia-Pacific region with Australian legal firms ($450,000 over three years).  The International Pro Bono Advisory  Group brings together a range of private sector lawyers, government and non-government agencies to  coordinate and better target international pro bono work.

More broadly, there are some areas where I think we can continue working together to develop innovative  approaches to address areas of need or gaps in pro bono service provision.  These include strategies for  engaging small and mid-tier firms, ways to support young lawyers wishing to undertake pro bono work and  how better to enable pro bono work in rural, regional and remote areas.

I think it is also important to engage in regular discussions about how the government and the legal  profession can better work together to further enhance pro bono work.  I am very interested in hearing  from you today about how you think work in these areas can be progressed and any ideas you have about  how we can continue to work together to promote and support pro bono work in the future.

The Australian Government recognises the importance of legal assistance in enhancing Australians’ ability  to access justice.

The challenge for government is being able to provide legal assistance services that are needed now as  much as they ever have been, whilst dealing with the reality that we have constrained resources with  which to accomplish the task.  The Review of the National Partnership Agreement on Legal Assistance  Services will provide guidance on how the Australian Government can best deliver against this challenge.

Pro bono work can not, and should not be expected to replace the provision of government legal services  for those in need.  However, pro bono work does play an important role in enhancing access to justice.

The Government is committed to continuing to work with the legal profession to further encourage and  facilitate pro bono work, because without your valued contribution - without you - access to justice, and  the egalitarian nature of Australian society, is diminished.

I invite your comments and suggestions about what government may be able to do to better promote and  support pro bono work.

Thank you.

