





2GB Afternoons

People smuggling issues in the Asia-Pacific region

Transcript, E&OE, proof only

3 July 2013

CHRIS SMITH: I thought I'd get Bob Carr on the line to clarify where  he thinks the Government's position is. He's on the line from the  Philippines. I do apologise for the quality of the line, but it is Sydney v  Manila.

But Senator Carr, good afternoon.

BOB CARR: Yeah Chris good afternoon.

CHRIS SMITH: Good to have your company. You're at somewhat of a  loggerhead today with the UN High Commissioner for Refugees  regional head Richard Towle over claims that those who are getting  here by boat from Iran are economic asylum seekers and not genuine  refugees.

Firstly, before we talk about what Richard Towle has to say, what  percentage of those coming from Iran at the moment do you  estimate are economic refugees only?

BOB CARR: Well we're talking about impressions here, and the  advice I'd got is that overwhelmingly the Iranians coming here are  middle class Iranians, they're from the majority ethnic and religious  group in the country. And they're coming here as economic refugees,  they're coming here to improve their economic - as economic  migrants, not as refugees, they're coming here to improve their  economic circumstances. And that is an understandable human  motivation Chris, but that's why we have a regular migration  program.

CHRIS SMITH: Yeah. You talk about the fact that there could be 100  per cent motivated by economic circumstances. I would agree with  you in that to get to Australia they surely would have to take two  flights to Jakarta, and then a leaky boat to Australia, would that be  right?

BOB CARR: Yeah, so just to clarify what I said. I said that in recent  boat arrivals 100 per cent appeared to be economic refugees.

CHRIS SMITH: Uh huh.

BOB CARR: I'll give you an example. There was a boat of guys on May  5 with Sri Lankans on it - 63 Sri Lankans, who were not even claiming  refugee status. They were economic refugees, and we were able to  send them back because I negotiated with the Sri Lankan  Government in December a return arrangement.

So they were flown back, and that has sent a powerful message to Sri  Lankans that you're wasting your money if you hand out $10,000 to a  people smuggler

CHRIS SMITH: Mm, mm.

BOB CARR: We haven't got the same return arrangements with Iran.  But Chris you're absolutely right, if someone pays money in Iran to a

people smuggler involving a flight to Malaysia and or Indonesia, and  then the trip on the leaky boat, they're certainly not people down on  their luck in a refugee camp.

CHRIS SMITH: What we're hearing from Richard Towle is that you  need to test your claims by actually processing these asylum seekers,  as opposed to continuing this 11 month suspension of asylum seeker  processing. He does have a point, doesn't he?

BOB CARR: Well [indistinct]... with my colleague the minister for  immigration. I started this debate by making some [indistinct] points.

But I'll just say this, I think our response around the [indistinct]  people to the comments you've quoted, are that Australia should be  given credit by the UN for having the most generous immigration  inflow of any country in the world in proportion to our population.

CHRIS SMITH: Yeah.

BOB CARR: And when it comes to resettlement on humanitarian  grounds, we actually [indistinct] the US.

CHRIS SMITH: Yeah.

BOB CARR: And we can be very proud of that, and I think [indistinct]  knowledge of it by the UN would go a long way to giving Australia an  appropriate mark for what the Australian people have done.

CHRIS SMITH: Some would say a tad overgenerous, but that's a  discussion for another day. Kevin Rudd will meet with Susilo  Yudhoyono in Jakarta on Friday, how tough can we go in forcing  Indonesia to lift its game and help us prevent the continual flow of  boat people to Australia?

BOB CARR: Indonesia is - as I pointed out on my visit there a few  days ago, a victim of the people smuggling rackets.

Indonesia says it's a transit country, the Iranians coming through and  coming on to Australia are not originating in Indonesia.

But, nonetheless, I tried to make the point with the Indonesian  leaders that it is a problem for them. There are undesirable aspects  of the Iranian immigration that I don't want to go into now, but it is a  challenge for Indonesia, as for us.

We've got to see this as a common problem.

CHRIS SMITH: Mm.

BOB CARR: Could I make a point here that I think needs to be made.

CHRIS SMITH: Sure.

BOB CARR: [indistinct] refugee advocates in Australia are saving. The  former head of refugees [indistinct]... it could be wise to apply the  definition of refugee under the Refugees Convention, now that's not  in dispute. Australia's a party to it, and this won't change.

And the point I'd make is that [indistinct] profile of many of the  current surge of arrivals suggest they are immigrant [indistinct]  seeking economic opportunity and a better life, rather than fleeing  persecution in the way contemplated by the Refugees Convention.

And I've been saying, without pre-judging any individual claim, that's  for the Immigration Department officials who undertake  assessments at the Refugee Tribunal. But I am saying the profile has  changed in the way we've been discussing, and that applies to the Sri  Lankans, and we've got a return agreement with the Sri Lankan  Government. That's a very good thing, I thank them for it.

The Iranians, and the Vietnamese [audio missing] if you look at those  current arrivals. And that begs the question whether people coming

from a majority ethnic and religious group are always, ipso facto, to  be counted refugees.

CHRIS SMITH: Yeah exactly. I've run out of time, and I know you've  got to jump on a plane as well. Thank you very much for your time.

BOB CARR: Thanks Chris, thank you.

Media enquiries

 Minister's office: (02) 6277 7584

 DFAT Media Liaison: (02) 6261 1555



