THE HON MARK DREYFUS QC MP  Attorney-General  Minister for Emergency Management  Special Minister of State  Minister for the Public Service and Integrity



TRANSCRIPT

26 July 2013



TRANSCRIPT OF INTERVIEW WITH BEVERLEY O’CONNOR AND MICHAEL ROWLAND -  ABC 24 NEWS BREAKFAST

SUBJECTS: Regional Resettlement Arrangement with Papua New Guinea; Federal  election.

E & O E - PROOF ONLY

O'CONNOR: The Attorney-General Mark Dreyfus has joined us in the studio. Many  thanks for your time this morning. Well, you're the Attorney-General, have you looked  at our obligations? Are we in breach under this new policy?

DREYFUS: Of course we've looked at the obligations and we think that the arrangement  that we've reached with Papua New Guinea does comply with Australia's international  legal obligations and with our domestic legal obligations.

O'CONNOR: How so?

DREYFUS: It complies because Papua New Guinea is a signatory to the Refugees  Convention. That's very important. It's something that, of course, the High Court looked  at last year in relation to an arrangement with Malaysia. Malaysia is not a signatory to  the Refugees Convention, Papua New Guinea is, and more importantly, has withdrawn  its reservations from that Convention in relation to people being transferred from  Australia.

So that's s a very important first step. It's a guarantee that the provisions of the  Refugees Convention will be complied with, and Australia has duties also under the  Refugees Convention. It is to make sure that if we do transfer people to another country  that is a signatory, that they're not going to be refouled or returned to the country  they're fleeing persecution in.

O'CONNOR: But isn't this the great unknown as we're sitting here right now? You don't  really have a sense of many, how able and how quickly you're going to get Manus up to  a level that would meet those obligations.



DREYFUS: The Minister Tony Burke was in Manus Island yesterday. He had planned,  some weeks ago, pretty much as soon as he was appointed, to go to Manus. He's going  today to Nauru, again a planned trip.

He said from Manus Island that the facilities, as he inspected them physically, looked to  be appropriate and he's talking to our officials about what are appropriate  arrangements, that is the management of the facility, and in particular things like  separation of groups which seems to be something that would be a useful measure to  manage this facility. And of course he's talking to the officials in the Papua New Guinean  Government, as are the people from our Department of Immigration to make sure when  we send anybody, it's to a place which is safe and which has appropriate  accommodation and that's the key to this.

ROWLAND: Gillian Triggs argues that the Australian Government could be in breach of  international conventions if people end up indefinitely in places like Manus Island,  which could be the case if the PNG Government can't find third countries to send those  people who aren't deemed to be refugees.

DREYFUS: Well, I don't think anyone is doubting that, hypothetically, there are breaches  of human rights in various places all over the world, but our job as the Government and  the job of the Papua New Guinea Government is to make sure we don't breach human  rights standards.

And being aware of them, and Gillian Triggs does us a service, it's her job as Human  Rights Commissioner to point out the possibilities like that. She does us a service, we  can avoid that occurring by working with Papua New Guinea and concentrating on what  the arrangements are.

O’CONNOR: If you're completely confident about where things stand there, why don't  you take up her desire to go to Manus Island and Nauru to see for herself? Certainly  Manus Island, the Australian Government with the PNG Government can extend that  invitation to the Human Rights Commissioner.

DREYFUS: As she said, it's outside her particular legal responsibilities, which are on  Australian territory. It is a matter for the Papua New Guinea Government whether they  would like her to visit, but we've made it clear we'd welcome visits from international  visitors.

The United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees has been more than once to the  facility on Manus Island and we've welcomed other international visits to check the  standards there. We will continue to do so. Papua New Guinea, I think, will continue to  do so.

O'CONNOR: Jason Clare spoke this morning of almost frenetic activity in Indonesia to  test the Australian Government and this new policy, getting people on to boats quickly  before the policy, you know, really to test your resolve.

DREYFUS: That's what we said would happen. When the Prime Minister announced,  with Prime Minister O'Neill from Papua New Guinea, last Friday what our arrangement  was going to be, we said the people smugglers will continue to test our resolve.

Unfortunately, that's what's happening and unfortunately, we have our Opposition who  said they would support this arrangement also deliberately undermining, playing into  the hands of the people smugglers who are of course telling lies effectively to their  potential customers.

ROWLAND: We will get to the Opposition's policy shortly, but how long is the  Government prepared to deal with this test of resolve, as you say? Are we talking  weeks, months of these boats coming in great numbers?

DREYFUS: We are prepared to keep at this policy which we are now implementing. As  Tony Burke said last night, we expect that health checks will be completed soon for the  people that have arrived since 19 July and they will be transferred to Papua New Guinea  in coming days.

ROWLAND: But where? I mean, there's 700 already this week. Manus Island at the  moment has about 300.

DREYFUS: We have capacity, and that's what Tony Burke has gone to Manus Island to  look at. We are continuing discussions with Papua New Guinea about alternate  locations.

ROWLAND: Alternate? Whereabouts?

DREYFUS: Well, we're continuing discussion...

ROWLAND: Within PNG?

DREYFUS: Of course. We're continuing those discussions, but at the moment it's Manus  Island. We are expanding the scale of that facility and that's why Tony Burke went there  yesterday to check.

O'CONNOR: Let's come to the Opposition's policy and we've had conflicting reports  from two military people about how this policy would work. What's your assessment of  whether it would be effective, and I notice too he has suggested that he will keep part  of the Government's plan as well?

DREYFUS: Well, I think it's just another slogan from Tony Abbott, unfortunately. It's a  change in some management arrangements at the upper reaches of the public service in  Canberra and, as a few people commented yesterday, unless the people smugglers and  their potential customers are reading the Public Service Gazette, it is not likely that it's  going to make much change where it matters, which is in the Indian Ocean, in the seas  around Christmas Island, on coast of Indonesia. That's where the action is here.

And we have a very clear message, by contrast. We have a plan, we have a clear  message, we are implementing our plan and that clear message is, if you get on a boat  and come to Australia without a visa, you will not be settled in Australia. I'm waiting to  hear if the Opposition has got any plan at all, anything beyond just three-word slogans.

ROWLAND: Okay, now finally, let's finish with a political question. Election date timing -  I'm in the process of organising my daughter's birthday party on 31 August. Can I  continue to do that without any distractions from the Federal Government?

O'CONNOR: Be sympathetic, come on.

DREYFUS: Michael, I sympathise and there are many people planning weddings on  Saturdays right around Australia as well. If I knew, you would be the first to know.

ROWLAND: Help me out here.

DREYFUS: If I knew, you would be the first to know.

O'CONNOR: You two talk off camera. Good to see you Mark. Thank you very much for  coming in, Mark Dreyfus.

ENDS

