Minister for Immigration and Citizenship  The Hon. Tony Burke MP



PRESS CONFERENCE   MANUS ISLAND, PAPUA NEW GUINEA  THURSDAY 25 JULY 2013





TONY BURKE: I don’t have a particular opening statement, just to say it’s good to

be here at Manus Island. My style as a Minister, no matter what my portfolio has

been has always been that you should get out to places and see for yourself. So

this trip was actually organised shortly after I first became Minister, well before

the reports of the last week and well before the announcement of Prime Minister

O’Neill and Prime Minister Kevin Rudd.

The visit has given me an opportunity to have a look at the facilities as we have

now, and to also have a look at the sites for the expansion. No one should doubt

the determination of the Government to implement this policy. The policy is very

straight forward: people who come by boat without a visa now will be

transferred out of Australia, and they will be settled outside of Australia.

It’s a significant shift, and it’s going to be implemented. As part of that

implementation we always knew that there’d be people who would try to test

our resolve. They will discover our resolve quite soon, and the expansion of

Manus Island will make sure that we can implement this exactly as we said we

would. Capacity will be increased as increased capacity is required, and at the

moment that’s able to be done here at Manus.

QUESTION: How soon do you foresee all the detainees currently held here being

moved off Manus Island?

TONY BURKE: There’s a couple of significant issues for a very small number of

detainees, where there are some issue under Papua New Guinean law with

respect to them. That obviously has to be resolved to the satisfaction of the

Papua New Guinean legal system, but for people who are not in that

circumstance, my intention is that they get moved off relatively soon so that to

the maximum extent possible, the only people who are here at Manus are people

who are operating under the new arrangement.

QUESTION: What did you make of the conditions of the site?

TONY BURKE: The conditions, depended on which section you’re in, obviously

permanent structures are always better than tents, tents are always very much

temporary facilities, but I saw a mixture of them. And in terms of making sure

that the minimum welfare standards that you want to make sure are being

observed are being observed, I was very impressed by the different people we

have working here, and certainly I have no doubt at all that a processing centre

here on Manus can operate, even with a significantly increased capacity, can be

operated to the standards that you’d expect.

QUESTION: Did you speak to any of the detainees?

TONY BURKE: Yeah I did.

QUESTION: What were they saying to you about life living there and what they’re

expecting…?

TONY BURKE: Oh look, we had a bit of a chat.  I think of all the conversations to

not disclose, it’s actually quite important that I don’t disclose conversations with

people who are currently going through a very personal legal process that will

have big outcomes for them.

QUESTION: What do you think of Tony Abbott’s plan, with a military aspect

towards border control?

TONY BURKE: My view is that Tony Abbott can announce whatever he wants.

We’ve got a policy, it’s agreed with Papua New Guinea, it’s a new arrangement, it

takes away the product that people smugglers are selling and we’re

implementing it. If Tony Abbott on the sidelines wants to announce different

things, well he can go for it. We’ve got a policy to implement and we’re

implementing it.

And the key, and I acknowledge the question you just raised, but the key to what

has been announced between Prime Minister O’Neill and Prime Minister Rudd is

this: it takes away the product that people smugglers are selling. If a people

smuggler can’t guarantee that you end up living in Australia, then why would you

pay them money to live in Australia? It takes away the product that they’ve been

selling.

Effectively, the policy in its entirely is quite simple. People smugglers have been

selling permanent residence in Australia. Under the new arrangement, the policy

of the government can be enforced - if you come boat without a visa, you won’t

be settled in Australia, therefore there’s no point paying the people smuggler in

the first place.

QUESTION: Can you give us a candid account of what your take on Manus Island

detention centre was like today, how would you describe it when you talk to your

mates?

TONY BURKE:  I would describe it as a processing centre to process a large

number of people that will soon be able to process a larger number of people.

I’ve been to detention centres on the mainland, when you visit those sorts of

centres, the buildings are permanent. They’re always difficult locations by

definition, no one can pretend that sort of environment is anything but. But in

terms of making sure that the standards are there, that people are being given

opportunity for recreation that you’re making sure that people are being treated

with dignity and the different sorts of welfare supports that around them, what I

saw today is in line with most of the principles I’d want. There are some

additional things in the configuration of the centre that I’m working through with

my department which I believe can address some of the issues that have been

dealt with more recently in the media.

QUESTION:  Can you give some examples?

TONY BURKE: There are particular issues about whether you have a larger

number of compounds, that you have some smaller compounds when it becomes

important to separate some people from the rest of the population. That’s one of

the criticisms that’s been made of the current configuration, and I’m working

through it with my department, ways of being able to fix that In the design of

what happens here.

QUESTION: Have you been making enquiries regarding these allegations of sexual

assaults?

TONY BURKE: I, as you’d be aware, wasn’t put in touch with the sources of those

stories until the night that the story went to air, notwithstanding that I’d been

asking to be in contact with him for some time. I’ve had a good conservation with

him but he still hasn’t been able to give me names of perpetrators or victims, nor

have there been formal reports of those. So in the face of all of that, I think the

most effective thing that can be done is you try to have a configuration of system

that avoids the possibility of what’s been alleged.

QUESTION: Did you talk about it with staff here? Did you make enquiries here?

TONY BURKE: I’ve had conversations while I’ve been there are as well but I’m not

going to go through with you.

QUESTION: What were the criminal charges you were alluding to?

TONY BURKE: I’m aware that there are issues under Papua New Guinean criminal

law, I haven’t gone through what those individuals charges are, but the…

QUESTION: Does that relate to asylum seekers or security staff?

TONY BURKE: The issues that I was referring to relate to asylum seekers. But the

particular charges, I mean, for me the principle is really simple. Under Papua New

Guinea law, there are procedures that they still have to go through that they

haven’t gone through, so we don’t remove them. It’s a fairly straightforward

concept, I don’t think I need to go through what was the charge before you get to

a principle like that.

QUESTION: And what’s the asylum seekers policy (inaudible)

TONY BURKE:  I said when this was announced that there is a period for health

checks to be done properly that usually takes in the order of about two weeks.

No one should expect planes to be coming earlier than that but no one should be

in any doubt that anybody who arrived after that announcement was going to be

caught by the new rules.

So anyone who is spending any time on Australian soil out at Christmas Island in

the interim should know that it is temporary. They are not staying there, they

have been offered the opportunity that if they want to go back to their home or

to a third country they have got a right to go to, we’ll help them do that. But if

they continue to want to seek asylum, then they’ll have an opportunity to do that

in accordance with the convention, but it won’t be within Australia.

QUESTION: And the big question is how much is all this going to cost?

TONY BURKE: That depends entirely on how many people listen to what people

smugglers are telling them and what some members of the Opposition arguably

are encouraging people to believe, which is that we won’t be able to deal with

the capacity, well it’s just wrong. As many people as test our resolve, as many as

try that, will completely define the number of people who come here and will

completely define the cost that’s associated with it.

QUESTION:  So here on Manus, have we committed to $100 million to upgrade

the naval base, just here on Manus, what’s the dollar figure?

TONY BURKE: I’ve just answered that question; I’ve just answered that question.

When you’ve got a demand driven program, to provide a high figure like that,

and say here it is but we’re waiting to see the demand would be a nonsensical

way for me to answer the question. The answer that I gave is the correct and

accurate answer to the question; it depends on how many people test our

resolve.

QUESTION: But those infrastructure projects, they’ve been promised to Papua

New Guinea for this facility so presumably those projects will….

TONY BURKE:  Yeah but they’re not managed by me, anything that comes out of

the foreign aid budget and those sorts of costs are managed under Bob Carr’s

department, you’ve got Melissa Parke there as the relevant member of the

executive dealing with a whole lot of those issues, and forgive me for not straying

across every portfolio, I’ve got a rather large job to do in my own at the moment,

and  the answer to the cost with respect to my own portfolio is as I put it.

The other thing I’d just say, this isn’t some one-off visit that I’ll make, you’ll be

seeing more of me. I hope that we’re able to continue having these sorts of

conversations; you’ll never find me hard to be able to reach when you’re wanting

to be able to be having a conversation with the media. Thank you



