THE HON BRENDAN O’CONNOR MP  MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP

E&OE TRANSCRIPT  SKY - AM AGENDA  THURSDAY, 20 JUNE, 2013

SUBJECT: ASYLUM SEEKERS, 457, LEADERSHIP

KIERAN GILBERT: First, though, to the Minister for Immigration, Brendan O'Connor. Minister thanks  for your time.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Good to be here.

KIERAN GILBERT: I want to ask you about the 457 changes in a moment…

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Sure.

KIERAN GILBERT: First, though, to this visit to Jakarta. Is it all a bit late as Scott Morrison says?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: No of course not, it's a very important neighbour, it was a scheduled visit,  we've had the President come here in 2010, I think also in 2012 in Darwin.

Prime Minister was in Indonesia and Bali in November last year.  A very important neighbour, lots to  talk about.  Leaders in the region, and I think it's a great opportunity for us to talk about those things  that matter to us both.

KIERAN GILBERT: But there won't be any great breakthrough that will stop the flow of boats will  there?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Well it's not just about one area of public policy, but I'm sure the Prime  Minister will talk about those issues, as will the President.

We are co-leaders, we co-chair the Bali Process. The regional framework that the Australian  Government and the Indonesian Government put in place with of course the support of members of  that Bali Process - 40 or more countries.

And I think that framework allows us to find a lasting solution to a very complex problem.

And Indonesia has been a leader in that regard, and I think therefore it is opportune for the Prime  Minister to meet with the President and to visit Indonesia.

KIERAN GILBERT: That process has been in place for a long time though - the number of years the  Federal Police and Australian Authorities have been working with their Indonesian counterparts and  - to put it simply, it's not working is it?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: No I think that…

KIERAN GILBERT: We've had 40,000 arrivals in the last three years.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR:  When you talk about bringing together 40 countries, countries of transit,  origin, destination, and deal with this issue, it's not going to be done in minutes, or weeks, or even  months, it has to be done over time, and it has to be done with a collegiate approach.

I think the efforts made by my predecessor, Chris Bowen, in that regard, working with the Prime  Minister and indeed working with the counterparts in Indonesia was very important.

The framework's there, we need to do more work, it's the only way, Kieran, we can actually respond  to this issue. It's not about a slogan, the turn back the boat policy we know is a fraud.

The Vice-President of Indonesia has called it out as what it is, which is a slogan and says they won't  be in favour.

You know, the former admiral of our navy has said it's very dangerous, the ambassador of Indonesia  said it's not on.

So there is one transit country currently that we have an offer on the table, which is Malaysia. We  have at the moment - the leader of the Opposition saying yes to the country that says no, Indonesia,  and no to the country that says yes, Malaysia.

KIERAN GILBERT: The Prime Minister, is she going to try and use this visit to wedge Tony Abbott on  that matter of turning back the boats, because it's inappropriate to be using foreign policy for  political purposes?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: This is a scheduled visit with a very important neighbour, a very important  friend of Australia. I'm sure the agenda is vast because we have so many areas of interest - mutual  interest.

KIERAN GILBERT: But we shouldn't expect some miracle solution overnight?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: This is a scheduled visit. And that's the point, anyone who is suggesting  miracles overnight, and anyone who's pretending that can happen, I think, are acting irresponsibly.

KIERAN GILBERT: But isn't that the way the Government's spinning it by saying, you know - the front  page of The Sydney Morning Herald says Gillard to fly north in a bid to stop the boats.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Well that's - that they may well be the commentary, this is a scheduled visit  with a very important neighbour to talk about a whole range of issues that go to trade, that go to the  challenges in the region.

KIERAN GILBERT: So it's not the Government spinning those lines?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: No I'm saying that this is a scheduled visit, we've had the President come  out here a couple of times - with very significant visits form the President. A large one in 2010 of  which I was part, meeting with counterpart ministers. It's an important thing to do, of course we  should do it.

KIERAN GILBERT: Are you hoping for a vote on this bill on the 457 visa changes as soon as today, is  that what you're - hoping to have it through the Parliament?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Look, it's scheduled for today.

There is an inquiry by the senate committee, which is scheduled I think for possibly tomorrow and  the Senate still has to consider it.

But there's a debate in the House of Representatives, of course we want to see the bill passed.

The bill - in effect Kieran - does nothing more than ask employers to look locally first. How? By  putting an ad in the paper.

That's the only requirement to ensure that they've satisfied themselves, and the Department, that  there isn't a local person with the requisite skills.

KIERAN GILBERT: So just an ad in the paper? Why then are all the business groups outraged? The  Australian Industry Group, the Business Council, they've all said don't vote for it.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: I don't know why. That's a good question, you should put it to them. Because  this scheme is built on legitimate shortages, we should look overseas. How do you test legitimate  shortages? Well the one simple way is to advertise locally, look local first.

KIERAN GILBERT: So you're saying the only mandatory thing here is to put an ad in the paper. Aren't  there also requirements to boost training spending and so on?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Those matters have always been in the bill, they're not changes, that they've  been requirements in terms of showing that you're looking to train.

And I can go to the report that the Member for Canning, Don Randall, recommended in 2007 when  he was chair of the parliamentary inquiry into 457s, where he says that we need to - employers must  demonstrate a commitment towards training in the Australian workforce, rather than relying on  access to skills from global, but at times limited, pool of workers.

He also goes on - saying employers must demonstrate the need for the workers.

It's a privilege he says, not a right, in the forward. And he recommends in this two thousand and… -  parliamentary inquiry, he recommends a trial on labour market testing. That was a time, Kieran,  when the number of 457s was less than half that it is now.

Now it's extraordinary because the contribution made by the Member for Canning, Don Randall, in  the debate yesterday was an outrageous slur on the motivations behind the Government to make  sure we put in place decent protections for local workers.

And his slur went to attacking me personally for being racist, which I found extraordinarily offensive,  and it's an outrageous thing to say. Particularly in light of his own recommendations when he was  chair of the parliamentary inquiry into 457s when there were far fewer then than there are now.

KIERAN GILBERT: So why then are the Independents not committed yet? Tony Windsor said he  hasn't made up his mind.

You would think if it's only an advertisement in a paper, that's the only requirement, that you would  have got these people on board. But there's no guarantee they're going to vote for it.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Well there's been - firstly there's been an extraordinary effort I think by  some to totally misrepresent the reforms here. There's been an extraordinary effort to distract and  sideline these issues.

I'll be talking to Tony Windsor today as he's already said in an interview this morning, and I'll work  through these issues with Tony and every other member and senator. And that includes not just the  cross-benchers, but all members and senators.

KIERAN GILBERT: So you're confident of getting this bill through today?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: I don't take anything for granted, and I think it's quite reasonable for people  to look at the merit of the reform - but, Kieran, why would it be - why is it too hard to explain to  people that you should look local first?

I know most Australians believe that's reasonable, before you go to a temporary overseas worker.

Of course we need temporary overseas workers to fill shortages, of course any legitimate shortage  should be able to be supplied with an overseas worker with the requisite skills.

But let's try employ - you know, unemployed Australians locally before we go overseas. And I think  that's a reasonable proposition.

KIERAN GILBERT: I want to ask you one final question on the Labor - the speculation. Bill Shorten,  who's apparently been talking to the SDA and others, the Daily Telegraph reporting that this could  be a sign of wavering support among Julia Gillard's industrial support base.

Is that something that she should be worried about?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Look I just go to the comments that Bill's made publicly, consistently. He  supports the Prime Minister, we all want to see a united government, we've got a very good  message to sell, you know - 960,000 jobs, a great economy, best performing economy in the  advanced world, and I think…

KIERAN GILBERT: Are you confident that Bill Shorten is rock solid behind Julia Gillard?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Well I believe Bill has made unequivocal commitments to the Prime  Minister, and I think he, like many of us, overwhelmingly want to see…

KIERAN GILBERT: You don't think he's wavering?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: I believe that Bill - when I hear what Bill says I believe what he says and I also  think he's got a - he is doing some great things in the area of his portfolio, and I think it's important  therefore that we just focus on the job, stop talking about ourselves, and look after the needs of  most Australians. That's what needs to be done here, let's put the interests of Australians first and  talk less about ourselves.

KIERAN GILBERT: Minister O'Connor thanks for your time, appreciate it.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Thanks Kieran.



