

Transcript

Scott Morrison MP  Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship  Shadow Minister for Productivity and Population  Coalition Campaign Spokesman

Tuesday, 6 August 2013

Transcript ABC News 24 Breakfast

Subjects: Coalition’s plan to increase offshore processing capacity at Nauru, Coalition visit to  Nauru, Kevin Rudd’s PNG election fix

EO&E.....................................................................................................................................

......



TRIOLI:  Joining us now from Adelaide is the Opposition Immigration spokesman, Scott  Morrison.  Scott Morrison, good morning.  Thanks for joining us today.



MORRISON:  Good to be with you, Virginia, as always.

TRIOLI:  You may have just seen that excerpt that we played there.  Your party’s candidate for  Greenway, Jaymes Diaz, fell over yesterday while trying to explain your 6 point plan to

stop the boats.  Now, I know that there is an Opposition 6 Point Plan for Productivity, can  you name the 6 points or was he getting the two policies confused?

MORRISON:  Our policy I think, on border protection, is probably the best known right across the  Australian community Virginia and that policy, as you know, involves turning back boats  where it’s safe to do so, it involves temporary protection visas, it involves rigorous  offshore processing.  We’ve made very clear our plan to ensure that those who come  without documentation and have thrown that documentation away, don’t go into the  queue at all, rather than going to the back of the queue.  There is the regional cooperation  that extends right across and up the chain, and of course we have Operation Sovereign  Borders arrangements which brings together 15 different agencies to tackle this task on a  daily basis as we go in to battle those people smugglers.

TRIOLI:  You might want to let Jaymes Diaz know that then at some point.  So look both the

government and the opposition now have offshore processing as you’ve mentioned,  Pacific Island solutions and are refusing to resettle asylum seekers here that come by  boat.  For the benefit of voters watching this morning, in your view then, what are the  real differences between you and the government’s policies specifically on asylum  seekers?

MORRISON:  Well there are several, and the first point I’d make is that the PNG arrangement that  they’ve announced is not actually real, Virginia.  They have no agreement with Papua  New Guinea to ensure the resettlement of people in Papua New Guinea.  They had a  deadline for the 31 July to have that MOU at least for offshore processing revised and  they missed that deadline.   And now we have the absurd suggestion with the Minister  saying that the High Commissioner in Papua New Guinea may in fact even go to sign a  Memorandum of Understanding in the caretaker period.  Now that would be  unconscionable.  I mean, this is an issue where it would bind future governments.  It is a  controversial issue and the government I think would be way out of order if they were  having Memorandums of Understanding binding future governments executed during the  course of the caretaker period.  So they don’t actually have a resettlement agreement in  Papua New Guinea, we know their Nauru announcement which they announced on the  weekend also fell over.  So that’s the problem with their offshore processing.  It’s not  actually real, it’s just a press conference and an announcement.   Of course turn backs are  a key point of difference and that’s been on the record for a long time.  Temporary  protection visas, that is also a key point of difference.  I mean if Kevin Rudd is re-elected,  30,000 people currently in Australia going through their processing, if they are successful  would get a permanent visa from Kevin Rudd.  They won’t get one from Tony Abbott  and I, only temporary visas.  Of course, the coordination, which is the point I made  before.  One of the things you have to do in this area is getting everybody working  together on the same problem and focussing ahead.   Now we have 15 different agencies,  that are working often across purposes with the best intentions and we owe it to them to  get better leadership across all of those organisations under a single point of command.

TRIOLI:  Scott Morrison, the issues that you raise as a potential problem in relation to getting  formal and solid and ongoing agreements with Papua New Guinea or with Nauru, they  would equally affect any plan that you would then want to put in place as government as  well.



MORRISON:  But this is the difference, Virginia, what Kevin Rudd is saying, and he’s spent millions of  dollars of taxpayers’ money saying this, is that everyone who arrives illegally by boat  will be sent to Papua New Guinea and they would be resettled there and they would never  be resettled in Australia.  Now that statement is just not true.  It’s just not real.  He  doesn’t have such an agreement with Papua New Guinea.  And to claim that he does I  think, is a gross misleading of the Australian public.  We are about to approach 50,000  people who have arrived illegally by boat and the reason that has happened, principally,  is Kevin Rudd’s decision back in 2008 and now we have him on the eve of another

election making a promise which he can’t back up, and the PNG Prime Minister’s  making that clear.  Even last night, yesterday, he was saying all of this could be re-opened and we learnt with Nauru at the end of the day they have a right of veto, as PNG  would.  So he is just making promises and claims that can’t be backed with  implementation.

TRIOLI:  Let me ask you what you might do should you win Government, would you close Manus  Island in favour of Nauru?



MORRISON:  No.

TRIOLI:  What’s the maximum population that Nauru could handle that you believe that you could  send asylum seekers there and could be there for an indefinite period?



MORRISON:  Well there’s the capacity to keep scaling up.  We’ve said that we can put an additional  2000 straight away.  That’s in addition to what the government announced on the  weekend.  All the government announced on the weekend is relocating people after the  riots.  That’s all that was.  It was dressed up with signing ceremonies, for something they  should have been doing anyway to clean up their own mess.  There’s capacity -

TRIOLI:  So you’re saying there’s endless capacity in Nauru?

MORRISON:  No that’s what you said, Virginia, that’s not what I said.  There’s an additional 2-

TRIOLI:  But I’m asking how many.  You say there’s significant - how many could you have  there?

MORRISON:  Well I’m answering your question.  An additional 2000 immediately, we know of another  site where you could put another additional 2000 on top of that.  You’ve also got the  issue of the post assessment accommodation.  Now this is the critical issue in Nauru.   You’ve got to be able to accommodate people after they’ve been found to be refugees for  some years, and we’ve also got the site we’ve identified there, down at what’s call the  Location site, which is a very run down area, which we would redevelop and that would  provide, not only housing for those who are found to be refugees but ultimately in the  long run it would be a very good housing project for the people of Nauru and leave a real  legacy.  So you have to deal with the accommodation needs right across -

TRIOLI:  And how many would that be there?

MORRISON:  Well at least 2000 you could put on that site.  And on top of that, you’ve also got the  processing capacity of the rebuilt centre which burnt down and they’re also, not as yet,  but they should have done so ages ago, building a family facility for 600.  So we think  you have to do both.  That’s our position.  The government says you’ve just got to do  Manus Island and that has a limit on it of 3000.  That’s been made very clear by the  Prime Minister of Papua New Guinea and already we are seeing the great division that is  occurring in Papua New Guinea about this arrangement that our Prime Minister has  announced so that has a long way to go and I think there are very real political difficulties  of implementing that arrangement in Manus Island, that’s why I think you have to do  both.

TRIOLI:  Scott Morrison you’re - well it sounds like there could be very real practical issues in  trying to get done on Nauru what you want to get done as well.



MORRISON:  Why do you say that?

TRIOLI:  Because you’re talking there about 2, 4 potentially 5,000 on such a tiny island with what  a 17km ring road around it?  You say you could effectively house people there.  A place  where there are significant law and order issues on Nauru already and not cause any  social dislocation problems.

MORRISON:  Well there are not significant law and order issues.  What do you base that on Virginia?  I  mean, I was there last Monday, I’ve been there on four occasions, I know the island  pretty well and I know all the Members of Parliament and I’ve met with them all over  many occasions and I know that they are very happy to see the processing centre  continue, provided we get the right arrangements in place, and they trust the Coalition to  do that.  I mean, we’ve been there many times, we’ve been working with them over a  long period of time.  Our policies have been thought through, they haven’t just been  dreamt up in a month after Kevin Rudd became Prime Minister.   We’ve been there - I  mean, Minister Burke has been there for four hours.  I’ve been there on four separate  occasions over three years.  I’ve worked this detail through, Virginia, I know the place  very well and I know it can be done.

TRIOLI:  And what’s your intention then, should you win government, on the idea of a regional  solution given that there are at least 100,000 asylum seekers in Malaysia, trying to get  out, they’re the ones that that we know of at least, that are registered with UNHCR,  probably more like 150,000.  How do you persuade Malaysia to tighten up visa

requirements to stop the influx of asylum seekers who can easily get a visa at the airport  and use that as a place of transit.

MORRISON:  Well that is what Operation Sovereign Borders is all about.  It is about bringing in the  regional elements of what we do in this space to integrate with what we are doing with  the domestic policies.  And we’ve started the -

TRIOLI:  But how do you persuade Malaysia - on that point of visas, how do you persuade  Malaysia?  Do you think you can?



MORRISON:  Well there has already been some movement, I understand, in that direction, and you  would have seen the movement also in Indonesia and those sorts of changes -

TRIOLI:  I’ve seen the Indonesian one but not with Malaysia yet, no.

MORRISON:  No I’ve seen some reports there’s some potential movement in Malaysia as well, and I  would welcome that if that were to occur.  But remember it was the Coalition that started  the Bali process, and that Bali Process of regional cooperation was principally focussed  on regional deterrence and that’s what the Coalition would also focus on, whether it’s  trying to tighten up border and visa controls on entry into whether it’s Malaysia or  Indonesia.  It’s about improving and increasing the scale of our police operations in  partnership particularly with the Indonesians but also with Malaysia.  That’s what  Operation Sovereign Borders is about.  It’s about connecting all of our activity, whether  it’s intelligence or police work or interception and disruption work up in the region.  And  even going further up the chain to Pakistan or Iran and Afghanistan.  You’ve got to make  all of this work together.  And the Captain Emad saga showed that the agencies were at  cross purposes and a people smuggler was able to sail in and fly out, and nobody seemed  to know.

TRIOLI:  Scott Morrison, you’ve only ever been in Opposition.  Do you think that being in  government and getting all this done, as you say it can be done, do you think it might be a  bit harder than it looks from the shadow bench?



MORRISON:   Well, I think it looks very difficult, I always have thought it’s very difficult, Virginia.   That’s why I’ve spent years on the ground talking to people directly involved in the  implementation of these things.  I’ve been to Indonesia several times, I’ve been up into  Malaysia, I’ve been over to Nauru and to Manus Island, to Papua New Guinea, all of  these places to get on the ground and understand the practical issues involved in  implementation.  That’s why I can say to you with some confidence about the work

we’ve done to ensure that we can hit the ground running.  Now I know this is a very big  challenge and I know we’ve given a very significant commitment to the Australian  people.  We haven’t done it lightly but we have done it because we know we can do it  and I think that’s the sort of work that is required if you are going to be in the position,  hopefully, the Australian people willing, of being elected to government.  You’ve got to  have done your homework and we certainly have on this issue and we have the record.

TRIOLI:  Scott Morrison, good to talk to you this morning, thank you for making time.

MORRISON:  Thank you very much, Virginia.

Ends













Media Contact: Julian Leembruggen, 0419 494 667

