





THE HON RICHARD MARLES MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER  PROTECTION  MEMBER FOR CORIO



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  INTERVIEW with Marius Benson - ABC NewsRadio  MONDAY, 16 DECEMBER 2013

SUBJECT/S: IHAG, Indonesia

JOURNALIST - MARIUS BENSON: The key body that provides advice on the  health of asylum seekers in detention has been formerly disbanded by the  Federal Government. The Immigration Health Advisory Group has been operating  since 2006 giving independent advice on issues including mental health. The ABC  understands the IHAG will be replaced with a Government advisory panel headed  by an Australian Defence Force medical expert. The Shadow Immigration  Minister Richard Marles joins us now to speak on that and other issues, Richard  Marles good morning.

RICHARD MARLES: Good morning Marius, how are you?

JOURNALIST: Good, what’s your response to this decision to disband IHAG?

RICHARD MARLES: Well I think this is a concerning decision, this is a body  which provides independent advice about health matters within the immigration  system, within detention facilities. I think given the Amnesty report that came  out last week, the timing of this decision is astounding and the decision itself is  very concerning. This is a mechanism that the Government needs to make sure  that it can maintain appropriate health standards throughout the immigration  detention system and I think it’s an extraordinary decision.

JOURNALIST: Working a little in the dark because the Government hasn’t  actually explained or even announced formally the decision, but we understand  from reports that the body IHAG will be replaced by the former head of the Joint

Health Command in the Defence Force, Dr Paul Alexander, he’ll become the sole  independent health adviser to the immigration department according to a report  in The Age. Is he not a suitable person for that role?

RICHARD MARLES: Well working in the dark is something we’ve all become  used to since September 7 - the Government is not providing us with the kind of  information that we would want, and it makes it difficult to answer the question  you’ve asked. But there appears to be real questions about whether or not there  is going to be more independence or less, as a result of the decision that’s been  made and whether there will be more transparency or less as a result of a  decision that’s been made.

And really what we need to see is the Government coming clean on this and  explaining why they are doing what they’re doing, what the purpose of it is and  where the former body was failing in the eyes of the Government. But this move  in light of the report that came out from Amnesty last week about the state of  affairs on Manus I think is a very concerning move indeed. And we’d be the first  to acknowledge that maintaining, getting the standards right in detention  facilities is a difficult question but that’s of course exactly why you need a body  of this kind to make sure that there is that advice coming through to  Government and there is a check and a balance within the system to made sure  that the standards are maintained.

JOURNALIST: You said their standards are hard to maintain in fact is it a fair  criticism that some would make that the Labor Party is not in a position to make  any criticism of the Government because of the level of criticism from  humanitarian groups during your own term in the way you dealt with asylum  seekers kept offshore?

RICHARD MARLES: Well it’s exactly why I frame the criticism in the way that I  do because I think that it is exactly because of the difficulties in making sure that  you get standards right that you need bodies of this kind in place and that’s why  I feel the timing of this decision is astounding and if we are seeing a  downgrading in the independent advice which is being providing to Government  about maintaining health standards within the detention system, well then that is  an extraordinary decision to make because it is precisely because of the  difficulties in getting this right that you need those bodies in place.

JOURNALIST: Richard Marles to another issue, the Prime Minister yesterday  said it was high time that Indonesia resumed co-operation on people smuggling  operations and he expressed some impatience with that. Is it not an appropriate  thing for the Prime Minister to say that, you’ve been critical of what you’re calling  megaphone diplomacy which he accused the Labor Party of engaging in?

RICHARD MARLES: Well he did accuse the Labor Party of engaging in  megaphone diplomacy and since coming to office that’s exactly the method that  he has taken up in the way in which he relates to Indonesia, it’s breathtaking,  and in that sense it’s totally inappropriate to go down this path. I cannot imagine  how his comments yesterday are going to help the situation of repairing the co-operation which needs to exist between Australia and Indonesia around asylum  seekers.

From the outset, the Coalition has put in place policies which the Indonesian  Government has expressly stated that they feel make no sense at all, which  would require their co-operation to have any hope of success, turning back the  boats, buying boats in Indonesia, all making no sense at all without co-operation  from Indonesia and yet here we’ve had a Government seeking to dictate terms.  And now we’ve got Tony Abbott once again, not for the first time, engaging in  megaphone diplomacy and using the media as the means by which he’s trying to  get Indonesia to do his bidding. This is amateur hour on the part of the  Government and really if we’re going to see a repairing in this relationship, they  need to grow up in the way in which they go about their diplomacy with  Indonesia and get this right.

JOURNALIST: Richard Marles thank you very much.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: SOPHIE ANDREW 0401 443 524





