Senator the Hon. Michael Ronaldson

Shadow Minister for Veterans’ Affairs

Transcript - Interview with Fiona Parker of ABC Central Victoria Mornings  regarding asylum seeker policy



28 February 2013

Subject: Bendigo electorate, asylum seeker policy, immigration policy

E&OE

Presenter: We’re joined now by Michael Ronaldson who is a Liberal Party senator for Victoria. Good morning,

Michael.

Ronaldson: Morning, Fiona.

Presenter: Why is the Liberal Party playing wedge politics in Bendigo?

Ronaldson: Well, I don’t think we are playing wedge politics. Indeed, Sue Nuttall from Rural Australians for

Refugees acknowledged yesterday that the statistics in the flyer are indeed correct. There have been some

42,000 arrivals since the Labor Party came into power, some 546 boats. The cost blow outs of that is nearly

$7,000 million.

Presenter: We’ve already said the facts are correct, in terms of the figures used in the flyer from the Minister for

Home Affairs and the Australian Customs and Border Protection Service. But the words “illegal boat arrivals”,

isn’t that inflammatory language and isn’t that playing wedge politics?

Ronaldson: These boats are illegal. In fact, there is a case going on in Indonesia at the moment with one of these

insidious people smugglers, who have been responsible for multiple deaths on the seas, has been charged

accordingly. These boats are illegal.

Presenter: But you’re only talking about the boats. Can you see how some people might think you’re talking

about the people on the boats being here illegally when it’s not illegal to seek asylum?

Ronaldson: But, Fiona, you’ve seen the brochure. It quite clearly says ‘Labor’s illegal boat arrivals’, so…

Presenter: Can you see how some people wouldn’t, you know, think that deeply, that you’re not talking about the

people on the boats?

Ronaldson: Well, I can see how some people who want to play politics with this will try to interpret it as something

other than it is, but it quite clearly says. Look, I think that Sue Nuttall yesterday said that the statistics are right

clearly indicated, in our view, that she agrees with us that people are entitled to know the facts about these failed

border protection policies..

Presenter: But when you add in the language and the unflattering photograph of Prime Minister Julia Gillard, can

you see, you know - you’ve got the facts but then you’re adding something else to the facts? You’re not just

presenting the facts, are you, you’re presenting an opinion with them?

Ronaldson: Fiona, it just states the facts. The brochure states the facts. Nearly 32,000 people, nearly $7,000

million cost blow-out. I am sure your listeners would view that sort of money, which impacts on the ability of the

Federal government to fund schools, hospitals, roads throughout Bendigo, are deeply concerned. I know that the

Liberal Party candidate for Bendigo, Greg Bickley, who has been doorknocking on a regular basis, is constantly

getting feedback from people that they are sick and tired of this money being redirected away from local schools

and roads and hospitals. This is a real issue - this brochure did nothing more and nothing less than tell people

the actual facts.

Presenter: Why doesn’t the brochure mention the Liberal Party in it?

Ronaldson: It’s authorised by Damien Mantach, who is actually the State Director, not the State President, and

104 Exhibition Street is Liberal Party headquarters…

Presenter: …so in other words Liberal Party (inaudible)…

Ronaldson: 104 Exhibition Street is Liberal Party headquarters. There has been no attempt at all to hide the fact

that this is from the Liberal Party. Exhibition Street is well known as party headquarters…

Presenter: …not by everyone. You don’t think not mentioning it is making it conspicuous by its absence?

Ronaldson: I don’t think it does.

Presenter: It doesn’t look like the Liberal Party doesn’t want us to know who put it together?

Ronaldson: I’m on your show today and I’m quite up front about the fact that, yes, it was the party that produced

it. We produced it on the back of some real concern about the cost blow-outs and also concerns about the quite

remarkable comments of Lisa Chesters, the Labor Party candidate, who was calling for a return to onshore

processing. The impact of this would effectively just open our borders. The cost blow-out would make the $7,000

million we have already had pale into insignificance.

I just want to quote comments from the Prime Minister last year when this new legislation went through. She said:

“Today the House has put in place arrangements for offshore processing. Today the House has done what the

Australian people have wanted us to do for a long time.” Ms Chesters is suggesting that we completely open our

borders up. She is suggesting that the cost blow outs, which will impact on schools and roads and hospitals in the

Bendigo district, doesn’t matter. She’s just prepared to open our borders up and I don’t think that any of your

listeners would accept that as a proper policy proposal.

Presenter: Will we see more of these types of flyers in our letterboxes in the lead up to the election?

Ronaldson: I’m sure, as you know, in an election campaign there is a variety of material put out by political

parties. The important thing about this brochure is that it’s just providing people with the facts. We don’t make any

apology for giving people the facts about such a serious issue.

Presenter: Senator Michael Ronaldson, thank you for joining us.

Ronaldson: Thanks very much.



