THE HON BRENDAN O’CONNOR MP  MINISTER FOR EMPLOYMENT  MINISTER FOR SKILLS AND TRAINING

E&OE TRANSCRIPT  SKY NEWS  AM AGENDA  TUESDAY, 23 JULY 2013

TOPICS: POLLS, PNG ARRANGEMENT, PARTY REFORM, PAID PARENTAL LEAVE

KIERAN GILBERT: And joining me this morning the Employment Minister, Brendan O'Connor, to  discuss the Newspoll and other news of the day.

Mr O'Connor, thanks very much for your time.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: That's all right.

KIERAN GILBERT: First of all, Martin O'Shannessy from Newspoll says that the Rudd honeymoon  is over, that the bounce now has levelled out. What do you say?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Well, look, I mean I don't go through the analysis of the pollsters, but you  can feel that there's been a shift. And I think it's clear that the Government and the Prime  Minister has been presenting, I think, a positive plan for Australia's future. And I think the  election's contestable, and that's a very important thing.

I think that we need to ensure that there is a proper plan. We've got a good record but, most  importantly, we have a positive plan for the future. And that's made clear, I think, by the Prime  Minister each and every day.

KIERAN GILBERT: One number here says that Labor's up six points in terms of managing the  issue of asylum seekers - still well behind the Coalition though. So it's far from fully neutralised  the issue, hasn't it, that PNG announcement?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Look, the PNG agreement is, in fact, I think, a very good piece of public  policy in a very, very difficult area. And I think for that reason the public understand that there's  been good movement on this very difficult challenging issue.

Now, you compare that with the simplistic slogans of the Opposition and, of course, it exposes  the fact that the leader of the Opposition, Tony Abbott, has a slogan and no plan. He has no  undertakings with any other sovereign nation. He has no agreement and, of course, his  arrangement, or his proposal, with Indonesia is, in fact, rejected by Indonesia.

So there's no doubt - the fact that the Prime Minister has managed to strike an agreement with  the Prime Minister of PNG has not only been a very good thing in sending a very powerful  message to people not to endanger their lives at sea, it sends a powerful message to people  smugglers who are doing - effectively, committing criminal offences. But it also, I think, exposes  the Opposition for not having a real plan.



KIERAN GILBERT: Mr O'Connor, do you think though that you might lose some support on the  left with Kevin Rudd's disapproval rating up five points in today's Newspoll? It looks like he's lost  a bit of gloss. Is there an issue there on the left of the party; those that think you've gone too  hard on this issue? Certainly, the Greens believe you have. Others - protesters, Labor members  out there at Balmain yesterday - believed you had.

Do you think you might lose a few votes, even though you might gain a few?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Look, I do understand people may find it difficult to accept that these  things have to happen. But it is absolutely - it's an absolute abrogation of our responsibility as a  Government if we do not consider the potential loss of life at sea.

We've had hundreds of people die. Now, you cannot just wish that away and then suggest we  don't have to get into some really, you know, difficult decision making and enter into  undertakings with another country. And I don't accept that this is a left or right issue. That  dichotomy - it doesn't work and apply in this area.

We have millions of people around the world that are displaced. We have people dying at sea  trying to come to our shores. We have a responsibility as a Government to make sure that stops.  And we also, at the same time, Kieran, have a responsibility under the Refugee Convention to  help people settle in Australia. We want to do that. We have 20,000 places for genuine  refugees. That's one of the most generous settlement and humanitarian programs in the world.  But at the same time we cannot turn a blind eye to people dying at sea. And this arrangement  with PNG...

KIERAN GILBERT: Were you - did you think it needs discussing?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: ...I believe - and I know this as a former Immigration Minister...

KIERAN GILBERT: You were the Minister though, yes. That's what I want to ask about because  you were the Minister...

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: ...and a former Home Affairs Minister - let me just say I've been in two  portfolios. I've seen the deaths up close. I saw infants dying. I've seen children - corpses of  infants and men and women placed in temporary morgues on Christmas Island in December

2010. Nobody has to convince me we have to find a way to stop the deaths at sea.

This, I think, is one of our best chances yet. And I think the Prime Minister and Minister Burke  should be applauded for their efforts, as should the Prime Minister of PNG.

KIERAN GILBERT: You were the most recent Immigration Minister before Tony Burke. Did you -  did these talks begin under your watch? Or is this something entirely - that's been generated  since the return of Mr Rudd?



BRENDAN O'CONNOR: The agreement between PNG has been struck between the Prime  Ministers of both countries. And Prime Minister Rudd and, indeed, Prime Minister O'Neill,  deserve the credit in forging that agreement. Agencies may provide advice all the time in what

we might be able to do, but it has to be realised through an agreement. And to that extent this  agreement, of course, has been realised through the efforts of the Prime Ministers of both  countries.

KIERAN GILBERT: Okay. The Labor Party met yesterday, signed off on party reform. Not all were  convinced - Stephen Conroy and the Defence Minister, Stephen Smith, expressing their concerns  during those meetings. But what was their worry about the change? Obviously, Kevin Rudd had  made clear his position. What were the concerns expressed yesterday?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Well, the Prime Minister also made clear - said this was a free vote. This  was a vote and people should be able to debate this matter freely. The caucus and - every  caucus member has a right to discuss the future rules of the caucus. And that's what happened  yesterday. That's democracy in action. And the fact is Senator Conroy and Stephen Smith may  have different views, but the fact is they - those views were expressed in the debate. The caucus  made a decision, and all caucus members will go forward accepting that decision.

KIERAN GILBERT: And finally, on the paid parental leave issue, the Greens are backing the  Coalition plan on this. It's much more generous than the Government. Is it time for the Labor  Party to get on board and to upgrade your program?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: This is just the third occasion I can recall that the Greens and the Liberal  Party have got together. They got together to stop a company tax cut. They got together to stop  the Malaysian arrangement. And now they're getting together to bring in what is an expensive  imposition; basically, a company tax, a tax on the companies which will filter down to the  consumers. That is irresponsible. It's not fiscally sound and we would not - we reject that  approach. But it doesn't surprise me to see the Greens and Tony Abbott agree again.

KIERAN GILBERT: Many other countries do it though in the OECD. There are many developed  countries that have full wage replacement schemes.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: What we don't see happening is imposing a tax on companies the way  that Tony Abbott has chosen to do so. So what we're seeing is Coles and Woolies having a tax  placed on them. They're going to pass that cost down to the consumers, to their customers. And  therefore, for that reason, that's why Tony Abbott cannot find a friend for this policy in his own  party. He has to find a friend in the Greens Party because his own colleagues don't support it.  Try and find someone, Kieran, that supports that policy in the Liberal Party today other than  Tony Abbott.

KIERAN GILBERT: Brendan O'Connor, thanks for your time.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Thanks, Kieran.

