





Campaign Transcript



TRANSCRIPT OF FOREIGN MINISTER, SENATOR BOB CARR IN DEBATE  WITH JULIE BISHOP  ABC BROADCAST OF LOWY INSTITUTE FOREIGN POLICY DEBATE  SYDNEY

7 AUGUST 2013

E & O E - PROOF ONLY  _____________________________________________________________



Subjects: Australia’s foreign policy   _____________________________________________________________



NEWSREADER: Hello, I'm Jo McDiarmid. As part of our Australia Votes coverage  we're taking you to the Lowy Institute in Sydney, where Foreign Minster, Bob Carr,  and his Opposition counterpart, Julie Bishop, are about to engage in a foreign policy  debate. The pair will give introductory remarks then answer a series of questions.  The debate simulcasts on the Australia Network and ABC News Radio. Let's go  there now.

MICHAEL FULLILOVE: The debate is being televised live on ABC News 24 and Sky  News. We encourage people here in the room at Bligh Street and at home to join the  Twitter conversation as Tony Jones would say, using the hash tag FP debate.

Ladies and gentlemen, the Institute is Australia's leading think tank, independent and  non-partisan, our role is to generate and disseminate high quality research and  perspectives on the trends shaping Australia and the world. Our job is to deepen  Australia's national conversation with the world. And in that context, I was delighted  to announce this morning that former US Assistant Secretary of State, Kurt  Campbell, will be joining the Institute later this year as our inaugural Distinguished  International Fellow.

Another way we can contribute to the national conversation is by hosting this  evening's debate. Ladies and gentlemen, a couple of introductory remarks. Australia  is now a member of the world's two most important economic and political forums -  the G20 and the Security Council. This gives Australia a new prominence in global  affairs and new opportunities to realise our prosperity and our security.

But membership of these institutions will also test us as a country. Our political and  our business leaders and our Government officials will need to engage on a much  broader range of global issues at a higher level and at a faster pace than they have

ever done before. Above all, to justify our place at the top table, Australia will need  big ideas. And tonight, we hope to hear some of those big ideas.

Let me introduce our speakers and panellists before explaining the rules of the  debate. Senator, the Honourable Bob Carr is the Minister for Foreign Affairs, a  position to which he was appointed in March 2012. From 1995 to 2005, he was the  Premier of New South Wales.

The Honourable Julie Bishop MP is the Deputy Leader of the Opposition and the  Shadow Minister for Foreign Affairs. She was formerly a cabinet minister in the  Howard Government.

We also have three distinguished panellists with us this evening to pose the  questions to our two speakers - Jane Hutcheon is the host of the interview program  One Plus One on ABC News 24. Jane was a long-standing ABC foreign  correspondent reporting from China, the Middle East and the United Kingdom.

Paul Kelly is the editor at large of The Australian. Paul was previously editor in chief  of The Australian and a visiting fellow at the Lowy Institute.

Finally, Rory Medcalf is the Director of the International Security Program here at the  Institute. He is a former Australian diplomat and journalist. Thank you to both our  debaters and our panellists for joining us.

Ladies and gentlemen, the evening's debate will run according to the following rules  to which both sides have agreed. Just before we came out we flipped a coin to  determine the speaking order. Ms Bishop won the toss, she will speak first and  Senator Carr will speak last in the debate.

Both speakers will begin with five minutes of introductory remarks before we turn to  questions from the panel. Neither the speakers nor their advisers have seen the  questions in advance. There will be a total of six questions, the debate will close with  three minutes of concluding remarks from each speaker. Let me say that strict time  limits have been set for each answer. For each question from the panel, the speaker  will have a three-minute response to be followed by a rebuttal of three minutes from  the other speaker and then a further one minute reply from the original speaker.

Ms Bishop, Senator Carr, with 15 seconds to go there will be a chime to alert you  that your time is nearly up. [Bell rings] And that's the chime. Isn't it great when  technology works. Thank you, Kate. When you hear that chime, please wrap up  within 10 or 15 seconds. If you speak beyond 15 seconds a long hook will emerge  from the curtains and pull you off stage.

And so to begin, I would like to ask Ms Bishop to make her opening remarks. Ms  Bishop, what are the three things that you would like to achieve as Foreign Minister  in the next term of the Parliament should the Coalition win office? You have five  minutes.

JULIE BISHOP:  The Coalition's foreign policy is designed to project and protect our  reputation as a strong and stable and prosperous nation and our values as an open

Liberal  democracy. Our strategy will be based on economic diplomacy, a practical  approach to align our foreign policy with our national economic interests. This will  mean harnessing our foreign policy assets and our presence overseas to enhance  our trade and our investment opportunities, to grow our economy.

We will seek to draw all arms of Government, wherever possible, to a single focus on  promoting Australia's strategic interests. The Department of Foreign Affairs and  Trade will be the lead agency in coordinating our international engagement across all  levels and all departments, so that our efforts in trade, investment, immigration,  tourism, education, foreign aid, for example, will all be consistent and aligned to our  strategic goals.

Ideally, Australia's overseas representation in all of these areas will be consolidated  into one location - a team Australia approach, if you like. And that will be a hallmark  of our presence overseas. This will include reviewing our diplomatic footprint to  ensure that it reflects the shifts in global strategic and economic weight. And as the  Lowy Institute itself points out, Australia has the smallest diplomatic network of the  G20 nations.

Priority will be placed on developing economic skills and experience amongst the  relevant Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade staff, and we will look for  measured outcomes, rewarding performance in pursuit of our foreign policy and  economic goals. And this strategy will be in partnership with Australian businesses  and with foreign investors.

We are a global nation with global interests, but increasingly our focus will be on our  region. The Indian Ocean, the Asia Pacific, for Australia's standing in the world is at  its highest when our influence in our region is at its strongest. Our enduring alliance  with the United States will be and continue to be the bedrock of our defence and  strategic framework and our significant economic relationship with the United States  is underpinned by the Australia/US free trade agreement signed by the Howard  Government.

However, our economic interests are increasingly focused on the growing economies  to our west and North - the Indian Ocean, Asia Pacific. And it will be a first order  priority of a Coalition Government to conclude free trade agreements with China,  South Korea, Japan, India, Indonesia, amongst others. We will establish a network of  bilateral and regional free trade agreements to establish new markets and enhance  existing markets for our producers, our exporters and manufacturers. We are  currently losing market share to our competitors who have been very active in  signing up free trade agreements with our major trading partners.

We are aware of the need to broaden and deepen and diversify our engagement in  the region and we will build on existing relationships. But I know, as a managing  partner in the 1990s of a law firm that sought to work with law firms across the Asia  Pacific to assist our clients do business in the region, I know how important long  lasting relationships are and that they must be built on mutual respect.

As a cabinet minister with the education portfolio when international education  became our third largest export item, I'm deeply aware that our relationships in the

region have to have mutual benefits. That's why under a Coalition Government we  will establish a signature initiative. We've dubbed it the new Colombo Plan, which will  be an opportunity for young Australians to undertake study in the region. As the  original Colombo Plan brought the best and brightest to Australia to study in the  region, we want to give our young people the opportunity to live and work overseas,  understand another language, understand the culture and bring back those  perspectives to Australia.

FULLILOVE:  Thank you Ms Bishop.

And now I invite Senator Carr for his five minute introductory remarks. Senator, I ask  you the same question I put to Ms Bishop - what are the three things you'd like to  achieve as Foreign Minister in the next term, should the Labor Government be re-elected?

BOB CARR: First Michael, let me congratulate the Opposition on giving us  bipartisan support on our policy on Afghanistan. We're 1,550 Australian Defence  Force personnel in that country, it has been crucial that their presence is not being  subject to partisan dispute back in Canberra.

Priority number one: building on our relationships in Asia and with our Pacific island  partners. I was - early in my time as Foreign Minister -  I was in Naypyidaw speaking  to President Thein Sein. I said to him Australia will lift - not simply leave suspended -   our sanctions on Myanmar. We recognise the transition in that Government is  proceeding at pace. And I said I like the attitude of our 10 ASEAN neighbours to  engagement with Myanmar and we will follow.

There is a practical example of Australia working in the spirit of the Asia White  Paper. We were - it was appropriate to do so - aligning our foreign policy with the  thinking of the 10 increasingly resilient and prosperous nations to our north.

With China, I was honoured to be there in April when former Prime Minister Gillard  spoke to President Xi and Premier Liu and sealed a strategic partnership, which  means annual meetings of our leadership. A relationship with China, fundamentally  important to this country, is very sound.

Indonesia has our biggest concentration of diplomats, it's our biggest aid program.  The level of collaboration on counter-terrorism is crucial to this country's security.  And we're concentrating our efforts on looking at the political transition that will take  place there next year.

On India, we've resolved the one big question in the Australia-India relationship,  which was Australia being able to sell them uranium. That's what they sought from  us, that's what we've delivered. We don't forget our long term friends Japan and  South Korea with which our relationship is so robust, our understanding running so  deep.

Australia in the Asian Century, realising the shift of economic gravity to the region to  our north, is crucial to our future. Second, building on our multilateralism. In our  board room in New York last year I spoke to 14 nations from the Caribbean and I

asked for their vote for the UN Security Council seat. The permanent representative  of Granada said we like Australia, we like your attitude on protecting the marine  environment, which was music to my ears. She said we like the Australian approach  on climate change. We're working with you on an arms trade treaty, and that support  you gave us, to the monument for the trans-Atlantic slave trade, which you've  confirmed in your address Mr Foreign Minister, we like that, but we expected no less  from a country with an ethical basis for its policies as confirmed by The Apology.  Capital T, capital A, The Apology.

That's a Caribbean country a long way from Australia. But our character as a nation  meant a great deal to those 14 island states. Australia on the Security Council has  intensified pressure on Iran to abandon its nuclear weapons program in partnership  with our friends, our colleagues on the Council. We pressured North Korea to  abandon its missile [audio skip] programs. This is all work in the multilateral arena,  as it is in Geneva.

Tony Abbott says we'll do less of Geneva. But hang on, it was at Geneva where we  worked with other nations to get an international inquiry into human rights in North  Korea. And at Geneva where we persuaded nations to accept Michael Kirby as the  head of that inquiry. With a quarter of a million people in concentration camps in  North Korea, that's good work, in Geneva, in a multilateral forum.

As host of the G20 in 2014 we'll have an opportunity to build on this. And here's my  third proposition - that is, that we should build deeper, and reinforce the habits of,  consultation both globally and in our region. I mentioned how we consulted ASEAN  over attitudes towards Myanmar and aligned Australia's thinking with those of the 10  members of ASEAN.

Let me talk about consultation with the US, our most important strategic relationship  of course, a fundamental pillar of our national security for a long time. The AUSMIN  consultations with secretaries Clinton and Panetta in Perth in November last year  underscored how deeply the habit of consultation with the US has become ingrained.  And how deep the trust is on both sides.

And I want to pick up a theme to apply to Australia's relationships, it's this one, and  sometimes we as Australians fall down on it, but we should always aspire to meet it.  Habits of consultation. With those Asian nations so increasingly important to us, with  the nations we work with in multilateral fora, like the Security Council and of course  with an old friend like the US.

FULLILOVE: Thank you for those introductory remarks and now to the panel. The  first question to Ms Bishop is from Jane Hutcheon. Jane?

JANE HUTCHEON:  Shadow Minister, the Government's Asian Century White Paper  gives the impression that the future of this region is one of prosperity and peace but  the reality could be quite different. Kevin Rudd has described the security tensions  between China and some of its neighbours as a tinderbox.



Apart from the obvious discussion about greater engagement in the region, what do  you see are the key challenges if these rosy scenarios that have been painted in the

Asian Century don't pan out? And what should Australia do to prepare for these less  than rosy scenarios?

JULIE BISHOP: The challenges will be economic and strategic. And whenever there  is a strategic shift in the weight of global power around the world, tensions arise. And  we are aware that many feel that the US-China relationship, and managing that, will  be one of the challenges of the future.

The growing economies of Asia have made many countries around the world  dependent upon their increased growth. China is now the largest trading partner for  about 120 countries around the world, including the United States and Australia.

And so managing the growth of China and managing the US-China relationship, the  Russia-US relationship, because Russia is now asserting itself as an Asia-Pacific  power. And the tensions that invariably arise between other nations in our region will  be one of the major challenges. I believe that China has far too much to lose, far too  much at stake to do anything other than to rise peacefully, as it has been doing in the  past. And I believe that Australia can continue to be a consultative partner in the  region and be an important player in ensuring that the interests of our global friends  are aligned and continue to operate in the interests of peace, prosperity and stability  in the region. I believe it can be and will be achieved.

FULLILOVE: Thank you, Ms Bishop. Senator Carr you also have three minutes.

BOB CARR:  One, work quietly to manage the territorial disputes in the region to the  extent we can. That means encouraging, supporting ASEAN, working towards a  code of conduct and to persuade China that a code of conduct is in China's interest.

And that's managing the disputes while they exist, while they're unresolved.  And two, working on a settlement of the disputes. Here is the approach I like, and  that is that Australia should be saying quietly, not in any bossy, intervening fashion,  because that is unacceptable to both sides, but saying quietly there is merit in setting  aside the dispute over sovereignty. Setting it aside and striking an agreement to  develop the resources in dispute and to split the proceeds.

There are three precedents in South-East Asia for resource sharing agreements and  one in Antarctica. I believe that offers an approach that means these intractable  disputes on which we take no side, of course, but these intractable disputes that do  threaten, that are a threat to the peace and wellbeing of the region, can be placed in  one corner. While to the benefit of the economy of East Asia you see a development  of the resources in dispute.

I think a great deal of the region will depend on whether China develops as a nation,  educated about the rest of the world and quietly confident in its own judgments and  working with multilateral institutions. Or a China that becomes insular and even  paranoid and therefore over-assertive. And we have got an interest in continuing and  deepening our engagement with China to achieve, to the extent we can influence it,  a happier outcome.

FULLILOVE:  Ms Bishop, you have one minute for reply if you'd like it.

JULIE BISHOP: Yes. I don't believe that the current tensions between China and  Japan over the Senkaku-Diaoyu Islands will escalate. There is a chance of a  miscalculation and that's the kind of scenario that we must be wary of, but I believe  that this is why many nations in our region are looking for more United States  leadership in the region, not less. And I believe Australia does have a role to play as  a member of the forums, the East Asia forum, the ASEAN forums, to ensure that  dialogue and diplomacy remains the order of the day.

FULLILOVE: Thank you, Ms Bishop. Back to the panel. The second question to  Senator Carr is from Paul Kelly.

PAUL KELLY: Question to the Foreign Minister. Australia as a nation seems to be  solving its border protection problems by exporting asylum seekers from outside our  region to the Pacific States of Papua New Guinea and Nauru to settle on a long term  or permanent basis. How wise, responsible and tenable is it for Australia to  financially sponsor the settlement of large numbers of Muslims into these Pacific  societies that are so profoundly different, with high risk of social troubles, tensions  and potential strategic and security problems?

BOB CARR: Paul, I don't believe it will be large numbers and I say that because I  believe this shock will stop people paying $16,000 to people smugglers based in  Tehran because they know they will no longer be able to get to Australia. I believe  the numbers will dry up. It won't happen, as the Prime Minister has kept saying,  within days, won't happen within weeks, but it will stop. It might stop in some fits and  starts but it will stop.

People simply will not hand over $10,000, $16,000 to a people smuggler if they know  they are going to be processed and resettled in Nauru or Manus Island. That's the  value of this. That's why our neighbours in the Pacific eager to help Australia and  alarmed by all the evidence of this human trafficking have stepped forward and said  it's actually in our interest to do this.  So I don't believe that unattractive scenario you have sketched will emerge. I believe  the deterrent effect of this will be forceful. And I just say to people who have  criticised it, whether from a humanitarian angle or a different angle, just consider  what else serves to provide the short, sharp shock to people smuggling activity that  this is designed to achieve.

FULLILOVE: Thank you. Ms Bishop, you have three minutes on that question.

JULIE BISHOP: This is Labor's greatest policy failing and it is the greatest policy  failure in recent memory. In fact, the moment Kevin Rudd unpicked the Howard  Government laws that had dismantled the people smuggling trade and had stopped  the boats and then cleared the people who had arrived by boat through our detention  networks, we have seen 50,000 people arrive, over 1,000 deaths at sea, and that's  just the unofficial figures. We don't know the official figures. And a billion upon billion  dollar blowout in our detention network budgets.

This is Australia's problem. It took a change of laws in Australia to create the  problem. It will take a change of laws in Australia to solve the problem. And Labor  have subcontracted out our border protection and our asylum seeker visa framework

to other countries. They tried it with East Timor, embarrassingly didn't contact the  appropriate people in the East Timor Government. They tried it with the Malaysian  Solution which was found to be unconstitutional, illegal by our High Court. They've  tried it with Manus Island. They try it with Nauru. And as Foreign Minister Kubobola  of Fiji has said recently, and as the Solomon Islands have made clear, the Pacific  Islands do not appreciate this unilateral action that will affect their society, their  economic and cultural wellbeing.

And it is a fact that for Labor to demand of PNG and Nauru that they permanently re-settle the asylum seekers, then that will cause massive challenges in the Pacific. I do  not believe that Labor have even thought through the impact of this policy.

The communiquÃÂ© that Kevin Rudd signed with Indonesia not so long ago pledged  not to take unilateral action and then two weeks later he took unilateral action by  announcing this PNG proposal which impacts on Indonesia and other countries in  the region. It didn't go through the Bali process. So Australia's reputation is suffering  badly under the last six years of Labor's mismanagement and chaotic and  dysfunctional approach and inconsistent approach to border protection and asylum  seeker policy.

We have promised a no surprises policy. We have promised to reinstate the Howard  Government laws that worked and we will bring together all arms of government to  ensure that we dismantle the people smuggling trade and we stop the boats so that  we don't have to impose upon our friends, our dear friends in the Pacific, in PNG and  elsewhere, by forcing them to permanently re-settle asylum seekers.

FULLILOVE: Senator Carr, one minute.

BOB CARR: Well, of course, Tony Abbott says he won't change the policy. Tony  Abbott has said the agreement with PNG stays in place. And two other corrections -  one is that PNG and Nauru have opted to be part of the regional re-settlement  arrangement. It's their choice and they did so to help Australia and to achieve a  regional resolution to a real problem: the growth in people smuggling.

The second correction is far from disconcerting Indonesia, Indonesia recognises it  was entirely legitimate for Australia to seek this understanding and Indonesia is  collaborating with us by hosting a conference on August 20, in Jakarta, of which I'll  be present to discuss further regional action on what is a regional problem.

FULLILOVE: Thank you, Senator. Now to the third question from Rory Medcalf to  Ms Bishop.

RORY MEDCALF: Ms Bishop, it's interesting that the main mention of Indonesia in  tonight's debate so far has been about boats, about a, I guess, a short-term  transactional challenge in the relationship, if you can put it that way. Now, this is a  country that is increasingly important in the Asian economic and strategic order,  indeed globally important. It's our near neighbour. At the same time the opinion  polling conducted by the Lowy Institute shows a pretty extraordinary, I guess, degree  of misapprehension and misunderstanding, misperception about Indonesia in this  country.



For example, only one in three Australians realise Indonesia is a democracy which is  a pretty extraordinary result. Do you think that the Government has missed an  opportunity to build a truly deep and lasting relationship that goes beyond this kind of  transactional relationship leaping from one crisis to another and what can be done to  fix this?

JULIE BISHOP: The Coalition has already stated that our foreign policy priorities will  include broadening and deepening our relationship with Indonesia. In fact we believe  it is one of our most significant relationships. We are concerned about our trading  relationship. A country of 245 million people, yet New Zealand with 4.5 million people  has a greater trading relationship with Australia than we have with Indonesia. That's  why we want a free trade agreement.

The new Colombo Plan, which is a new era of soft diplomacy, soft power diplomacy  in our region will be focused on ensuring Indonesia is one of the first countries to opt  into our plan so that we can encourage young Australians to study at universities in  Indonesia and the partnership with business will ensure that our young students  study in Indonesia will have an opportunity to work with Australian businesses  operating in Indonesia.

I've had high-level discussions with Indonesia about it and I've received  overwhelming enthusiasm from them, that they see this as a practical way not just a  gesture, a practical way of ensuring that thousands of young Australians have an  experience of living and studying in Indonesia, learning the language, understanding  the culture, coming back to Australia with greater understanding and insights and  perspectives about Indonesia.

We think that it's got to be at a people-to-people level and initiatives such as the new  Colombo Plan, such as greater dialogue between businesses including the free trade  agreement with Indonesia will all help to build a much closer and long lasting  relationship based on mutual respect and trust and understanding.



That's why we have guaranteed to the Indonesian Government that we will adopt a  no surprises approach to our relationship with Indonesia which means that we will  consult with Indonesia. We don't want to see a repeat of the live cattle ban. We don't  want to see a repeat of what's happened in border protection when Labor have  announced East Timor solutions, Malaysia solutions, Nauru solutions - all impacting  on Indonesia but not consulting with them beforehand.

It's all very well for Senator Carr to talk about being consultative. It's what you  actually do and that's why we've given them this guarantee of a no surprises  approach.

FULLILOVE: Senator Carr?

BOB CARR: One hundred and thirty-one senior visits, two-ways, since 2007.  Indonesian leaders coming here, ministers, senior officials or us going there. An  average of one every three weeks. The level of defence co-operation, with police co-

operation, of counter-terrorism is more advanced than it's ever been. We've never  had that level of comfortable co-operation with the Indonesians.

Our biggest concentration of diplomats in the world is not in Washington. It's in  Jakarta. And our aid program is the biggest, and it's relevant. I've been to madrasas  that are being built. Mainstream Islam in line with the policy of the government of  Indonesia being taught as opposed to Saudi madrasas teaching their version,  because of thoughtful Australian aid backing the priorities of the President and his  Government.

On my recent visit I've engaged with people who are the likely presidential  candidates in 2014. We have got dialogues going with them. When I spoke to the  Foreign Affairs Committee of the Indonesian Parliament, every one of the people at  that meeting have a son or daughter studying in Australia, studied in Australia  themselves or have a grandson or granddaughter studying in Australia.

We've already got, of course, that reverse Colombo Plan. It's there, it's existing and  it's funded. It's called Asia Bound. It offers 4000 grants a year for Australians to study  overseas at a cost of $47 million. They exist to get Australians to go there along with  Australia awards that are bringing students to study their masters or their PhD from  Indonesia into Australia, like their Foreign Minister, Marty Natalegawa, who did his  PhD at the ANU, like so many of the people I meet in Indonesian leadership  enjoying, as they see it, a very co-operative relationship with Australia.

Our relationship is in good repair. It's robust. It's sound. It takes into account  Indonesian interests and ours.

FULLILOVE: Ms Bishop, a reply?

JULIE BISHOP: Our new Colombo Plan is designed to be a rite of passage for  young Australians. The norm rather than the exception. Not a couple of thousand  scholarships every now and again, but the norm for young Australians to spend time  living in the region. And I hope that Indonesia will be one of the first countries.



And Senator Carr talks about what's been achieved. Well, I'm concerned by the  results of the Lowy poll and that there is this level of understanding and  misunderstanding, should I say, between Australia and Indonesia, particularly at the  people-to-people and business-to-business level. And we need to adopt what  Foreign Minister Marty Natalegawa has called his idea for a treaty of friendship and  co-operation, that he's talked about, based on trust, communications and managing  our challenges together. And I believe that Australia and Indonesia have a long way  to go but I'm absolutely convinced that the best days of the Australia-Indonesia  relationship lie ahead.

FULLILOVE: Thank you. Jane Hutcheon, your next question is to Senator Carr.

HUTCHEON: Senator Carr, the Australian Government spent at least $24 million  lobbying to secure a seat on the UN Security Council. But this has barely raised our  international profile, nor has the position produced any substantive outcome if we  compare our history before the Security Council seat. That's one-third of the way into

the tenure. Our image abroad is about how hard we work at keeping foreigners away  from our shores. How would you improve Australia's image as a foreign policy  leader, where we punch above our weight in terms of ideas and strategies to solve  global issues, rather than the reality of being a middle-ranking power, happy to  participate, but providing no creative leadership?

BOB CARR: I've really got to dispute that interpretation. Australia is seen as a  creative middle power. In fact the consensus in the forums of the world is that we  decidedly punch above our weight, decidedly. I don't know where you got that  interpretation but I went through it. I mean election to the Security Council is a rough  and ready test. It's not a bad KPI of where you stand and to have 14 nations of the  Caribbean say, hang on, we are a long way from Australia but we like them.

To have every - just about - we find it hard to locate a nation in Africa that didn't  support us. And when Kevin Rudd spoke to the African Union, he stood up and he  said to them we're across Indian Ocean from you but we're not America and we're  not Europe. We're Australia and we have got our own perspective. He got rousing  applause and they voted for it, because they like that approach. They like the  character of Australia in world affairs and they would say you are a creative middle  power. You are a - the Arms Trade Treaty, we're one of the seven original sponsors.  And it was our ambassador, Peter Woolcott, who in the final negotiations got it up,  nailed it down - one of the reasons the Caribbean nations and African nations like  Australia's style in world affairs. We did that.



In Geneva they saw Australia say this is a horror in North Korea. Not only do we lend  our support to an inquiry in human rights there, but we're going to lend you a judge to  see it through. Now that's the Australian image in world affairs. And when it comes to  immigration, stopping people come to Australia, every country in the world has got a  concern with people smuggling, irregular immigration, human trafficking.

So when I phone foreign ministers to say my Prime Minister thinks we ought to have  a conference to look at how the UN Convention on Refugees works in practice, there  was support from Asian and European foreigners, not resistance. Not resistance.  Australia is seen as a creative middle-power. I'm not going to reflect on other nations  and their foreign policy. But I'll tell you what, there are nations that are emerging  powers or pivotal powers or middle-powers that are not seen as creative, as forceful  as Australia.

Winning that debate to get the G20 lending its weight to getting the expansion in the  membership of the East Asia summit - in all those forums, we're seen as a serious  contributor. It doesn't mean you always win. I wanted a medical pact on Syria. There  was reluctance. You know how deadlocked the international community is, the  leadership of the international community is, tragically, on the subject of Syria. But it  doesn't mean you don't fight and when we had meetings of the [indistinct] of Syria, it  was Australia in the front line saying let's get medicine to these wretched people and  let's protect the doctors and nurses and the hospitals in this war torn, devastated  country.

FULLILOVE: Ms Bishop?

JULIE BISHOP: I believe that Australia's image overseas is positive. I think that we  are considered a constructive middle power and our image is of course dependent  on our ability to maintain a strong and stable and prosperous economy. It's  dependent upon the quality of our engagement and how we use our membership of  [indistinct] at a global level. And how we live up to our values that we espouse, our  commitment to our values of freedom and democracy and the rule of law.

If we were elected to government, and I were honoured to be appointed the Foreign  Minister of Australia, I would use our position on the United Nations Security Council  to pursue our strategic goals which include ensuring that our neighbourhood, and by  our neighbourhood in this context I mean the Pacific, is secure and prosperous.

I would use our position there to focus the Security Council's attention on the Pacific,  to show leadership and vision in the Pacific, to ensure that we don't have failed  states in our neighbourhood. As I've said, our standing in the world is at its highest  when our influence in our region is at its strongest. And I fear that in the Pacific our  place has been taken by others and I believe that with a focus from the UN Security  Council, as well as our own far deeper engagement in the Pacific then we will be  achieving what the world expects of us to support our region, our neighbourhood.

FULLILOVE: Senator Carr, one more minute on the Security Council.

BOB CARR: Yeah, I just caution on that last concept. The role of the Security  Council, of course, is to work on peace and security. It's a big step to say you'd take  matters out of the Pacific and lodge them in the Security Council. I don't think our  neighbours in the Pacific, Fiji, Vanuatu, Solomons, PNG would respond happily to an  Australian Foreign Minister saying we have got these issues, we are going to lodge  them as disputes in the Security Council.



JULIE BISHOP: I didn't say that.

BOB CARR: Well it gave strongly the hint that you thought matters out of the Pacific  should go to the Security Council. That's not what the Security Council is there for.  It's there for threats, to handle threats to peace and security. Sending a message to  our neighbours in the Pacific that somehow behaviour or conditions there warrant  reference to the Security Council is a deep concern.

JULIE BISHOP: I didn't say that either.

FULLILOVE:  Ms Bishop, maybe you can respond to that in the next question which  has some similarities. Let me go to Paul Kelly if I can, to ask the next question to Ms  Bishop.

KELLY: My question to the Shadow Foreign Minister. It's about China and the United  States and I might begin by saying that I don't think it's good enough for us to say  that we think everything will be OK. My question is whether we have the  sophistication in our foreign policy to manage future ties with both China and the  United States. I ask, is it your view that Australia's prosperity will become more  dependent on China in the future and that Australia will also become even closer to  the United States in strategic and military terms? If these are both your views and

calculations, can you explain, in credible terms, a policy framework that makes this  viable for Australia? And secondly, how should we prepare for tensions between the  United States and China that might lead to conflict?

JULIE BISHOP: Once more there's an assumption here that the United States and  China will at some point end up in military conflict, and I do not subscribe to that  theory.

I believe that the United States and China are now so interdependent that there is far  too much to lose for them to engage militarily. This is not the Cold War. This is a  completely different scenario where it's a multi-polar world, where the United States  and China have such economic integration that the likelihood of them engaging  militarily is in fact subsiding.

The engagement between the US and China on military exercises is increasing. The  United States and China have a strategic and economic dialogue which they both  take seriously. There are more people in the United States' State Department  focused on the China relationship than we have probably got in all of the Department  of Foreign Affairs and Trade.

So I believe that the United States has a very sophisticated approach to its  engagement with China. I believe that China has a very sophisticated approach to its  engagement with the United States. And of course there will be tensions but I do not  believe that Australia will be asked to choose between our growing economic  reliance on China and our increasing defence ties with the United States.

I know you have a view on this, Paul, I read your article in American Interests  recently. But I do put it in this context - there are other issues where the United  States and China must work together - tensions on the Korean Peninsula, for  example. Concerns over the Middle East, for example. And while they might take  different positions at present, ultimately I believe that we will find a greater level of  co-operation between the United States and China than your question would  suggest.

I do believe, as John Howard said yesterday, that Australia can sensibly, maturely, in  a sophisticated way, manage its relationship with China and its relationship with the  United States. But as I indicated earlier, we should not be putting all our eggs in one  basket, economically speaking. We should be diversifying our trading relationships  between just China.

Nobody's mentioned India - well I did about the free trade agreement. But India is  another player in the global scene, an emerging global economic powerhouse where  Australia must deepen our connection there. So we need to have a much more  diversified approach to our economic underpinnings as well as ensuring that we  engage in the increasing co-operation between the United States and China, for  example, in military and strategic exercises.



And another player in all of this is Russia. As Russia is asserting itself as a Pacific  power, that also must be fed into this equation. But I'm convinced that the United  States and China, being so interdependent, will not gamble losing it all.



FULLILOVE: Senator Carr, I'm going to give you a few extra seconds, if you want to  take them, to even it up.

BOB CARR: Yup. How China expresses its greatness, its re-emergence as a  dominant economy in the world is of course the question here. Will it be an edgy,  anxious, over-assertive China or will it be a China comfortable about its power,  working in all sorts of multilateral fora and engaged and educated about the rest of  the world? Understanding the rest of the world and understanding America most of  all.



I veer to Ms Bishop's optimism, rather than to the implied pessimism of your  question. I believe, as Ms Bishop says, that both sides have got a big stake in  making this relationship work. And when there has been a slide to what might have  been a misunderstanding between China and the US, for example during the  economic and strategic dialogue, both sides did the right thing.

I think we have got to work with ASEAN, we have got to work on a peace - we've got  to work in a spirit of a seeking a peaceful resolution of the disputes that exist, the  territorial disputes that I referred to earlier in the South China and East China Sea.

Resource sharing is a positive contribution that Australia - Australia is sponsoring  work on that. Encouraging the military-to-military co-operation which reduces the risk  of an accidental conflict by local commanders. And, of course, continuing to engage  China so that those pockets of paranoia or nationalism that exist in the Chinese  commentariat can be tested and teased out by the Chinese talking in forums like this  - getting to understand us and our instincts as our knowledge of them deepens.

FULLILOVE: Thank you, Ms Bishop, a reply?

JULIE BISHOP: I believe that the Australia-China dialogue, which has now been  formalised between our Governments, is a great opportunity for Australia and China  to discuss these issues. We have a similar dialogue with the United States

commencing this weekend. Again, Australia plays a useful part in being part of the  dialogue.

I think an example of how the United States and China have managed their  relationship has been the tensions that could have arisen over some diplomatic  issues involving asylum. You recall Bo Xilai's police chief, the blind activist, Mr  Snowden recently. And in all of those instances, both the United States and China  handled the potential for miscalculation or for misjudgement, deftly, maturely and  with a high regard for each other's position.

And those examples are just one amongst many of how the United States and China  have managed their differences and long may that continue to be the case.

FULLILOVE: Thank you. The next question from Rory Medcalf to Senator Carr.

RORY MEDCALF: Thank you. Senator Carr, we have heard some words tonight  about resourcing Australian diplomacy, about providing the diplomacy we need for all

these future challenges. Now as a country, we seem to be spending more and more  taxpayers' money and diplomats' time and energies on consular cases - on  Australians who have got themselves into trouble overseas, sometimes through their  own fault, sometimes not.



We have heard cases of Australians getting in trouble overseas, having to be  evacuated on emergency flights and then asking for frequent flyer points for the  experience. Now at the same time our diplomatic service has, it can be argued, been  starved of resources over the years. It's been stretched and it faces huge challenges  in meeting the kind of agenda we have heard about tonight in advancing Australia's  interests in the world.

Will you commit, here and now tonight, to increasing the resources of the Australian  Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade and providing it with what it needs for the  challenges that lie ahead? And what, in your view, is a sensible limit to the consular  assistance that we provide Australians overseas?

BOB CARR: I'm going to announce shortly a - shall I call it a refinement - in the level  of consular service that Australians are able to seek from overseas posts.

I think they are sensible reforms. They respond to the concern reflected in your  question, that we have got too much diplomatic time being taken up looking after  Australians who in many cases should be taking responsibility for their own safety  and wellbeing.

But there are cases where an Australian in trouble has got a reasonable expectation  that we will insist on them being treated with due process and we will look after their  welfare should they be one of the 600 Australians who were arrested last year  overseas. It's a reasonable expectation, I think.

What is striking is that not every Australian calls for that assistance. There are, last  time I was briefed, about 55 Australians in jail in China. I think we have only heard of  three cases that have punched their way into the media, three cases where families  have been concerned or disaffected with the level of assistance they have received.  There are a lot of Australians in trouble with the law overseas who take it as it  comes.

But you are certainly right, when people were evacuated from Lebanon, it struck me  as being the height of unreasonable expectation - that calling out for the nanny state  - that they turned around and said to a hard working Australian diplomat with his  sleeves rolled up trying to get bundled them onto a plane, will I get frequent flyer  points from this rescue mission?

BOB CARR: That's not the sort of country we imagine ourselves to be. I think we  can lower expectations just a bit.

FULLILOVE: And Senator Carr, on the first part of Rory's question about the  [indistinct] resources.

BOB CARR: Resources? Yeah, look, I'm a spending Minister and I will fight hard to  increase the share that my department gets. In the circumstances we faced in recent  years, it has been tough. With revenues down there is pressure on any department.  We fared well in the last budget. We are expanding diplomatic missions I would like  to expand faster. Expanding in Africa, and I was up there opening a new Australian  Consular General in Chengdu, getting a base in Western China, deeply appreciated  by the Chinese, is going to be of practical assistance for Australians doing business.  I want to see more of that and I will be enlisted with battle with the Treasurer should  we be re-elected to get the resources I need for a department with the aspirations  and the qualities and the talents that DFAT has.

FULLILOVE: Ms Bishop?

JULIE BISHOP: I think it's hard to make generalisations about how consular cases  should be handled overseas. Clearly, on a case by case basis they differ  dramatically. But we do need to manage expectations of Australians travelling  overseas. Many more Australians are travelling overseas to many more countries  and there are now airline services to places unimagined in the past.

So Australians are an adventurous lot. They like to be travelling the world but then  when they get into trouble, they want to have Qantas fly them home. And we have to  manage those expectations about travel insurance, about reading the travel  advisories from the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade, having a realistic  expectation of what your government can do for you when you are overseas. And  particularly some cases where Australians have broken the law according to another  country. There is only so much the Australian Government can do if you have broken  the law according to the laws of that country.

And so managing expectations is a challenge for any government. I don't think it is  helpful for consular cases to be managed at ministerial level through the media.  There may be some instances where media pressure by a Minister is appropriate but  I can't think of too many. And so I think we should be leaving it to our experts, those  trained in this, to do the best they can behind the scenes to assist where appropriate.  But Australians should and can expect a level of support from their Government  should they get into trouble overseas, but we can't solve all problems.

As to the second part of your question, I have committed to a review of Australia's  diplomatic footprint overseas to better reflect our priorities as a nation in the 21st  century. I have spoken also of a realignment of all of our agencies to ensure we have  a more efficient and effective focus on our core mission. That will see efficiencies but  I also think it will see DFAT assume its rightful place as the co-ordinator of our  international engagement overseas. It has lost that status for a number of reasons. A  lot of power and resources has now been put into Prime Minister and Cabinet and  every department, it seems, across government, has an international arm.

What I want to see is DFAT become the lead agency once more, a place where our  best and brightest want to work and stay in DFAT.

FULLILOVE: Senator, a brief reply?

BOB CARR: Yeah. I think we're very well served by DFAT. I don't think there's any  doubt that there are sharp minds and serious thinkers in the Department. In  Government you need coordination. There are other agencies with an interest in the  arguments overseas. We've seen that as we've looked at irregular immigration, and  one thing that struck me in the time, the short time I've been in this post, is the  effectiveness of the National Security Committee of Cabinet. I believe under Prime  Minister Gillard and under Prime Minister Rudd, it is a rigorous but collegial process.

Ethos counts more than structure, in politics or in government. And the ethos around  that committee table works every time. I think Australia can be proud of that. I think it  is effective.

FULLILOVE: We have got through the questions a little quicker than anticipated and  I think we have time to squeeze in one more question to both. So with the permission  of the speakers, I'm going to ask Rory to ask one more question to Ms Bishop and it  will be the same structure as before: first three minutes to Ms Bishop then three  minutes to Senator Carr and then one more minute to Ms Bishop. Rory Medcalf?

MEDCALF: Thanks, Michael. And this is, I guess, at one level a philosophical  question but it goes to much that's been said in the debate tonight. I hear the note of,  I guess, optimism about Australia's future, that I think came through the remarks of  both yourself and Senator Carr. At the same time if you read the kinds of  assessments that are out there in the public domain, for example, the US National  Intelligence Council last year put out a report on the world to 2030 or 2035, talking  about really major changes ahead in global order, whether it's economic changes,  demographic changes, environmental challenges, the strategic order, new  technology, military threats and so on.

I guess what I want to put to you is at what point would you have, I guess, a sense of  urgency about the challenges ahead for Australia and a sense that we can no longer  have a business as usual approach to foreign and external and security policy, and  how would you level with the Australian public about that if you reached that point?

JULIE BISHOP: I think that the indicator would always come back to our economic  security and stability. And if I felt that our economic security and stability was  threatened by some of the scenarios that you have mentioned then that would be a  time to change tack, to do something different, to respond, react.

I hope that the foreign policy direction that I've outlined tonight will ensure that  Australia can avoid that kind of scenario by focusing on economic diplomacy in our  trade and investment requirements by focusing on a new region for us, if I call it the  Indian Ocean, Asia Pacific or the Indo-Pacific, as others call it, or as Tony Abbott  says, more Jakarta, less Geneva, by a new era of soft diplomacy that is exemplified  by a new Colombo Plan.

So I hope that we have the ideas and political will and the political leadership to  ensure that Australia continues to be a strong and prosperous nation and therefore  continue to be an open and liberal democracy.

I think that a very interesting report is the World Bank's Report 2030 on China. After  all, as I mentioned, China is the largest trading partner for over 120 countries around  the world. What happens in China matters globally. And The World Bank says that  even with all its challenges, as long as China continues to grow, even a third as fast  as it has in the past, let's say it's 6.6 per cent over the next 30 years rather than 9.9  per cent as it's done over the last 30 years, then it will still become an enormous  economy that will outstrip the size of the United States by 2030.

The World Bank has set out the challenges that China faces in terms of its domestic  reforms that will be required. Looking at more innovation, more private sector  investment, the debt position at all levels of government, the social reforms, the  open, more unfettered access to opinion that will be required.

So if we look at the challenge from China, for example, even given its challenges  that lie ahead, there's optimism about the strength of its economy. The United States  that some were writing off recently as being in severe and irreversible economic  downturn has bounced back in the last 12 months through its creativity and its  innovation with the shale gas revolution, so-called, which has the potential to  transform the global energy market and rebuild United States manufacturing so that  it is a global powerhouse into the future. Australia benefits from both those  examples.

FULLILOVE: Senator Carr?

BOB CARR: Small population, vast continent, countries with big populations to our  north, no guarantees about their futures. Of course one's got to dwell, as an  Australian, on the strategic challenges. The fall of Singapore, February 1942, is the  darkest day in Australian history. Every day in this job I think: is this country, is this  people going to be secure as we project into the future? Can we make assumptions  about our security?

Here are some goals, here are some ideas that I think feed extra security for  Australia. One is assisting the emergence of 10 resilient economically successful  societies to our north. The nations of ASEAN, the ten nations of ASEAN. Within  ASEAN, for example, seeing the emergence of a zone of prosperity from Assam on  the border of Myanmar through to Yunnan in Southern China, a zone of prosperity,  interconnected, that connectivity that's the big ASEAN thing.

Ten resilient societies - prosperous, stable. A zone of prosperity through Indo-China  - from India to southern China. And a shared strategic understanding, which we are  building, specifically with Indonesia. That's important. And that economic growth and  political maturity of Indonesia is vital as well.

China achieving rich world status by 2049, which is their goal and which they need  all the recommendations out of the World Bank Report to achieve, is vital as well. A  rich China is less likely to take risks and to be subject to desperate nationalistic  pressures.

Our alliance, our strategic alliance with the US, kept in good repair, a month by  month proposition but it's vital to Australians and a secure future and I don't take any

risks with it. Australia Awards, by the way, are seven times bigger than the Colombo  Plan ever was. They're important but they're running stronger and far more  decisively than the old Colombo Plan, bless its heart, ever did. So let's not look at  this with a nostalgic glow - they were good in their day, it's just that what we're doing  now, called the Australia Awards, is seven times bigger.

FULLILOVE: One minute reply Ms Bishop.

JULIE BISHOP: Economic strength is vital to our future security, that's why we're so  critical of the way Labor have mishandled our budget and squandered the  opportunities over the last six years with record debt and record deficit. How this  impacts on our security is evidenced by the fact that we are reliant on the US  Defence and Security umbrella, yet we have been accused of free loading off the  United States because spending on defence has been cut to the lowest level as a  percentage of GDP since 1938, this year 1937.

So we cannot be complacent about the economic challenges that face this country,  that's why we need a change of Government to put our economic credentials back  on track, pay off Labor's debt, again, pay off the deficits again. [Indistinct] back into  surplus so that our economy is strong once more. It leads directly into our security  requirements.



FULLILOVE: Ladies and gentlemen, we have reached a point of debate for  concluding remarks. Ms Bishop and Senator Carr you will have three final minutes  each. And for this final part, can I ask you please to highlight the three main areas  where your policies on international issues differ most clearly from the other sides.  Ms Bishop, you go first please.

JULIE BISHOP: In my introduction I said that I wanted to achieve a focus on  economic diplomacy for our trade and investment opportunities, a focus on our  region, which I defined as the Indian Ocean, Asia Pacific and a focus on a new era of  soft diplomacy exemplified by our New Colombo Plan.

Three areas where I believe we differ dramatically from the Government is our  approach to the distribution of foreign aid. We will make Aid for Trade a cornerstone  of our aid policy. We will put in place benchmarks, performance benchmarks against  which our aid budget, our aid spending will be judged, to ensure that we have the  most efficient and the most effective use of our aid budget and the best value for  money, not only for our taxpayers but for the recipients.

We believe that we should be promoting sustainable economic growth rather than  aid hand outs in the region. Secondly, we are committed to concluding free trade  agreements, free trade agreements with our major trading partners. Foreign policy  will be trade policy, trade policy will be foreign policy. We, of course, will be focusing  on the Indian Ocean, Asia Pacific. That includes the countries such as India, China,  Indonesia, through to the Pacific, including the United States.

But I want us to be the partner of choice for countries in the Pacific. With our great  friends in New Zealand, I believe it's time for us to change the nature of our  engagement in the Pacific, to get away from the stereotypes of aid donor and aid

recipients and have true economic partnerships based on mutual respect and  understanding with the nations of the Pacific.

With Fiji, we will commence the process of re-establishing the relationship with our  wonderful friends, the people of Fiji. We need to have greater recognition in our  region of what we actually do. I was at Samoa's 50th Independent celebrations  recently and you would have thought that the greatest aid donor to Samoa was the  United States, China, followed by Israel. I couldn't see a reference to Australia  anywhere. We need to have a much greater effort at promoting our influence, our  friendships and our connections in the Pacific.



And if I am known for one thing, should I be the Foreign Minister, I hope will be that  we became the partner of choice for Pacific nations.

FULLILOVE: Thank you, Ms Bishop. And now Senator Carr, Ms Bishop got the first  word of the debate so you will have the last word. Three main differences in three  minutes, please.

BOB CARR: Well, we are the partner of choice because every nation in the Pacific  apart from Fiji voted for us in that UN Security Council ballot, and because they look  to Australia. And you've got to be careful about linking aid to trade. When we say we  will wipe out malaria in the Solomon Islands by 2020, it's got nothing to do with trade.  It's got everything to do with rescuing people from a devastated life.



When we say we're going to train midwives in Cambodia, as we do on a big scale, to  drive down the rate of maternal deaths from 500 to 100,000 births, to something  where it is in a developed country, 20 or 10 per 100,000 births, it's Australia doing  the right thing. Australia doing the right thing, because we're a decent country with  decent values and our behaviour overseas reflects that character.



The Opposition is different from us on Palestine because we voted in the UN  proudly, not the block enhanced Palestinian status. We're proud of that and we voted  with old friends like all the Europeans except one, we voted with the UK and we  voted with all the nations of ASEAN, not to see Palestine relegated. Australia would  lose a lot in the Arab world where we do dump that commitment to supporting a  Palestinian state, providing aid which the Opposition has criticised - aid to Palestine  has been criticised. I have been quizzed in the Senate about it and there's no doubt  that that would be withdrawn.

Another difference is Tony Abbott's constant talk of an ‘anglosphere’. An  ‘anglosphere’ offers Australia comfort. But if Tony Abbott were to start talking about  the ‘anglosphere’ as Prime Minister, it would send a message all over the world that  somehow we were retreating to the old Australia and our engagement with all parts  of the world, Asia especially, but Africa, the Caribbeans I spoke about earlier, Latin  America, where we've got big interest, big mining interests, they’re somehow not  highly regarded by us.

To have another Australian Prime Minister speculate or opine about the  ‘anglosphere’ is one thing, but coming from Tony's mouth it raises the prospect that  you're going to have a conservative Prime Minister drawing Australia back to the

certainties of the 1950s. And I don't think Australians want to be cleaning up that  mess.

Family planning - I noticed that one big part of our foreign aid program is to rescue  women and girls by providing support for family planning. It was barely there under  John Howard because of a deal he struck with Brian Harradine in the Senate. We've  lifted it. I'm proud to say, as Foreign Minister, I got it up to $50 million, a steep  increase to help women and girls in developing countries. And yet we faced a  resolution in the Senate where 10 shadow ministers, colleagues [indistinct] said  Australia should not be supporting family aid programs. That's a big difference and  it's a big feature of our foreign aid.

FULLILOVE: Ladies and gentlemen, what a rich and strikingly optimistic discussion  we've had tonight. Can I first of all thank our panellists, Jane Hutcheon, Paul Kelly  and Rory Medcalf for your questions. Thank you most of all to Ms Bishop and  Senator Carr for your participation this evening, for doing so in such a good spirit.  Ladies and gentlemen, you may recall that in the 2011 Republican presidential  debate, Governor Rick Perry pledged to shut down three federal government  agencies - commerce, education and - oops. Ladies and gentlemen, we didn't have  any Rick Perry oops moments this evening, quite the contrary. We had two  politicians at the top of their games, presenting their visions for Australia's relations  with the world. So thank you again Senator Carr and Ms Bishop and thank you  everyone else for joining us this evening for the 2013 foreign policy debate. Good  evening.

ENDS

08/08/2013  SYDNEY



