The Hon. Scott Morrison MP  Minister for Immigration and Border Protection



Task Force Pharos targeting corruption within the  Australian Customs and Border Protection  Service, Indonesia, UNHCR  Wednesday, 27 November 2013

Doorstop interview, Sydney

Joint Press Conference with Scott Morrison - Minister for Immigration and  Border Protection and Michael Pezzullo - CEO of Australian Customs and  Border Protection Service.

Scott Morrison: Thanks for joining us. Today I'm joined by the CEO of the  Australian Customs and Border Protection Service, Mike Pezzullo. We're here to  make an announcement about a new reform program initiative within the Australian  Customs and Border Protection Service. The risk on our borders is not confined to  people smuggling. Drug importation, revenue evasion, tobacco smuggling, money  laundering, people smuggling and human trafficking, together with firearms  trafficking and all of these matters form part of the risks that present on our borders.

As the CEO has recently observed in one of his recent speeches, which I would  commend to you, as international connectivity enables globalised communications  and the global movement of people and goods, the transnational organised crime  threat against nation states like Australia will only increase. Now, just this past week,  the service highlighted the alarming rise in what I've termed scatter importation of  drugs, ordered through online forums and delivered unwittingly by legitimate  distributors such as Air Express couriers and Australia Post, and then ultimately  using our own school children as post mules for drug traffickers.

We will increasingly be a target for drug importation for a simple reason, in particular,  what the CEO described as a cocaine invasion. I'm advised that the average price of  a kilogram of cocaine in Australia can be up to $300 000. Now, that compares to  $2500 in Columbia and $12 500 in Mexico. By 2017, we're also facing an 85 per cent  increase in air cargo, a 20 per cent increase in containerised sea cargo, and a 25 per  cent increase in international travel numbers to Australia. Against this background,  supply chains are also becoming increasingly dynamic and more complex, which is  obscuring the true point of origin for goods and making the determination of intent  behind cross border movements a much more challenging task, providing  opportunities for organised crime groups to camouflage themselves within the supply  chain.

Now, this means we need to be on our game on our borders, when we need to meet  these challenges to protect our borders and all of us who live behind those borders  to keep us safe. We must overhaul our operating model, we must modernise our  systems, we must harden our defences against corruption and criminal penetration,  and get into the border intelligence business in a very significant way. We must also,  I stress, work with our partners in the region to strengthen the borders of our region  in the face of transnational crime, as stronger regional borders make stronger  borders for Australia.

Now, this has been the topic of my several discussions that I've had in my recent  visits to Indonesia and Malaysia. Of course, people smuggling was a key topic of the  discussions at those meetings with my counterparts. But I stress that transnational  crime was equally, and I must say even more so, a topic for our partners both in  Malaysia and Indonesia and I announced some things in relation to that on return  from my visit to Malaysia.

Addressing the challenges that I've outlined and the CEO has outlined on many  occasions, will not be easy in the current fiscal environment. It's important to note  that that since 2008-09 and out to the forward estimates of 2017, the Australian  Customs and Border Protection Service has had to absorb actual and real program  cuts of $733 million over that period of time. Now, since 2007-08, the number of  offices in the service has decreased from 5740 in 2007-08 to just 5000 today, and  last year this included reducing staffing in frontline regional port officers, including 37  frontline positions at those ports being abolished.

Now, on the funding profile inherited from the previous government, I am advised  that staffing numbers will drop further to around about 4400 by 2017-18. This  presents a very significant challenge and working together with the CEO, I will be  mounting a reform program business case to navigate this challenging future. But  today, I want to announce a further step in the reform program that continues. That  has received bipartisan support in the last parliament and I am sure in this one. And  that is already under way. I know that those who work in our uniform law  enforcement and service organisations take great pride in what they do and are  more appalled than any when they are let down by those who abuse that trust by  engaging in corruption.

Now, as a son of a policeman - former policeman, as the brother of an ambulance  officer, and the brother-in-law of a former fireman, I understand the sacrifice that  people who put on a uniform to protect us make and the sacrifice of their families,  and I understand their great disappointment, those who do the right thing and they  are the majority, when they see these things happen. And it's important that when we  discuss matters of this nature that we acknowledge the fine and upstanding work  done by the people in our Australian Customs and Border Protection Service. The  ones we're after here are the few, not the many, the many do a great job for our  country in protecting our borders and by definition then protecting the Australians  who live behind those borders.

That is why the CEO and I are here today to announce the establishment of Task  Force Pharos to combat hard to detect corruption in the service, to weed out those  that think they can lie low while the heat passes. The task force will identify officers

or groups who pose significant risk to the service as a result of their on duty or off  duty behaviour, their associations outside the workplace or their involvement in  criminal activities. It'll act as an intensive check to ensure that the integrity measures  introduced in the past 12 months are robust and effective and most importantly that  they are not being actively undermined by those within the service who would seek  to do it harm.

A select team of suitably vetted a trained intelligence analysts and investigators  drawn from across the Customs and Border Protection Service will be appointed to  this task force, which will be operational before the end of the year. They will report  to Customs and Border Protection's Special Integrity Adviser, who will be a senior  officer of the service tasked with managing cases of corruption and serious  misconduct. This initiative will complement existing integrity reform measures that  have received bipartisan support and support external investigations of alleged  corruption and serious misconduct where appropriate. Now, those initiatives have  included to date - drug and alcohol testing for all Customs and Border Protection  officers, integrity testing for all Customs and Border Protection officers, mandatory  reporting for misconduct, corrupt or criminal activity, and the power of the CEO to  make a declaration about an officer's employment.

Now, before I hand to the CEO I wish to commend him and his entire team on this  initiative and the work that has already been done to date in this area and the job  they are doing to protect our borders each and every day, but I also want to  commend him and the team on the excellent planning and capacity building work  they are doing in difficult fiscal circumstances to pre-empt and counter the threats  that are coming tomorrow. The government will be doing everything it can to give  strength to his and his agency's arm.

Thanks, Mike.

Michael Pezzullo: Thank you, Minister. I'll just reinforce a couple of those points if I  may.

If I could make just a few points to reinforce the comments that the Minister has  made, since August of last year, eight Customs and Border Protection officers have  been arrested. They are facing criminal charges, and in two cases convictions have  been either brought down or are pending on the basis of guilty pleas. Our staff are  outraged by their behaviour. It introduces risk into the environment, it tarnishes the  great work as the Minister indicated that the vast majority of our officers are doing.

In addition to those eight officers, five of whom were arrested through Operation  Heritage and three through other operations. There have been a number of officers,  a greater number of officers, who are the subject of code of conduct proceedings  and whose employment has either been terminated or they have resigned prior to  termination.

The parliament and the last parliament before the election gave great support to the  Customs and Border Protection Service by expeditiously passing legislation on a  bipartisan basis, and I wish to thank both the former government and the then  opposition and now, of course, the Coalition Government for that terrific support. It

enabled us to move quickly after those arrests commenced and introduce the  measures that the Minister just outlined towards the end of his remarks; drug testing,  alcohol testing, integrity testing, and so on and so forth.

But we are moving forward in the direction of a reform program that's also been  discussed in the remarks that have already been made. I don't want to be in a  position as the Chief Executive to be saying to the Minister in the middle part of next  year after 1 July when we introduce the new reformed workforce model, we forget to  check that we weren't bringing into that new workforce people who have got  undeclared associations, unexplained wealth, anomalous financial transactions.

So as an additive to the integrity measures that have been put in place since late last  year with the support of that parliamentary action that I've just described, this task  force will work intensively and forensically for the next seven months to ensure that  we're not carrying forward into our new business model, our new workforce model,  any officers who are not what they seem.

Can I just, in passing, or concluding, rather, commend the hard work done by the  vast majority of our officers, this task force is not targeted at you. This task force is  targeted at those people who we know. There are some officers currently under  lawful surveillance, who will be dealt with at the appropriate time, who think that they  can just simply fly under the radar, get out of drug tests, defeat the efforts that have  been mounted against them in terms of surveillance - this is a clear message to  them, we're on to you and, through this task force, we'll ensure as best we can that  we eradicate any other instances of hard to detect corruption and criminal behaviour.  Thank you.

Scott Morrison: If there are questions to the chief executive, I'd ask you to direct  those, and if there are any other issues that you'd like to raise with me I'll address  those once he's departed.

Michael Pezzullo: Thanks, Minister.

Scott Morrison: Questions for the CEO?

Question: So, these people already on your radar, how have you already  determined who they are?

Michael Pezzullo: A number of officers are the subject of current lawful special  operations that are being conducted by the Australian Commission for Law  Enforcement Integrity, and in partnership with other law enforcement agencies. I  don't want to even begin to talk about the nature of those operations, simply because  that will tip off officers who are currently under suspicion and surveillance.

Question: So, what will this task force actually help you do, does it strengthen your  powers, or what would actually help you with?

Michael Pezzullo: The powers that exist are the ones that were granted by the  parliament in the last term. What this task force will do - will bring additional  intelligence capability, people who can do searches using what's known as big data

analytics, forensic checking of data, to look for anomalous patterns of things like  unexplained wealth. Why do certain officers have certain luxury goods, for instance?  There might be a perfectly reasonable, lawful and proper explanation that might say,  for instance, with inheritance out of an estate.

But, in other cases, there might be some officers who are living in a manner that's  not really consistent with any income we can discern, and we'll be looking at financial  records, we'll also be looking at criminal associations, running everyone through -  and I've given a direction, everyone from me down, we're going to be running  everyone's name through relevant databases. And if unexplained associations with  outlaw motorcycle gangs, Middle Eastern crime groups, Asian crime groups, or other  groups that are going to introduce integrity risk into our organisation come to light,  we'll be asking those officers to explain themselves.

Question: When do you expect to make your next arrests? When are you expecting  to make more arrests?

Michael Pezzullo: I'm not really in a position to comment on that for several  reasons, one is the arrests are undertaken either by the Commission for Law  Enforcement Integrity, or on their recommendation, and in the case of Operation  Heritage it was by the Federal Police. So I don't want to comment on operational  decisions that are going to be taken by other partner agencies. What I can tell you is  that there are a number of very serious ongoing investigations, they are disturbing,  and they relate to behaviour where the officers in question seem to think, or do in  fact think, that by lying low and waiting until all this parliamentary, ministerial, and  chief executive attention all passes, they can go back to the way they used to do  business. The message for them is, you can't, and we’re on to you.

Question: How many people are you investigating?

Michael Pezzullo: I'm not prepared to comment on that.

Question: So these eight arrests that you have already made - this is what's given  you suspicion that it's more widespread?

Michael Pezzullo: No, the eight arrests relate to Operation Heritage which was the  operation at Sydney International Airport where there were five arrests. The three  other arrests relate to unrelated operations.

Question: What reason do you have to believe that there's a big [indistinct] problem  in your ranks?

Michael Pezzullo: I'm in no way suggesting that there's a big, medium, or small  sized problem. What I'm saying is I don't want to carry a legacy integrity problem into  a new workforce model when, as the Minister indicated, when he takes a proposition  to his colleagues saying we're going to rebuild this agency, we're going to have a  new workforce model, I want to be able to assure him that we've undertaken, from a  due diligence and prudential point of view, a series of checks. My hope is we find no  anomalies, my hope is that, other than the officers who are currently under

investigation through those other special operations I've just mentioned, no one else  comes to light. I can hope that, I can't plan on the basis of hope.

Question: Do you know who's going to head the task force?

Michael Pezzullo: Yes. It'll be an officer within the service who reports to the special  integrity advisor. Effectively, that officer, the special integrity advisor, is my internal  inspector general, and she reports directly to me.

Question: How much is being set aside to cover the operations of this task force?

Michael Pezzullo: The size of it will be an evolving concern. If I need to put more  investigators on I will, but initially there'll be half a dozen investigators.

Scott Morrison: Well, thanks very much, Mike, and good luck.

Michael Pezzullo: Minister, thank you.

Scott Morrison: Anything else?

Question: Andrew Robb appears to have breached the protocol not to comment on  intelligence matters. This morning on television he referred to the Indonesian phone  tapping as unfortunate and a fact of life that you have to deal with. That's not very  helpful, is it?

Scott Morrison: Well, I haven't seen those comments or heard them, so I'm not in a  position really to offer any commentary on a commentary that I haven't heard or  seen.

Question: What do you make of the statement by President Yudhoyono overnight?  Are you comforted by it, do you think it means that border protection-type activities  can resume soon in cooperation with Indonesians?

Scott Morrison: Well, I'm sure all Australians would be encouraged, I think, by what  we've seen overnight. I know the Prime Minister has made comments on this earlier  today, and I'm also encouraged. There's obviously some work to do and that work is  being done between leaders and through the process they're establishing between  them. But I remain optimistic, and - for one particular reasons, and that is this  relationship is incredibly important to both parties. That is well understood and has  been for a very long time. It is not just about people smuggling, it's about trade, it's  about the connections between two very robust and friendly peoples. And that is  where we want to see the relationship head in the future, and that's what everyone's  working very hard to achieve right now in what has been a challenging time.

Question: Can you clarify, are Australian Federal Police and Border Protection  officers working in conjunction with the Indonesians, or has that been put on hold as  the Indonesians say?

Scott Morrison: Well, right now, I don't think my commentary on those specifics are  going to help the very real optimism that we now have about this relationship moving  forward, and there is nothing I would want to say today to put any of that at risk.

Question: Would you describe the phone tapping as unfortunate and as a fact of life  we have to deal with?

Scott Morrison: Well, I'd give the exact same answer I just gave then, and that is it's  important that we now focus on the leader to leader dialogue processes that have  been established, and the outcome of that process is what, I think, all Australians  want and that is for this relationship to grow in strength, for the cooperation that we  have, whether it's on people smuggling, or in trade, or in education, or the many  other spheres in which it operates, counter-terrorism and so on, all of this is so  important to both countries. And that's why I've always had a sense of optimism  about this, because of what is at stake for everybody who is involved.

Question: Have you spoken to your counterparts in Indonesia since these  revelations have been made to try and ease the concerns?

Scott Morrison: Well, in my area - and I made this comment the other morning  when I was talking to Fran Kelly - there is always some contact that occurs between  officials within our various organisations. That's not to suggest they're negotiations,  or discussions, or anything like that as some sought to misrepresent. There is always  contact, and I think that's one of the virtues of relationships that are built up over  many years, that even in difficult times at least some information can pass between  countries that don't amount to what I'd describe as cooperation, but just simply of  keeping each other informed of where things are at.

Question: When do you expect operations between Australian authorities and  Indonesian authorities on issues such as border protection and dealing with people-smugglers and asylum seekers to resume?

Scott Morrison: Well that's - all of this is going to be a function of the very positive  process that I think that is now being established between the leaders, and, I want to  give that process every opportunity of success.

Question: Nauru and Manus Island - UNHCR's [indistinct] damning report on the  conditions there, at what point does that become the responsibility of the Coalition  Government as opposed to the previous government that re-established those  centres?

Scott Morrison: Well, the previous government re-established offshore processing  having first abolished it and being dragged kicking and screaming to restore it. It was  announced in August of 2012, and for the next year there was this muddled and  incompetent reimplementation of a policy that was under capacity and unfunded.  They sent families to Manus, and then they took the families off, then they sent  people and then didn't send people. And I think this presented a real challenge for  particularly our partners in Nauru and in PNG who were putting in place an  assessment and processing system, but had to deal with constant chopping and  changing of Australian Government policy.

And so when I look at the report, and I have looked at the report quite carefully, I  think the criticism of particularly Papua New Guinea and Nauru is quite overstated. I  think they have been working very hard to put their systems in place. The Australian  Government is working with both of those countries to ensure that they have both the  capacity of the assessors to undertake the processing, as well as the facilities to  ensure that can occur.

Now, we're working very hard also on building the capacity of those centres overall,  and we are in that transitional phase at the moment. And so, we will continue to  improve those things in the months ahead. In our first 100 days, it is our expectation  that we would have more than doubled the capacity of offshore processing and  addressed the quite serious funding issues that remained unaddressed by the  previous government.

So, look, this report is there. It will be discussed to the extent that is appropriate with  our partners about some of the issues that are raised. But, let me make this point,  the UNHCR has had a fairly long track record of being completely opposed to  offshore processing. That has been their position, I understand that, we have a  difference of view about that. The report actually says it is a setback that people  would never be settled in Australia. We would obviously have a very different view  about that because having strong border protection policy stops people getting on  boats, and we prize that outcome very, very highly because when people get on  boats they far too frequently die on boats.

Question: Earlier you were talking about the money that was stripped from Customs  by the former government - and you said you were going to, what was what it, mount  a business case, is that to restore funding? And, if so, I mean, 730, I think it was,  odd-million?

Scott Morrison: Well, the cuts that were made under the previous government were  quite savage on Customs and Border Protection. And, frankly, they were far more  savage than we knew at the time, and since coming into government to learn of that  figure of over $700 million in cuts, and taking a service from well over 5000 people  and taking it on a trajectory to 4400, which someone argued was well below a  sustainable level, now that presents me as a new minister in this area with the  challenge of how we address that in the current fiscal environment. Now, there are  many ways of approaching that and that's what the CEO and I are working through,  to make the business case for both the rebuilding and establishing of that agency to  deal with the threats that are coming.

I mean, I think all Australians were a bit shocked this week to learn that school kids  were being used as post mules for drug couriers. And if there are students out there,  or families, who I hope would be discussing these issues with their kids, and if they  are getting these approaches, they should call 1800 06 1800, and relay that to the  appropriate authorities. Because these traffickers or smugglers, or outlaw motorcycle  gangs, or whoever they are, who are all trying to engage with transnational crime,  are targeting Australians at the end of the day.

And it's important that we're wise to what they're up to, and what I particularly  commended the CEO on today is they are thinking ahead as an organisation. They

are seeing the trends and seeing what's happened. The CEO has just been in the  United States where we were able to put in place a memorandum of understanding  with the United States Government and their agencies to work more closely on  issues of intelligence and things of that nature when it relates to transnational crime.  Now I think they're important developments, and they're useful developments, but  they have to be given the appropriate support to enable them to do their job.

Question: Would you like to see more people employed in the detection process at  the international mail exchange? That was a key point in detecting those  importations.

Scott Morrison: Well, we'll have some announcements about that over the next few  weeks. We said before the election that we would be looking at the screening  capabilities of the Customs and Border Protection Service, and I've been taking  some advice from the CEO on that, and we need to know that it isn't just parcels,  how this is coming in. It can come through myriad items of post, which is done to try  and evade the detection of our services, but our services are on to them. They're on  to them, but we can't just leave all of that job to the uniformed officers who are  patrolling our borders.

We rely on the information also we get from the community, and so when people  know about this stuff, they should get on the phone and tell us. Because in doing so,  they're not just protecting their own child, who may have been tried to be drawn into  this, but they're protecting the kid who lives down the road as well.

Question: Are you advising the Prime Minister at all into the make-up of the special  envoys that have been sent to Jakarta to negotiate with the Indonesian  Government?

Scott Morrison: Well, the Prime Minister and I talk about many things, I'm a  member of the National Security Committee of Cabinet, as are many of my  colleagues, and what I think Australians should rest very assured about is the  process of government that is being run by our Prime Minister to address situations  such as this, I think the Prime Minister has taken a very calm, measured, procedural  approach to addressing the challenges of this situation, and it is our hope, and the  signs overnight are encouraging, that that will bear fruit.

Thank you for your time.



See: Index of Speeches

URL:http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/sm/2013/sm209868.htm   Last update: Thursday, 28 November 2013 at 13:34 AEST



