

Julie Bishop MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS



ABC Lateline

7 August 2013

Subjects: Paid Parental Leave Scheme, company tax cut, release of policy costings, carbon  tax, border protection, PNG solution, Kevin Rudd vs Rupert Murdoch

E&OE…

TONY JONES We’re joined in the studio now by the Deputy Leader of the Liberal Party and  Opposition spokeswoman on foreign affairs, Julie Bishop. Thanks for being there.

JULIE BISHOP Good evening Tony.

TONY JONES Now is big business happy now that you’re Parental Leave Scheme is  effectively being funded by taxpayers?

JULIE BISHOP I suspect that we’ll continue to receive criticism from some sectors from the  business community about our Paid Parental Leave Scheme but we believe it’s an important  measure for productivity, for participation, an important economic measure that treats  parental leave as a workplace entitlement not a welfare entitlement.

TONY JONES I note that you didn’t deny that it is now being effectively funded by  taxpayers because its become revenue neutral for those big companies that had to pay for it  originally.

JULIE BISHOP But what we’re doing is offering a tax cut for 750,000 companies across  Australia that will stimulate business activity. Tony, the economy is stagnating according to  the government’s own economic statement. There’s a lack of confidence in business,  investment in the consumer sectors.

We need something to ensure that people can have confidence in investing, taking risks,  growing businesses and we believe, and the Labor Party used to believe, that a company tax  cut would boost jobs growth and boost the economy.

TONY JONES The Liberal Party used to believe that measures like this were socialist  measures. It seems to have changed enormously, except in the National Party because they’re  still screaming.

JULIE BISHOP Well I believe in this policy, the Paid Parental Leave policy. I believe that  maternity leave, parental leave, should be a workplace entitlement and it shouldn’t be a  welfare entitlement and I do think it will enhance participation in the workforce.

We want to have more women to have the opportunity to come back into the workforce after  they have taken time out to raise a family or support their children and in this way, business  also gets the tax cut. I think it’s a win-win.

TONY JONES So when’s it going to start?

JULIE BISHOP The tax cuts occurring on the first of July 2015. The Paid Parental Leave  scheme will be the subject of a further announcement during the course of this campaign.

TONY JONES Will you start it at the same time as the tax cut so that no one’s out of pocket  in big business?

JULIE BISHOP That’s something that Tony Abbott will be announcing later in this  campaign. We’ve only got 31 days to go Tony, but there’ll be plenty of time for these  announcements.

TONY JONES As we know Treasury has been forced to constantly re-look at its expectations  as to the Budget surplus as they did to the Labor Government last week.

Are you leaving yourself with no room for manoeuvre at all in case Treasury, when you’re in  government, if you make it, starts to revise things down again?

JULIE BISHOP Well Tony I think everybody was shocked, most certainly in the business,  but we were as well, by the revision down of the budget by $33 billion last Friday within a  couple of months of the Budget. It didn’t even make it to the end of the financial year. That’s  $3 billion a week.

This isn’t about revenue write-downs. Revenue has been increasing. It’s just that they’ve  made these wildly optimistic revenue forecasts and then spent money up to the level of those  revenue forecasts.

TONY JONES But that’s what you’re going to do.

JULIE BISHOP But when revenue actually continues to increase it’s the issue of spending.  The spending outstrips the revenue every single time and now we’ve seen a $33 billion write  down.

TONY JONES But you might find yourself in the same position. That’s my point. If that’s  the case you’ll be looking for revenue wherever you can find it, and of course the Senate may  well reject your attempts to scrap the carbon tax, so presumably if that’s the case you’ll keep  collecting the revenue from the carbon tax.

JULIE BISHOP First we will look for spending cuts wherever we can find them and there  will be more spending cuts announced during the course of this..

TONY JONES Well what about the carbon tax..

JULIE BISHOP It’s two sides of a coin. First you’ve got to cut the spending and that’s what  Labor’s not doing.

TONY JONES Sure, but if the Senate rejects your attempts to scrap the carbon tax it will still  be in place, in fact it will still be in place at the level it’s in now. So will you just keep using  it to boost your revenue?

JULIE BISHOP Well we believe that this election will be a referendum on the carbon tax and  that should we be elected by the Australian people we will have a mandate to repeal the  carbon tax. And we would expect the Labor Party to respect that mandate as we did over  Work Choices in the 2007 election.

TONY JONES It’s pretty unlikely that they will..

JULIE BISHOP Why do you say that Tony?

TONY JONES Because politically it would be perhaps silly for them to do that?

JULIE BISHOP Why would you say that? Some might say it would be silly for us to….

TONY JONES Because they brought the carbon tax in they were trying to turn it into an  Emissions Trading Scheme.

JULIE BISHOP Well we brought in Work Choices Tony and we lost the 2007 election and  we respected Labor’s mandate to repeal Work Choices. They did it and I’m expecting Labor  to show us the same, well show the Australian people, the same respect we did after the 2007  election.

TONY JONES That’s what you’re asking them to do but in fact you’re expecting the  possibility of a double dissolution election which could take quite a long time to get  organised. In the meantime, you’ll keep collecting the carbon tax, will you? At the rate that it  currently is?

JULIE BISHOP But before you go there Tony, Kevin Rudd has now admitted that the carbon  tax is hurting families, hurting jobs, hurting the economy. This is what we’ve been saying for  the last couple of years and now Kevin Rudd hs admitted that.

He says, of course the big rhetoric, that he’s going to get rid of the carbon tax. He is not. He’s  just going from a fixed price to a floating price, but the fact is the carbon tax is hurting the

economy, it is driving up the cost of living, it is a tax on electricity and if the Australian  people…..

TONY JONES Yes, but if you can’t scrap it will you keen collecting revenue from it?

JULIE BISHOP Well let’s see what happens in the Senate before we start making those sort  of assumptions.

TONY JONES Alright, Tony Abbott says the cost of lowering the company tax 1.5 per cent  was already set out in the $17 billion of savings measures he outlined in his budget speech-in-reply. Joe Hockey today is talking about having identified $15 billion worth of savings. Who  is right, $17 billion or $15 billion?

JULIE BISHOP Well I guess it depends what you include in that amount. We had a savings  package of, I thought it was $17 billion, but it depends, some of that might well now not be  available, given what the government’s done. But we will make other savings during the  course of the election campaign.

TONY JONES How do you get a $2 billion discrepancy in one day between the leader and  the shadow treasurer?

JULIE BISHOP Well Tony, these announcement were made back in the Budget-In-Reply.  Since that time Labor have, and I haven’t gone into the detail, but I know Labor have taken  some of those savings, so we don’t have all of them available.

That’s why we have to find more savings but there were things like the Clean Energy  Cooperation and the School Kids Bonus, a reduction in the humanitarian intake…….

TONY JONES Yes and they all add up to, if you look at it, as I did this afternoon, they all  add up to about $15 billion and yet Tony Abbott is saying they add up to $17 billion and so  I’m asking why the discrepancy between the two?

JULIE BISHOP Well I’ll have to find out what Tony included in the list. We have been  announcing savings for some time and we’ll announce more.

TONY JONES So he might have included things in his list that you haven’t yet announced. Is  that what you’re saying?

JULIE BISHOP No, I’m saying I don’t know what he included in his list. We have made a  number of announcements. Some of them could have been savings that Labor’s now made so  they’re not available to us.

TONY JONES Is it a bit embarrassing when the shadow treasurer says one thing and the  leader says another thing and they’re out by $2 billion?

JULIE BISHOP Oh c’mon Tony. I don’t know whether Tony’s included everything that Joe’s  included. We’ll get them both on the program and they can go through it with you.

TONY JONES Well they are both talking about the same thing. They are both talking about  the savings identified in the budget speech in reply.

JULIE BISHOP Do you know what’s embarrassing? Do you know what’s embarrassing? A  $33 billion write down within three months of the budget!

Labor are the ones who’ve got to be embarrassed about their numbers. They’ve missed  virtually every forecast, every target, seriously if Kevin Rudd were the CEO of a business  that had that track record he would have been sacked long ago.

He wouldn’t be going to the shareholders, going “give me another three years so I can do  three years more of what I’ve been doing for the last three.”

TONY JONES But if you were the CEO of a business you’d have to reveal your costings and  we’ve no idea at all when you’re going to do that.

JULIE BISHOP Oh Tony you’ll get them before the, well the Australian public, not you I’m  sorry, the Australian public will get them in good time before the election.

TONY JONES What’s good time before the election by-the-way? Is it a week? Is it days? I  mean before the election could be the day before the election.

JULIE BISHOP Let’s not be too precious about this. Do you remember in 2007 when Labor  released all of their policies for costing, put them in for costing 24 hours before the election.  We won’t do that.

TONY JONES So how long?

JULIE BISHOP I’ll leave that to the shadow treasurer.

TONY JONES Have you got it figured out? Do you know how long it will be before you  actually give them?

JULIE BISHOP I’ll leave that to the shadow treasurer.

TONY JONES Ok, Joe Hockey and Tony Abott have both confirmed that the rate of the GST  will be on the table in the tax review that you’re planning to have if you win government, if  you’re elected. If the GST is on the table can you actually guarantee that you will never raise  it?

JULIE BISHOP We are not taking any policy regarding the GST to this election. There is no  change to the GST.

TONY JONES Not to this election, but you’re going to have a tax review when you’re in  government.

JULIE BISHOP Well what we’re going to do is make sure what we say before the election  we commit to. We’re not going to break promises as Labor did when they said there would be  no carbon tax and then there is a carbon tax.

TONY JONES Yes, but in this case, if I could just make the point, in this case you’re putting  the GST on the table in the tax review. Which of course Labor refuse to do.

JULIE BISHOP Yes a tax review will look at taxes and the GST is a tax. It was ridiculous for  Labor to leave the GST out of the last tax review, the Henry Tax Review. Everybody said  that. Every sensible commentator across Australia said that.

TONY JONES Ridiculous because logically if you’re looking to raise money that will be the  place to do it.

JULIE BISHOP It doesn’t mean you’re raising it necessarily. It means you would look at it.  The review might say leave it as it is, but you would include it as a basket of taxes.

TONY JONES What if the review says, as many expect, you should actually raise it?

JULIE BISHOP Well that would be a matter for every State and Territory because the  Commonwealth alone cannot raise the GST, can’t change the GST, it has to be unanimous  agreement by every State and Territory.

TONY JONES Would you do what John Howard did and if you wanted to raise the GST and  take it to an election?

JULIE BISHOP This is a hypothetical. We’re not taking any change to the GST to this  election.

After the election we’ve promised a proper tax review as Labor promised and then the only  tax that they picked up was the Super Profits Tax for the mining sector which was a  disastrous policy and even more disastrous when they tried to amend it into a mining tax that  doesn’t collect revenue.

TONY JONES Labor is right about one thing and that is you can’t possibly rule out never  raising the GST if you’re having a tax review and you’re putting it on the table.

JULIE BISHOP Well we are including all taxes in a tax review. That’s a sensible thing to do.  Unless we redefine tax and I guess Labor’s doing that with their mining tax -  ‘Commonwealth revenue raising measure that doesn’t raise the revenue’ - they say it will. I  mean, who knows?

TONY JONES Ok, let’s go to an area that’s more in your portfolio zone. If elected, you’ll be  using the navy within weeks. That is probably around the middle of September to start  turning back asylum boats to Indonesia. Have you actually cleared that yet with the  Indonesian authorities?

JULIE BISHOP We are in opposition. We cannot reach agreements. We cannot sign treaties  with foreign governments from opposition.

We have discussed our policies with Indonesia. We have made it clear publicly from the day  we got into opposition, or should I say from the day Kevin Rudd unpicked our policies in  2008 and our policy has been clear.

But as Foreign Minister Alexander Downer pointed out, our policy of turning boats back  where it’s safe to do so doesn’t involve any breach of Indonesia’s territorial integrity or their

sovereignty, and so as he pointed out, he didn’t seek their permission because it’s within  Australian territorial borders.

We have given a commitment to the Indonesian Government that, should we be in  government, there will be a ‘no surprises’ policy adopted towards Indonesia. That is, we will  inform them of what we intend to do if there are any issues. This is not just in relation to  border protection, any issues that affect Indonesia’s national interest.

TONY JONES Can I just raise this possibility with you - because Marty Natalegawa, whose  the Foreign Minister of Indonesia, says Indonesia won’t accept a unilateral policy of turning  back boats. How do you make it bilateral?

JULIE BISHOP No what Marty Natalegawa has said is that he knows what our policies are,  he’s looking for more detail - as one would expect, we’re only in opposition - and they’re  prepared to work with us.

Now he said that freely on an interview on Sky News and spoke about that generally. So I’m  very comfortable that we will be in a position to implement our policies, should we win  government.

TONY JONES Of course if the PNG Solution actually works there may not be any boats to  turn back.

JULIE BISHOP Well I am deeply concerned about the PNG announcement because this is  typical Kevin Rudd, standard operating procedure. He makes the big grandiose  announcement and then the lights and cameras move on. You look at the detail and it’s not  what he announced. It starts to unravel.

There’s absolutely no clarity around who PNG will take but it’s quite clear now that we’ve  seen the detail that PNG has a veto over whose going to be resettled in PNG and who they’ll  accept and who they won’t.

Whereas Kevin Rudd had said no one arriving by boat from that date would be resettled in  Australia, well none of the documents we’ve seen since that date bear that out.

TONY JONES Now you've said that the PNG refugee resettlement plan will cause chaos in  Papua New Guinea and in the region. Do you agree with those who say that sending Islamic  migrants into the Pacific will be a toehold for al-Qaeda?

JULIE BISHOP Well I am aware that there are Pacific leaders, Pacific Island leaders who are  deeply concerned about Labor's requirement that PNG and Nauru permanently resettle  asylum seekers. They have expressed concerns about the challenges that these Pacific Island  nations already ...

TONY JONES Yes, but specifically the challenge that I just referred to. You may have read  this weekend's - or this week's Spectator ...

JULIE BISHOP No, I haven't.

TONY JONES ... where the suggestion is being made it'll create a toehold for al-Qaeda. I  mean, this idea is floating around in some circles. I'm wondering do you think that is a  problem?

JULIE BISHOP There are concerns that Pacific Island states could be vulnerable to terrorist  groups, but that's been a concern quite apart from this debate.

TONY JONES So you wouldn't link that at all to this resettlement plan?

JULIE BISHOP Well of course there are security concerns about people coming by boat to  Australia.

That's why we have such - we're meant to have such - comprehensive security checks to  ensure that there isn't a connection between terrorist groups and asylum seekers coming to  Australia.

TONY JONES So you're specifically not concerned about this.

JULIE BISHOP No, I'm concerned. I am concerned about this - and that is that according to  the Australian Government authorities, they are doing very light touch security checks these  days because of the backlog caused by the number of people who are now coming to  Australia.

Over 50,000 today, we've now reached over 50,000 people coming to Australia by boat and  our health and security checks are very much under pressure, according to the authorities  themselves. It's ‘very light touch’.

TONY JONES So let me ask you the really obvious question - are you going to scrap the  PNG resettlement plan if you come to office?

JULIE BISHOP We will not demand of PNG that they permanently resettle people who are  found to be asylum seekers, and the class of people that I am concerned about is those who  are not .......

TONY JONES But are you planning to scrap ...

JULIE BISHOP Can I finish this bit?

TONY JONES Well it's an important question though, because Bob Carr said today...

JULIE BISHOP This is an important answer.

TONY JONES But Bob Carr said - very specifically to the question that I asked, Bob Carr  said you were not going to scrap it and you've made that clear. Are you going to scrap it or  not scrap it?

JULIE BISHOP If there are elements of the PNG announcement that work, we would reserve  the right to keep them.

But if there are elements that don't work - and this is where I'll come to the point I was about  to make - and that is, the class of people who are found not to be refugees but can't be  returned involuntarily to their home country, for example, some Iranians, what's going to  happen to them?

PNG have said they're Australia's problem, and then Kevin Rudd says they won't be resettled  here. Well, what is going to happen to those people?

TONY JONES Well according to Tony Burke there may not be that many of them because  he's saying he's got firm intelligence that asylum seekers are now demanding their money  back from people smugglers.

He's further saying there's evidence already that some of those who've gone to Manus Island  are asking to be sent back to their home countries by the international migration organisation.  I mean, do you trust that intelligence?

JULIE BISHOP And he hasn't given any details of how many people or who or where. He's  just said he's got intelligence, he's got evidence.

Well share it with us Tony, tell us. We're in caretaker convention now. Share it with us, tell  us about it.

TONY JONES Well, I mean, you could seek intelligence yourself from the intelligence  community on this subject.

JULIE BISHOP Indeed. Well the first I heard about it was when Tony Burke announced it  today, so I have no doubt that Scott Morrison will be seeking those details.

TONY JONES Sorry, go ahead.

JULIE BISHOP But this agreement with PNG has opened up a whole new front.

There's a clause 19 that says Australia may well be exposed to a whole new front of activity  because we will be asked and could be asked to support people who are coming directly and  illegally into PNG.

Now there's a 760km border between Indonesia and Papua New Guinea. There are already  about 10,000 West Papuans and others that have come into PNG and are living there  illegally. And this .....

TONY JONES Alright, we'll get to the nub of that. Are you actually saying that Australia  will be responsible under this clause for West Papuan refugees going across the border into  Papua New Guinea?

JULIE BISHOP This agreement exposes Australia to a potential whole new commitment to  support people not coming by boat, but people who have come directly and illegally into  Papua New Guinea.

Now that wasn't part of Kevin Rudd's announcement. We've only seen it in the detail of the  document.

TONY JONES You're not saying Iranians, Afghans and others will come via West Papua, to  Indonesia, to Papua New Guinea?

JULIE BISHOP Well, Tony, I have no idea how the people smugglers will turn this into a  new channel, but the point is there's now a clause in this agreement that says Australia may  be asked to support those who have come directly and illegally into PNG.

We already know there are about 10,000 people there. Are the Australian taxpayers going to  foot the bill for them as well? This is what we need to know.

TONY JONES Final quick question - the Labor Party's obviously not happy with News  Limited with its front page headlines saying "Toss this mob out".

They're focusing on Rupert Murdoch, suggesting that he's actually very worried about the  effect the NBN might have on his business case for Foxtel in Australia.

Kevin Rudd has turned his attention on Rupert Murdoch today. From your point of view, is  the Coalition happy to have Rupert Murdoch at your back?

JULIE BISHOP I'm actually worried about Kevin Rudd's state of mind. I watched him on the  7.30 Report tonight and he seems to be descending into some dark world of conspiracies  where everybody's against him and it's led by Rupert Murdoch.

TONY JONES It's not a conspiracy when he really is against you though, is it?

JULIE BISHOP Well I do recall that when Kevin Rudd lost the leadership to Julia Gillard, he  hot-footed over to New York to seek career advice from none other than Rupert Murdoch.

So he's spent the last three years leaking against his colleagues, getting stories in News  Corporation papers and now that the News Corporation editorial doesn't think that he's fit to  be Prime Minister, a view that his colleagues share, all of a sudden it's a conspiracy.

Then he's got this theory that somehow Malcolm Turnbull launching our broadband policy at  Fox Studios was something sinister. I mean, seriously? It's a showcase for high technology. It  would have looked good on TV. Why wouldn't you launch your broadband policy there?

But for Kevin to find something sinister in that, I think he's lost the plot.

TONY JONES Julie Bishop, we really do have to go. Thank you very much for joining us.

JULIE BISHOP Thank you.

- Ends -



