

Campaign Transcript



TRANSCRIPT OF TRADE MINISTER RICHARD MARLES  RADIO 2CC  21 AUGUST 2013





E & O E - PROOF ONLY



Subjects: Election; Coalition cuts; Asylum seekers and PNG.



MARK PARTON: We do have the Federal Minister for Trade, Member for the  Victorian Federal Seat of Corio, Richard Marles on the line. Morning Richard.  RICHARD MARLES: Morning Mark, how are you?  PARTON: Excellent. You party's on the ropes, you've got two weeks to make up  some serious ground to catch the runaway Tony Abbott, you need some  diabolical  mistakes  from  the  Opposition,  I  don't  know  that  you're  going  to  get  them. Obviously publicly you and your party are going to put on a brave face and  keep  up  the  fight  but  I'd  love  to  know  when  the  private  concession  of  defeat  comes.  MARLES: Well,  we'll  be  fighting  this  right  through  to  the  last  day  because  we  absolutely  know  what  it  would  mean  for  the  country  were  Tony  Abbot  to  be  elected because it would be a disaster. I mean - the issue right now is we've got  an alternative prime minister who is putting a proposition to the Australian people  which  has  in  it  a  huge  budgetary  hole  which  he's  saying  he's  not  going  to  tell  people about potentially until after the media blackout for Wednesday before the  election.  PARTON: A bit of trust required here isn't there, a bit of trust, a lot of it.  MARLES: People - voting for Tony Abbott now would be an enormous leap of  faith and a leap of faith to somebody who has acknowledged that he has a  funding challenge which he has to meet, who has already started cutting into  school kids bonus, [indistinct] superannuation income contribution, who will be  cutting from things like the car industry. That's very bad for manufacturing, not  just cars, but that will be bad for manufacturing around the country, and who's got  the GST under review. That's the leap of faith that people will make if they go  with Tony Abbott and that's the point that we're making to people. Kevin Rudd is  a known quantity. People have seen him as prime minister. People know the  difficult decisions that we've taken whether or not they agree with them; means-  testing the Medicare rebate or the FBT, we obviously - these are hard decisions

A New Way

to  make  and  there's  been  criticism  of  them. But  you've  got  no  idea  what  Tony  Abbott will do if he's elected because he's just not telling you.  PARTON: Your PNG solution isn't a solution. It hasn't worked. The boats  haven't  stopped. We've  got  legal  challenges,  five  people  lost  their  lives  at  sea  yesterday, you must agree it's been a disastrous failure.  MARLES: No  I  don't  agree  with  that  and  firstly  I  think  that  there  has  been  a  decline in the rate of people coming on boats since the PNG announcement was  made -  PARTON: - Really?  MARLES: Yeah that's right and [indistinct] of Tony Burke -  PARTON: - But 3000 people have come since the policy was laid on the table.  MARLES: But not withstanding that there has been a bit of a surge in the last  few days. But we have seen people asking for their money back in Indonesia  who were going to be getting on boats, we're seeing people who are in Manus  inquire about how they can go home because they know that Australia has been  taken off the table and the rules have changed. But no one imagined that this  would be an overnight solution. It can't be.  PARTON: But Richard, Richard if we weren't in the context of an election  campaign, I reckon you'd be saying to me, yeah you know what, maybe it's not  going to work.  MARLES: I don't think that's right. I think this is a really difficult issue and it  would serve this country well if we had some bipartisanship on there so people  stop  playing  politics  with  it  which  is  really  what's  been  going  on  for  a  longtime  now.  But we all know that what we need to do to stop the people smugglers is take  Australia off the table. People can see the logic that what the arrangement with  PNG does is exactly that. It means that if you come and you are a refugee you'll  be offered resettlement in PNG, not in Australia. Now that is making a difference  and it will make a difference given the fullness of time. I'd make the other point in  terms of legal challenges, of course we expected this to be challenged. We  expected challenges both here and in PNG, but we're confident about the legal  ground in which we stand and we're confident this will survive those challenges.  PARTON: Richard, thanks for your time this morning. Appreciate it.  MARLES: Pleas ure Mark, good to talk to you.  ENDS

Communications Unit: T 03 8625 5111 www.alp.org.au



Authorised by G. Wright, Australian Labor Party, 5/9 Sydney Avenue, Barton, ACT, 2600

