MEET THE PRESS

04 AUGUST 2013

INTERVIEW WITH JOE HOCKEY

KATHRYN ROBINSON, PRESENTER: Mr Hockey, will you blow a $70 billion hole in the  Budget with your policies? And, if it's not that much, how much will it be?

JOE HOCKEY: Well, there's deep irony in all of this. Labor releases its Budget figures on  Friday that show that they've been haemorrhaging $3 billion a week for the last 10 weeks,  and as a weapon of mass distraction, they put out a figure that they fabricated three years ago  about our numbers, and claim that somehow it's all about us. Well, in fact, it's not about us.  It's about the Australian people. Our numbers are going to be absolutely right. We'll release  them before the election, whenever that might be. But we're not going to cop a lecture from  the Labor Party on accuracy in numbers. I mean, give us a break - the Labor Party has got  every number wrong for the last six years. They certainly aren't getting our numbers right,  and they're dead wrong again.

JESSICA IRVINE: With respect, Joe, it is about you. In a couple of weeks’ time, you might  be the Government, and you haven't told the Australian people yet how much money you're  going to spend, how much you're going to save, and you say you're going to tell us before the  election. But I've got an economics degree, and this is going to take me some time to digest.  How do you expect normal people to be able to understand your complex policy costings if  you just lob them on them on the day before an election?

JOE HOCKEY: Well, because they won't be as complex as you would expect. We will  identify where, in the current published numbers from Labor, we are going to cut, and we  will say, “That will be the equivalent, or more, of what we need for our new policy  announcements.” Now let me just make this point - Labor hasn't released its policy costings.  They're in Government.

JESSICA IRVINE: Well, there was the economic statement.

JOE HOCKEY: No, no. The economic statement was about the state of the Budget today.  They've said nothing about what they're going to do over the next three years. And they  haven't released any new savings.

JESSICA IRVINE: But you haven't even said what you're going to do right now.

JOE HOCKEY: We have, actually. For example-

LAUREN WILSON: You've put 200 policies in to the number-crunchers at the Parliamentary  Budget Office on Friday. When are we going to see them?

JOE HOCKEY: Well, you’ll see it - again, before the election. Because what's happening is  that the base keeps moving. This is Labor. This is about what they do. They have released an  economic statement on Friday. Look, let's talk about what the Budget actually is, rather than  speculating about us. Let's talk about what the Budget is. The Budget has fundamental -  fundamental errors in it, released by the Government on Friday.





Their assumptions about getting into surplus are complete rubbish. They're now forecasting  unemployment to rise to 800,000. They're haemorrhaging $3 billion a week. Debt is going to  $400 billion. And they want you to talk about us.

LAUREN WILSON: Well, let's look at what that means-

JOE HOCKEY: Let’s have an election and talk about it.

LAUREN WILSON: Let’s look at what that means for your policies. Paid parental leave, for  example. Is that now too expensive, given, as you say, the state of the Budget?

JOE HOCKEY: Well, we will only promise what we can afford.

LAUREN WILSON: So, can you afford it?

JOE HOCKEY: We've always said this is a productivity measure. Labor defines it, and some  people define it, as a generous scheme. You know, it's actually a fair-dinkum scheme. And  there are productivity benefits that not only all women should be embracing, but small  business should be embracing. Because small business has never been able to compete with  big business.

LAUREN WILSON: So it’s still affordable in the context of the economic statement released  Friday?

JOE HOCKEY: We will make it - we will make it affordable and timely. And that's what  matters. We will - obviously we're inheriting a deteriorating position. And it's only the  Coalition that can save this Budget. And we'll do the right thing, because we have to. We  must.

KATHRYN ROBINSON: Let's look at some of the policies that were announced in the  economic statement that have been announced and costed by the Government. The tobacco  excise - would you support that?

JOE HOCKEY: Ah, well, we have deep concerns about the tobacco excise increase, because  if you're a pensioner, a smoking pensioner, you will lose up a third of your pension increase  just on Kevin Rudd's new tobacco tax. Now, last time Kevin Rudd announced a massive  increase in tobacco tax, he said it was all going to health. This time, it's about plugging  revenue holes in the Budget.

LAUREN WILSON: So you're unlikely to support it?

JOE HOCKEY: So, we want to - we want to consult with the health industry. We want to  find out - and we've lodged it with the Parliamentary Budget Office - to find out whether,  actually, the last time they increased tobacco taxes, what was the impact on consumption, and  what was the impact on inflation? We are not going to have a knee-jerk reaction to what the  Government announces as a knee-jerk policy announcement last Friday and Thursday.

JESSICA IRVINE: What about the bank deposit tax? That's actually been something that's  been argued by the Reserve Bank that we need, and it's something to set up money for a rainy  day. Why wouldn't you just take that?

JOE HOCKEY: Well, again, Jessica, I want to consult with the people affected. For example,  smaller financial institutions are gravely concerned about it, and the cost of increasing  deposits, for example. Ah, you know, credit unions and smaller institutions may well be  significantly adversely affected, because they rely heavily on Government-guaranteed  deposits. Whereas bigger institutions, like the four majors, they have other sources of  revenue, such as superannuation and insurance and so on. So the impact on their balance  sheet may well be a lot less than the impact on smaller institutions.

JESSICA IRVINE: This is the thing, though - nobody wants to pay higher taxes, and every  industry that you’re going to go to is going to say, “Don't tax us.” The problem is, we're not  raising enough money in the Budget, or we’re spending too much. And you have to tell us-

JOE HOCKEY: No, the problem - Correct. This is it. This is it. The issue is they're spending  too much. For example, we’ve said - we've been upfront. The Labor Party says, “Well, you  have no savings.” But then they attack us for cutting the schoolkids bonus. They say, “You  have no savings,” and then they say, “Well, you're not honouring our commitment to go from  9% to 12% in the time frame that we've announced on superannuation.” And then they say,  “You've got no savings,” and they say - they attack us for saying we’re going to reduce the  public service by 12,000 over the first few years. So, this is the spin out of Labor, right? On  the one hand, they attack us for not having savings, but on the other hand, they attack us for  having savings.

LAUREN WILSON: But do you accept that the economic statement shows that there are real  structural difficulties on the revenue side of the ledger-

JOE HOCKEY: No.

LAUREN WILSON: As well as the spending side of the ledger, and isn’t this a clarion call  for broad tax reform?

JOE HOCKEY: Well, that's what we've said. You see, for example, we said we will have a  proper process for tax reform. We thought the Henry Tax Review was going to be a proper  process. Now, that has obviously been an abject failure. We've said - Tony Abbott announced  in Budget and reply speech - we will have a proper process for proper tax reform, and  whatever comes out of that process, which will be a white paper, we will take to a subsequent  election, seeking-

LAUREN WILSON: Including a GST increase?

JOE HOCKEY: We will take it to a subsequent election, seeking the mandate of the  Australian people - their approval. Right? As we did previously with tax reform. But we are  not going to go down the path of Labor, with 43 new or increased taxes coming out of left  field like the FBT increase, which is like a baseball bat to the car industry and charities and a  range of others. We are not going to have that sort of knee-jerk policy initiative, and certainly  not in relation to tax.

JESSICA IRVINE: Joe, you've been out there trashing the reputation of Treasury for some  weeks and months now. You say you can't believe anything Treasury says. They've never got  a number right. I guess you're going to have to get into Treasury if you're in power and sack  Martin Parkinson?

JOE HOCKEY: Well, you can speculate all you want. Firstly, I always say the Government is  the one that's got it wrong.

JESSICA IRVINE: So you're going to keep him?

JOE HOCKEY: Well, Penny - Penny Wong is the worst Finance Minister Australia has ever  had. Wayne Swan was the worst Treasurer.

JESSICA IRVINE: But you've been attacking Treasury as well.

JOE HOCKEY: Just, let me finish. The Treasurer and the Minister of Finance are the two  people responsible for the numbers. And they've got every number wrong. Every single  number under Labor is wrong. And how many times - how many times do we have to have  another economic statement to prove that Labor can't manage money? They've lost control of  the Budget. They're losing control of the economy. The sooner the election is held, the better  - for the sake of Australia and the sake of people's jobs.

KATHRYN ROBINSON, PRESENTER: Mr Hockey, it is an election year. Do you feel as  though you've at all been snookered since Kevin Rudd's return? He's moved very swiftly on  key policy areas - the carbon tax, Labor Party reform, border control, and the economy - all  areas that the Coalition once attacked the Government on?

JOE HOCKEY: Well, Kevin Rudd's all talk. He's all talk. Everything starts to unwind in the  days and weeks after he makes these big announcements. Whether it be the carbon tax - and  we now know it's still going to $38 a tonne after the economic statement came out - where he  claimed it was $380 per year, and even his own Treasurer had to correct him. Or Papua New  Guinea, where it's not worth the paper it's written on, effectively, and Kevin Rudd is now  building bigger detention centres in Australia after claiming that everyone would be going  offshore. Or be it the car industry, where he says people driving expensive cars are the ones  that are going to be hit by the changes on fringe benefits tax. And in fact, the people being hit  are driving Camrys and are earning $60,000 a year. So everything they say is proven wrong.  Now Kevin Rudd is in a position - I have never seen a Prime Minister that has had to be  bullied by his own party into calling an election. Kevin Rudd thinks that the more the  Australian people see of him, the more they will love him. The problem is it's not about  Kevin Rudd, it's about the Australian people. And we are seeing the economy bleed now. The  economy is bleeding because Kevin Rudd will not call an election, because he thinks he's  more important than everyone else in Australia.

LAUREN WILSON: But we've seen a number of reactionary policies from the Coalition.  We've seen the 2,000-person tent island on Nauru. We've seen the three-star military border-protection policy. We've also seen your back flip on Gonski. Are you spooked?

JOE HOCKEY: No. No! Spooked by Kevin Rudd? I mean, you know, he - how could you be  spooked by someone that is more interested in himself than in good policy? Now, from our  perspective, we've been rolling out policy. We've rolled out more than 40 policies.

And people say, “You're reacting to Kevin Rudd.” We're not reacting to Kevin Rudd! Kevin  Rudd is - I mean, you know, he’s running around like Kevin Kardashian. He thinks he's a  celebrity. We need someone to govern the country, someone with real policies, with real  substance. And the Australian people will see through Kevin Rudd. I mean, they have to.  Because we can't afford another three years of Labor.

LAUREN WILSON: On the issue of border protection, for instance, Labor's policy offers  asylum seekers no - a guarantee that they will never be resettled in Australia. Your policy  offers asylum seekers no guarantee they will. Surely you're offering some level of hope to  people-smugglers who are putting asylum seekers on boats?

JOE HOCKEY: No. No. We've said we will turn back the boats where it's possible to do so.  Kevin Rudd hasn't said that. Number two - we've said we will have offshore processing.  We're the ones that developed it. We were the ones who built it. Kevin Rudd, version one,  closed it. Version two, he can't rush fast enough to open them. And number three - we said,  “You'll go on Temporary Protection Visas if you get to Australia. You won't be guaranteed  permanent residency.” So there's nothing to sell. The fact is, Kevin Rudd said people are not  going to get to Australia, but they are. We've seen barely a bus load of people go to Papua  New Guinea now, and the fact is, he - it comes out yesterday that they're building new  detention centres in Australia. Why would you build new detention centres in Australia if no  one's going to come here? So, this is a hypocrisy.

JESSICA IRVINE: Why would you build tents if no one's going to come here?

JOE HOCKEY: Well, because, that's right - there are tents overseas. And that's what we've  said - they will go there. They will go to Nauru. And, you know, I'm just bemused at the  suggestion that somehow we're reacting to him, because he's trying to move onto our policy  framework and pretend that it's all his. Remember, he said, “You don't want to jump to the  right,” in relation to people-smuggling. Now he says, “You don't want to jump to the left.”  This is a man bereft of values and principles. And it's now coming through in his policy back  flips.

JESSICA IRVINE: Just on Gonski - you've been out there and the Coalition has been out  there saying this is an incredibly expensive promise - $16 billion over - $15 billion over six  years. It's not about the money, it's actually about the quality of teachers. And yet Tony  Abbott has announced that you will embrace those Gonski extra monies for schoolkids. Did  he talk to you first about that?

JOE HOCKEY: Yes, of course. And, in, in, in - of course! What- what would you do?

JESSICA IRVINE: And you said, “Go spend the money?”

JOE HOCKEY: I - what we have said is the funding envelope for schools will remain in  place, because we want to give stability and certainty to those schools. I mean, we're now  getting towards the end of this financial year. It's ridiculous now to try and change next year's  funding. And in subsequent years, we're saying, “This is the envelope.” But firstly, let me say  what is being claimed to be Gonski is not Gonski. And, you know, poor old David Gonski -  I'm starting to feel sorry for him about this, because what he recommended and what the  Government is implementing are two very different things.

Secondly, we go beyond money. We're saying, “Look, this is the funding framework, but we  are going to change the way things are run. We want to give more power to principals and  we're not going to set up a second bureaucracy in Canberra to have a second organisation  trying to run state schools.” These are big changes. But from our perspective, we want to give  funding certainty to the schools.

