

Julie Bishop MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS





Marius Benson ABC Newsradio

15 July 2013

Subjects: Election campaign, election date, Neilson poll, Greens policy on unemployment  entitlements

E&OE…

MARIUS BENSON Julie Bishop, good morning.

JULIE BISHOP Good morning Marius.

MARIUS BENSON The ads are up and running. Fair to say the election campaign is on  really now.

JULIE BISHOP Except that we need an election date. Labor nominated the 14th of  September as the election date and Kevin Rudd has given no reason why the election won’t  go ahead on that date. So why isn’t the election on the 14th of September? It was announced  six months ago and people expect it to be on that day.

I know many people who have made their plans around an election on the 14th of September.  So while Kevin Rudd procrastinates about a date there’s more uncertainty for business, for  families, for the country generally.

MARIUS BENSON The guessing game this morning involves one guess in The Daily  Telegraph which suggests there’s a Caucus meeting next Monday at which the Caucus  members are expected to endorse Kevin Rudd’s changes to party rules, reforms of the party

and that after that Kevin Rudd will announce a date, either August 24 or August 31. Is an  earlier election better?

JULIE BISHOP We’re ready whenever Kevin Rudd calls the election. He still hasn’t given a  reason as to why it’s not on the 14th of September but we’ll be ready whenever he deigns to  call an election, whether it’s in August, September, October, or any other date.

MARIUS BENSON The Neilson poll in the Fairfax papers today has it at 50/50, it has the  primary vote for Labor up to 39 per cent which is just a fraction ahead of where it was at the  2010 election. Do you think it’s that close?

JULIE BISHOP The polls are always close in Federal elections. That’s what we expect  because it’s a contest for the leadership of the nation. An election should be a contest of  ideas. The Coalition has done the hard policy work and when the election date is set we’ll  release all our policies and make a strong case for stable, experienced government that  delivers a strong economy and protects our borders.

Kevin Rudd is yet to come up with any solutions to any of the problems he caused last time  he was in the job, whether it’s the mounting government debt or the influx of boat arrivals.  Until he actually puts out some policies I believe that the Coalition will be able to present a  very good case to be elected.

MARIUS BENSON What is not close in the Nielson poll is the standing of the two leaders.  Kevin Rudd is miles ahead. Is that a surprise to you?

JULIE BISHOP Well every Prime Minister that Tony Abbott has gone up against the Labor  Party has sacked. We know that Kevin Rudd won’t last beyond the next election and there’s  no doubt that Tony Abbott has been a very effective opposition leader in highlighting the  incompetence of this Government. It’s still a dysfunctional and divided rabble.

Last time Kevin Rudd was in the job his approval rating started very high and then  plummeted when people realised the full extent of his incompetence and the chaos that he  caused such as the debt, the waste, the scandalous pink batts scheme, the change in border  protection laws which re-activated the people smugglers.

MARIUS BENSON So given that view, why the Rudd-mania now? Why the rockstar  welcome?

JULIE BISHOP Well that’s what happened the first time he was in the job and then after a  little while his ratings plummeted and I expect that to be the same.

MARIUS BENSON And Tony Abbott’s ratings very low.

JULIE BISHOP Well that’s the lot of opposition leaders. Tony Abbott has been a very  effective opposition leader and he’ll make a fine Prime Minister. He’s got a policy platform,  he’s got real solutions to some of the problems that our country faces and he’ll provide the  certainty, the competence, the experience, the stability that I believe people are yearning for.

MARIUS BENSON Malcolm Turnbull has said yesterday that many, many people say they  want me as leader, me Malcolm Turnbull. Do people tell you they want Malcolm Turnbull as  leader?

JULIE BISHOP No they don’t, I believe Malcolm is referring to the opinion polls, but  Malcolm’s an integral part of our team, he’s a very effective communications shadow and  he’ll be a very effective member of our team.

MARIUS BENSON But nobody’s saying we want Malcolm Turnbull to you?

JULIE BISHOP People want a change of government, that’s what they’re saying to me. They  want an election and they want a change of government and they know that to get a change of  government they have to vote for the Coalition.

MARIUS BENSON Can I ask you about a specific Greens policy which was announced  yesterday which is that they would increase unemployment payments. Do you believe the  current dole payment of $35 a day should be increased?

JULIE BISHOP All entitlements have to be looked at in the context of the overall budget  position. As we now know the budget is deeply in deficit, in fact, the Labor Party have  delivered I think four, perhaps five of the largest deficits on record and there is a mounting  debt started under Kevin Rudd and it’s still continuing.

Until we see the state of the books we’re not in a position to increase any entitlements. That’s  why we want an election called so that the government at last has to reveal the true state of  the debt and deficit that they’ve run up.

MARIUS BENSON Julie Bishop, thank you very much.

JULIE BISHOP It’s been my pleasure.

- Ends -

- Ends -

