1







THE HON DR CRAIG EMERSON MP  MINISTER FOR TERTIARY EDUCATION, SKILLS, SCIENCE AND RESEARCH  MINISTER FOR TRADE AND COMPETITIVENESS  MINISTER ASSISTING THE PRIME MINISTER ON ASIAN CENTURY POLICY



Transcript  Parliamentary Doors      20 June 2013



E&OE

Subjects: PM’s visit to Indonesia.

CRAIG EMERSON: In the White Paper on Australia in the Asian Century, the  Government has identified Indonesia as a top priority for  Australia. We have an excellent relationship with the  Government of Indonesia, but that will be further advanced  with the Prime Minister's visit to Indonesia with the President.  The relationship is in great shape. And just recently, for  example, the Indonesian Government announced that it would  be importing, free of quotas, high-quality beef. And that's a  really important breakthrough for the relationship. We'll  continue to deepen and strengthen that relationship in other  areas such as education, such as infrastructure development.  Certainly the Indonesian Government has a philosophical  approach of inclusive growth. It wants to ensure that the  benefits of growth aren't limited just to large corporations and  the major cities, but that people in rural Indonesia also benefit.  And, of course, we are already cooperating on beef cattle with  the Indonesian authorities to improve the animal husbandry in  Indonesia. We know that the Indonesian people would like to

2



consume more and more beef. My good friend and  counterpart, Trade Minister Gita Wirjawan, considers that we  can get beef consumption in Indonesia up from two kilograms  per person to 20. That's a tenfold increase. So there are  enormous opportunities here and we are seeing a responsive  Indonesian Government which wants to see us investing in  Indonesia, maybe Indonesia investing in Australia, and greater  trade in beef and in other products.

QUESTION: Why is this Indonesia trip being left to the last minute? I mean,  you're about to go into an election campaign. Why now?

EMERSON: This is the third … this is actually the third meeting at leaders'  level involving Prime Minister Gillard and President  Yudhoyono. The timing's actually set by the Indonesian  authorities and it's one of three regular meetings.

QUESTION: Given that President Yudhoyono is retiring at the next  Indonesian election, how productive do you think this visit will  be?

EMERSON: Well, you always want to have meetings with the top  leadership of any country. I think President Yudhoyono has  shown great leadership and continues to do so. He's been an  influence for peace and stability within Indonesia and beyond.  So I think he's performed very well, and he's got more work to  do. So we will continue to nurture that relationship. Because  this is a country of 245 million people, which is not too far off  entering, you know, the top echelons of economies around the  world. That's certainly set out in the White Paper on Australia  in the Asian Century. We see countries such as Indonesia -  obviously China, Japan, Korea and India - as being really central  to the creation of not only more jobs in Australia but better

3



jobs. And, you know, creating in the Asian region more peace,  more stability, more prosperity is good for both countries.

QUESTION: Is this just a way to appease voters in Western Sydney that you  are doing something about boats?

EMERSON: This is a regular visit. I just explained that.

QUESTION: It appears before an election campaign, though.

EMERSON: I just explained that. I don't know what appears to you, but this  is the third in a series of meetings at the leadership level whose  timing has been determined by the Government of Indonesia.

QUESTION: But realistically, [indistinct]

QUESTION: What will be discussed on asylum seekers?

EMERSON: On asylum seekers: I'm sure that will come up. You know, the  value of regional cooperation. These are regional problems  that can only be addressed through a regional solution.

QUESTION: What can Indonesia do to help?

EMERSON: Well, Indonesia has been working with the Australian  authorities in intercepting and providing information on people  smuggling operations and boats that might be departing. The  problem is, of course, that Indonesia is an archipelago of, I  think, 19,000 islands. So you can't actually monitor and provide  surveillance over activities across such a broad expanse of land  and sea.

4



QUESTION: Have they done enough, though?

EMERSON: Well, it - the Indonesian Government - is working very hard on  what is a vexed issue. No-one believes otherwise. We've  obviously seen Tony Abbott realise that his own slogan of “stop  the boats” doesn't actually stop anything. And now he's  vacillated and backed down to some very vague reference that  maybe if he was elected some time into the future, maybe not,  something might possibly happen.

QUESTION: You're convinced Julia Gillard will be going there on 4 and 5  July as Prime Minister?

EMERSON: Of course. And the President of Indonesia, President  Yudhoyono, will be the President of Indonesia.

QUESTION: Realistically, what can be achieved by these talks given you'll  effectively be in caretaker mode?

EMERSON: We won't be in caretaker mode at all. I think that happens  when the writs are issued in August. We're governing and we  will be talking constructively with the Indonesian Government  about, you know, increased beef - cooperation in the beef  industry - education's a really important area for us. The  Indonesian Government wants to see greater opportunities for  Indonesian students studying here in Australia. And indeed the  Australia Awards program dwarfs the Colombo Plan, absolutely  dwarfs it. It does in five years what the Colombo plan took 35  years to do. So these are the sorts of areas of cooperation that  the Prime Minister and the President will be discussing. Okay,  thanks very much.

