





Sky News Australia

Transcript, E&OE, proof only

17 February 2013

CHRIS KENNY: Foreign Minister Bob Carr, thanks for joining  Viewpoint.

BOB CARR: Pleasure.

CHRIS KENNY: The detention and deportation of Senator Nick  Xenophon from Malaysia, what does that say about the state of  democracy and the general respect for human rights in Malaysia?

BOB CARR: Well, I found it very disappointing. I thought that there's  no possible harm done to a robust democracy by allowing a senator  from Australia to go there and observe what's taking place, so found  it surprising as the Prime Minister said. Surprising and disappointing.

CHRIS KENNY: What action will you be taking to register Australia's  objections with the Malaysian Government?

BOB CARR: Well, Chris, last night I spoke to Foreign Minister Anifah  from Malaysia. I indicated again that we were disappointed in the  decision. I told him I thought the visit by an Australian senator would

pass virtually unnoticed and cause no angst or distress to Malaysia's  exercise in democracy, which must take place, I understand, by April  this year, a national election. He said, as you'd expect, that Malaysia  does not welcome interference in its elections, it is a democratic  state. We agreed that we wouldn't let this incident mar the strong  bilateral ties that are in the interest of both countries. Australia and  Malaysia must get on. It's in our interests. We've got a host of  interests tied up in this relationship.

CHRIS KENNY: In reality, though, you can't be too firm with the  Malaysians, can you? Because you need to nurture that relationship,  especially in order to maintain prospects for the Malaysian solution  on asylum seeker policy.

BOB CARR: The Malaysian Arrangement doesn't figure in this. That  can't be given effect due to the deadlock about it in the Australian  Parliament. Why in God's name we can't have the Malaysian  Arrangement passed by the Australian Parliament, approved by the  Coalition and the Greens, I do not know. I do not know. I think that's  one of the mysteries of existence. But, no, that doesn't figure in this.  The point is Australia's got to have good relations with its 10 ASEAN  neighbours.

CHRIS KENNY: Just while we're on the asylum seeker issue, I want to  mention the fact that you're spending some of the aid budget on our  asylum seeker program, about $275 million has been redirected as I  understand it. Now, I don't have a problem with that, I know you're  getting some criticism for it, but I'm interested in the aid budget  overall as the Government looks to trim spending in the upcoming  overall budget. Isn't there room to cut more spending from the aid  budget to at least reduce the expected growth because, as I

understand it, AusAID is already having difficulty spending the  growing aid budget efficiently and effectively enough?

BOB CARR: Chris, that is not my view. I've now had time to observe  AusAID programs. Indeed, last week in Solomon Islands, in Kiribati,  Vanuatu and Samoa I saw how darn practical Australian aid is. The  practical difference it's making is the striking thing.

CHRIS KENNY: Yes, there are certainly many effective aid programs,  worthwhile aid programs, but does that mean that you're ruling out  any further aid cuts in the looming May budget?

BOB CARR: Chris, I don't speculate about what is in future budgets. I  can't do that. The view I take with budgets is turn up on the night  and you'll see what happens. I'm glad you made your earlier point,  though, about the legitimacy of finding money in the aid budget to  support refugee sustenance. If you're looking after refugees on  Australian soil, in quality it's no different from looking after stateless,  homeless people in refugee camps in Pakistan or Indonesia. They've  got the same validity.

CHRIS KENNY: Okay. I want to mention North Korea now, especially  after they detonated or tested that nuclear device last week. They're  thumbing their nose now at the international community, aren't  they, and doesn't this just demonstrate the complete impotence of  the United Nations Security Council?

BOB CARR: It shows the difficulty the world community - not just the  UN but the world community - has. And it shows the difficulty the  nations of East Asia have, it shows the difficulty China has in bringing  influence to bear on one errant state. This is a regime that is unique;  unique in its lack of humanity towards its own population and almost  unique in its determination to upset a balance and stability in its

region by pursuing nuclear armaments. The regime is a unique study  in political repression.

I don't believe there's any area of the globe that has such systematic  denial of human rights as North Korea. And we're going to highlight  that very vigorously in the United Nations Human Rights Council in  Geneva and in other forums. But I can only agree with you on the  bottom line. It is able to snub world opinion, the opinion of its  neighbours and its ally China as much as that of the other nations in  the United Nations.

CHRIS KENNY: You've acted to defer a visit by North Korean officials  to Australia. They were coming here to look at setting up an embassy  here, but that's strong action in response to this, sure. But I'm very  surprised that this was going to be undertaken anyway. After all,  North Korea tested nuclear devices a few years back. Since then, of  course, there've been missile tests and missile firings in  contravention of UN Security Council resolutions, so now surely -  even before now wouldn't have been the time to be going soft of  North Korea?

BOB CARR: No, Chris, I believe quite the contrary, that while you  support sanctions and speak openly and vigorously about the  country's denial of human rights you should have diplomatic  relations with them.

CHRIS KENNY: Let's go to the other side of the world now, and the  case of Ben Zygier or Prisoner X, the dual national Australian-Israeli,  and have you made more requests of the Israeli Government to get  more information about this case and are you satisfied that there  were no suspicious circumstances surrounding his death?

BOB CARR: It's very hard for Australia to establish an answer to that  last question. We are going to be dependent on what the Israelis  themselves tell us. There's no way we can conduct an inquiry in  Israel, no way we can call witnesses, there's no way we can go into  that very secure prison. But we've already asked the Israelis for  information and we will do that in a more formal fashion, I think in  the next few days.

CHRIS KENNY: But Kevin Rudd, the former Prime Minister and  Foreign Minister, reminded us in his television interview this morning  that the Government was first notified about this case back in -  when he was still Prime Minister, back in February 2010. Wasn't that  the time to be asking questions about that, rather than waiting 'til  now?

BOB CARR: Well, Chris, that's exactly why I've asked for a full report  from the head of my department, Peter Varghese. I want to know  how from 2010 to the present we maintained contact on this issue. I  want to know whether DFAT failed in its consular duties here. I want  to know what contact there was between security agencies and the  Israelis. I can only take this further, and I can only force a change in  consular practice by my department - if that's required - when I  have that full report. We want the Israelis to make a contribution to  that report.

[Interview moves to domestic matters]

Media enquiries

 Minister's office: (02) 6277 7584

 DFAT Media Liaison: (02) 6261 1555



