PRIME MINISTER  TRANSCRIPT OF QUESTION & ANSWER SESSION  NATIONAL PRESS CLUB, CANBERRA  30 JANUARY 2013



E & O E - PROOF ONLY

Subjects:      Natural disasters; Parliamentary reform; Budget and savings;  2013 federal election date; NT Senate preselection; Governing; United Nations  Security Council; MRRT; Media policy; Opposition’s costings; Fixed-term  elections; Robert McClelland; Political conduct; Agriculture and farming

JOURNALIST: I have to ditch my first question now. We've had another summer of  natural disasters. Have you got a sense yet of what impact that will have on your  budget?

And despite the higher level of household savings that you mentioned, there’s a  large incidence of underinsurance by Australian households. Are you concerned  about that and is there anything your Government can do to address it?

PM: The answers in turn is, no we don’t have a cost estimate yet.

What we know about flood waters is you can’t cost and see the damage until the  floodwaters subside, until they go away and you can see what's left underneath.

That was our experience when we last saw devastating floods in Queensland. That  will be our experience in these floods.

So the costing will take some time and we'll work with the State Government to  assess damage and to make appropriate arrangements to rebuild Queensland and  other parts of the nation that have been hit by natural disasters in the last few weeks.

And we've still got the worst of the fire season to come so there are still potentially  some difficult days ahead.

On insurance, it does concern me if people are underinsured. We've worked with the  insurance industry to clarify definitions, to try and get out of the system some of the  things that drive people most crazy about their insurance policy; that they think  they're covered and when they get it out they're not, so we’ve worked on that.

But my message is always to people that they should be appropriately insured. We  do work to support people at times of natural disaster, but government will never be  able to be wholly there to substitute for the benefits of appropriate insurance.

MODERATOR: In terms of local government underinsurance Prime Minister, do you  have a particular concern about that, councils themselves?

PM: We had a good look at this following the 2011 natural disasters and I think some  good work was done to talk about insurance and who needs to be insured.

Also to talk about some of the facts about premiums that would come with some of  our big infrastructure assets, which actually wouldn’t make it worthwhile.

So I think we’re better informed than we were.

But the extent that anybody is underinsured, whether that’s a household, a business  or a government instrumentality, then that’s something that they need to direct their  attention to.

Government can assist, will be there, we always will. But we cannot substitute for  appropriate prudential arrangements.

JOURNALIST: As we come into the third year of minority government, it would seem  - based on observations of a number of factors - that Australians hold our political  process in some sort of contempt. Hold our Parliament in some sort of contempt, if  not dismay.

What can you do to restore confidence, to restore the electorate’s confidence in our  parliamentary institutions, and do you accept any blame for the toxicity of our political  debate. Tony Abbott, your opponent today is promising to reform parliament. Should  this be part of your agenda as well?

PM: Minister Albanese has dealt with the announcement made by his opposite  number Christopher Pyne, so I won’t bother to deal with that.

On the topic overall, I think Australians want to see stability, they want to see  certainty, they want to see you getting down to the work, they want to see you’ve got  a plan for the future.

That’s what I’ve outlined today, that’s what’s driven us during this period of  government. And that’s what will be presented by me to the electorate when it comes  time for electioneering, and I’ve outlined the date for you today.

In terms of the atmosphere of politics, this in my view has been a difficulty since the  days of the last election because there was a strategic decision taken by the  Opposition that it was in their interest to maximise the appearance of chaos and all  the rest of it in Parliament.

Here we stand a few years later in election year with the Parliament going to election  on the normal date. That tactic has been a spectacular failure and I hope it would  therefore dissuade people from pursuing it in the future.



JOURNALIST: The Government said it’s unlikely to deliver its promised surplus  because of the falloff in taxation revenue, which you mentioned during your speech.  Will the deterioration in the budget bottom line be solely due to that falloff in tax  revenue? Will all your new spending between now and September 14 be fully offset,  not just your big signature policies, but all policies?



And also given that Labor in opposition didn’t release its full costings until the  election campaign, isn’t it reasonable for Tony Abbott to do likewise, and if you don’t  think so, why not?

PM: Okay, happy to take those questions too. We are sticking to our medium-term  fiscal strategy, which means that we are offsetting spending with savings across the  forward estimates for our major new structural expenditures like the work we need to  do in schools, and the work we need to do for Australians with disability.

You will see the long-term savings strategy to match those expenditures, or to  support those expenditures, so as I said in the speech, structural spending needs to  be associated with structural saves.

What you will see in the Budget and what the Treasurer made clear at the end of last  year, is that we’ve seen revenue downgrades happen again. I’ve explained in the  speech how they are in breach of the economic orthodoxies that have been around.

We are not offsetting those revenue downgrades and we are not offsetting the  operation of the automatic stabilisers.

On costings, I do believe that particularly having made an $11 billion error last time,  it is incumbent upon the Opposition to put forward detailed costings this time.

They have two things that an Opposition has never had before to enable them to do  that.

One, they’ve got the benefit of a fixed election date now, with several months’ notice.  Two, because of what we’ve done with the Parliamentary Budget Office, they’ve got  more resources available to them than an Opposition has ever had before in the  history of our nation to produce proper costings.

I think people are entitled to conclude if they can’t produce costings with that level of  resources over a time period of months that is because they either can’t do it or they  deliberately don’t want to do it because they don’t want you to know the truth.

JOURNALIST: Just following on from Lenore’s question, I’m just wondering if you’re  going to commit to a surplus in the next term of Parliament if Labor’s elected.

And secondly I’m also very interested about September 14. How did you come up  with the date, who did you consult, did you tell Cabinet you were going to do this last  night? Could you just explain how we came to September 14?

PM: The well-known fascination with a good process story. When served up with a  big outcome story there’s always something to write, but if you need the process  story to go with it, the process story is this.

I have always said that the Parliament would serve full-term, always said it. I’ve said  it in the days that the hysteria about the life of this Parliament was at its maximum

effect. Said it in those days because it was right then, I’m saying it now because it’s  right now. And I’ve given you the date. So Parliament going full-term.

If you have the opinion that Parliament ought to go full-term - and I always have -  then there’s only a limited number of dates on which the election could be held.

I reflected on this over the summer and thought that it’s not right for Australians to be  forced into a guessing game, and it’s not right for Australians to not face this year  with certainty and stability.

So in the interests of certainty, in the interests of transparency, in the interests of  good governance I’ve made the date clear today.

What it means is people can make their plans. It means they can look at the  Government and know very clearly which are the days of governing and which are  the days of campaigning.

Other participants in the political process don’t have to worry about surprises, they  can be very clear too about when they will outline their fully detailed, fully costed  plans.

I consulted with the Deputy Prime Minister and a few senior colleagues. I discussed  with them the decision I’d come to over the summer and I’m announcing it today.

MODERATOR: I think there was a first part to your question, I was so taken with  your second part that I’ve forgotten what it was.

JOURNALIST: Just interested in whether you’ll commit to a surplus in the next term.

PM: We’re not delivering the May Budget for you as well today, Sid. You’ll have to  wait.

JOURNALIST: I sense, it’s probably early, but I sense a collective sigh of relief  across the nation today, your announcement, for the business community and  journalists and people in general.

PM: I couldn’t take another month of Kieran Gilbert standing out in the rain and the  cold, it’s too much.

JOURNALIST: Given what you’ve done do you think there’s a case just to move to  fixed terms in this country for the very reason you’ve just outlined, why you’ve done  what you’ve done?

PM: I think there will probably be a debate about that because of the decision I’ve  announced today. But I’m really not going to be distracted myself by that debate.

I took a decision about this year. I took a decision about this election. I’ve always  been crystal clear that we were going to go full-term and it seemed to me the right  thing to do.

If I settled on a strategy and settled on a date to make it transparent to the Australian  people it seemed to me the right thing to do in the interests of good governance to  be clear about what days people could look to their Government for the days in  which we’ll be acting as a Government and the days in which we will be in the  campaign period.

And I thought it was good to give people certainty, so I have.

JOURNALIST: In your speech you outlined some of the concerns of Australians, and  I note that some of them are things like travel time to work and community safety  when you gave statistics saying that we’re actually safer than a lot of other places,  and seemed to be suggesting that these are not well-founded fears.

Are there some things that governments just cannot address for Australians? Would  you acknowledge it’s just not all about the money that there are some sentiments  and some things that you just can’t fix.

And secondly, going back to yesterday, and you’re departing Senator in the Northern  Territory, Trish Crossin. She has called for the Federal Government to compensate  the Stolen Generation’s members in the Northern Territory as has been done in the  states around Australia. Will you do that, if not why not, is it because you can’t afford  it?

PM: Well I’ll take the second question first. Trish Crossin over I think more than two  years now has pursued this idea, policy idea of hers about having a compensation  arrangement for members of the Stolen Generations in the Northern Territory.

It’s something she is in discussions about with Jenny Macklin. I’m not in a position to  give you an outcome to those discussions today, but I do very much respect that it’s  something that Trish has worked long and hard on and is very dear to her heart.

In terms of your first question, just remind me?

MODERATOR: All things, can you really do all things for all Australians.

PM: Okay, no of course government can’t do all things for all Australians. We don’t  try to, and we never would.

People want to get about their lives getting the benefits of their hard work, getting the  benefits of the responsibility they show in their own lives, building their own lives,  having their own love affairs, making their own matches, nurturing their own families,  all of the things that go to make up a life. Of course they want to do that.

But they have got a legitimate expectation that government has got a plan for the  future, it’s a plan which means there will be opportunities available to them to be  seized. That they can look forward to the opportunity for their first job, or a better job,  or the opportunity to open a small business.

That they can look at their kids and know that they will be in a nation that can offer  them the best of those opportunities too; a good job, a better job over the course of  their life.

That's what we are seeking to achieve through the work we're doing to build our  economy robustly enough for the challenges of the future.

And people want to know that there is some sharing of risk, that if the worst  happened to you, someone would be there to assist you.

People don't ask to have a child born with cerebral palsy. They don't ask to be  the person that got Parkinson's disease. They don't ask to be the mother of the  teenage boy who didn't think about all the risks and dived off that pier and came up  with an acquired brain injury.

No-one asks for that. And I think as a nation, there are times in which we should  share risk.

Labor, through its history, has been the party that has created the opportunities of  the future, the opportunities to get ahead. And we're party that has better shared risk.

People used to go to bankruptcy court because they couldn't pay their medical bills.  Labor fixed that with Medibank, and then Medicare. That's what I mean about  the sharing of risk.

And those things, properly construed, give you more ability to shape and structure  your own life than you would have had if government hadn't acted. It is an  empowering thing to put people in a world of opportunity. It is a comforting thing to  know that if you fell, someone, government, would be there to help you.

JOURNALIST: Could I please clarify, did you negotiate or discuss the election date  with Rob Oakeshott, Tony Windsor and the Greens as your agreement said that you  would, so was there conversations with them before the announcement?

And you've talked today about good governance and being clear with the people and  calling on the Opposition to show their costings. Can you please update your  costings, the Treasurer announced before Christmas that the surplus was now  unlikely. So can you tell the people watching this broadcast what size deficit for this  year they should be preparing for given there's a bit of speculation it could be in the  order of up to $10 billion?

PM: On the surplus/deficit issues, on all aspects of government accounting, you will  see the May Budget and you will see the most up-to-date figures and then the pre-election fiscal outlook will be delivered during the campaign.

There will be no mysteries, no surprises, you will be able to read every figure. And I  can certainly say on behalf of the Government you will be able to read our costings  of the policies we're implementing as a Government and that we put forward for the  consideration of the Australian people.

They can be there, they should be there, and from us, they will be there.

In terms of others in the Parliament, I did speak by telephone to Mr Windsor and to  Mr Oakeshott and advise them of the decision I'd made.

JOURNALIST: You mentioned in your speech new opportunities and respect coming  to Australia now that we're on the UN Security Council. Yet quite recently the UN's  refugee agency has condemned the Government over the treatment of  asylum seekers. I'm just wondering just how you reconcile those and if there's any  sort of cause of embarrassment for Government that we're actually on the Security  Council yet being quite severely criticised by the UNHCR?

PM: Absolutely not. No, none. I don't think there's any difficulty reconciling them.  They're not inconsistent.

We are founding members of the United Nations. We are people at the United  Nations held in high regard. We would not have been successful in a ballot for the  United Nations Security Council if that were not so.

We fought a hard campaign, and won through because people do respect our nation  around the world, its efforts in peacekeeping, in peace-building, what we achieved  through our aid program.

And we've got a proud track record of welcoming refugees into this country. And will  continue to do so.

The arrangements we make as a nation state about dealing with unauthorised  arrivals and the assessment of people's refugee claims are a matter for us. And we  need to make the right decisions, honouring always our obligations under the  Refugee Convention, and we do.

Now, in terms of criticism from any instrumentality of the United Nations, one of the  reasons we have the United Nations is so it can raise issues, spark debate, have  consideration, whether that's the women's agency or Helen Clark running the  development agency or whoever else. That's a good thing in terms of the democratic  fabrics of nations around the world.

But I don't accept criticism of our approaches to asylum seeker and refugee issues.  We've got a lot to be proud of and I don't think anybody can maintain that we are  somehow viewed badly around the world because of those things, how do you  square that up with having been elected on the Security Council?

JOURNALIST: You've talked again about the pressures on revenue. Do you have  any plans to revisit the MRRT? There's a lot of initiatives tied to the MRRT. If you're  not going to re-examine it, how are you going to pay for them given that revenues  are a shadow of what was forecast? And do you regret tying so much to the MRRT  revenue given that it was always going to be volatile?

PM: Well you don't solve problems by misdiagnosing cause and effect. And the way  in which we've seen revenues fall as a unit of GDP is not about the MRRT and no-one should mistake it as being about the MRRT.

The huge write-downs have been in company tax and we've also seen a lessening of  capital gains. The huge write-downs are in company tax.

There's this fashionable commentary that somehow there's lots of revenue that's  flowing in from mining at this stage, including through company tax. Because we're in  the investment phase of the boom this is not the phase of the boom where  people pay a lot of company tax.

They pay company tax when they've done the investment; they've started pulling the  oil or the gas or whatever it is out of the ground and selling it and making a profit on  the transaction.

The MRRT, we always understood, would be a tax with movement in it. It  is deliberately calibrated as a profits-based tax because that's the most efficient  way of doing it.

JOURNALIST: Tony Abbott has promised that he'd introduce no adverse changes to  superannuation during a first term of a coalition government. Do you care to match  that promise or do you think it's an irresponsible pledge?

And secondly, is media policy still on your agenda and if so, will you introduce a  public interest test during those months of governing?

PM: There's a difference between a policy and a platitude. In order to convince  people that the Opposition has got a policy for superannuation, then they would need  to produce a fully detailed, fully costed plan which shows how they will integrate it  into the government's budget.

If they're unable to do that then it's a platitude, not a policy.

So if the Opposition produces a policy in that regard, I will respond to it at that time,  and I won't be holding my breath for the time in between.

On the question of media policy, we are still considering the government's policies  and plans following the various reviews that Minister Conroy initiated; the  convergence review, the Finkelstein review and the like. And once again when we've  got something to say in that area, then we will.

JOURNALIST: A couple of questions. You mentioned PEFO, the Pre-Election Fiscal  Outlook. That's usually released about ten days into the campaign.  Usually oppositions wait for that until they start releasing their own costings.



Given you have given Treasury a bit of advance notice in the election day,  can PEFO be released earlier than this in the campaign, perhaps the first day?  Particularly because more and more people are voting early too.

And secondly you mentioned aged care early in your speech, but there was  no further mention of it. You've released a plan, but we haven't seen any legislation,  when will we see aged care reform legislated and operating?

PM: We've certainly outlined comprehensive changes to aged care which we're  committed to, and will do all the things necessary to make sure that they are put into  effect. So yes, what Minister Butler has said to the Australian people is the plan that

we intend to enact.

On PEFO, I'm not in a position to tell you what conclusion Treasury may or may not  come to having heard this speech. But I don't think you should talk yourself  or anybody else into the position that people need to wait for PEFO.

There will be the May Budget.  There will be an election on 14 September. May  budget, 14 September. It is a limited amount of time for any forecasting or revenue  matters to change. A very limited amount of time.

So in those circumstances, in receipt of the budget figures, then there's absolutely  no impediment on anyone contending for the election putting out fully costed policies  and plans.

And I would note too, given a number of things that seem to be referred to in this  platitude sense are expenditure commitments, there's absolutely no embargo right  now on costing them and then outlining where the revenue source would be.

That doesn't need you to know the full sweep of the budget bottom line, or to  have the full May Budget details sitting on your table. If you've come up with a  policy that costs a billion dollars then you look at other expenditures in the Budget  and you find a billion dollars.



If you can't cost it then there are people who can help you. If you can't find it then  you are not going to get it done. If you don’t want to tell people where that's  coming from, why don’t you want to tell people where that's coming from?

JOURNALIST: You've given away what's normally regarded one of the advantages  of having your job by revealing to us all when the election will be. Do you think we  should have fixed terms federally and also some have pointed out online  September 14 is Yom Kippur, the holiest day of the year for Jewish people. Was that  a factor in your thinking at all?

PM: There are only a limited number of days because of international events where  we continue to need Australia to be represented. It's only a limited number of days  because of things like football finals. So I do understand the significance of the day  in question for the Jewish community.

But there would be many of my Melbourne Jewish friends who would also  understand the significance of AFL grand final day. So there are only so many days  and so many selections.

As people are aware, there's more pre-poll and early voting now than there has ever  been before. And so people who face a reason, anything that means it's  not convenient or proper for them to vote on election day, can make alternate  arrangements and have their voices heard.

On my thinking, my decision is about election day 2013. And I've made it. So I've  exercised traditional prime ministerial prerogative. I've just done it in an unusual  fashion and taken everybody into my confidence at a far earlier stage than is done,  and I'm pleased to be able to do so.

I think it gives certainty and shape to the year that Australians having lived through  last year are entitled to.

In terms of fixed terms as a standing feature of how we do federal elections, I think  there will be a debate. I wasn't making a policy decision about that for the long term.  And for me, it's not the uppermost policy matter on my mind.

I'm very focused on jobs, opportunity, fairness, on getting done the big things that will  shape this nation for the future so that's where I will be putting my energies.

MODERATOR: The Prime Minister has indicated she can go beyond our normal  finishing time, at least to some extent so I would ask each of those  remaining journalists to keep their questions reasonably short.

JOURNALIST: Obviously an optimist, do you think the Bulldogs will go straight  through to the preliminary final in September, but I’d like to ask given the recent  events in the Northern Territory, do you plan to intervene in the preselection to  replace Robert McClelland and if so, who do you favour to replace him? And  what will be your lasting memory or tribute to Robert McClelland and his career?

PM: Well, on football and the Bulldogs, I've given you the election date. I can't  give you the Grand Final winner. Though I must admit I have done pretty well with  my tips in the last few years but I need to get closer to the Grand Final to make  sure I have got my tip right.

For AFL devotees, the weekend, the Saturday I've selected, obviously there are  semi-finals being played.

I don't know what the AFL has got planned this year but over the last few years  they’ve made that a Friday night game and a Saturday night game so you're still in  a position to get out there, do how-to-votes for several hours and still get to the footy.  So there that's no cause for alarm amongst people of Melbourne or anywhere  else around the nation.

One of the things that the Deputy Prime Minister and I canvassed was the  implications for NRL as well and I think Swanny's satisfied we haven't done  any damage there. So that's the election timing and the footy.

On Robert McClelland. Robert McClelland has been a terrific local member. He  cares a great deal about his community. I know that from my many discussions with  him.

He has been a good contributor to the Labor team over a long period of time. Both in  opposition as a shadow minister and then as a minister in the Government, including  in my cabinet and did a terrific job.



So he will go to another phase of his life, he's someone who's very dedicated to  family; his wife Michelle and the kids, and I'm sure they're looking forward to the next  stage of the life of the McClelland family, without some of the stresses and  strains that come with this life.

In terms of who will be preselected for that seat, when I announced that I intended  to secure the preselection of Nova Peris for the Northern Territory senate spot,  I indicated then I am a respecter of party processes. I was not going to make it a  usual feature of how I did my work as Prime Minister.

So for that electorate, normal party processes will apply,  including normal preselection processes for the New South Wales branch.

JOURNALIST: Do you favour anyone?

PM: If normal preselection processes are applying then it’s not for me to put the tip  in.

JOURNALIST: Following your captain’s pick of Nova Peris which is forcing Trish  Crossin out of the Senate against her will, the Opposition has again seized on the  issue of trust.

Do you believe or do you accept that you do have an issue when it comes to trust  out in the community, out in the electorate, and if so, can you fix that between now  and 14 September?

PM: Well I think there comes a time in federal politics when we’ve got to speak a fair  bit more frankly about these questions.

I am not the only Prime Minister or political leader who has decided that somebody’s  of such merit that they ought to be preselected. It’s been done in the past by Labor  leaders, I am sure if you scour the history books you will see that it’s been done in  the past by Liberal leaders.

I believed on this occasion for the nation that it was important that an Australian of  the standing and significance of Nova Peris presented for election for our party and  that she, the electors of the NT willing, was the first indigenous woman to come into  the Australian parliament. I think that's an important thing.

On these issues of political conduct more generally, which the Opposition is fond to  have a carry on about, as I understand my history, Mr Abbott is in his position  because a ballot was held against a leader of the opposition, that is there was a

contest against a leader. As I understand my political history, Mr Turnbull was there  because he had a contest against Mr Nelson.

So I understand my political history, John Howard was there because of a number of  contests and twists and turns with Mr Peacock. If this conduct is viewed  as unsatisfactory in Australian life then we'd want to rewrite the history of the last 30  years and we'd want to cull down pretty far in our Parliament before anybody  presented for election.

Now people mightn’t like some of the things that happen in politics. It's not for the  faint hearted and I make some tough decisions. The decision I made about Trish  Crossin was a tough decision. I've made some other pretty tough decisions in my life  too.

You need, in this job, to be up to making the tough decisions. I'm happy to be judged  by them.

And so I would say to people who are thinking about character questions, the one  thing that they would see when they look at me is someone who has shown a  capacity, even in the most difficult of times, to get things done.

And in the world in which we live that can throw up the unexpected and the  hard around every corner, then I think maybe that's a merit in a political leader, not  a deficit.

JOURNALIST: Our farmers are one of the sectors that are coming under  increasing pressure because of the high Australian dollar and other financial factors  that are quite immediate. This is not just a story about whinging farmers. There's  actually some concerns, genuine concerns about ongoing viability.

Given those immediate circumstances what sort of vision can we see from the Labor  Government for our agriculture sector and farmers, and do you regret closing down  the live cattle trade in June 2011 and what sort of damage do you think that's done  for Labor's cause in getting re-elected?

PM: Well, I'm happy to take both questions. Farmers face some extraordinary  pressures. I've talked extensively in the speech about the pressures on  our economic diversity coming from the high Australian dollar and those pressures  impinge on farmers in a variety of ways.



Farmers are facing the consequences of climate change. Climate change is not a  future tense proposition; we are living through climate change.

And people who have worked their land for year after year can often talk to  you passionately, movingly, about the way in which their land has changed  and things about how they go about making their land productive have needed to

change as a result. So there's lots of pressures around.

But in our agricultural sector there are also some incredible opportunities and that is  what we are focused on. On helping our farmers realise those incredible  opportunities.

We live in the region of the world where people, as they become middle class in their  hundreds and hundreds and hundreds of millions, we know because we've watched  that happen with Asia's rise, that they will change their diet; that they will want more  of the kind of food that we produce; that they want more protein, that they will want  more meat; that they will want more dairy; that they will want more wine.

That they will want to eat and enjoy the kind of things that you and I like to eat  and enjoy. This is a huge opportunity for Australian farmers and we've got to  be ready and right to seize it.

It's about what we do overseas, it's about the productivity of on-farm, it's about  working with the agricultural sector, it's about getting the export links right. All of  these things are things we continue to work on with the agricultural sector and

we'll continue to work through them, including with the food strategy that Minister  Ludwig has been working on.

On the live cattle trade, I took what was not an easy decision, and I knew when we  took it that it would cause heartache and dislocation from a major industry.

But my real concern, apart from the welfare of the animals involved, my real concern  for the industry was if we didn't act then the Australian people would have effectively  withdrawn the social licence of that industry and campaigns would have started in a  way which meant that it could not be a continuing industry in our nation.

We live in a democracy. And if enough people get their campaigning up  with sufficient force then they change markets, they change economics, they change  the way that people do things. And if we did not, and people got their own views  about that conduct and I've got my own view about some of that conduct too, but it's  a reality.

And if we did not work so that Australians could be satisfied, or more satisfied than  they were about the animal welfare standards, then I think that would have been a  threat to the existence of the industry.

So it's a pretty tough call. You take the short term disruption and have an industry for  the longer term, or do you try and tough it out and maybe not have the industry for  the longer term?



Well on that call I thought the short-term disruption was better.

JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, congratulations on becoming the first Prime Minister  in Australian history to announce a 225-day election campaign.

PM: It's most definitely not that, Sam.

JOURNALIST: But you've promised some nasty cuts in that speech, not a lot  of detail of where they would be.

In terms of families planning their budget is the 50 per cent child care rebate safe?  Would you look at reducing that for wealthier families or axing it? What about the  baby bonus, have you gone as far as you can in terms of reducing that for a second  child and means testing that also?

PM: Let me assure you, as I did in the speech, my purpose here is not to see the  longest election campaign. Quite the reverse.

I know people are being treated to mini-campaigning and the like so people were  already potentially having to settle in for a long campaign. That is the exact opposite  of my perspective about fixing the date today.

I want to be clear with people. What they will see me do over the coming months  is the work of government and that is because I said in the speech time is not for  wasting.

We have got big things we need to do and I'm going to get them done and they will  be submitted to the judgment of the Australian people now on a fixed time and  people can outline what they think and why they think it on 14 September.

So for me this is about governing and getting the job done and that's what you  will see me doing.

In terms of the rule-in-rule-out games, we've played this game before and I'm not  going to play it, so I know inevitably now there will be stories which says PM refuses  to rule out cuts to CCTR and baby bonus and all the rest of it and people get  themselves into a bit of a frenzy and a bit of a carry on. Well knock yourselves out.

What you will see from us is those structural saves and you can judge them when  you see them.

And perhaps rather than creating an atmosphere of could it be this or could it be  that, why don't we take the approach we've now taken with the election campaign.  You will know and you will be able to judge it from there.



MODERATOR: We'll conclude there. Thank you.

[ENDS]

