

Julie Bishop MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS



Lunchtime Agenda

20 June 2013

Subjects: Prime Minister’s trip to Indonesia, ‘turn back the boats’ policy, crackdown on 457  visas, Afghanistan peace talks

E&OE…

DAVID LIPSON I’m joined now by the Shadow Foreign Minister, Julie Bishop.

I know you may have to get to the Chamber soon so I want to get straight into the Prime  Minister’s trip to Indonesia. Do you welcome her announcement that she will be going to  meet with President Yudhoyono?

JULIE BISHOP David of course the Prime Minister should be meeting with President  Yudhoyono on a regular basis, but yesterday Labor tried to create the false impression that  the Prime Minister had initiated a meeting with President Yudhoyono specifically to discuss  the solutions that the government should come up with in order to combat the people  smuggling trade that has been reinvigorated since Labor took office and weakened the laws.

DAVID LIPSON How do you say they started that false impression?

JULIE BISHOP The way the media had been briefed that this was some sort of special  meeting and we now know of course that it’s the annual leaders’ meeting that takes place in  July every year. The Prime Minister had it in her diary anyway, but yesterday they tried to  give this impression she was tackling the people smuggling problem and specifically  commissioning a trip to Indonesia. Of course that’s not true. The visit was scheduled in July  as it was last year when President Yudhoyono came to Darwin on the 3rd of July. DAVID  LIPSON But asylum seekers will be discussed and the policies..

JULIE BISHOP Well I assume the Prime Minister will discuss the fact that Labor weakened  the Howard Government policies that worked and as a result it reinvigorated the people  smuggling trade which impacts on Indonesia. The people smuggling syndicates are thriving  in Indonesia, it’s a problem for Indonesia and they are definitely deeply concerned about it.

The Prime Minister must come up with solutions, so far she hasn’t come up with any  solutions. She talks about the Malaysia solution but as we know that was to impact only 800  asylum seekers, it would have been exhausted within seven days, within a week.

The Government has no solutions at all and Julia Gillard still cannot explain why it is that in  2008 the Labor Government unpicked the policies that worked. They found a solution and  created a massive problem. Hundreds of deaths at sea, 44,000 people have arrived by boat  and still the Government doesn’t take responsibility for it.

DAVID LIPSON The Indonesian President will no doubt be asked about the Coalition’s ‘turn  back the boats’ policy. If he says that he won’t countenance it will that be enough for the  Coalition to dump it?

JULIE BISHOP It would be appalling if Julia Gilllard tried to bring domestic politicking into  a meeting with a head of state. I’m assuming that the Prime Minister won’t try and play  politics with the President of Indonesia. That would be utterly appalling. But the point is this  - at no stage at all has the Coalition ever said anything in our policies would violate  Indonesian territorial waters, it didn’t under the Howard Government, it wouldn’t under the  Coalition.

The questions that are being put to the Indonesian officials assume that there would be some  violation of Indonesia’s territorial rights, absolutely not. I agree with the Indonesian Vice-President when he said he wouldn’t accept the navy of Australia towing boats back to the  Indonesian ports. That’s not our policy, it wasn’t under the Howard Government, it’s not our  policy...

DAVID LIPSON Sure, but the Coalition has said that the Indonesians are aware of your  policy and yet the Ambassador and the Foreign Minister have both said that it is not  acceptable to them. Why is that not good enough?

JULIE BISHOP What is being put to the Indonesian officials is quote “a tow-back policy”  which implies that the Australian Navy would be escorting boats back into Indonesian ports.  That would be a violation of Indonesian territorial sovereignty and we’ve never suggested  that would be the case.

DAVID LIPSON Will the Coalition discuss its policy with Indonesia further before the  election?

JULIE BISHOP We’ve had ongoing discussions with Indonesian officials, indeed I meet with  the Ambassador on a regular basis, I meet with Indonesians on a regular basis. Our  relationship is much broader than just the issue of people smuggling as important as that is to  both Indonesia and Australia.

We also discuss issues in how we can reinstate the live cattle trade after the government’s  disastrous decision to ban the live cattle trade into Indonesia and the impact that that’s had

not only on Indonesian food security but also on cattle producers in the North of Australia  and also down the chain throughout Australia.

DAVID LIPSON Will there be any more formal talks than the ongoing discussions that  happen?

JULIE BISHOP Well we are about to go into a campaign mode when Parliament rises next  week, barring any change of leadership. Apparently we’re still waiting on Bill Shorten to  decide who should be the Prime Minister of the country, who should lead Labor. Inexplicably  Bill Shorten seems to be the person who decides who leads the Labor Party.

If Julia Gillard is still the Prime Minister by the end of the week and if the election is still on  the 14th of September then clearly we’ll be campaigning in Australia and I think overseas  travel would be somewhat limited.

But we maintain an ongoing discussion with Indonesia, it’s a very cordial relationship.

DAVID LIPSON Just on the Government’s attempts to crack down on 457 visas - there is  some evidence of rorting, not a great deal, but there is some evidence of rorting. What’s the  problem with getting ahead on potential increases in rorting? Why not legislate now before it  becomes a big problem?

JULIE BISHOP David, there’s no systemic rorting of the system. There’s no evidence of  that. For the Minister to claim tens of thousands of people were rorting the system was an  appalling effort to demonise foreign workers.

Labor is now trying to hide behind a few instances of abuse which of course should be  stamped out but the laws are there to do it anyway.

This is just Labor dancing to the tune of the unions. Julia Gillard needs the unions to keep her  in power and they are just doing their bidding. I think it sends an appalling message to the  region and beyond that the Government of Australia is demonising people who come here at  the request of employers, many of whom are Labor State Governments, to provide skills that  we’re not able to fill in Australia.

If there’s a problem fix it, but don’t demonise foreign workers. It’s ugly politics and the  government should be above this.

DAVID LIPSON And just finally on the US and the Taliban negotiating this week. Is that  something that the Coalition welcomes? Negotiations to end the war peacefully in  Afghanistan?

JULIE BISHOP I have just had a meeting in fact with the Afghan Finance Minister and we  discussed this very topic. Secretary of State Kerry has been in discussions with President  Karzai but as the State Department makes clear these negotiations must be by Afghans -  Afghan to Afghan. The United States can facilitate that and we certainly welcome it but this  is not going to be an easy process.

Overnight four American servicemen were killed at Bagram Air Base by the Taliban. The  conflict continues but we certainly welcome any efforts facilitated by the United States to

ensure that the Afghan Government can sit down with whomever on behalf of the Taliban to  see if there can be a peaceful resolution.

Of course Australia is part of the international forces there. We’ve paid a very heavy price in  the lives of some of our soldiers and so we would welcome any efforts to ensure that peace  and security can be returned to Afghanistan.

DAVID LIPSON And now that Australia particularly has a place on the Security Council, is  there a role for Australia in these negotiations?

JULIE BISHOP Australia should offer to provide whatever support we can. We have an  interest in the outcome of such negotiations and whilst the United States have made it clear  they’re a facilitator, and it must be Afghan-led, I’m hoping we can see some sort of  breakthrough.

DAVID LIPSON Julie Bishop, we’ll leave it there. Thanks very much for your time.

JULIE BISHOP It’s been my pleasure.

- Ends -



