

Julie Bishop MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS

Drive ABC 774, Melbourne

1 May 2013

Subjects: NDIS levy, Coalition policy, May budget, refugees in detention

E&OE…

RAFAEL EPSTEIN Mark Dreyfus joins us from Sydney, Julie Bishop joins us from Perth,  thanks to you both for being there.

JULIE BISHOP Good afternoon Rafael, good afternoon Mark.

MARK DREYFUS Good afternoon Raf, good afternoon Julie.

RAFAEL EPSTEIN Mark why don’t I start with you. The Prime Minister said there’d be no  carbon tax, then we had one for three years, there was not going to be a disability levy now  we have one. Why should Australians trust you that the levy won’t keep going up every year?

MARK DREYFUS Raf, I think what’s important here is we’ve announced a strong and stable  funding stream for generations to come for Disability Care Australia, that’s what’s important,  this is a very fundamental social policy reform.

RAFAEL EPSTEIN People might back it and be worried about your track record of promises  though.

MARK DREYFUS We’ve said very clearly this is the way we’re going to fund it. It’s going  to be a half a per cent increase in the Medicare levy. It’s a stable funding stream that is going  to fund this very very important reform into the future and it’s after the Productivity  Commission has looked at this and made recommendations, it’s after very extensive  consultation, it’s after negotiations..

RAFAEL EPSTEIN Its top recommendation was general revenue and not a levy wasn’t it?

MARK DREYFUS We think this is the most stable way to make sure that there is this strong  funding stream for disability care now and into the future where every single cent raised  through this levy will be spent on the Disability Care Scheme.

RAFAEL EPSTEIN Julie Bishop does the Opposition support a levy or not?

JULIE BISHOP The Coalition supports the NDIS, we supported a Productivity Inquiry and  its recommendations, we supported the budget announcement on the NDIS last year and the  legislation this year. But what is concerning to us is that we learn today that the levy the

Prime Minister’s ruled out having ever been interested in introducing, in fact she said that  Campbell Newman was insincere and ridiculed him when he suggested a levy, what’s  concerning is we find that this proposed levy won’t cover the full cost of the scheme, in fact  less than half the cost.

RAFAEL EPSTEIN Levy’s rarely do, that’s not a reason to oppose it, is it?



JULIE BISHOP But we need to know how Labor intends to fully fund the scheme. It would  be cruel to commence providing services and then have to cut or reduce services in the future  because it wasn’t sustainable over the long term.

RAFAEL EPSTEIN That’s not necessarily logical, I mean you can begin the scheme..

JULIE BISHOP It’s very logical. The Government must tell us how they'll fund the scheme,  how they intend to fully fund it and how it’s going to be sustained over time. Now as you  point out, the best way to fund it would have been out of revenues which a Coalition  Government would have done but Labor’s been spending far more than it’s received in  revenue. It’s blown the budget to smithereens and borrowing billions and billions of dollars  to pay for the spending and what have they got to show for it?

RAFAEL EPSTEIN I can understand your criticisms of the Government. But you could agree  with all the criticisms that you have made yet still ask of the Coalition - if the NDIS is a  priority, how much are you going to spend on it? That’s a fair question for a voter to ask. You  don’t need to know the state of the budget.. not if it’s a priority. You could say right we’ll  match the $3 billion that the Government says they’re going to spend and we’ll commit to  finding the savings we need to find in the budget. There’s nothing wrong with nominating a  figure if it’s a priority is there?.

JULIE BISHOP Except you can’t trust any of Labor’s figures, their forecast, their promises..

RAFAEL EPSTEIN It’s not about the forecasts..

JULIE BISHOP Day-by-day their story on the state of the budget changes, their story on the  state of Government finances changes, so we will respond to the budget and after we’ve seen  the budget we’ll be in a position to commit funding. When we can see what they’ve spent,  what they’re borrowing.

What concerns me also is that Julia Gillard said she wouldn’t introduce legislation before the  election to implement it. So why won’t she do that? Because she’s not telling us how it’s  going to be funded. That’s the only reason she wouldn’t introduce legislation. So we’re  calling on her to introduce the legislation and in that legislation there’ll be details on how  they intend to fully fund it.

RAFAEL EPSTEIN I’ll give Mark Dreyfus a chance to respond but I’d like to ask you Julie  Bishop and I’ll get to callers as well 1300 222 774, is it reasonable for a voter, when they’re  considering Labor or the Coalition to say well I’d just like to know how much money the  Coalition is permitting to a scheme that they support, $1 billion, $2 billion, $3 billion, is that  a reasonable expectation for a voter, or not?

JULIE BISHOP Of course it is and when we’ve seen the budget we’ll know how much  money we can commit to it. We have committed to the NDIS, we’ve said that all along, we  supported the Productivity Inquiry, we supported its recommendations, the Prime Minister’s  had them for years. We supported the budget announcement on the NDIS last year and we  supported the legislation this year, so we support the NDIS.

What we need to know from the Government is how they’re going to fund it because the levy  that she’s proposing, that she said she’d never introduce because she said it was going to  come out of the Commonwealth budget as she said last year, she promised to make the  appropriate arrangements out of the Commonwealth budget without a new tax. So that’s now  changed - we need to see the detail.

RAFAEL EPSTEIN Mark Dreyfus, and then I’ll go to a caller on this very topic.

MARK DREYFUS If the Leader of the Opposition is prepared to support this half a per cent  increase in the Medicare levy to fund disability care we will bring this legislation into the  Parliament and he’s got to answer that question, so should Julie Bishop answer the question.

JULIE BISHOP Oh it’s always Tony Abbott’s fault. Why won’t you say how it’s going to be  funded? How’s it going to be funded? Just tell us.

MARK DREYFUS No I’m answering two questions here and if Julie would let me finish, I  listened to her raving in silence and..

JULIE BISHOP Oh not raving please, show some manners.

MARK DREYFUS This is important, if the Leader of the Opposition can’t answer the  question and if the Opposition can’t answer the question about what they believe in on this  matter, or they want to oppose an increase in the Medicare levy then we will take it to the  Australian people in September. If they want to say they support the Medicare levy, the  increase in the Medicare levy, then we will bring the legislation into the Parliament.

RAFAEL EPSTEIN Ok, I want to give Paul in Prahan a chance on the same topic, so if you  desperately feel the need to respond to one of those points you can, but lets bring Paul into  the conversation. How are you Paul?

PAUL: Hi there, how are you?

RAFAEL EPSTEIN Good what do you want to say?

PAUL: A few months ago, or last year when the ANZ Bank fired 10,000 people, I called  [inaudible] and told him I would love to put up $10, $20, $30 a week if it meant that a father  and a mother had children safe.

RAFAEL EPSTEIN Do you support the idea of a levy?

PAUL: Absolutely and totally because if one day I’m disabled I’d like to think that my fellow  Australians would take care of me. The point is though, evolution studies have shown that  altruism is a great matter of survival, like monkeys that groom each other…

RAFAEL EPSTEIN Ok can you narrow that down to a question?

PAUL: The question is this, unless we stop becoming a selfish society that we have become,  the human race’s demise will come from that.

RAFAEL EPSTEIN So are you saying that if you oppose the levy, you’re being selfish?

PAUL: Well I think so.

RAFAEL EPSTEIN Look Paul I’m not sure I can include evolutionary theory in the  discussion that might make it a little bit difficult to handle. I’ll put that to you first Julie  Bishop and you might want to respond to some of the points the Attorney General made as  well. Are you being selfish by opposing the levy?

JULIE BISHOP I didn’t say we were opposing the levy. I said we want to see the budget and  how they intend to pay for it because what Mark Dreyfus hasn’t admitted is that this levy  won’t cover the full cost of the scheme, in fact less that half of the cost of the scheme would  come from this levy. So we need to know how Labor intends to fully fund the scheme and  they won’t tell us.

It must mean that Labor’s going to raise more taxes. Labor spends far too much and then  taxes too much, but we supported the NDIS and we were promised by the Prime Minister that  it would come from the Commonwealth budget without a tax, without a levy. Noe we’re told  today it’s got to come partly from a levy.



But the other point I make is that the Government has been borrowing, now up to $300  billion. The annual interest bill on Labor’s debt is over $8 billion annually. Well there’s an  area that we could find to fund the NDIS.

RAFAEL EPSTEIN Can I go to one point about spending and borrowing? The Government  says that it’s the revenue side of the ledger that has collapsed and the budget figures for  spending in health and education for the year that we’re in now. They’re actually lower than  the year before. So is it actually the case that their health and education spending is slightly  lower than last financial year? Is it still the case that Labor’s spending too much?

JULIE BISHOP Absolutely, let the facts speak for themselves. Labor will be spending $100  billion more than the last year of the Howard Government and total receipts this year will still  increase by $25 billion or that’s over 7.5 per cent on the previous year, about three times the  inflation rate. So they don’t have a revenue problem, they have a spending problem and this  Government has now borrowed $300 billion.

You know the Howard Government didn’t borrow a cent. We paid off debt and we paid for  programs out of revenues and that’s what the Prime Minister promised and this is just another  broken promise. You can’t trust anything she says.

So I don’t know what they’re actually going to bring to the budget in relation to payment for  the NDIS and it would be reckless of us to commit until we saw how they intended to cover  the scheme fully.

MARK DREYFUS As usual we’ve got a Liberal Party spokesperson here not prepared to  mention the Global Financial Crisis, the worst economic downturn in 75 years. There’s a  pretence that it didn’t happen.

We’ve got a Liberal Party that’s prepared to proceed to put a levy on business to fund its  massive Paid Parental Leave Scheme which is going to provide rich working people with  even more money without knowing what the budget it is. So for one thing they are quite  happy to do a levy without knowing what the budget is but for the Disability Care Australia  Scheme, the National Disability Insurance Scheme which they claim to support, they’re not  prepared to say how they’re going to fund it and they’re not prepared to support the levy.  That’s what I’m hearing from Julie Bishop, not prepared to support the levy.

RAFAEL EPSTEIN Ok I want to bring in a few more of the callers, Julie Bishop we’ll get  back to you. This query is I think directed at Mark Dreyfus, Tony’s call from Lilydale. Hi  Tony.

TONY: Thanks Raf. Mr Dreyfus, just on the back of what your co-speaker said. When the  Labor Party came into power they were left $60 billion, the mining boom only slowed three  months ago so you had a huge income stream from the mining boom. We’re now looking at a  $12 billion deficit in the upcoming year. Where has all the money been spent? And the  Treasurer Mr Swan said not six months ago that Australia has not been compromised by the  world climate of economics, so..

RAFAEL EPSTEIN Ok Tony we might narrow that down to what happened to the money the  Howard Government left you and where did all the money go Mark Dreyfus?

MARK DREYFUS We provide services as a Government, there’s a long list - health  services, the aged pension, defence spending, many of these are actually locked in for many  years ahead, some of them are actually permanent.

We have a very well functioning economy with low debt, AAA rating from all three global  rating agencies and we have a present problem with the revenue which is that we have  resource prices coming off and we have a high dollar which is causing a further decline in tax  revenue. That’s what the treasurer’s been talking about, that’s what the Prime Minister’s been  talking about in recent days and to put a question - where has the money gone? Every year  the Commonwealth Government spends at present somewhere around $380 billion on  providing services to Australians. Most of those are pretty locked in.

I think if you look back over the last five years you’ll see real savings and real reductions in  expenditure by our Government. Far more than the Howard Government was ever able to  achieve.

RAFAEL EPSTEIN Look Julie, there’s a question for you and if I can ask you to put your  response to what Mark had to say and combine it with an answer to Jordy who is calling from  Bendigo.

Hi there Jordy.

JORDY: Hi there, I’m just addressing this question to Ms Bishop. After the Coalition  released their rather pitiful NBN policy I’m just wondering when they’re actually going to

release other policies so that the Australian people can actually make a comparison instead of  just criticising the Government.

JULIE BISHOP Well we’ve announced a number of policies, not only the NBN policy which  is a affordable and will be rolled out much faster than Labor’s. But I’ve also announced a  New Colombo Plan policy which involves a student exchange, sending Australian students to  study at universities in our region. We had a Policy Development Day at Parliament House  when 160 people from business and other countries, the ambassadors and high  commissioners attended, so personally I’m aware of a significant policy in Foreign Affairs  and Higher Education.



But of course as the Opposition we need to see the Government’s budget which will be  delivered in May and after that we’ll be able to announce more of our policies.



But let me make this point, first in relation to the Paid Parental Leave Scheme it’s a  workplace entitlement and it’s fully costed and fully funded. Secondly, in relation to Labor  being unable to balance the budget not once in the five years they’ve been in Government,  and the spending was on overpriced school halls, a $6 billion blowout in the detention  network, $900 cash giveaways..

MARK DREYFUS Well I don’t think that was an invitation to repeat Liberal Party slogans  and lies which is what Julie Bishop is here doing.

RAFAEL EPSTEIN Mark I need you to pause and Julie Bishop I’m going to ask you to  pause as well, I want to give people some traffic details, we’re going to be with both of our  protagonists through to 5pm.

Traffic report

RAFAEL EPSTEIN Mark Dreyfus and Julie Bishop are with us. Mark Dreyfus is of course  the Attorney-General. Julie Bishop is the Deputy Opposition Leader.

I’ve got another question for Mark Dreyfus, I know that both Mark and Julie have points they  want to make, I’d just ask them to make them briefly, I know the temptation to respond is  strong, just try to keep it brief. Steve’s call from Gisbourne, hi Steve.

STEVE: Good afternoon Raf. Yeah I do have a question for Mark but I don’t know why you  bother to bring him in you’re doing a very good job yourself for the other side of it.

RAFAEL EPSTEIN Why don’t you put a question to Mark Dreyfus while we’ve got the  time.

STEVE:I would like to hear Mark tell us how much the NDIS is costing and compare that to  the amount they are planning to raise through this levy.

MARK DREYFUS The Disability Care Australia Scheme is going to raise initially around  $3.3 billion in the first year, that’s going to rise to $20.4 billion between 2014-15 and 2018-19 when the full scheme comes into place.



RAFAEL EPSTEIN But your plan is not to raise the levy but to add more money from  general revenue is that right?

MARK DREYFUS That’s right and the Prime Minister made that clear at the press  conference that if the $3.3 billion in the first year from the half a percentage increase to the  Medicare levy is not sufficient, then the funds will be found from general revenue and that’s  from both Federal and State and Territory general revenue. The Government will need to  make savings for that full cost and there’ll be no free ride to the States and Territories, that’s  what the Prime Minister said this morning, they’ll need to step up too.

RAFAEL EPSTEIN Julie Bishop you did mention before that, I think you mentioned about  student exchanges to Colombo. Forgive me that’s not much of a policy, I think people want a  bit broader detail than that. If you offer that up as an example of policy…

JULIE BISHOP It’s a very detailed policy that I’ve been involved in…

RAFAEL EPSTEIN It’s not exactly covering a very broad range of Government revenue or  Government initiative is it?

JULIE BISHOP Well in fact it’s a long-term visionary policy for greater engagement in the  Asia Pacific Region to ensure that young Australians are Asia-literate. It’s an example of a  policy that I’m involved in, but of course we’ve announced other policies in other areas  including Tony Abbott’s Paid Parental Leave Scheme which he’s been talking about for some  time, which has been fully costed and fully funded.

RAFAEL EPSTEIN Just on that Mark raised the point that you’re happy with having that  levy and pledging to that yet you’re not happy with having a levy for the NDIS. What’s the  distinction? What’s the difference?

JULIE BISHOP What I said is that our Paid Parental Leave Scheme is fully costed and fully  funded which is different from the NDIS which we’re still to hear where the 60 per cent of  funding is still to come from. Mark talks about savings in the budget, well that would include  cuts to Disability Support Pensions so I think people need to be aware of those facts.

RAFAEL EPSTEIN And by the way there’s no budget position that would see you dropping  the Parental Leave Scheme?

JULIE BISHOP Well we’re committed to it because it is a productivity and participation  measure to build a stronger economy to increase the revenue and therefore give us stronger  government finances. It will be a boost to small business in particular.

RAFAEL EPSTEIN If you win the election it’s going to happen no matter what the budget  situation is. Is that right?

JULIE BISHOP We’ve announced that and what we’re not going to do is make promises that  we won’t keep and that is in contrast to the Government.

So my point is this - we have a whole range of policies that we’ll be putting out but of course  we need to fund them and in order to do that we need to see the state of the budget and you

know this, you can’t trust Labor on the state of the budget.

RAFAEL EPSTEIN Off the top of your head Julie Bishop, because I can’t remember, is the  Federal Budget, what’s it $350 billion? Someone’s just asking for a bit of context?

MARK DREYFUS It’s $380.

RAFAEL EPSTEIN $380? Ok I just wanted to get that in there. There’s a question for Mark,  actually about asylum seekers I think. Sara’s call from Brunswick. Hi Sara.

SARA: Hi thanks Raf. My question is about the 55 people who’ve been found to be refugees  that are currently detained in immigration detention along with some of their kids because of  negative ASIO assessments.

Given that the Attorney General has recently said that indefinite detention is not a humane  option as well as the importance of Justice Stone’s review of ASIO assessments. Will the  Attorney General now guarantee that Justice Stone’s recommendations will be made prior to  the September election for all 55 refugees…

RAFAEL EPSTEIN You mean will the judges recommendations be made public? Is that  what you mean? Or are you asking that they be made public or that they’ll listen to her?

SARA: That’s right. Both.

MARK DREYFUS We will certainly be listening to Justice Stone’s recommendations. The  reason why we set up this review by Justice Stone of the adverse security assessments of the  55 refugees who are in detention because of those adverse security assessments is that we  want them to be reviewed and of course we’ll be listening. I understand that Justice Stone’s  first set of recommendations, I don’t think they’ll be in respect of the whole 55 all together,  they’ll be in respect of an initial group.

RAFAEL EPSTEIN So we won’t get all of them before the election?

MARK DREYFUS I don’t know that. I’m simply saying that I understand that the first group  of recommendations, and I’ve been in communication with Justice Stone, in fact I met with  her today, the first group of her recommendations will be made within weeks and of course  I’d be hoping now that her process is up and running that she’s provided reasons to each of  the 55 refugees and started to hear their representations, meet with their lawyers.

RAFAEL EPSTEIN Do you not know or you can’t tell me for reasons you can’t tell me?  Whether or not we’ll get all those recommendations?

MARK DREYFUS It’s up to Justice Stone as to how long she needs to take. She’s going to  give due care and consideration to every single one of these people’s cases.

RAFAEL EPSTEIN Julie Bishop would the policy be any different under the Coalition?

JULIE BISHOP Well the policy will always be different under the Coalition because not only  has the Government lost control of the Federal Budget, they’ve lost control of border  protection. We abide by the ASIO assessments of course.



Our concern is that the processing of asylum seeker claims has been chaotic under this  Government. The detention network is out of control and we need to return to the policies  that stop the boats and ensure that we can clear the detention network of claimants.

MARK DREYFUS Well Julie should answer the question which is that the Liberal Party’s  policy is that there should be no review. They’ve been very clear about this and it’s really an  outrageous position to have adopted.

RAFAEL EPSTEIN Look I want to thank you both for making the time to join us. I know it  takes time out of you day to get out to the ABC studios. Mark Dreyfus and Julie Bishop,  thank you very much.

MARK DREYFUS Thank you Raf, thank you Julie.

JULIE BISHOP Thank you very much for having me on and thank you Mark.

- Ends -



