CHRIS BOWEN MP  Interim Leader of the Opposition  Member for McMahon



TRANSCRIPT

INTERVIEW WITH MARIUS BENSON, ABC NEWSRADIO

WEDNESDAY, 25 SEPTEMBER 2013







SUBJECTS: Labor Leadership debate, Coalition broken promise on  demand driven funding for universities, boat arrivals.

MARIUS BENSON: Chris Bowen, that debate last night was heralded as a  battle of ideas between Anthony Albanese and Bill Shorten. No surprising ideas  seemed to be in evidence and in fact there wasn’t much evidence of a battle  there.

CHRIS BOWEN: Well, I think it was a good thing and this is exactly the sort of  thing we were talking about when introducing this reform. Having somebody  who wants to be the Labor leader, the alternative Prime Minister, go around the  country and explain their vision to party members, to explain why they’re the  best person for the job. I think it’s an excellent process and its going well. I think  Party membership has been reinvigorated by it. I think we’ve seen a big increase  in applications to join the Party which is a very good thing after an election  defeat - not necessarily what you would expect. And it’s just the dose, the shot  in the arm that the Labor Party needs at this point.

BENSON: Bill Shorten, almost his last words were, ‘the year of the Messiah is  over, no more’, obviously a reference to Kevin Rudd. Do you take it that way?

BOWEN: Oh look, I think Bill was referring to there was the need for all of us to  come together, that the Labor Party is at its best when united. That the Labor  Party is greater than the sum of its parts...

BENSON: But the reference to the Messiah?

BOWEN: Well, I think it’s a reference to the fact that the leader is the first  amongst equals. I think the new leader, whoever they are, Anthony or Bill will  have more legitimacy and more security than any Labor leader or any political

leader in the past because they will have been elected by 40,000 people not 86  people and its important that they have the knowledge to make the tough  decisions with the support of those 40,000 Labor members and that they’re  secure in the job and they will be because of this system we’ve introduced.

BENSON: As I’ve said before, there is an assumption that you as a member of  the Right will back Bill Shorten but you’re not saying publically who you will  back?

BOWEN: No, I’ve said previously, many times Marius, as interim leader I take  the view that I shouldn’t publically be picking sides here. I have a job to do as  interim Labor leader, I’ll let Anthony and Bill put their case and they’re putting it  very well. They both have a lot to offer, they’re both fine individuals and either  of them would make a good leader.

BENSON: Can I go to a couple of other issues in the news today, one is the  Education Minister, Christopher Pyne, speaking to Fairfax news has indicated that  perhaps the lifting of caps on university admissions to help the participation of  disadvantaged students will be reviewed. The caps maybe reintroduced because  of a compromising in quality in Tertiary Education. Is a return to those caps a  good idea?

BOWEN: This is a clear breach of promise by the Liberal Party and it’s a very  retrograde step. The Liberal Party explicitly said they would keep the demand  driven model in. The Liberal Party has never cared about access to university and  equity of access to university, they did nothing about it during the Howard years.  We instituted the Bradley Review, we think it’s important that people from all  walks of life get access to university and we’re very proud of the fact that in our  term of office we created 200,000 university places by moving for the demand  driven system.

Now, there will be universities who will be the big losers out of this, regional  universities, the Australian Catholic University for example will be very big losers  out of this. But more importantly, those students from around the country,  maybe not from the wealthiest parts of the country maybe not from the  wealthiest schools and maybe not from the wealthiest families but the young  people who have an aspiration to go to university will be the biggest losers of all  out of this. The Liberal Party said there would be no cuts to education,  furthermore they explicitly said they would keep the demand driven system.  Now, less than a week after coming into office they’ve walked away from that  commitment. They’ve never cared about access, equity of access to university  and clearly they are reverting to type.

BENSON: To another issue, the Nine Network is reporting this morning that an  asylum seeker or a Customs boat carrying asylum seekers, brought 19 asylum  seekers into Darwin last night. There’s been no official word on that in keeping  with the new policy of only having weekly news conferences on that. Do you  think that’s satisfactory that those asylum seekers will be reported next Monday  when Scott Morrison has his next news conference?

BOWEN: Far from satisfactory Marius, far from satisfactory. This lack of  transparency from the new Government is quite appalling. Before the election  you couldn’t turn on your TV without Scott Morrison on it talking about boats.  Now after the election he is the Minister responsible and he’s gone into hiding  and he’s refusing to announce when a boat arrives, this is a clear lack of  transparency and an avoidance of scrutiny by this government. They said they  had a plan to stop the boats; well they actually had a plan to stop the media  releases. The new Minister needs to take responsibility for his decisions to hide  boat arrivals from the Australian people. And also, to hide the fact they have  attempted any turnarounds or not.

They have said they aren’t going to tell us if they have even attempted a turn  around on the high seas - and whether or not they are successful. This was the  centrepiece of their policy before the election; they won’t even talk about it after  the election. I think it’s because it’s a whole lot harder than they said it was and  instead they are just trying to control the media cycle, not control our borders.

BENSON: Chris Bowen, thank you very much.

BOWEN: Nice talking to Marius.

ENDS





