Immigration & Border Protection Minister

Scott Morrison

Government's actions to deny people smugglers' promise of  permanent visas for illegal boat arrivals, Indonesia, PNG

Wednesday, 04 December 2013

Interview with Leigh Sales, ABC

Leigh Sales: The Abbott Government has today unveiled a tough, new measure in  its campaign to stop asylum seeker boats.

The Immigration Minister Scott Morrison says no more applicants will be granted  permanent asylum this financial year.

The move follows the failure of the government's bid earlier this week to reintroduce  temporary protection visas, which give would-be refugees short-term protection  without granting them asylum. That was blocked by Labor and the Greens.

The Coalition says boat arrivals have almost halved under its watch, but the minister  has faced criticism for his limited media briefings and perceived secrecy.

Well, he's here tonight though, live from Canberra.

Scott Morrison, good to have you with us.

Scott Morrison: Hi, Leigh. Good to be with you.

Leigh Sales: The 30 000 or so people who would be affected by this decision that  you've taken, many of them are legitimate refugees, aren't they?

Scott Morrison: Well, those processes hadn't been completed, and to the extent  that they are, it's unfortunate that the Labor and the Greens have teamed up to deny  - or I should say to abolish temporary protection visas. I mean, we had actually  restored them, they were back and operative. We introduced them again after  coming to office and they moved the disallowance motion, the Greens, and Labor  joined them in that. But that's the process that has been necessary to ensure we  keep our commitment, that is, no-one who's arrived illegally by boat gets a  permanent visa from this government.

Leigh Sales: So, what happens to the people in this lot who are actually legitimate  refugees?

Scott Morrison: Well they'll remain on the visas the previous government had them  on.

Leigh Sales: Which are?

Scott Morrison: Bridging visas.

Leigh Sales: Right. So does that mean that they do as some point have a prospect  of being permanently resettled here?

Scott Morrison: No. It doesn't, because what will happen is the government will  seek to reopen the opportunity to finalise their claims and any applications they have  with a temporary protection visa when that facility is restored.

Leigh Sales: But when somebody's in this country and they're found to be a  legitimate refugee, we have international obligations to not return them to a country  where they can face persecution.

Scott Morrison: That's right and no-one is doing that.

Leigh Sales: So what happens to them though long-term?

Scott Morrison: Well, they're a refugee for as long as they are a refugee and our  non-refoulement obligations apply in those situations. But there is no guarantee or  requirement for permanent residency under the Refugee Convention. What there is a  requirement of is non-refoulement and providing a place of safe haven, which is  exactly what we're doing. Now that'll be provided under - at the moment under a  bridge visa. And what we we're proposing is that be done under a temporary  protection visa. Labor and the Greens decided that they didn't want to support that  despite the significant mandate that was given for that measure to the Coalition by  the Australian people. Now, they voted against what the Australian people voted for.

Leigh Sales: So, just to be clear, can I check then that people who are currently  found to be refugees, you say they can't be permanently resettled, does that mean  you will regularly reassess them to check, 'Well are you still a refugee? Can we now  send you home?'

Scott Morrison: Yes, that's right. That was one of the features of temporary  protection visas, because hopefully, and this is often the case, people are not  refugees indefinitely.

Leigh Sales: But is that a humane situation, where you have people who are  absolutely legitimate refugees, but they can't make any sort of permanent new life for  themself because at any time you could say, 'Well, sorry, you're going home now.'

Scott Morrison: Well, the convention doesn't provide for permanent residency,  Leigh. And the convention requires safe haven ...

Leigh Sales: I'm just asking about what's humane though.

Scott Morrison: Well what we're doing is completely consistent with our obligations  under the Refugee Convention and that's what we're obliged to do. And the last thing  we also want to do, Leigh, is encourage people to take this dangerous journey, and  to do that, we need to ensure there's no product to sell. Now, I should stress that the  TPVs were applying to the 33 000 potentially who had arrived already and were  already in Australia and had arrived illegally by boat. The other measure that

obviously is in place for those who turn up now is that they are sent to Nauru and  Manus Island in short order and they also would not be getting a permanent visa or  settled in Australia.

Leigh Sales: Let me ask some just basic questions about asylum seeker numbers  since you were elected. How many people have arrived in Australia via boat since  September 7th?

Scott Morrison: Well since Operation Sovereign Borders commenced on 18th  September, there's been 15 boats and they're - we've reported at our usual weekly  briefings and that's around about 750 people. So we've had an average weekly  number of people turning up under Operation Sovereign Borders of just less than 80  per week. Now that compares to the period since the Regional Resettlement  Arrangement was outlined by the previous government up and through to the start of  Operation Sovereign Borders, which was an average of 461 per week. So that's a fall  of over 80 per cent, comparing those two periods. Now, that's good progress, it's a  good start, but it's not the outcome we're seeking.

Leigh Sales: So, 750 have arrived by boat. How many people have arrived via  plane?

Scott Morrison: Well, I haven't got those numbers to hand, Leigh, but what I can tell  you is that under the previous government what had changed, particularly in the last  18 months, is the number of people who'd arrived by plane and sought asylum for  the first time was actually less than the number who'd turned up by boat, according  to the department's figures.

Leigh Sales: It's still quite significant though. It was about 8000 asylum seekers  arriving by plane last year. Why do asylum seekers who arrive by plane get  preferential treatment from the government? Because they do have a prospect of  resettlement here and onshore processing. Why, when we do have significant  numbers coming by plane, are they treated differently to people who come via boat?

Scott Morrison: Well several reasons, Leigh. The first thing is people aren't dying  on planes coming to Australia. The second reason is that people are turning up on  planes are turning up with valid documentation, they're turning up for a valid visa for  entry into Australia, so they've legally entered Australia. They have passports and we  are far better able to determine their claims if and when they make them.

Leigh Sales: But don't your policies send a message to people smugglers and  potential asylum seekers that they should now direct their attention to doing  everything they can to get here via plane because you've got a better chance of  getting to stay here than if you come via boat?

Scott Morrison: Well, they will fail because it is incredibly difficult to get to Australia  illegally by plane. You need to get a visa, you need to have documentation - you  need all of those things and our Border Protection agency and Immigration agencies  are very efficient and they're some of the best in the world at preventing that sort of  illegal entry by plane. That's why people don't do it, Leigh. That's why they come by  boat. And as we know, people die on boats, and that's why we're doing this.

Leigh Sales: We know that Indonesia has suspended cooperation with Australia on  people smuggling due to the diplomatic row over spying. When did you last speak to  your Indonesian counterpart?

Scott Morrison: Well my last discussion with Minister Syamsuddin was when I was  in Indonesia some weeks ago. The dialogue about what is occurring at the moment  is happening at a leader-to-leader level and there is also now the envoy discussion,  which is happening between Foreign ministers, which as I understand, takes place  tomorrow. So that is where the dialogue on the ongoing cooperation at the political-diplomatic level is continuing. At the same time, at an operational level, there has  been continued contact to keep people effectively informed at that operational level,  which has always been the preference for where that dialogue should take place.

Leigh Sales: But there must be some limitations occurring on what you're doing,  given how closely you were hoping to work with the Indonesians and given that they  are withdrawing full cooperation.

Scott Morrison: Well we had 207 people turn up illegally by boat in the month of  November during what has been this difficult and tense time with Indonesia and that  is the lowest level for November arrivals in five years. And what that says, Leigh, is  that we've already made such a devastating impact on the smugglers and we're not  relying on any one measure or any one partner to get the results that we are  achieving. Now, of course we want to see a restoration of the type of level of  cooperation we're having before and I'm very optimistic because there is so much at  stake for both countries to get this right and that's why I believe we will get it right  and I look forward to better times ahead.

Leigh Sales: Just one quick question before we run out of time. Last week the PNG  Prime Minister Peter O'Neill said that if, '... people being processed there are  assessed as genuine refugees, we would have to take our share and Australia and  other Pacific Island countries would have to take theirs, something we're working on  with the Australian Government.' That seems at odds with your statement that  nobody processed there can ever be resettled here.

Scott Morrison: Well I only met with the Prime Minister last week. No-one who was  processed and found to be a refugee in Papua New Guinea will be settled in  Australia.

Leigh Sales: So that's final? There aren't ongoing negotiations around that?

Scott Morrison: No-one who is offshore in our centres, Nauru or Manus Island, will  be resettled in Australia. That is the nature of that arrangement. And it's an  arrangement, Leigh, that we've been salvaging. The previous government have left  the cupboard bare - offshore processing centres under-capacity, unfunded. That  policy is now in the right hands and that's why we're getting the right results.

Leigh Sales: Scott Morrison, thank you very much.

Scott Morrison: Thank you very much, Leigh.



