

Julie Bishop MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS





ABC 720 Mornings with John McGlue

12 August 2013

Subjects: Leader’s debate, gay marriage, release of policy costings, WA’s share of GST  revenue

E&OE…

JOHN MCGLUE I’m joined now by someone who was there at the debate last night. Hardly  an impartial observer I’ve got to say. It’s the Deputy Leader of the Opposition Julie Bishop.

Julie Bishop, good morning and welcome to the program. Good to talk with you.

JULIE BISHOP Good morning John. Good to be with you.

JOHN MCGLUE You’ve heard and read the reaction to the debate last night. No clear winner  and certainly no knockout punch delivered by either person. How will it change anything on  September 7?

JULIE BISHOP Well Kevin Rudd is behind in the polls and he needed a clear win last night.  In fact, he needed a knock out win and he didn’t get that. I was in the audience at the debate.  There were two aspects that focus people’s attention - the style and then the substance. On  style, Tony Abbott appeared assured, relaxed and confident. In contrast, Kevin Rudd  appeared nervous and lacking confidence and it was surprising that having agreed not to have  prepared notes he actually brought in notes and relied on them throughout and that made him  look nervous.

He’s been Prime Minister for three years. He’s plotting to be a Prime Minister for another  three years and I certainly expected Kevin Rudd to be prepared for this debate but he clearly  wasn’t or he was too nervous to refrain from referring to prepared notes throughout, despite  agreeing not to.

But I think on style Tony Abbott won hands down. He looked like a leader. I thought he  looked positively Prime Ministerial.

On substance, Tony presented a pretty coherent plan.

Kevin Rudd was caught out early on his claim that 70 per cent of asylum seekers on Nauru  under the Howard Government plans had come to Australia. That wasn’t true and Tony  Abbott called him out on that and then Kevin Rudd tried a couple more fibs but he was  caught out on both of them.

Tony presented our plan - getting rid of taxes - the carbon tax, the mining tax - growing the  economy, more jobs, removing red tape and unnecessary regulation, infrastructure and the  like.

And Kevin seemed to be in a time warp. When he was talking about the end of the China  mining boom I closed my eyes and thought this is Kevin debating John Howard in 2007. He’s  been using this same excuse for the last six years.

So I didn’t get any sense of direction from Kevin Rudd at the end of the day I couldn’t tell  you what his first term agenda would be.

JOHN MCGLUE Well something that was new and certainly it was a clear point of  difference between Kevin Rudd and Tony Abbott was the Prime Minister’s position on the  gay marriage issue.

He said he would introduce a bill into Parliament within 100 days if he’s re-elected and Tony  Abbott’s position was he wouldn’t give a commitment, even on a conscience vote.

Where do you stand on this issue are you in favour of gay marriage and regardless do you  think Liberal MP’s should be allowed that conscience vote.

JULIE BISHOP Well it’s interesting that’s what Kevin Rudd is going to do in his first 100  days. It’s the only announcement he’s made in the campaign as to what he would do in the  first 100 days and that is introduce legislation for gay marriage.

That is not what the Coalition would do in the first 100 days. We will focus on getting rid of  the carbon tax and trying to assist people with cost of living, putting the economy back on  track and ensuring that we can start getting the massive debt and deficit under control - the  kinds of things that the Australian people would expect of us.

Now gay marriage is an issue for people, for some in the community they’re against it, for  some in the community they’re for it but I don’t think it’s the first order priority for a  government that has run the country into massive debt. It’s going to hit gross debt of $400  billion in 2016-2017, massive budget deficits. In fact on the Friday before the campaign was  called Kevin Rudd issued an economic statement that showed the budget was $33 billion

worse than it had been in the budget in May. They couldn’t even get through three months  without having a massive write-down in the budget. So they are the issues of concern to us  for the Australian people.

As for my position, I have supported the Coalition’s position throughout the 2010 campaign  and now the 2013 campaign that we will not introduce changes to the Marriage Act. There  was a debate in the Parliament, there was legislation brought before the Parliament and there  was an overwhelming vote of no against changing the Marriage Act.

Now Tony Abbott has said, quite clearly, if this matter comes up again, even though the  Parliament has voted on it recently, if the matter comes up again, then that will be a question  for the party room to determine at that time. That’s a consistent and appropriate response.

JOHN MCGLUE Julie Bishop it’s clear from the ABC’s Vote Compass that the economy is  by far and away the most important issue in the election and we’re keen to hear precisely how  the Coalition proposed to fund promises and where it proposed to make spending cuts  precisely.

Now, as you know we’ve just had an interesting experience here in Western Australia where  the Liberal Government has been re-elected and the voters are hearing a very different story  after the election to the one that they heard before the election.

Now, given that backdrop why is the Federal Coalition so reluctant to tell voters about its  plans before the voters actually vote?

JULIE BISHOP Oh we’re not reluctant at all John. That’s quite the wrong impression. We  need to see the detail of the Pre-Election Economic and Fiscal Outlook that is being released  tomorrow because Labor’s forecasts have been wildly wrong, all on the down side, and a  government that just presides over the biggest budget blowouts in living memory in just a  few short weeks has absolutely no credibility at all on economic management and on  balancing the budget.

So we want to see the detail of the Pre-election Economic and Fiscal Outlook, released  tomorrow, and then we’ll be able to be informed by that and we will be releasing our savings  and what we’re spending and the impact on the bottom line which we claim will be better  than Labor’s.

And let’s not be too precious about this. Labor submitted when it was in opposition in 2007,  submitted the bulk of its policies, over 100 policies within three days of the 2007 election to  prevent them being costed by Treasury. So I’m not going to take lectures from Labor on what  an opposition should do in costing our policies.

Tony has said consistently that we will have them out in good time for people to make a  judgment before the election. But for a start when they wrote down the budget by $33 billion  on the Friday before the election you can hardly blame us for wanting to see their next  economic statement, the Pre-election Economic and Fiscal Outlook tomorrow, to see how bad  the figures really are.

JOHN MCGLUE And I want to talk to you finally just about another financial matter and it  does relate to Western Australia. Colin Barnett and Troy Buswell are screaming blue murder  about WA’s share of GST revenues.

The indications from your colleagues in Canberra is that a Coalition Government would have  very little joy for WA on this issue, even though the latest State Treasury projections here say  that Western Australia will be receiving less than one per cent of GST revenues even though  we’ve got 11 per cent of the country’s population.

Why would the Federal Coalition discriminate against WA like this?

JULIE BISHOP That’s not what we’re doing at all. In fact, Tony Abbot has said that he  believes the State Premiers in the major states - and that is Western Australia, Queensland,  New South Wales and Victoria - should get together and come up with a formula that they  believe is fair and ensuring that other states don’t miss out, but come up with a formula that’s  fair.

I understand that that is precisely what the Premiers of Western Australia, Queensland, New  South Wales and Victoria are doing. They’re looking at the formula and when the states can  agree amongst themselves then that’s an opportunity for the Coalition should we be elected to  government to talk to them about it, indeed if Labor were to be elected to government then  I’m sure Labor would want to hear from those Premiers.

JOHN MCGLUE Julie Bishop thanks so much for your time today.

JULIE BISHOP It’s been my pleasure.

- Ends -



