SHADOW IMMIGRATION MINISTER SCOTT MORRISON

Transcript - Radio National

Wednesday 31st July 2013

Subjects: Coalition’s plan to increase offshore processing capacity at Nauru,  Coalition visit to Nauru, Operation Sovereign Borders, Australia’s refugee and  humanitarian intake

E and OE

KELLY:  Shadow Immigration Minister, Scott Morrison, is back from his trip to Nauru where he  announced a Coalition Government would increase the total number of asylum  seekers housed on Nauru to 5000 over 5 years.  We now have three competing  asylum seeker policies out in the public.  The Government’s PNG Solution, the  Opposition’s Nauru Solution, let’s call it that, and today the Greens, denouncing the  major parties for their cruel and barbaric policies, advocating instead an increase to  our immigration humanitarian intake from 20,000 to 30,000 refugees.  Shadow  Immigration Minister, Scott Morrison, joins me in the breakfast studio.  Scott  Morrison, good  morning.



MORRISON:  Good Morning, Fran.

KELLY:  Your trip to Nauru was funded by Toll Holdings, the company that stands to benefit  from your policy.  Now you say that’s not unusual but should it be unusual?

MORRISON:  Well it’s on my Register of Interest, which is the transparent way of dealing with  these things and the News Limited story that was run on the same issue, that was  disclosed in that report Fran, so the way you manage these things is through  transparency and disclosure and we’ve made full disclosure on these things.  We’re  not in the middle of any tender process, we are in opposition, we are not in  Government and Toll Holdings were going up there for the ordinary course of  business anyway, which was in my disclosure, as was in their statement and it’s not  the first time we’ve had privately funded trips to Nauru.  We were there with Tony  Abbott a year or so ago and ABC, Fairfax and all other journalists were on that trip

as well.  So look this is a fairly standard way of doing things when you are in  Opposition.  I mean, the Government flies around on taxpayer funded jets, the  Opposition doesn’t have access to that, which I am not suggesting there should be  any change to that but to get to these places, you need to make arrangements and  I’ve done that and I’ve been fully transparent in the way I’ve done it.

KELLY:  You’re not in the middle of any tender process-



MORRISON:  No

KELLY:  -but we are perhaps only days away from calling an election.  If the Coalition wins  that election, and who knows who will, in six weeks you could be in Government and  you could be in the middle of tender processes with this very company, because Toll  Holdings currently has $26 million worth of contracts with the Immigration  Department working with asylum seekers.  Could we -

MORRISON:  Well there’d be appropriate procurement processes on any of those things, Fran, as  you’d expect, and those things are done at arm’s length from the Ministers as well,  so I mean I don’t…

KELLY:  Perception’s important though isn’t it?

MORRISON:  And so is transparency, Fran.

KELLY:

Here you are taking a gift from a company that we could expect, perhaps, to have  contracts working with asylum seekers under a future Coalition Government.

MORRISON:  And that’s why I’ve been so transparent about it.  I’ve been totally transparent and  it’s on my Register of Interest.  It was disclosed in the media at the time in the  reports so we’ve been totally up front.  Now, I could contrast that with my Labor

opponents.  I mean, they’ve sought to make an issue out of this, now this is the  same Labor party who we had Ministers who were then not ministers at that time,  going off to ski lodges with Eddie Obeid and not disclosing those things on the basis  they were good friends of Eddie Obeid.  Now that will be out in ICAC today about  Eddie Obeid.  So look, I’m quite happy to put my credentials on these things and the  transparency I’ve displayed on these things.  I’ve been very up front.  If the Labor  Party wants to start throwing stones on this, then they are sitting in a very big glass  house.

KELLY:  Well they are throwing stones.  But let me ask you this question.  Did you think about  this before you decided to do it and why didn’t you just decide to pay for the trip out  of Coalition funds.  Are you short of funds?

MORRISON:  Well, no.  But you need to make the best use of all your funds and when you’re in  Opposition if there’s an opportunity to get to somewhere which is important for your  further policy development process, then, if you’re transparent and up front about  that, which I have been, then that’s the appropriate way to do it, Fran.  That’s what  the transparency and disclosure rules are for.  So these things are all out there in the  public and I don’t have any problems with that.  And the plane was going there  anyway, it wasn’t chartered for the Coalition.  That was a misreport by Fairfax  yesterday, who I just assume had a bit of sour grapes that they weren’t there as  well.

KELLY:  You have, now we know, that one element of your asylum seeker policy is increasing  the capacity to hold asylum seekers on Nauru.  A week ago the Liberal Deputy  Leader and Shadow Foreign Minister, Julie Bishop, criticised Kevin Rudd’s PNG  announcement because it was not costed, there was no indication how long asylum  seekers would be in PNG at Australian expense and the policy was completely open  ended.  Don’t all those criticisms apply to your Nauru plan?

MORRISON:  Well not at all.  The first point is, this isn’t an alternative to the PNG arrangement,  this is in addition to the PNG arrangement.

KELLY:  Still, do these things hold?

MORRISON:  No no, I was just about to get to that point.  In your intro, you made the point that this  was an alternative, it’s not.  It’s in addition to what the Government is doing in terms  of PNG.

KELLY:  Except, just on that point, to be clear, you’ve said you will keep some elements of the  plan but you haven’t committed to the entire PNG plan.

MORRISON:  Well we don’t know what the whole plan is yet, there is no resettlement agreement  currently, between PNG and Australia.

KELLY:  So it’s not necessarily in addition to, is it?

MORRISON:  Well no.  We will seek to implement whatever is implementable out of that  agreement but at the moment, they have no costings, they have no time frame, they  have no capacity.  But to get to our point on that, we have said the indicative costing  for putting the initial 2000 man camp in is $50 million roughly.  That’s an indicative  costing.  That’s obviously subject to going through more close detailed operational  planning at the time.  In addition to that, we have a 5 year arrangement with Nauru,  that’s what we’d be seeking to have in government, if we were elected and we’ve  started and flagged that with them and we would immediately proceed to commence  those discussions if we were elected.

KELLY:  And what does the 5 year plan mean in terms of people who are settled there?

MORRISON:  Well the five -  no one is resettled in Nauru frankly, as it’s highly unlikely many  people will be resettled in PNG, given the many difficulties that are there in that  agreement.

KELLY:  But that’s the agreement though, isn’t it?

MORRISON:  Well there is no agreement, there’s an arrangement -



KELLY:  Well that’s the arrangement.

MORRISON:  And they haven’t even got to the resettlement part of that yet so I mean and Prime  Minister O’Neill, the other day on Leigh Sales’s programme made this point.  He said  that people would be resettled who asked to be resettled.  That’s what he said in the  interview the other day.  Now, I’m not sure how many of those will be putting their  hand up.  And on the PNG arrangement, Fran, this is the test.  The test is not  whether people get sent there for offshore processing.  They have been running  offshore processing now in PNG for almost a year and they’ve actually taken more  people off Manus Island than they’ve sent there.  That’s not the test.  I’m sure they  will send 50, 100, 200, maybe 500 people there over the next few weeks.  That’s not  saying the agreement’s working, that’s just offshore processing.  Whether it’s  working or not, whether it’s actually implementable, is if they have a resettlement  agreement which says what the Government says they can achieve.  And that is  everyone, everyone will not be resettled in Australia.  Now the Government just can’t  back up that claim.  It’s just not real.

KELLY:  Well what is your claim in terms of this 5 year process.  Let’s stick with the 5 years  first before we get to the resettlement.  Julie Bishop said the other day in relation to  Kevin Rudd’s PNG program, how long will Australia be paying support for people in  PNG.  If I ask you that question, how long would a Coalition Government be paying  support for people housed on Manus Island?  On Nauru, I should say.

MORRISON:  Well this is a 5 year rolling arrangement.  So we commit to 5 years and that’s  important for how we do business up in Nauru as well.  At the moment, it’s all very  uncertain.  If you have a 5 year arrangement with Nauru then you can get some  greater regularity about pricing, of various issues because of the uncertainty that’s  there currently.  And that’s everything from fuel to land to whatever the issues are,  supplies and so on.  So we have a 5 year arrangement which involves temporary  accommodation, which involves permanent accommodation for processing, which is  the rebuild of the centre that was burnt down as well as the family facilities and then  the post assessment accommodation.  Now the Government has had their-

KELLY:  Which is if you’re found to be a refugee -



MORRISON:  Where do you live?

KELLY:

Where do you live?

MORRISON:  Well, you’d be living on Nauru and we have this 5 year arrangement and then at the  end of those 5 years, we would look at what the situation is, because there’s no  guarantee that people end up in Australia.  They would be seeking resettlement in  other countries, as was the case when the Pacific Solution worked last time.

KELLY:  Well with the Pacific Solution last time, more than 40% of those people ended up  back in Australia, is that what you imagine will happen here?

MORRISON:  Well I’m not imagining anything, all I’m saying is the policy is that there is no  guarantee and this is the other key point, if anyone does end up in Australia, as they  will under the Government’s plan with PNG, they will end up in Australia, as well,  they will be getting permanent visas under the Labor Party.  Under the Coalition, you  will never get the permanent visa, you will get a temporary visa at best.  And that’s  what takes permanent residency and citizenship off the table in what the Coalition  has always said.  So what we are puzzled about Fran is, fine, go ahead and put your  arrangements in place in PNG.  There are many difficulties in implementing that but  why would you then stop at that?  Why is that all the Government’s prepared to do?   Why won’t they do temporary protection visas?  Why won’t they -

KELLY:  Because the Government says they are not coming back here.  The Government’s  ad, and I’m sure you’ve seen it in the newspapers -

MORRISON:

Well the Government is not telling the truth, Fran.

KELLY:  -says that if you take a boat you will not end up living in Australia.

MORRISON:  But it’s not true, Fran.  It’s not real.  They don’t have an agreement to support that  claim.  It is a bluff.  And what we see with the Labor Party’s bluffs is they always  unravel after the election.   The same was true with East Timor.  The same ended up  true about Malaysia.  It all unravels at the end of the day.  So what we have really  here is a contrast between the Labor Party’s unreal solution, the bluff, or the real  plans that we’ve announced, which encompasses the full suite of activities,  Operation Sovereign Borders, as you know, deals with everything from offshore  disruption and interceptions, it deals with things right up the chain, through  intelligence, it goes right through the detention space, the returns and the transfers  under a centralised, coordinated command.  Now that is what actually we believe is  needed to stop the boats and people have got a choice here, more chaos under  Labor, with their track record, with just one shot in the locker, or to do the full suite of  policies that we’ve been talking about and believed in for over a decade.  I think the  choice is fairly clear.

KELLY:  It’s quarter past eight on Breakfast, our guest is the Shadow Immigration Minister,  Scott Morrison, talking about the Nauru policy, which was really announced this  week, an increase in the capacity on Nauru.  Just to finish up on this resettling and  where people go.  If they’re not resettled in Nauru and they’re not going to be, if  some end up in Australia, basically you say, the Government’s promising no boat  arrivals will be resettled here, you say they can’t promise that.

MORRISON:  No they can’t . It’s not true.

KELLY:  Under your policy, some boat arrivals will go to Nauru, they’ll end up in Australia on  TPVs.  That’s -

MORRISON:

Well no.  What I’ve said is that they will need to seek resettlement somewhere else -

KELLY:  Yes.



MORRISON:  And our policy is temporary protection visas as well -

KELLY:  For how long?

MORRISON:

The temporary protection visas?

KELLY:  Yes. Forever?

MORRISON:  Well temporary protection visas will be at the discretion of the Government.  So they  could be as little as six months or they could be up to three years and then they  could be renewed as a TPV, not as a permanent visa.  And the thing about TPVS

KELLY:  So someone can end up going to Nauru, ending up being resettled to Australia on a  TPV and end up on a TPV forever here.  Is that right?

MORRISON:  Well we can play speculative things on scenarios, Fran, what I’m saying is -

KELLY:  Well it’s important-

MORRISON:

No let me just finish the point about temporary protection visas.  At the end of  someone’s temporary protection visa, they would be reassessed in terms of their  refugee status.  So there is an opportunity to actually then send people home, if  hopefully, their refugee situation is no longer current.  Now the problem we would  have if we were in Government is almost 50 000 people have turned up.  15 000 of  them have been given permanent visas, there is no opportunity now for Australia to  revisit those decisions.  The Labor Party have given the permanent residence in  Australia.  Now that is not our policy, never has been, never would be.  And that’s

why there’s a clear contrast because you’ve got to have the full suite, Fran, whether  it’s the last port of call, the last line is temporary protection visas.  The first line is the  intelligence and AFP work done right up the chain -

KELLY:  Sure.

MORRISON:  -then there’s the work at sea and then there’s the work in the detention space.  And  that’s why we’ve said up in Nauru, as well as on PNG, you need to ramp up the  capacity.  Now we have a plan for doing that on Nauru, a very comprehensive plan,  that we would be ready to work with Nauru -

KELLY:   Tents.

MORRISON:  No.  Not just tents as I said before.  It’s the permanent rebuild of facilities, it’s the  immediate ramp up in tented accommodation.

KELLY:  Which is what Kevin Rudd is promising in PNG.

MORRISON:  In PNG, but not on Nauru.  So why wouldn’t you do both, Fran?  Why is the Prime  Minister only looking at a one shot in the locker solution in PNG? We are going to do  it all.

KELLY:  Two quick points.  The Greens leader, Christine Milne, has branded both of your  policies as barbaric and she’s also said in her policy released today that the  humanitarian intake should be increased from 20,000 to 30,000 and that was one of  the recommendations of the Houston Policy.  Now, you’re in fact promising to reduce  the humanitarian intake from 20,000 to 13,000.  Why would you do that and why  don’t you agree with Christine Milne’s plan?

MORRISON:  Well a) I don’t agree with Christine Milne’s plan because that won’t stop the boats  but our policy is to preserve the 13 750 places under the Refugee and Humanitarian  programme solely for those who have come legally to Australia or through the

offshore orderly process.  Not one of those visas will be given to someone who has  arrived illegally by boat.  Under the Government’s policy, of the 20 000, all of those  visas can potentially be given to people who come by boat.  What we have done,  which those in the refugee sector have been arguing for for years, is we’ve delinked  the programme.  Temporary -

KELLY:  But they also want an increase and the Houston Panel said it should be increased.

MORRISON:  Well we don’t agree that increasing the intake, at the end of the day when you’ve got  less than one per cent of the world’s refugees actually getting resettlement at the  end of the day, and you’ve got around 80,000 places that are available globally each  year, and you’ve got hundreds of thousands, if not millions of people seeking them,  moving that dial by 4 or 5 thousand either way is going to make any real difference.   The great risk of what the Greens have said and I’d be interested to see what  Indonesia says about this, is you don’t want to create Indonesia as a magnet for  people to move into either.  Our policy is about regional deterrence, which stops  people from coming into the region, not just into Australia.  That’s what Operation  Sovereign Borders is designed to achieve through the coordinated plan that we have  and that’s based on the lessons of years, Fran.  I mean, Tony Burke’s been in the  job for a month.  Kevin Rudd, the same.  For a month.  And to say that their plans  have been well thought through, when they’ve just been working them up on the run,  in the run up to an election, I think is ridiculous.  Tony Abbott and I have been  working on these plans, whether it’s been on Nauru, Operation Sovereign Borders,  the turn backs policy, for years.  That’s why we’re ready to go and our form says that  we can deliver.

KELLY:  Scott Morrison, thank you very much for joining us.

MORRISON:  Thanks, Fran.

Ends



