THE HON BRENDAN O’CONNOR MP  MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP

E&OE TRANSCRIPT  SUNRISE  CHANNEL 7  MONDAY, 10 JUNE 2013

SUBJECT: LABOR PARTY, ASYLUM SEEKERS

DAVID KOCH: Joining us now is Immigration Minister Brendan O'Connor. Good morning to you.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Good morning.

DAVID KOCH: What's your view? Is it time for Bill Shorten to tap the Prime Minister on the shoulder?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: My view is we get on with the job of governing. That's what we are there for  and that's what the people expect of us, and they don't want us just talking about ourselves. They  want us delivering to all Australians. And I am on, of course, to talk about an unfortunate tragedy at  sea. But speculation may continue, Kochie. The only challenge to the Prime Minister’s job is Tony  Abbott, and he has no plan for Australia's future.

DAVID KOCH: Right, okay, well, we will get on to that tragedy very shortly, but it's the leadership that  has got the headlines at the moment because it seems as though, you know, the Labor Party is  almost like lemmings heading for a cliff here. It's a disastrous political result. The polls are saying so  many of your colleagues are going to lose their job.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: As I say, they don't want us talking about ourselves. They want us delivering,  and I think we have got a good record of delivering, both in terms of responding to the global  financial crisis, outlining our plans for education and DisabilityCare, ensuring we grow the economy -  in fact, we've created over 950,000 jobs. I mean, we have got a good record but nobody, of course,

wants to see a government talking about itself. That's why we have got to focus on the issues that  matter.

DAVID KOCH: OK, let's talk about the three-day search for survivors of the capsized asylum seeker  boat near Christmas Island. It was called off last night. Is there any possibility anyone survived?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Look, it seems very unlikely Kochie. This is a terrible tragedy underlining again  the real dangers of embarking on these perilous journeys. And for that reason, you know, we want  to work out the best way to stop that happening. We know that the - look, the search and rescue has  been suspended at nine o'clock last night, and I guess, the authorities, led by the Australian  Maritime Safety Authority, will determine whether the search resumes. But look, it looks very, very  unlikely, and that's just an awful tragedy.

DAVID KOCH: Well the boats are coming in record numbers at the moment. Most of us thought we  had a deal with Indonesia they would do something before they even left Indonesia. Are you feeling  betrayed by the Indonesians? Obviously they are turning a blind eye to all of this.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Look, I don't think that's a reasonable conclusion. The Indonesian National  Police, for example, work closely with the Australian Federal Police. They have disrupted many  vessels but there are 46 million people displaced around the world. All first world nations are  confronted with this issue. Many countries deal with far greater numbers of irregular arrivals than  even Australia, so it's one of those really difficult issues, when you have got conflicts around the  world and displacement you will see this happen.

But that's why we needed - I think that's why it's important to focus back on the experts'  recommendations. Tow-backs are too dangerous, fly-backs to Malaysia is on the table. I think we've  got to take it up.

DAVID KOCH: And you've announced a new detention facility for families?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: We have, because we need to detain people for security, identity and health  purposes. We need the facility - we want to make sure the amenities, both in terms of infrastructure  and provision of services, are suitable. But we need to ensure that because we cannot release  people into the community if they have not been assessed for those purposes.

DAVID KOCH: And particularly if they're coming in record numbers, it's hard to put them anywhere.  Alright, thank you very much for your time, appreciate it.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Thanks very much, Kochie.



