THE HON BRENDAN O’CONNOR MP  MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP

E&OE TRANSCRIPT  2SM  MORNINGS  MONDAY, 22 APRIL 2013

SUBJECT: ASYLUM SEEKERS

JOHN LAWS: Australia's immigration policy has been - you know, it's hard to deny - in turmoil really  for years now. Ever since the High Court struck down the so-called Malaysian solution Labor has  failed to come up with a viable policy. While our politicians squabble in Canberra thousands have  arrived here by boat. Not only that, but hundreds of people died on the way here. Well, I'm not sure  there's hundreds but certainly a hell of a lot and that, of course, is totally unacceptable. One person  who I assume is trying to come up with some kind of workable solution to the problem is the Federal  Immigration Minister Brendan O'Connor and I'm happy to say we have the Minister on the line now.  Brendan O'Connor, good morning and welcome.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Good morning, John.

JOHN LAWS: Is Australia's immigration policy in crisis?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: No. We are confronted with the same problems that all first world nations  are confronted with and that is 46 million people around the world displaced or seeking to get to  those countries. And I think we do a very good job in those circumstances but we could do better  and that's why we've been seeking to implement all of the 22 recommendations outlined by Angus  Houston's panel which we believe will deter the vessels coming in that manner, will save lives at sea  and send a very powerful message to people smugglers. They cannot lure people onto these  unseaworthy vessels.

JOHN LAWS: Why do people take the risk, because they're desperate?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Well, I think it's a combination of factors. There's no doubt, for example,  some of the people we've returned to Sri Lanka - and we've returned over 1000 now in several  months - have come here for a - have been economically motivated and they've taken the chance.

JOHN LAWS: Yes.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: There are others - and I'm not going to pretend otherwise - John, that have  fled persecution. Literally, have had their families butchered and murdered and they are running  from an awful situation and they seek to go to countries around the world. We receive - about one  per cent of people seek to come here, 99 per cent elsewhere. But there are conflicts around the  world. Now, what we've made clear is that this government, as has been the case of previous  governments, will take our fair share and we've actually increased that to 20,000 places. But they've  got to be fair dinkum. They've got to be genuine refugees. And if they are, we will afford them  protection. But if they are not, we will return them home and indeed, we will also say to them that if  you take the irregular path you will get no advantage whatsoever. That is, you will not be processed

in a manner that will - you know, that will be accelerated just because you've paid people smugglers  and endangered your own lives which, of course, it's a terrible thing.

JOHN LAWS: Yes. Well, there's a massive element of stupidity in the whole thing but I think a lot of  people are sold a furphy. They've got no idea how dangerous the situation is once they're at sea in  these leaky old boats.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Well, you were right the first time, John, when you said it's hundreds. It is  hundreds and it's not the first time. In 2001 one vessel alone, 350 people died. It will - look, this  issue is a global problem needing a regional response. That's why we believe if we don't engage with  Malaysia and genuinely engage with Indonesia - in fact, conversely, if we offend Malaysia and we  offend Indonesia, the two largest transit countries in our region, we're not going to tackle this issue  successfully.

And that's why we believe the way in which we've proceeded is correct and the experts have advised  us so. And that's why we disagree, respectfully, with the Opposition who believe that they can use  an old policy that is not going to be acceptable to either Malaysia or Indonesia. That's not going to  reduce the vessels. That will inflame our relationships with transit countries and increase the  likelihood of vessels coming. And I think therefore, the Opposition should rethink.

JOHN LAWS: Yes. Is it true the recent annual report from Serco, the private company that runs our  detention centres, actually welcomed the flood of asylum seekers to Australia saying it has been  good for business?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Well, I'm not sure what Serco would say but you can imagine, providers of  government services are not so concerned if the services are required. I can assure you, from my  point of view, I want to see every taxpayer dollar spent on those things that matter for this country.  And indeed, I don't want to see any dollars spent unnecessarily. So we will do everything we can to  put an end to this very dangerous path of irregular migration and we want to make sure we  implement all 22 recommendations and we call upon the Opposition to give it a try. Now, my fear is  John that they're not supporting the Malaysian arrangement now that we've put something forward  after the High Court decision to which you referred.

JOHN LAWS: Yes.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: It's not because they don't believe it will work. I'm afraid that they're not  supporting this because they're scared that it will work and I think that's not a responsible approach.  When we were in opposition we responded and cooperated with the Howard Government on a  bipartisan basis in the interests of national security. And we do believe on this occasion, even if  there's any doubt in the mind of Tony Abbott at all he should allow the experts' advice to be  implemented and let's see what will happen.

Now, the idea that he is now saying as of yesterday that it is dangerous to turn back boats means  that he is willing to endanger the naval and customs' personnel and I think that is a very, very  unprecedented and unwise approach by the Opposition. And now, that's the first admission he has  made. He has always said in the past, John, as you know, that if it was safe to do so he would turn  back the boats. Well, in an interview yesterday the Leader of the Opposition did say that he will  return them even when it's dangerous. Now, this sets a very dangerous precedent.

JOHN LAWS: It sure does.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: And it worries me and it worries our personnel and it worries Angus Houston,  the former chief of the Australian Defence Force, and I think it is unacceptable. But beyond that, if  Indonesia and Malaysia are not accepting that approach then it will only inflame our diplomatic  relations. Now, here we have a situation where Malaysia is saying yes and Tony Abbott is saying no.  Indonesia, on this policy is saying no and Tony Abbott is saying yes. This is not going to work. And the  real - that's why, if you've noticed, there is no longer “stop the boats”. It's always “we will make a  difference”, we will see what we can do. See, they're running away from disclosing because it's not a  policy. Now, I'm not pretending that we've got this matter solved but I am saying we've got a set of  recommendations, if implemented as advised by Angus Houston, Michael L'Estrange and Paris  Aristotle, three eminent Australians, and (indistinct)

JOHN LAWS: And independents, importantly.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Indeed, indeed, and supported by the independents. But these three people  have 75 years of diplomatic border protection and asylum settlement experience amongst them. All  of them came to this issue with different views, compromised their views in the interests of the  nation. I think it's now time that the two major parties come together and the Parliament comes  together and realise those plans because without them, I'm afraid that we will not see a successful  end to this complex regional challenge.

JOHN LAWS: Of those asylum seekers who arrived in Geraldton a few weeks back, how many of  them have been returned to Sri Lanka?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: 38 of 66 on this occasion. We've put in a screening process to prevent those  that are coming here that are economically motivated. I can sympathise with them but we have  20,000 places. We're a fair nation. We will take our fair share, like every other first world country.  But we're not going to fill and I will not allow for those places to be filled by people who are not  defined as a refugee or are here for other purposes than fleeing persecution. There are - we can only  do so much but we're going to make sure those places, John, are filled with people that are  genuinely fleeing persecution. We afford them protection. What we cannot do is liberalise the  definition to allow people that are coming here where they're economically motivated but they're  not in danger at all. That is the - even though, you know, people think that's hard hearted. That is  hard headed and it's the right thing to do for those desperate people where we take, as I say, our  fair share, no more, no less.

JOHN LAWS: Do we have any clear indication of how these people have been able to get so far south  without the vessel being intercepted?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Well, they were - obviously, it's a very, very dangerous and irregular path of  migration, right out there on our west coast, further south and further west than before. And to that  extent, these are wood hulled boats. They're right off sort of the normal navigation routes. Indeed,  they're very lucky, John, they arrived at any land at all. They were that…

JOHN LAWS: Yes.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: This is the most perilous effort we've seen to date and they're lucky that they  were - they survived and we're glad they survived. But we've sent those home, 38. Now, the others  may indeed, be refugees, they may not be. We will determine that. But we screen these people out  using a fair process and we sent the most powerful message of all. If you are not exercising our  obligations under the Refugee Convention you will be flown directly home. There's no more  powerful message than that.

JOHN LAWS: No, there isn't. Brendan, you missed the question. Why were the boats not detected?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Look, all I can say is there was - it was very unusual. We've got, you know,  thousands and thousands of kilometres of coastline and tens of thousands of square nautical miles  of ocean out there. There has been only two undetected arrivals in our five years. You compare that  with 19 vessels that arrived in New South Wales, Queensland, Northern Territory and WA under the  previous administration.

So we've got better at this but you can imagine how difficult this is with our vessels and our fleet. So  this was an exceptional case. It was unfortunate. But the good thing here is that firstly, that we have  screened those people for those that are not to be afforded protection. They've been sent home. A  plane flown back into Colombo sends the most powerful message. Why waste your money and why  endanger your lives.

JOHN LAWS: Well, it does send a powerful message. Listen, the costs have blown out by billions,  according to the report from Serco in the Saturday Herald, I think it was. You know, why does Sri  Lanka seem happy to take these people back but Indonesia wants nothing to do with them?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Well, Indonesia does help disrupt many, many launches, people trying to  embark on launches. And I can - when I was former Minister for Home Affairs and Justice I worked  very closely with my counterpart. The AFP worked with the Indonesian National Police. We've  disrupted so many services, so many launches, but the fact is that the difference here, of course, is  that those people working their way through Indonesia are not Indonesian Nationals. The Sri  Lankans are Sri Lankan Nationals. And I think you have a different arrangement where you are  returning to country of origin directly.

Now, it's not to say Indonesia won't assist. They have done a lot of work. But we still need to work  with them about further work to work through how do we identify and prevent people coming  through Indonesia. Now, of course, we rely upon them heavily to do that. But you can understand  why they want us to help them as well because...

JOHN LAWS: Sure, yes.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: You know, I will put the alternative view. If people were coming through our  country and heading off to another, of course we would assist. But you can see their point of view.  They're not nationals of that country. And to that extent, we've still got some way to go to build that  relationship between country of origin, transit and destination in the region.

JOHN LAWS: This has got to be knocking the budget about, surely.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Look, it's always an impact, of course. But, you know, John, we do the right  thing here. We send the strong message. We will send people home when we can. But we're not  going to harm people. We're a civilised and democratic nation. We - you know, we're not going to be  mugs either and that's why we've had 1004 people returned to Sri Lanka in the last few months. But  we will fulfil our international obligations. We're in the same boat - pardon the pun - as other  nations. United States have hundreds of thousands.

JOHN LAWS: That's true, yes.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Europe has tens of - we have border crossings of tens of thousands in Europe.  So in terms of scale, I'm not pretending for a moment this is not a challenge, it is, John. But  sometimes I think people get carried away. In terms of scale, when I talk to my counterparts in other  nations, they would love to have so few coming over a year. Now, I'm not trying to belittle this  situation. I know this is a big challenge. But by comparison to some nations, I think we do well and I  think we shouldn't take it out of context or overly inflate the situation. I'm not trying to  underestimate it but let's not overcook it either.

JOHN LAWS: Okay. But when you consider the population of these other countries that are receiving  these people who are arriving on their shores, they - from a percentage point of view, when you  consider the population of this country opposed to other countries, the percentages surely would be  much the same, wouldn't they?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: No, no. Look, for example, there are much higher numbers in European  states. They have - yes, they might have the population that might double ours or more but the  numbers that they receive…

JOHN LAWS: Double ours?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: More than double ours. If you look at - it's not just about the people coming  by maritime arrival, of course, because they have massive land movements from the east and from  the north. So they will have - so for Europe they have Africans coming from the north. They also  have people from South East Asia coming from the east and south east. So they have more  challenges. I guess we're positioned in a manner which makes our job a little easier.

But we need to get to the - we need to really tackle this. The best way - I'm going to return to what I  said at the beginning - is to let - we got those experts together for a reason. We've had to deal with  some High Court decisions and, with respect, we've dealt with them, provided the Opposition allow  our legislation to pass. At this point, they've not allowed that.

JOHN LAWS: Okay. Brendan, as I've got you there I would like a final answer on this question that is  thrown to me constantly and I know the assertion is totally incorrect or I hope it is. Claire - this is  from a listener - please explain why the illegal immigrants are treated better than Australian citizen's  aged pensioners?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Well, they're certainly not. There would be never - there's never a situation  where any support or income would be anywhere near what we would provide our fellow  Australians. Yes, of course, when we release people into the community after clearance and security  checks they're given some level of support but it's well below Newstart, which is well below pension

income. And we do that, one, because we're a humane nation. We also do that - we don't want  crime to be committed. And so we do all the right things but we don't do any more. And there are a  lot of rumours running around. If people want to know the answers they can ring the department or  go to the website. They will know exactly what is happening. And people shouldn't perhaps listen to  rumours. I can assure you, John, we put Australian citizens and permanent residents first.

JOHN LAWS: I'm aware of that. I mean, we've gone through it time and time again. But the rumour  persists and people seem to want to spread this sort of rumour. There seems to be something about  asylum seekers that Australians just don't like.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Well, look, I don't think - I think some - I think there are concerns with some.  But I think in the end we're a generous nation. 750,000 refugees have come here since World War II.  They've built this nation. And there's some remarkable stories of remarkable men and women that  helped build this nation and they came as refugees. So let's not forget that when we're concerned  about this issue in the contemporary sense.

JOHN LAWS: Okay. Another question here from one of our listeners: why do they get free dental and  healthcare when our own pensioners who've paid tax their whole lives can't?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Again, of course, we afford them a duty of care. If there is a major infection,  for example, of someone's mouth because of a dental problem we're not going to allow that to  fester. We're not going to allow people to suffer and we're not going to allow it to become more  costly. If their life is endangered we will respond to prevent those things happening. So we provide a  modicum of care which is, I think, comparative - or comparable to our levels of decency. And I think  people would be horrified if we were to allow people to suffer unreasonably and unfairly. We would  never do that, John.

I again ask people to understand and be Christian like or be decent in their considerations of others.  Irrespective of whether we've agreed with the manner in which they've come, we're not going to  harm people. And by neglecting their health to such an extent would be a deliberate form of harm.

JOHN LAWS: Yeah. Well, I agree with that but it's very hard to get it through to a lot of people. A lot  of people seem to have a repugnant attitude to asylum seekers as though they're some second class  citizen. But a lot of these people are actually fleeing hideous countries in which they have suffered  greatly.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Unimaginable stories I've heard of horror, of absolute horror. And that - and  remember, this is nothing new. This has happened before. We've had people coming from Europe,  as we know, in the period of the Second World War and just before. So let's not forget our history  and let's remember, if we do the right thing but send a firm message about those who cannot come  in that manner I think we've got the balance right. But we need the Opposition to help us with the  Malaysian arrangement and other panel recommendations.

JOHN LAWS: Okay. And this expression “illegal immigrants” has got to go because it is not illegal to  claim asylum, is it?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Yeah. No, it's not, it's not. And we will return people that are not but it is  inappropriate to use that term. In fact the Press Council has already called Mr Abbott up on that.

Now, John, I'm actually being called for the third time for a plane. I'm in Melbourne Airport. If I miss  that, I will be in big trouble. I'm not trying to go - I hope we've had a good conversation and I'm  happy to talk again soon.

JOHN LAWS: No, no, no. We always have a good conversation and I'm sure the listeners are happy  with what you've had to say and I thank you for it, Brendan.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Thank you. Thanks, John.

JOHN LAWS: Okay, bye.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Bye bye.



