THE HON BRENDAN O’CONNOR MP  MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP

E&OE TRANSCRIPT  ABC NEWS 24  ABC NEWS BREAKFAST  TUESDAY, 28 MAY 2013

SUBJECT: ASYLUM SEEKERS, 457 VISAS

VIRGINIA TRIOLI: For more on those asylum seeker numbers the Immigration Minister Brendan  O'Connor is with us from Parliament House. Minister, good morning, and thank you for joining  us.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Good morning, Virginia.

VIRGINIA TRIOLI: So, that's a significant underestimate there by both the Government and also  the Department on the numbers of expected asylum seeker arrivals. How did they get it so  wrong?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Well we've always known that we needed to fulfil all of the 22  recommendations of the expert panel. The Houston panel is made up of Angus Houston,  Michael L'Estrange and Paris Aristotle. They came together with different perspectives in order  to ensure we put in place the most efficient set of reforms and policies that would deter people  getting on unseaworthy vessels.

Now, we haven't realised all of those and we need to do that and, of course, we call upon the  Parliament to realise the recommendations as recommended.

VIRGINIA TRIOLI: So there's more people coming because your policy has been put halfway in  place or in an incomplete way in place, that's the reason? That actually doesn't make a great  deal of sense. If you can't put the entire policy in place and therefore achieve the proper  outcome, you can't partially implement it and turn around and say, oh goodness me look what  happened.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Well it's actually a bit more complex than that. I mean, it's for a variety of  reasons including, of course, more conflicts around the world. If you look at the people  movement throughout our region, most of the conflicts currently in the world are within close  proximity to us. So for a variety of factors you are seeing people flow, and people seeking to  arrive in first world countries.

But we are not alone, Virginia. We have about two per cent of people seeking to come here.  Most first world countries deal with this issue. But we have got, I think, a set of initiatives that if  they were implemented in combination we would see people not endangering their lives at sea.  And that's why we need the Opposition to support some of those fundamentals that are

required including the Malaysian arrangement. It would be a return to a transit country, it would  actually send a very powerful message, the same message, Virginia, that I think we have sent by  screening and returning over 1100 Sri Lankans in the last several months.

So that's the sort of stuff we need. But of course we have a situation where the Opposition says  no to the transit country that says yes, Malaysia, and says yes to a transit country that says no,  Indonesia. That is because they do not want to see any successful outcome in this area.

VIRGINIA TRIOLI: Okay, well we've ranged across a number of complex areas there and I'm glad  you recognise and talk about the complexity, particularly when it comes to people movement in  our region and the number of conflicts and wars that people are just going to naturally going to  flee.

But the issue is that if you're not going to have an Opposition that supports all of your policy,  then surely now if you've got the policy that's only partially in place but you say can't achieve  the entire outcome, there's no point sticking by it?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Well, that's why we've done other things, Virginia, that's why for  example...

VIRGINIA TRIOLI: [Interrupts] But they're not working, Minister, they're clearly not working.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: But that will - let me just turn to that. That's why beyond the  recommendations we introduced the enhanced screening for Sri Lankans which has seen 1100  returns to Sri Lanka that were not engaging our obligations pursuant to the refugee convention.  That has actually seen a massive decline, a 90 per cent decline in direct arrivals from Sri Lanka in  - and that, of course, there is no more powerful message than that.

We obviously want to do more and indeed I foreshadowed other initiatives. What we've had to  do, because of the obstinance and the relentless negativity of the Opposition, is find ways  beyond the Parliament in order to ensure that we prevent people endangering their lives at sea.  Too many people have perished at sea and we needed the Parliament, we needed, if you like, a  bipartisan approach on some of these matters.

Unfortunately, as I say, we do not have that. We have an Opposition who doesn't support the  Malaysian arrangement not because they don't think it will work, they don't support it because  they're afraid that it will. Now that's a terrible indictment on an Opposition leader who should  be putting the national interest first.

VIRGINIA TRIOLI: Can you afford to process 22,500 people?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: I'm sorry, I missed the question.

VIRGINIA TRIOLI: Can you afford to process 22,500 people?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Well we'll process people pursuant to the no-advantage principle, that is,  we'll continue to ensure people are processed, they will be processed according to the law, but  what we have said is they will receive, those that arrive from 13 August, will receive no  advantage whether they're being processed here, or in a processing centre, or another part of  the world.

VIRGINIA TRIOLI: Minister, I appreciate that but I didn't ask you that. Can you afford it? Have you  budgeted to process 22,500 people?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Well we have a, as you would know, we have a 20,000 cap. Therefore  there will be no - we will not exceed that cap. And so of course it will take longer for people to  be determined, longer for people to be processed but more importantly longer for people to be  allocated a place under those 20,000. We will not exceed that cap.

VIRGINIA TRIOLI: Okay, I need to clarify that though, if you won't exceed that cap what do you  do with the 2500 or more extra people? Where do they go?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Well what you do - well you just - well people have to wait until the  places are there.

VIRGINIA TRIOLI: Where do they wait?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Well they either wait - if they've arrived in this country they will be  waiting either in detention or, of course, in the most instances, they will be waiting on bridging  visas because that's what they will have to do for the processing. We will not exceed the 20,000.  That is an extraordinary generous allocation of places and what we will not do is exceed that  cap. That is, as I say, as high as any other place in the world per capita, and second highest only  to the United States.

So we're a fair country but we will not exceed that allocation and therefore yes, people will have  to wait to be provided a protection visa place.

VIRGINIA TRIOLI: Okay, I hear that but they will be waiting - in many cases they will be here. If  these figures are correct they'll be here waiting, as you say, either in detention, which is  expensive, or in the community which is expensive but not for you because the Government  doesn't pay for that. They can't work these people and so they rely on charity. So...

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: That's not true.

VIRGINIA TRIOLI: ...you're happy to be part of creation some kind of underclass in this country?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Well that's not true. They do receive income if they're on bridging visas.

VIRGINIA TRIOLI: They receive a tiny portion of government benefits that nobody can really live  on.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: No they received 89  per cent of what 660,000 Australians receive. They  receive a significant - an adequate level of support.

VIRGINIA TRIOLI: But those Australians are also able to work if they can but these can't work,  they're not allowed to get work.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Well we've actually made clear that we will not afford work rights for  people who have arrived from 13 August because that has been one of the lures, if you like, for  people to endanger their lives by getting on vessels, telling them they will get a job as soon as  they arrive in Australia. We do not want to see that occur and for that reason we have in place  that we provide adequate income for people, in my view, no more, no less than that. But it's  unfair to suggest that the Government would not provide support for those people on bridging  visas, we certainly do. And we work with providers to ensure that they are - they're helped in a  number of ways.

VIRGINIA TRIOLI: I've just seen a tweet here from Stephen Jones MP, your Labor colleague, and  he said I just spoke with my local radio station on the need to introduce a local workers first test  before employers can ask for a 457 visa for workers. Is that something you'd support?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Well as you know Virginia I'm looking to reform the 457 visa just to  ensure that the scheme maintains its integrity. We believe in a temporary skilled stream  provided its legitimate shortages, and of course we should ensure that the skills shortage is real  and employers are not avoiding local employees and just looking to employ people from  overseas. Of course I support that general contention. But we do need a 457...

VIRGINIA TRIOLI: [Interrupts] But how do you do it though? That's a complicated thing to try and  do.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Well how we do it? Well we'd do it the same way the countries around  the world do it. We make sure that employers look to see whether there's people with sufficient  skills locally first. If there is not - if those skills do not exist, then of course they should use the  457 scheme. However, too many employers are not looking locally - they are seeking to only  have people from overseas on a temporary stream. We think that's really in violation of the  intention of the scheme and for that reason we need reforms to make sure that the shortage is  legitimate before you get an application for a temporary worker.

VIRGINIA TRIOLI: Now moving to another subject, Australian Federal Police are saying this  morning that now a total of 28 life jackets have been found washed up on Cocos Islands there.  They're suspected to come from perhaps an unexpected arrival, an unexpected vessel that  perhaps has sunk or found - hit some trouble. What do you know about this and why is there  still no formal search yet for a missing boat?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Well you might understand, Cocos Island is five and a half hours flying  time from mainland Australia. But it seems to me another tragedy at sea. Too many tragedies

occur where people are endangering their lives. This is exactly why Virginia, exactly why we  need to have in place a deterrence that actually reduces the chance of people taking their lives -  risking their lives in such a manner.

Now I don't know - I have not been briefed fully on the detail of that of course but it would  seem that it could well be another maritime tragedy and that's an awful thing and it should  focus people's minds in ensuring that we put in place the most effective means to reduce those  things happening again and again.

VIRGINIA TRIOLI: Brendan O'Connor, good to talk to you this morning. Thanks for making time.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Thank you very much Virginia.



