THE HON BRENDAN O’CONNOR MP  MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DRIVE  6PR  WEDNESDAY, 3 APRIL 2013

SUBJECT: BALI PROCESS, ASYLUM SEEKERS, 457 VISA



HOWARD SATTLER: I think we're breaking new ground. I've got a living, breathing, current  Immigration Minister in the studio. His name is Brendan O'Connor. Hello, Brendan.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: G'day, Howard. How are you?

HOWARD SATTLER: What are you doing here? They normally don't come in, they don't talk to  me.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: I love to come in. If I'm in Perth and you invite me in, I'll be here, I  promise.

HOWARD SATTLER: It's a big issue here, you know, immigration.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: It's a big issue across the country.

HOWARD SATTLER: It is, and another boat's just arrived. That's four in two days.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Yeah. It's a very big challenge and that's why of course the work we're  undertaking in Indonesia just the other day, came back...

HOWARD SATTLER: I saw that.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: ...came from there last night, it’s so important because if we don't get a  regional approach to this and an effective approach then this is going to be a very difficult  matter to control.

HOWARD SATTLER: Can I just replay part of an interview with the Prime Minister on this issue,  because I put it to her, I said look, Sri Lanka's now come to the party. They seem to be doing as  much as they can to try and stop the boats leaving. Why can't you get Indonesia to do the same  thing. And here's what she had to say.

[Excerpt from interview]

HOWARD SATTLER: How come Sri Lanka can stop the boats leaving their shores?

JULIA GILLARD: We have returned to Sri Lanka around a thousand people who have travelled  here by boat. We've done it in a very quick time.

HOWARD SATTLER: So, we can't do it with Indonesia?

JULIA GILLARD: Well, you're talking about two entirely different things. What has been  happening with Sri Lanka is people have arrived. They haven't had a credible claim for asylum-seeker status and they have been returned. What you put to me about Indonesia was turning  boats around at sea and towing them back to Indonesia. Problem number one; fact number one;  it puts Australian lives at risk. Fact number two; Indonesia won't take the return of these boats. I  know that and the Leader of the Opposition knows that as well.

[End of excerpt]

HOWARD SATTLER: Why won't they take the return of these boats? I mean we - Indonesia owes  us something surely?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Indonesia - Look, they've been working with us for some time.  Remembering this though too - the other thing I'd like to distinguish in relation to Sri Lanka,  because I think it's a very important question you raise, Howard. Sri Lanka is a country of origin.  It's dealing with its own citizens, as the Prime Minister said, who are not afforded protection on  the base of what we were told and on that basis we've sent back just under a thousand.

Indonesia is a transit country; the only people trying to get through there, get through their  country are not citizens of that country, but let me just make it very clear, they've been involved  in disrupting thousands of people getting on these unseaworthy vessels. There still needs more,  there needs to be more done. That's why I met with the Foreign Minister of Indonesia yesterday  with our own Foreign Minister.

It was very important because what we talked about acting on is using law enforcement and  using the laws that they've now put in place. Like three or four years ago, Indonesia didn't even  have significant penalties for organising ventures. Now they have 10 year sentences, and they've  actually convicted people most recently - in the last 12 months, which had never occurred  before. There were like, a couple of months for immigration offences.

So the Indonesians are taking it far more seriously, I think, than they once did. They have been  working with us but yes there is more to be done. I'm not...

HOWARD SATTLER: You seem like a pretty straight shooter, Brendan. Would you describe  yourself as that?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Well, I hope so.

HOWARD SATTLER: Don't gild the lily here. You and I both know that at a local level there is so  much corruption in Indonesia. I'm going to just hand you a review of a book. You should read  the book. Don't read the review. And it's all about what goes on up there. And it's all about the  fact that at a local level you've got customs people, port authority people, police - all getting  hand outs from the people smugglers. They're standing on the beach saying, give me the money  and then, okay, I got the money, see you later, you can take the boat now. It's happening.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: All countries...

HOWARD SATTLER: You know that don't you? You know that.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: All countries. Well, can I respond?

HOWARD SATTLER: Is it happening or not?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Look, I think there's corruption in all countries of varying levels. We know  that. We've had to stamp out corruption in our own country, and I'm not suggesting there is no  corruption in Indonesia. I think...

HOWARD SATTLER: You couldn't, you couldn't.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: I know, and there's corruption in all countries. I think the other thing  about Indonesia is it is a very, very big decentralised country and I think for the National  Government that's shown its commitments to us by setting up task forces to disrupt the  ventures for engaging without the Australia Federal Police. If you asked - If you had the  Commissioner of the Australian Federal Police on today, Tony Negus, he would tell you that our  relationship with the Indonesian National Police is second to none. We've worked on terrorism  issues, we've had to deal with the Bali bombings. We've...They've been genuinely engaging in  transnational crimes.

HOWARD SATTLER: But I'm saying, gotta stop corruption at a local level. That's where it's all  happening.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: And as I say to you, that's why I think there's been a national resolve. I  mean, we've had the president of Indonesia. We've had the Foreign Minister who co-chaired the  Bali process. We've got Indonesia co-chairing this conference that has over 40 countries of the  region involved. Countries of origin, transit and destination looking at doing whatever we  possibly can to stop the deaths at sea, and stop people exploiting others.

HOWARD SATTLER: That all sides of politics and all people in the community want to stop.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Of course they do. All reasonable people do.

HOWARD SATTLER: And Scott Morrison, and I know they do- an issue with him on a lot of things,  but he does want to stop that. You can give him credit for that. He doesn't...does want to stop  deaths at sea.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: I think he wants...I think we all want to stop vessels, but saying stop the  boats, doesn't stop them. I think we need to put in place, you know, a comprehensive set of  policies and actions to do that.

HOWARD SATTLER: And the sales pitch of the people smugglers is that, if you get on one of our  boats, you'll get to Australia. Now, I'm told again by Scott Morrison, tell me if he's wrong, only  one in twenty people arriving illegally by boat are being sent to Nauru and Manus Island since  the Government announced the restoration of off-shore processing. Right or wrong?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: That's about right. There's been...

HOWARD SATTLER: But why?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Because we will send - the fact is that we send...we make it very clear  that if you've arrived since 12 August, you may well be processed in a regional processing...

HOWARD SATTLER: No advantage in another...

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: ...in another country - hold on. And the other thing, though, even if  you've arrived here, you don't receive an advantage. You do not have your processing settled  any quicker, and as you know under the BVEs you don't have certain rights afforded to you and  you don't get work rights the way in which they were getting them under the TPVs. That's...

HOWARD SATTLER: But the people smugglers say, get on our boat, we'll get you to Australia.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Yeah but...

HOWARD SATTLER: They can do that.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Yeah but they - that's what they say and of course we have people - I've  been to Manus Province where the centre's there, and there are people, of course on Nauru,  and of course those that are here we say that they won't be processed in any advantageous way  because we need to send that message. But of course we look to do more and that's why we  wanted to implement the Malaysian arrangement and it's yet to be realised but I think it's worth  a go and of course that's...

HOWARD SATTLER: If Malaysia will sign up to protect... [indistinct].

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Look, you know, they've been - the ferocity of the attack on Malaysia by  the Opposition...

HOWARD SATTLER: Well, why can't they sign up to it? Why can't they sign...

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Let me just make it very clear - Howard, let me just say something to  you...

HOWARD SATTLER: It's a question.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Because the Opposition has made it clear they don't care what we do in  relation to the Malaysian arrangement. They are going to vote against it in the Parliament. Now  it seems to me, when you've got the eminent experts like the former chief of the Australian  Defence Force, Angus Houston, Paris Aristotle and Michael L'Estrange, three eminent  Australians saying, this is an approach that should be tried then I can't see what the problem is  in at least giving it a go, and my concern is that this is not being supported by the Opposition.  Not because it won't work but because they're scared that it will.

HOWARD SATTLER: Well, if you get Malaysia to sign up it that would take away their argument,  wouldn't it?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Well, if they're trying to find a fig leaf to oppose it, but they've made  clear they are not going to support the Malaysian arrangement, and I think it's fair to say this.  Malaysia was shocked at the way - at the ferocity of the attack on their reputation. I mean you  had...

HOWARD SATTLER: Oh, poor souls.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: You had - well...

HOWARD SATTLER: They're a bit precious, are they, Malaysia?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: They're our neighbours and they're our good friends and they wanted to  do something to help us in this area…

HOWARD SATTLER: Yeah, but they've got to step up to the mark, surely?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: And they did step up, and all they got from the Opposition was an assault  on them. I mean, fancy if you want to be the Minister for Immigration of this country, fly into  another country which we rely upon for cooperation, standing on their soil, and basically  abusing them. That is not a way in which you're going to have a future relationship. I think the  relationship that the Opposition have with Malaysia, and indeed Indonesia, is not going to bode  well for this country if they are every elected to government.

HOWARD SATTLER: Well, why has no one been sent to Manus Island for two months?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: There have been - I mean these might be all the questions that Scott  Morrison has asked you to put to me...

HOWARD SATTLER: No, he didn't ask - is it true or not?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: … but let me just make it very clear, there will be transfers - this is a  temporary facility. We're building a permanent facility and this temporary facility, Howard, is  being filled and we will do so operationally with the two departments working together because  we need to send that message that you may well be sent to those processing centres and we've  done that, and we'll continue to do that, and I made it - when I spoke to the Foreign Minister of

Papua New Guinea, he assured me that the operational side of things are still underway. And  we'll continue to deal with that.

HOWARD SATTLER: Okay, now your side’s been pretty voracious about these 457 visas in recent  weeks...

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: You want to quote me?

HOWARD SATTLER: No, I'll ask you about this...

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Yeah sure.

HOWARD SATTLER: I'm asking you about the hypocrisy of the Prime Minister having a  communications director who's on a 457 visa. Now he's a bloke who would deal with the media  isn't he - Mr John McTernan?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: I think that - yeah well you're saying there's no skill deficiencies in the  media?

HOWARD SATTLER: I'm telling you there's about 1500 people from Fairfax who lost their jobs in  recent times.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Is that right? And has News Limited employed any 457s or Fairfax?

HOWARD SATTLER: I'm not interested in that, I'm interested in the fact...

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: My point is you might want to be distracted by one person employed in  the Government, let me just make it very clear. These reforms are to ensure that we provide  opportunities to local workers, permanent residents and citizens first.

HOWARD SATTLER: Yeah, 1500 journalists out of work...

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: One hundred thousand-plus in all sectors of our economy. I have no  problems in the use of 457s, I have a problem with the misuse and abuse of 457s and so should  any Australian worker...

HOWARD SATTLER: Well should Australians get jobs...

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: ... or any parent who wants their young person to be trained in an area  we need.

HOWARD SATTLER: Well hang on, should Australians if they got the qualification get a job ahead  of a 457 visa holder?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: I think that the employer...

HOWARD SATTLER: Should they?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Let me explain this.

HOWARD SATTLER: That's a pretty straight question.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Yeah well let me just explain. The 457 visa was used to fill temporary skill  shortages. What I've always made clear is if there's a demonstrable need for those skills, of  course they should use the 457 if they need to. But my point is if there are locals who have got  the skills Howard, I think it's only fair that they get a go first.

HOWARD SATTLER: Well tell the Prime Minister that and tell Tony Sheldon that too. He's the  national vice president of the ALP - your party. He has bagged 457 visas. He's got three people;  he's got a bloke called Dermot Ryan, media officer Barry Dunning and senior organiser Celia  Petty all on 457 visas. He's been one of the most (indistinct) critics of the system.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: To be a critic of the abuse of 457s is not to be a critic of the proper use of  457s. And I would distinguish this. I have made clear since 23 February when I announced these  reforms Howard, that we would ensure that the 457 scheme is used properly. And I also said  that the majority of employers absolutely use it properly.

But we don't want the scheme undermined and there's been sufficient evidence to show that in  some sectors of our economy in some occupation groups there's been abuse which has either  left out local workers or what's even potentially worse in the future is that we'll no longer  dedicate investment in our future in our kids - we'll say oh we don't need those skills, we don't  need those graduates, we don't need those trades people, we can get them from overseas. Well  I think we need to get the balance right here and I say we always need skilled migration but we  need to get the balance and our first obligation and I make no apology will be to Australian  permanent residents and citizens of this country because that's only reasonable.

HOWARD SATTLER: I hope Julia Gillard's listening. We'll take a break.









