1







PRESS RELEASE

THE HON. TONY ABBOTT MHR, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION

THE CHOICE: ELECTION 2013

The Liberal and National Parties welcome this election, because at last the people of Australia get to choose.

At this election, it’s you who get to choose - and not the faceless men.

The Coalition offers real change with a positive Plan and a united team - real change for the better.  We will  deliver strong, experienced and stable government, a stronger economy, stronger borders, a stronger  Australia and a better future - for all Australians.

We aren’t about talk - we are about real action and real delivery.

Only the Coalition can form a strong and stable government that will deliver on our positive Plan for lower  taxes, real help for families and build a strong, prosperous economy.

By contrast, the best that Labor can do at this election is hang on.  The best Labor can offer is more  compromise, more deals and more uncertainty.

There is only one way that Australians can be sure to leave the chaos, the division, the failures, and the  bloodletting behind, for good… and that is to change the Government.

Labor is just offering you more of the same.  If Labor hangs on, they will only be offering more talk, more  chaos, more division, more uncertainty and more unexpected new taxes. There will be more turmoil and you  can be certain there will be another deal with the Greens.  It will be the same Rudd-Gillard-Rudd Labor  failure all over again.

The risk at this election is another Labor minority government just like the one we’ve had for the past three  years.

Another hung parliament with the Greens and Labor sharing power just means more uncertainty, more debt,  more taxes, less jobs and more unexpected hits on you and your family.

Only the Coalition can be trusted when we say there will be no deals with the Greens, no deals with flaky  independents; no deals whatsoever.

Under no circumstances will I allow the Coalition to enter into a minority government arrangement.

I believe this election is the clearest choice in a generation. It’s about choosing real change and real action to  help all Australians get ahead again.

A real change means a strong, unified government that's more than more talk.

Real action means taxes actually cut, more for families, better local services, stopping the boats and two  million new jobs.  Real action means new roads underway in major cities within 12 months and more help  for small businesses to create jobs and get the economy moving.

2





When Mr Rudd talks about the future he only means the next five weeks.

On Friday the government confirmed that Australia faces a Budget emergency.

Between now and September 7th, Labor will make many promises and fake commitments on the economy  but I ask Australians to judge the parties on their record.

Only the Coalition has a Plan to build a stronger economy, repay Labor’s debt and create jobs.

I want to build a future for our children with more jobs, less debt, better services and more opportunities for  all Australians to get ahead.

Australians can be confident that the Coalition will deliver a strong, prosperous economy and a safe, secure  Australia because we have listened to people from all parts of our country, and carefully developed Our Real  Solutions Plan to build a strong Australia and a better future - for all Australians.

Our Real Solutions Plan lays down 10 clear actions that we will take which will make our country stronger  and families more secure:

1. We will build a stronger, more diverse economy with lower taxes, less waste

A stronger economy is the foundation of everything that the Coalition seeks to build - because a  stronger economy means more jobs, higher wages and better services - as well as the funding that’s  needed to help families get ahead.

In building a truly strong economy we’ll scrap the carbon tax, the mining tax, help small businesses  create jobs and provide a modest company tax cut - which is real taxation reform in the first term of  a Coalition government.

2. We will get the Budget back under control

According to Labor’s own figures, Australia’s record debt will cost Australians an average of $10  billion in interest each year over the next four years - money which should be going to support  health and education and build and repair roads.

By getting the Budget under control, repaying debt and strengthening our finances we can protect the  economy from future shocks and ensure our children aren’t left to pay a soaring debt legacy through  interest payments and higher taxes.

3. Help families get ahead by freeing them from the carbon tax

Abolishing the carbon tax is the quickest way to reduce power prices and take the pressure off the  cost of living - and by keeping the current tax thresholds as well as fortnightly pension and benefit  increases, we can provide a tax cut and a pension increase without a carbon tax.

And don’t forget, if Labor is re-elected, the carbon tax remains and increases - pushing up prices for  years to come.

I won’t play a word game with the carbon tax.  It’s gone under a Coalition government.







3



4. Help small businesses grow by reducing business costs

We will make it easier for small business to employ more people by cutting $1 billion a year in red  and green tape; conducting a ‘root and branch’ review of competition laws; and by not proceeding  with Labor’s $1.8 billion hit on FBT and cars.

Our plans will help get small businesses growing again, double the rate of small business start-ups  and get small business back to where it was under the last Coalition government.

5. Build a Five-Pillar economy

Australia needs a more diverse economy, without all our eggs just in the mining basket.  I want  Australia to build on its strengths in manufacturing, agriculture, advanced services, education and  research as well as boosting mining.

By diversifying and strengthening the economy we can deliver stronger jobs growth in many  industries right across Australia.

6. Generate one million new jobs over the next five years and two million new jobs within 10  years

Australian jobs growth is now the slowest in over 15 years and there are 75,000 more unemployed  people now than when Labor introduced its carbon tax. And the latest Budget forecasts show that  unemployment will rise significantly under a re-elected Labor government - to nearly 800,000  unemployed.  This is not acceptable to the Coalition.

Our plan will grow a bigger economy, cut taxes and make government more efficient and businesses  more productive.

7. Build more modern infrastructure to get things moving

Reducing bottlenecks on our roads will be a key priority for a new Coalition government. We will  help get major infrastructure projects going across Australia within 12 months - with major  investments in: WestConnex in Sydney; Gateway Motorway in Brisbane; East West Road Link in  Melbourne; the South Road in Adelaide; the Midland Highway in Tasmania and we are committed to  the Perth gateway project.

With major investments in the Bruce Highway and the Pacific Highway - we will have a network of  upgrades to our national highway network that will finally modernise our national highway network  along the Eastern Seaboard.

8. Deliver better health and education services - with local communities in charge

The next Coalition government will work closely with the states to try to ensure that public schools  and public hospitals are locally-run rather than controlled by distant bureaucracies.

Local hospital and school boards will provide better health and education services at the local  community level and at the same time deliver better value for their money.

Our approach is about lifting standards in these critical areas.

In education, I want a school system with better teachers, better teaching, higher academic standards,  more community engagement, and more principal autonomy.

4



We’ll also provide schools with funding certainty - so the Coalition will match the dollar-for-dollar  commitments already made to schools for the next four years, without Labor’s Canberra takeover of  schools.

In health, I believe in private health insurance - because a strong private health insurance scheme  keeps people out of public hospitals and keeps waiting lists down.  It means a better health system  for everyone.

9. Build a 15,000-strong Green Army to clean-up the environment

We will build the largest environmental workforce in our history that will clean up riverbanks and  creek beds, revegetate sand dunes as well as undertake remediation and conservation projects around  Australia.

10. The boats will stop - with tough, proven measures not talk from proven boat failures

There is a national emergency on our borders - with almost 50,000 illegal arrivals by boat, over $10  billion in additional costs to the Budget and tragically, over 1,000 lives lost at sea.

We have a real solution to stop the boats. Our position has been consistent.  Australia needs more  than a Labor election fix, followed by another Labor failure. We will use all measures to stop the  boats - a full and comprehensive set of measures, not just a few.

Above all, we will return stable, certain, competent Government so all Australians can again plan their  futures with confidence.

I know the last few years haven’t been easy for Australians, particularly for families.

The Coalition offers our country a better way.

I have real confidence in our Real Solutions Plan - and real confidence in my team.

Unlike Labor, we are not a one man band held together with sticky tape and fakery, just for show  immediately before an election.

We offer the only truly united team - and experienced team as well.  Sixteen members of the Shadow  Cabinet were ministers in the last Coalition government.  In contrast, Labor is severely depleted because of  in-fighting and a factional system where Labor members can’t work together.

My message to the Australian people is that only by choosing your Liberal or National candidate will you  get a stronger voice in a better government.

Only by choosing your local Liberal or National candidate will you get a truly united team that can and will  take real action to help all Australians get ahead.



On 7 September, I’m asking for your support to make the real change to a stronger, united government with  a Plan to build a stronger Australia and a better future - for all Australians.



4 August 2013

