

Julie Bishop MP

Shadow   MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS

Channel 9 Today Show with Ben Fordham

26 April 2013

Subjects: Illegal boat arrivals, Clive Palmer’s relaunch of United Australia Party

BEN FORDHAM I'm joined by Deputy Opposition Leader Julie Bishop who is in London  this morning. Good morning to you, Julie Bishop.

JULIE BISHOP Good morning Ben, good morning Bill.

BEN FORDHAM …and our Work Place Relations Minister yes, Bill Shorten from  Melbourne. Good morning to you, Mr Shorten.

BILL SHORTEN Good morning Ben, good morning Julie.

BEN FORDHAM Ok I’ll kick it off with you first of all Julie, despite the fact you’re in  London in your state of Western Australia the Coalition has unveiled its illegal boats  billboard this week only for it to be vandalised 24 hours later.

So we can see here images of Tony Abbott putting up the billboard and then it was - yeah,  defaced within 24 hours.

Some people have a problem with the description of "illegal boats". Why is the Coalition  comfortable with that language?

JULIE BISHOP Well, it is language that the Labor Party have used. It is reflective of the fact,  and the Government has lost control of our borders. While ever Labor is in Government,  these boats will continue to arrive. There have been about 38,000 people arrive by boat,  there's been a massive blow-out - that’s about a $6.5 billion dollar blow-out - in the cost of  the detention network. Hundreds of people have died at sea and Labor has no policy, no plan  to stop the boats. The Coalition does and we will continue to promote that policy, we will  stop the boats, we’ve done it before and we’ll do it again.

There is nothing humanitarian about encouraging, enticing people to get on boats and pay the  people smugglers. It’s a battle of wills and the people smugglers have beaten the Gillard  Government in this issue. Until there's a change of government and a change of policies,  sadly these boats will continue to come.

BEN FORDHAM Mr Shorten, are they illegal boats?

BILL SHORTEN Well, with regards to this billboard, it is a stunt but I certainly have got no  time for defacing it or vandalising it. In terms of the bigger and more important issue about

people being people-smuggled here, the people-smugglers what they are doing is illegal, but  we know the only way to solve this problem is through working with countries in our region.

I think it’s remarkable that whilst it may be ‘grist to the mill’ for local politics, that the  Liberal party's proposed solutions have got the Indonesians saying it won't work. Indonesia is  one of our key relationships in the world. It is relationships in the world. It is easy to throw  rocks from opposition but you want to be careful that you don't damage our relationship with  Indonesia in the process.

BEN FORDHAM When you were talking about throwing rocks from Opposition, I mean,  when the Labor Party was in Opposition, obviously, there were plenty of rocks thrown at  John Howard's policy. That policy was changed and as you know Mr Shorten the boats have  been coming ever since.

BILL SHORTEN Yeah, Ben, I can't change the past. What I can do though is make it clear  that the policy of towing boats back to sea has been condemned, remarkably, from our  nearest neighbour. They say it is unworkable. Our own experts think it is. What you may say  - or what people say about a billboard though doesn't change the truth that the Opposition  policies are not workable in terms of the tow backs. I know that, you know that.

BEN FORDHAM Ok I will raise that with Julie Bishop in just a second. Let me just go  through these numbers though, this year alone 100 boats have arrived. In April, so far, 2596  people have arrived. That is the all time record surpassing the 2,501 who arrived in March.  There are a lot of people risking their lives coming across the ocean. We know some of them  have not made it they’ve drowned and died. What’s going to give?

BILL SHORTEN Well, you are right about the incredibly unsafe nature of catching a rickety  boat from Sri Lanka or from the Indonesian archipelago. That is why we’ve sent the message  clearly - just about a thousand people have been returned to Sri Lanka. So the message will  be getting out that if you come here by boat and you don't pass the test, you won't be allowed  to be here. We've had prison prosecutions and legal actions against the people smugglers. So  we are doing what has to be done.

Let me quickly just switch it to Julie Bishop only because I know that we’ve got limited time,  Bill Shorten's point is right isn’t it Julie Bishop? Indonesia has told Tony Abbott very clearly  that the tow back the boat policy is not acceptable to them?

JULIE BISHOP That is not right. The Coalition has a proven track record in this regard,  including working behind the scenes with Indonesia, and, of course, I'm not in Indonesia, and  of course, I'm not going to make public the kind of discussions and negotiations...

BEN FORDHAM Indonesia hasn’t told Tony Abbott that they don’t want boats towed back?

JULIE BISHOP I'm sorry, I'm answering the question and what Labor has done represents  the greatest policy failure in a generation. We had stopped the boats - in fact in one year,  when only three boats arrived, Julia Gillard said, "another boat, another policy failure”.  There’ve been 100 boats come this year, so on Julia Gillard's own statement, that is 100  policy failures. Hundreds of people have died at sea, 38,000 people have come by boat, the  people-smuggling trade is back in business and the Government has absolutely no plans to  stop the boats. We have done it before, and we will do it again.

BEN FORDHAM I want to get your quick thoughts on this - Clive Palmer on 'Lateline' last  night where he announced that he was re-forming the United Australia Party and running  candidates in 127 seats in the September 14 election - have a look.

Clive Palmer: By the end of next week, we’ll be announcing some of our candidates for  Federal Parliament. We plan to run in 127 seats in the House of Representatives and all  Senate seats. So there will be a good chance for the people of Australia to have a real  alternative for a change.

BEN FORDHAM 30 seconds for each of you, first of all Bill Shorten are you worried about  Clive?

BILL SHORTEN Oh, I don't really know the man. He is the Liberal Party's failed  preselection candidate. He is their problem child. I'm just curious if any of the big donations  he’s given to the Liberal Party have been used for that billboard.

BEN FORDHAM He was one of your biggest supporters Julie Bishop for a while, he’s now  going to run against you.

JULIE BISHOP Well the great thing about Australia it’s a democracy and if Clive Palmer  wants to put together a political party well it’s going to be up to the Australian people to  decide whether they agree with his policies and his election platform. We welcome a contest  of ideas from anywhere, but it will be interesting to see if he launches his campaign on his  new Titanic.

The fact is if you want to get rid of this incompetent wasteful, reckless Government you have  to vote for the Coalition, the Liberal Party or the National Party.

BEN FORDHAM Ok thank you both for your time this morning, Bill Shorten and Julie  Bishop.

- Ends -



