

Julie Bishop MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS





Sky & ABC 24 - Darwin Doorstop

16 July 2013

Subjects: Darwin visit, trade policy, live exports, Northern Territory development policy,  carbon tax/ETS, border protection policy.

E&OE…

JULIE BISHOP I’m here today to talk with local businesses, local producers, exporters,  manufacturers, the chambers of commerce and a whole range of associations that are  involved in trade.

Australia’s standard of living depends upon our ability to export our goods and services to the  world and I believe that trade policy has fallen behind under the Labor Government. In fact,  our competitors are signing up and concluding Free Trade Agreements with countries in our  region and taking market share away from Australia.

For example, other countries have signed Free Trade Agreements with China, South Korea  and Taiwan, Hong Kong and a number of other countries that were receiving record levels of  Australian goods and services.

The Government’s inability to conclude Free Trade Agreements particularly with China and  South Korea means that we are losing market share to the United States, to New Zealand in  particular.

Under a Coalition Government we will make concluding free trade agreements that are in our  national interest a first order priority of an Abbott-led Government. In particular, we’ll focus  on Free Trade Agreements with China, South Korea, Japan, Indonesia, India but the globe is

our market and we will pursue export opportunities wherever we can find them, finding new  markets and enhancing existing markets.

The Coalition recognises that Darwin and the Northern Territory is the gateway in and the  gateway out of Australia with regard to the Asia-Pacific region. We will work hard to ensure  that our plan for developing Northern Australia is something that we can establish as soon as  a Coalition Government is elected, should that be the wish of the Australian people.

To that end, Natasha Griggs and I will be working very closely with the Northern Territory  Government to ensure that our plan for developing Northern Australia has the support of  Northern Territorians, as well as, the governments and the people of Western Australia and  Queensland.

We also have held a meeting today with business people, with representatives from  associations, universities, chambers of commerce, the cattle producers, seafood association,  to talk about trade and export opportunities under a Coalition Government. We’ve had some  wonderful feedback, lots of ideas, plenty of input. I’m grateful for the feedback and the  assistance that we’ve had from so many people in Darwin today.

Just on a final point before I hand over to Natasha. The Treasurer has made an announcement  today, along with the Prime Minister about the carbon tax. This is a con from Australia’s  political con-man.

The fact is, this carbon tax will continue in place, they can call it what they like, but under the  government’s own modelling this price on carbon will continue to go up. It will continue to  impact on electricity prices and cost of living prices under the government’s own modelling.  Modelling that they have commissioned, that they own, the price will go higher than it  currently is today.

If Kevin Rudd was serious about abolishing a carbon tax he would recall the Parliament and  pass legislation now, proving that he’s going to get rid of the Carbon Tax. Otherwise it’s just  a con and he’s the second Labor Prime Minister to promise, just before an election, there will  be no carbon tax under a government I lead.

The only person you can trust on that is Tony Abbott. Under Tony Abbott the carbon tax will  be abolished, thus relieving the cost of living pressures on Australians, thus taking the  pressure off electricity costs in this country.

JOURNALIST Ms Bishop how would more Free Trade Agreements with Asia benefit  Territorians and Territory industry?

JULIE BISHOP Currently, Australia is paying quite high tariffs to get our goods and  services, goods particularly, into Asian countries and yet countries with a Free Trade  Agreement get their goods in tariff-free or at much reduced prices.

For example, New Zealand has a Free Trade Agreement with China and New Zealand is able  to get its seafood into a very lucrative market in China, virtually tariff-free and it will be over  time. Whereas Australian producers are having to pay upward of 15 per cent or more.

In relation to beef - there’s a very lucrative beef products market in South Korea. The United  States now has a Free Trade Agreement with South Korea and will be getting beef into South  Korea at reduced tariffs down to zero over time, whereas Australia is paying something like  40 per cent.

So it’s in our national interest, in the interest of manufacturers, exporters, producers in  Australia to have Free Trade Agreements, trade liberalisation so that we are able to benefit  from the burgeoning markets in Asia.

Under the Labor Government they’ve dropped the ball on trade. Free Trade Agreements that  should have been concluded some time ago are still in somebody’s in-tray. Now the current  Trade Minister says he’s going off to Beijing. Kevin Rudd’s sending him off to Beijing. Well  Kevin Rudd said that’s what he was doing in 2007 last time he was in this job and no  progress has been made. The Coalition will make Free Trade Agreements that benefit  Australians a first order priority.

JOURNALIST [Inaudible] more goods travelling through the Northern Territory. For  example, through the port and putting extra pressure on those infrastructures though?

JULIE BISHOP That is certainly part of it. That’s why I met with representatives from the  Port Authority today. To discuss what infrastructure needs there are in the Territory to ensure  that Darwin can be the gateway in and the gateway out for Asian produce, goods coming  from Australia and goods coming in.

We are aware of the capacity constraints and these will be the sorts of issues that we’ll be  discussing in the context of our plan to develop Northern Australia as well as our trade  policy.

JOURNALIST You mentioned that you spoke to Luke Bowen from the Cattlemen’s  Association and actually cattle producers have been so severely damaged from the suspension  of the live export. What sort of assurances have you given them?

JULIE BISHOP We have assured them that the Coalition will work very hard to re-establish  the trade to Indonesia to pre-ban levels and hopefully even greater.

There is an enormous market for live cattle in Indonesia. About 90 per cent of Indonesian  households do not have refrigeration and they want their cattle, there live so it can be  slaughtered fresh daily. Australia has the cattle and Indonesia has the market.

The ban imposed by the Labor Government without warning to Indonesia damaged not only  the trade in Australia and the trade in Indonesia, but it also damaged our reputation as a  reliable and trusted supplier of goods.

We will work very hard to re-establish the trade and ensure that our reputation is no further  tarnished by this kind of unilateral action on the part of a Labor Government. There are a  number of issues to ensure that the best practice standards are complied with and we will  work in cooperation with Indonesia to ensure that this trade can continue.

The impact on the live cattle industry in Australia cannot be underestimated. People are still  feeling the pressures of this unilateral ban without notice to Indonesia. We have assured the

cattle industry that we will do what it takes to re-establish the trade so that their livelihoods  are protected once more. This is about jobs, this is about growing the Australian economy,  this is about jobs in the Territory and growing the economy of the Northern Territory.

JOURNALIST Do you support an ETS?

JULIE BISHOP I support action in coordination with the rest of the world. Until there’s a  global coordinated effort, Australia should not be damaging its economy by imposing a tax, a  price on carbon that no one in the rest of the world is paying. It makes us internationally  uncompetitive. It has an impact on our manufacturing. It has an impact on our cost of living.

The Labor Government have finally admitted that their carbon tax that they were telling you  right up until two days ago - they were telling you was good for jobs, good for cost of living,  good for families, good for manufacturers. They’ve now admitted that it’s bad for families,  bad for the cost of living, bad for manufacturers, bad for investment.

We don’t trust Labor on the issue of a carbon tax. Kevin Rudd’s had so many different  positions on this. There’s no way the Australian people can trust him when he says he’s  getting rid of a carbon tax. Of course, he’s not. His own modelling shows that the tax will  continue to go up. So unless he recalls parliament and unless he puts through legislation, then  this is just a con and we know that the Greens are very unlikely to support it. So he’s just  posturing once more. All talk, no action.

JOURNALIST If the Coalition were to win, what would be the chances of Australia leading  that international debate around broader climate change?

JULIE BISHOP The world changed after the Copenhagen Climate Change Conference. It  was quite apparent at the end of 2009 that there would not be global action and Australia,  being responsible for about one per cent, or a little over one per cent, of global greenhouse  gas emissions should not destroy its economy and drive jobs offshore and manufacturing  offshore without coordinated global action. That’s the position of the Coalition.

JOURNALIST Just on asylum seekers - is it the right decision for Scott Morrison to not  commit to the dialogues that are going to be held in the region?

JULIE BISHOP We are committed to the Bali Process and Scott Morrison has said that time  and time again. The Bali Process was set up under the Howard Government to ensure that  this issue was dealt with on a regional basis. But that doesn’t mean countries can’t take their  own action and put in place the right laws to stop the boats coming to Australia which is  causing hundreds and hundreds of people to die at sea. My question for Kevin Rudd is: what  action will he take to stop the boats coming, and stop the deaths at sea? What changes to the  law in Australia will he take to ensure that people stop this dangerous journey?

You see it took a change of law in Australia for John Howard to stop the boats. It took a  change of law under Kevin Rudd in 2008 to reinvigorate the people smuggling trade. We  have seen, I believe, a thousand deaths at sea under Labor’s policies. What decisions will  Kevin Rudd make today? To stop the boats coming and to stop these deaths at sea?

- Ends -

