

Julie Bishop MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS



2UE with Brian Carlton

23 July 2013

Subjects: Opinion polls, Kevin Rudd’s ‘PNG solution’, FBT changes

E&OE…

JULIE BISHOP Thank you Brian, delighted to be with you.

BRIAN CARLTON Are you a little more comfortable than you were this time last week?

JULIE BISHOP Well Brian there’s no doubt that Julia Gillard’s Government was deeply unpopular and  I think people were prepared to have a second look at Kevin Rudd.

But we do know that his own colleagues thought he was not fit to be Prime Minister last time he was  in the job and as far as I can see nothing has changed with Kevin Rudd. The familiar pattern is  playing out all over again.

BRIAN CARLTON Oh no something has changed fairly significantly. There was a 15 point jump as  soon as he became Prime Minister in terms of who is the preferred Prime Minister. That must still be  making you a little bit nervous but not quite as nervous as you were off the back of the last one?  JULIE BISHOP That was the point I was making. I think people were prepared to give Kevin Rudd  another look. He was taken out of the Prime Ministership before the Australian people had an  opportunity to vote on his performance. The Labor factional warlords removed him from the job and  put Julia Gillard in. Her government became deeply unpopular.

But I think that Kevin Rudd hasn’t changed at all. Leopards don’t change their spots. He’s the same  person that his colleagues’ thought was unfit to be Prime Minister last time.

BRIAN CARLTON Ok it’s been pretty obvious that the Coalition doesn’t think that every boat person,  every asylum seeker will be transferred to Manus Island and PNG. Why do you think that?

JULIE BISHOP Well there are so many unanswered questions about the PNG announcement. It is  just typical Kevin Rudd. He makes a big announcement, he gets a big headline and then he moves on  before the detail is known and it leaves great uncertainty and chaos.

In this case we know that the announcement where he said no one will now come to Australia isn’t  borne out by the document that he signed. There is nothing in that document that says people won’t  be resettled in Australia, won’t be processed in Australia.

BRIAN CARLTON Indeed the noises of the PNG Prime Minister Peter O’Neill suggest exactly that. In  fact there was an MP from Manus Island on the TV a couple of days ago saying ‘look it’s entirely  possible that nobody will be resettled in PNG’.

JULIE BISHOP That’s right. This is the same old Kevin Rudd. He makes these big promises, grand  announcements that then unravel.

The problem is that the document that he signed doesn’t support his claim that not one person  arriving by boat from now on will end up in Australia.

BRIAN CARLTON Ok. The significant issue, or one of them, there’s several, the significant issue is  Tony Burke was in the process of moving people out of Manus Island. Obviously there’s going to be a  whole bunch of people going in to Manus Island.

The stark reality of it is it’s a very temporary type cap. It can’t possibly deal with the thousands that  are expected over the coming months and the construction plan there looks to be years rather than  weeks or months to get it to house anywhere between three and six thousand people.

JULIE BISHOP Well there are justifiable concerns about Papua New Guinea’s capacity to cope in  terms of the housing and other support and services.

12 months ago the Gillard Government entered into an arrangement to rebuild the detention centre at  Manus Island and I understand that only 100 people could be housed there now in temporary  accommodation, or in tents.

So it’s taken them 12 months to get 100 places ready. I understand they are working on a capacity of  300, but as we know over the last few weeks people have been coming in their thousands.

So I have grave doubts about PNG’s capacity to cope and of course the Australian taxpayer is on the  hook for the entire cost. There are so many unanswered questions about this, and the cost to the  Australian taxpayer.

BRIAN CARLTON Tony Burke who was quite adamant today at a media conference, the Immigration  Minister, suggesting this will be revenue neutral. There will be no added cost to the Australian  taxpayer because it’s been taken out of the PNG aid budget. You have some issues with that as well.  Could you just talk us through them?

JULIE BISHOP Well I can’t understand how he could say that because Australia will be paying for the  services for these people who arrive by boat. We don’t know how many people or for how long they’ll  be living in Papua New Guinea. Do we pay for their entire lives? For how long are they going to keep  receiving payments from Australia?

BRIAN CARLTON Well if they’re rejected as refugees it seems that indeed might be the case. If they  are not accepted as a genuine refugee, therefore won’t be resettled into PNG or any other regional  country, or back here in Australia then they may well be in detention forever and we’re going to be  paying for them forever. Especially the Iranians, whose right to return to their country of origin is  refused by their government.

JULIE BISHOP Well we’ll be paying for them whether they’re in PNG or in Australia. But at least in  Australia you could try and get them to make some contribution to society, for the community, for the  economy. But if they’re in PNG then of course the Australian taxpayer just funds their life in PNG and  that will cause tension. Let’s be blunt. That will cause tension in PNG where they don’t have the  welfare system like we have in Australia. They don’t have social security and it’s a very very poor  country.

BRIAN CARLTON Ok Julie Bishop. One of the things that I have serious concerns about here - under  our aid budget, to our aid program to Papua New Guinea, much of it was what we call tied grants. We  give them money for a specific thing.

Now giving PNG the total control of the $500 million budget, or foreign aid budget from Australia. You  and I both know, PNG is not the least corrupt country on Earth. It is quite a corrupt place. How much  of that money is going to be absolutely wasted. Lining the pockets of bureaucrats and politicians?

JULIE BISHOP Well our concern is that the Prime Minister of Papua New Guinea, clearly believes  that Kevin Rudd has agreed to change the way the aid budget, the $500 million, change the way the  aid budget is controlled and handled.

Clearly the Prime Minster of PNG believes that. Kevin Rudd’s now equivocating and won’t answer the  questions. We need to know what accountability framework will apply, what transparency  arrangements will apply. Whether the arrangements are for joint management and if so what has  changed, because that was the case in the past.

Has Kevin Rudd promised more aid money than the $500 million? Mr O’Neill has claimed there’s  going to be substantial new infrastructure - roads, hospitals, universities. Given that the priorities of  the aid budget have already been agreed, there are programs already in place, has Kevin Rudd  promised additional aid funding and if so where is that coming from? Where’s this money coming  from?

BRIAN CARLTON Yeah that’s of course over and above the construction, housing, medical costs for  the people who do end up in PNG.

It does appear to me to be looking like it’s unravelling. But as I mentioned yesterday - this only needs  to be seen to be working until the election day. Doesn’t it?

JULIE BISHOP Well the test is how many people that arrive by boat will be sent to Manus Island?  How many people will still be in the detention network in Australia on Christmas Island at the time of  the next election? But you’ve made the absolute point - this is not about a long term solution to the  asylum seeker issue.

This is about an election fix, It’s all about getting a headline and that’s why the details aren't there,  that’s why so many questions are unanswered about the aid budget, about how much it’s going to  cost the Australian taxpayer. They haven’t come up with one figure other than the advertising budget.

BRIAN CARLTON Yeah, I’ll come to that in a sec. I think Kevin Rudd is relying on us all having very  short memories. He seems to be dropping a new policy a day and hoping that the new policy, say for  example, the Catholic Schools signing on to Gonski today. He wants that to be the headline rather  than the PNG.

That was last Friday’s headline and indeed over the weekend and he does seem to be hoping that we  don’t recall the decision that was made a week ago, which brings me back to the Fringe Benefits Tax  change.

Tony Abbott’s been suggesting today that we’re likely to see higher wage claims in enterprise  agreements and a bit of a lawyer fest as a result of this $1.8 billion clawback on the FBT. Can you just  explain why he’s suggesting that might be the case?

JULIE BISHOP Sure. Well first Brian, this manic, chaotic, dysfunctional announcement today is  precisely the Kevin Rudd that his colleagues got rid of last time round. So nothing’s changed.

BRIAN CARLTON Because it was the brand new policy introduced a couple of years ago and it was  all terrific and the systems kind of fixed and now they’ve changed.

JULIE BISHOP Well this is devastating, not only for those who have arranged their affairs in  accordance with the law enabling employer provided vehicles, it is also hitting the salary packaging  firms, the companies that are set up to provide this kind of financial advice…

BRIAN CARLTON Yep more job losses announced today.

JULIE BISHOP .. the vehicle manufacturers, the dealers and so on throughout the supply chain.

This is typical of Kevin Rudd.There was no consultation with the people affected, no warning. Again  Labor claims there was an abuse of the system, but they don’t produce any evidence of rorting. It  reminds me of the 457 visa debacle. Labor claimed there was 10,000 people rorting the system and  yet couldn’t produce any of that evidence.

So this is just another Kevin Rudd disaster that hurts people. And the point is, this is part of people’s  salary packaging so if you take away this benefit then people will have to be compensated in another  way. So it changes the whole employer/employee relationship.

BRIAN CARLTON And looking more broadly at the economy it’s likely to be in fact inflationary.

JULIE BISHOP Well indeed that’s another issue we should be looking at, but it’s just devastating for  those people who have been hit, out of the blue, without any consultation, without any warning.

This is the standard operation procedure, isn’t it? No consultation, no warning, makes an  announcement and moves on before the paint dries.

BRIAN CARLTON The other sad reality is though, much of the media is following him around and  basically just reporting it pretty straight. Not much analysis going on or you’ve really got to do some  serious reading to get proper analysis of what these policies actually mean.

I think he’s hoping that there’ll be such a torrent of information out there for the media and the public  to digest. We’re going to digest that crucial detail that might make us go ok, hang on a sec, no no no  you can’t do that.

JULIE BISHOP That’s what he banks on. He’s a very clever politician in that regard. He plays the 24/7  media cycle and doesn’t stand still long enough for anybody to look at the detail of what he’s  announcing.

BRIAN CARLTON My fear is he’s going to get away with it though Julie. I mean, hence my first  question - you must be feeling a little more comfortable in at least that some Australians are starting  to see through the ruse.

JULIE BISHOP I believe that people will see him for the devious politician that he is and we hope that  over the next few weeks as we’ll continue to put out our policies and people will trust and respect the  job that we’re doing from opposition.

It’s not easy to win an election from opposition but we’re working very hard, we’ve done the hard  policy work. We will have announcements that have been costed, where we’ve consulted broadly and  widely with people and we hope the Australian people will reward us by giving us their trust and  confidence at the next election.

BRIAN CARLTON Tell me, final question, do you buy this argument that the $2.1 million of taxpayer  money spent so far on commercials - in all the daily papers, here on 2UE, other radio stations about  the all new boat policy is something that should not have gone through the due process and is  important in terms of getting people who might have arrived here by boat, who are refugees or who  are migrants to jump on the telephone and call those who may be planning a trip to suggest not to?  Because these ads haven’t run overseas yet have they? Just here.

JULIE BISHOP Well that’s the whole point, as someone observed today, these are not targeting boat  people - they’re targeting vote people. Spending taxpayer’s money to put ads in Australian  newspapers is not targeting the people smugglers in Malaysia, or Indonesia, or Sri Lanka. It’s just a  shameless political advertising stunt using taxpayer’s funds. Might I point out, because the  government has blown the budget, this is all borrowed money.

BRIAN CARLTON Oh well it’s all borrowed money. Even the positive things they’re campaigning on  like the NDIS and Gonski. There’s no money for them either.

JULIE BISHOP It’s all borrowed money and that’s why we’re so determined to start paying off Labor’s  debt again and put the budget back into surplus. Governments must live within their means.

BRIAN CARLTON Julie Bishop I appreciate your time today. Thanks so much.

JULIE BISHOP Thanks Brian.

- Ends -



