



THE HON BILL SHORTEN MP  Leader of the Opposition  Member for Maribyrnong

TRANSCRIPT



E&OE TRANSCRIPT   ABC 7.30  INTERVIEW WITH ANNABEL CRABB  MONDAY, 14 OCTOBER 2013





SUBJECTS: ELECTION AS LABOR LEADER



ANNABEL CRABB:  Bill Shorten, welcome to 7.30 and congratulations.

BILL SHORTEN:  Good evening. Thanks very much, Annabel.

ANNABEL CRABB:  You must feel personally very grateful to Kevin Rudd that  thanks to his intervention it's almost impossible to blast you out of this job.

BILL SHORTEN:  I feel very grateful to the members of the parliamentary Labor  Party and the wider Labor Party for giving me the privilege to represent Labor at  the leadership level.  I thank the hundreds, and people in the thousands, who  voted for me.    I also acknowledge that Anthony Albanese ran a great campaign and I think  between the two of us, we've managed to come through a leadership contest  without too much blood on the floor.

ANNABEL CRABB:  Yes, it's just about the politest power struggle you've ever  been involved in, I imagine.

BILL SHORTEN:  You could almost hear the gnashing of media teeth because  we were actually able to debate ideas.  What is important here is that Labor lost  the last election.  We were only getting 34 in every 100 votes with a number one  next to a Labor candidate. Labor's not guaranteed of a return.  We have to earn  the trust of Australians. This process was the first step to help us build the right  policies which will help Australians believe that Labor is relevant to their future.



ANNABEL CRABB:  Well what's the next step in terms of the party?  I mean, the  constituency and the rank and file seem to have taken with great enthusiasm to a  taste of power.  Do you propose to give them more?

BILL SHORTEN:  Well, first of all, I do think it's important that we encourage  more people to belong to the Labor Party.  This process has been a good  incentive for people to join.  I mean, the Coalition I don't think will ever give their  people who join the Liberal Party or the National Party a say in their leadership.   So at least when you join Labor, you do get consulted about who should be your  leader. So making it easy to join the Labor Party is a big early priority for me.  I  also think it's also important we have the most diverse range of candidates.  I do  think it's important to encourage more people to have a say in our preselections.

ANNABEL CRABB:  Talking to some of your colleagues today, I detected some  support for direct election of Labor candidates for the Senate.  Is that something  you'd personally entertain?

BILL SHORTEN:  Well, I that hasn't crossed my mind at this stage.  What I do  recognise though is that we need to make sure that you don't need to just come  from one set of backgrounds to be able to be a Labor Senate candidate. We’ve  got very good Labor senators. In fact Penny Wong and Stephen Conroy have  been elected the leaders of Labor in the Senate and Tanya Plibersek, my Deputy  in the Reps. But we can always work hard to increase the opportunities.

ANNABEL CRABB:  I had a look at the 26 senators that will be sitting for Labor  in the Senate from next year, and of those 26, 18 of them are former Labor union  officials.  Do you personally think that that is reasonable?

BILL SHORTEN:  Well I think, having been a trade union representative,  standing up for the conditions of working Australians, is a good background.  It  helps prepare for Parliament, but it's not the only background.

ANNABEL CRABB:  It's not especially diverse, though, is it: 18 out of 26?

BILL SHORTEN:  I understand that there's some in the community who'd rather  never see any people from a union background having a say in public policy but I  do believe that we can make our party more diverse in representation.  So I  accept part of what you're saying.  If you have a look at this process and who  we've picked, if we want to have a diversity competition, we've got 11 Shadow  Ministers who are women.

Once I announce the allocation of portfolios on Friday after consulting my  colleagues and announce the new parliamentary secretaries, we'll have more  women in the executive of the Labor Opposition than either side of politics has  ever had in Australian history.  And when you look at the fact that the Liberals

could only find a spot for one woman in their top 20 positions in the Government  of Australia, I can assure you that Labor's got a lot of talented women and there'll  be plenty more than one in our line-up.

ANNABEL CRABB:  When we first started talking tonight, and you said this  yesterday as well, you said that Labor needs to rebuild trust.  What was the  tipping point, do you think, at which your party lost that trust in the Australian  electorate?

BILL SHORTEN:  Well we did get more votes than I think the Obama Democrats  got in America as a percentage of the population, or British Labour.

ANNABEL CRABB:  They have voluntary voting of course.

BILL SHORTEN:  That's right, but it's not enough to form a government.  So we  have to win back votes from both sides, both the left and the right, but in  particular in the centre ground of Australian politics.  We will regain trust of  people who used to vote for us or we'd like to vote for us now by having policies  which are relevant to the future of Australians' lives. That's why I spoke in the  leadership ballot about making Labor the party of science, research, innovation,  higher education, for instance. You know, a smart nation is always going to do  better than it otherwise would. We need to be a party who's brave. We need to  speak up for the powerless and the voiceless. That's why I'm determined to make  domestic violence a national political issue.  It's not just a women's issue or a  police issue, it's an issue we all need to address.

ANNABEL CRABB:  Possibly the loss of trust over the course of the last  government may have been occasioned by the chopping and changing on some  policy areas and you've made it pretty clear in recent weeks that you're planning  to stand by carbon pricing. You maintain support for the mining tax. I wanted to  ask you about asylum seeker policy. Were you personally happy with the PNG  solution and the policy package that Labor took to the last election?

BILL SHORTEN:  Yes, immigration is a complex issue and dealing with  refugees.  I probably wasn't happy that our language about refugees was calling  people illegal.  I do believe that we're an immigration nation.  Other than  Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islanders, we're all boat people or plane people.  We  are the nation of the second chance and we have been since European  settlement.

So I think that for Labor to help deal with the question about the demonisation of  refugees, we need to unequivocally state that immigration's good for Australia.  Once we do that, and once we establish that refugees are part of our immigration  mix, I think you can then have a more sensible debate that we're not going to  support the human traffickers and the people smugglers and the criminal  syndicates in South-East Asia. Getting people to board unsafe ships, pay tens of

thousands of dollars, preying on their vulnerability, that's not humane to not  tackle that.

ANNABEL CRABB:  Just finally, Bill Shorten, what about trust in your own  judgment?  You've been in Parliament for six years now and at the three-year  mark you used your own considerable personal influence to remove a sitting  prime minister.  Do you think, hand on heart, looking back, that that was the right  judgment?

BILL SHORTEN:  I believe that at every stage what motivates me for the hard  decisions is what do I think's in the best interests of the party, but more  importantly than the Labor Party, the nation.  I believe it's never a good idea for  Labor to be uncompetitive to a point where the Coalition can bring their policies  for Australia, which I don't support, and to have them in control of the Senate and  the House of Representatives. So these are hard decisions.

What I recognise now, and what I recognise unequivocally, is that sometimes  change can be too sudden, if decisions aren't explained, people resent them.  I  believe the Labor process that we've adopted where we have a transparent  approach involving tens of thousands of people, have a campaign of ideas and  policies and approaches.  I actually think that this demonstrates that I and in fact  all of my colleagues recognise that we've got to do politics a different way if we're  to regain people's trust.

ANNABEL CRABB:  Bill Shorten, we're right out of time, but thanks for joining us  on 7.30. We look forward to seeing much more of you, and goodnight.

BILL SHORTEN:  Thank you. Good evening.

