

Julie Bishop MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS





Hasluck Campaign Launch Doorstop  20 July 2013

Subjects: Ken Wyatt campaign launch, Kevin Rudd’s ‘PNG solution’

E&OE…

JULIE BISHOP I’m honoured to be here with my colleague Ken Wyatt, the Member for Hasluck to  help launch his campaign for his re-election to Hasluck. We’ve had a fantastic level of support from  the local community here at his campaign launch and it’s quite evident that Ken is a very popular,  hardworking local member. The number of people who are here to support him gives me great heart  that his work, his commitment and his interest in the local community will be rewarded and  recognised.

Ken makes a very dignified contribution to the national debates and as a nation we should be very  proud of Ken Wyatt as the first indigenous person to be elected to the House of Representatives. He’s  also a very valuable member of the Tony Abbott team and the contribution that Ken makes, as well as  my other colleagues, is so important to ensure that we can win the trust and the respect of the  Australian people at the next election, whenever that may be held.

We are certainly ready to govern. We have been releasing policies and we’ll continue to release our  policies in the weeks leading up to this election, policies that will build a stronger and more  prosperous economy and a safe and secure Australia.

Overnight we have heard reports of a very violent outbreak at the Nauru detention centre where up to  50 people are now being held after a riot where people were hurt, where buildings were damaged and  I am deeply concerned for the safety of staff at the Nauru detention centre. I call on Prime Minister  Rudd to ensure the safety of the people who are working at this detention centre.

Sadly it’s yet another consequence of the decision by Kevin Rudd in 2008 to unpick the Howard  Government laws that worked, that dismantled the people smuggling trade, and stopped the boats.

When we left government in 2007, there were just four people that had arrived by boat in our  detention network. 47,000 people later, a multi, multi billion dollar blowout in the cost of the detention  network and over 1000 deaths at sea - these are the tragic consequences of Kevin Rudd’s decision to  change the laws that work.

Yesterday, Mr Rudd made another big announcement about how he was going to stop the people  smuggling trade. I think this is the seventh big announcement that Labor has made about how they  will fix the problem. Yet each time their so called 'fix’ unravels. Once more a big announcement but no  detail.

I call on Kevin Rudd to release the agreement that he has made with the government of Papua New  Guinea. The Australian people deserve to know what is contained in that agreement. Last time this  government signed up for an agreement with another country, the so-called Malaysia solution, it  unravelled within weeks. It was ultimately declared to be unconstitutional by our own High Court.

Mr Rudd must release the documents so we can see what obligations the Australian taxpayer must  bear, how much will this cost? For how long will the Australian taxpayer be funding people who will be  living in detention centres in Papua New Guinea?

Mr Rudd claims that he’d put the people smugglers out of business. Yet he’s also had to admit that  the boats won’t stop. The boats won’t stop in the short term and it could be years. So once more, a  big announcement, yet no detail. Mr Rudd must provide a copy of the agreement so that the  Australian people understand why it is that Kevin Rudd thinks his seventh solution is going to work  when every other one that he tries to implement never does.

Finally the government is yet to release the full details of how many deaths have occurred at sea. We  understand from the independent report, the Houston Report that was released about 12 months ago,  that there have been something like 1000 deaths at sea. The government must release the official  figures so that we can judge the full scale of the tragedy that’s been unfolding in the sea to our north.

We know that boats have gone missing. We know that boats have been rescued on the Indonesian  coast and we know that at least 1000 have died at sea, but the government is refusing to release the  official figures. I call on Mr Rudd to tell the full story to the Australian people so that the full  consequences of Kevin Rudd’s decision to unpick the Howard Government laws that worked can be  assessed not only within Australia, but within our region.

Any questions?

The new announcement as of yesterday has been considered the hard line. Do you think it’s hard  enough, or not hard enough?

JULIE BISHOP This is not a question of whether it’s hard line or not hard line. It’s a question of  whether it will work. This is the seventh so called solution that Labor have come up with and none of  them have worked and they still refuse to put in place the policies, the laws that were in place under  the Howard Government that were proven to work.

I don’t have any faith in Kevin Rudd to implement such a significant program. I don’t have any faith in  Kevin Rudd’s capacity to implement anything complex. This so called PNG solution will be an  enormous challenge, not only to the people of Papua New Guinea, not only to the Government of  PNG but also to the Australian Government. This Australian Government has shown itself incapable  of implementing anything properly without dramatic and drastic consequences and that’s what I fear  will happen here. It will again.

Is it your view that the plan could work, just not under Kevin Rudd?

JULIE BISHOP The plan will never work under Kevin Rudd because he’s incapable of implementing  such a detailed policy. He’s great on the grandiose announcements but he never delivers. That’s why

it’s so important that we see the copy of the agreement, written yesterday with the Papua New  Guinean Government.

We need to know how much this will cost, how long the Australian taxpayers will be paying for it] and  how it’s going to work. The last time they introduced an agreement with another government, the  Malaysia Solution, it was found to be unconstitutional. What’s Kevin Rudd hiding? If he wants the  Australian people to support this he must release the agreement.

Do you think we’re heading down the same road? Are we going to end up back at the High Court  again?

JULIE BISHOP We have to look at Labor’s record. They are incapable of putting in place a solution  that works. That’s why the Howard Government laws must be reinstated. That’s why the Coalition is  the only party that we can trust to actually put integrity back into our border protection system and  integrity back into our immigration system.

You talk about Mr Rudd releasing details of the policy. Do you think voters have enough detail about  how the Coalition will stop the boats?

JULIE BISHOP At the 2010 election we released a 4000 word document that comprised our border  protection policy. It was very detailed. Mr Rudd dismisses it as a slogan. It’s not a slogan. It’s a  detailed, well thought through policy. We’ve done the hard work and we can rely on our record to  prove that our policies will work.

Mr Rudd has yet to release this agreement and I call on him again, to release the agreement so the  Australian people will see how much this will cost. What obligations there will be and for how long on  the Australian taxpayer?

Refugee conventions and human rights advocates are actually saying we’re not doing the right thing  anyway by sending the boats back and putting them into an impoverished country. What do you think  of that?

JULIE BISHOP I do have great concerns about the challenge this will present for Papua New Guinea.  The government has been very kind in responding to this request from Kevin Rudd. The Papua New  Guinean Prime Minister was generous enough to spend time with Tony Abbott, Scott Morrison and  me yesterday in Brisbane. He briefed us on the detail, as they understood the agreement, and it’s  quite evident that there’s a lot of detail that’s not been made available to the Australian people. That’s  why I call upon Kevin Rudd to release this agreement.

I make the point, Kevin Rudd is refusing to admit that he got it wrong in 2008 and therefore should put  it right by putting back in place Howard Government laws that work. The laws that stopped the boats,  that dismantled the people smuggling trade.

This is a battle of wills between Kevin Rudd and the people smugglers and they have been winning  and I’m afraid that Labor will continue to just come up with these grandiose announcements but fail to  implement them and fail to take the action that’s required.

We must stop any more people getting on boats and making that dangerous journey to Australia.

So the test for Kevin Rudd is - will this stop people getting on boats today? Will it stop people putting  their lives at risk today? Will it dismantle the people smuggling trade today? And the answer is no.

- Ends -



