*

THE HON KEVIN ANDREWS MP  Shadow Minister for Families, Housing and Human Services  Federal Member for Menzies

28 March 2013

TRANSCRIPT OF THE HON. KEVIN ANDREWS MP,  INTERVIEW WITH KIERAN GILBERT AND DAVID BRADBURY,  AM AGENDA, SKY NEWS

Subjects: Superannuation, asylum seekers.

E&OE...........................................................................................................................................

KIERAN GILBERT  Joining  me  to  discuss  this  and  other  matters  of  the  day,  the  Assistant  Treasurer,  David   Bradbury,  and  Liberal  frontbencher,  the  Shadow  Minister  for  Families,  Kevin  Andrews.   Gentlemen — good to see you both.

David Bradbury — on this list of marginal seat MPs to go, you’re right at the top. This JWS  research must add to the awful morale within Labor ranks.

DAVID BRADBURY  Look, Kieran, I’m sure you will have a lot to say about the polls. I don’t intend to comment  on them further, frankly. We’re getting on with the job of trying to govern for the country. If  you want to ask me about our record of job creation — more than 900,000 jobs created —  our record of growing our economy at a rate of, where it is now 13 per cent larger than it was  before the GFC. You want to ask me about the things we are doing to support families — the  Schoolkids Bonus — the things we are doing for the future — rolling out the NBN. Preparing  for the Asian century —

KIERAN GILBERT  I’ll ask you about superannuation a little bit later. On this issue of people preferring a Labor  win but not being able to stomach voting for the ALP. What do you put that down to?

DAVID BRADBURY  In the end, all elections are about choice and there will be a very clear choice that people will  have come September. A choice between whether or not we get on with the job of building  the  big  platform  for  our  future,  whether  it  be  things  like  pricing  carbon,  whether  it  be   investing in education, whether it be about making sure we roll out the NBN so that everyone  has access to high speed broadband. We’re doing these things. Mr Abbott, on the other hand,  wants to rip away those things and he wants to put his hand in people’s pockets and rip away  the assistance that comes with things like the carbon price.

People  are  beginning  to  understand  and  I’m  starting  to  get  phone  calls  into  my  electorate   office  and  people  are  raising  it  with  me  in  the  community  —  particularly  from  pensioners.   Pensioners that fear the fact that Abbott will rip money away from them. He’s been telling  people  for  two  years  now,  if  you  don’t  have  the  tax,  you  don’t  need  the  compensation.  He   will rip away the carbon price and take money out of people’s pockets.

KIERAN GILBERT  Let’s go to Kevin Andrews — are you surprised that a majority of voters surveyed in this poll  would  actually  prefer  a  Labor  win?  That  does  seem,  as  I  said  at  the  start  of  the  program,   counterintuitive given they’re voting intention would suggest otherwise.

KEVIN ANDREWS  As  I  travel  around  Australia,  what  I  find  is  people  are  simply  saying  they  are  fed  up  with,   they’re  sick  and  tired  of  a  Labor  government  which  is  essentially  at  war  with  itself.  What   they are looking for is a strong, stable government that’s going to give certainty and security  for the future and they just find that Labor is fighting an internal civil war. They want a plan  for  the  future,  they  want  a  plan  like  we’ve  got  for  the  future  about  a  strong  Australia.  But   they’re not getting that from the Labor government.

KIERAN GILBERT  When  you  look  at  these  numbers,  Kevin  Andrews,  you’ve  been  around  politics  for  a  long   time, if this is a case where voters have stopped listening to the Prime Minister, really this  looks like the unloseable election, doesn’t it, for your side?

KEVIN ANDREWS  No election is over until the last votes are counted. We all know that and things can change.  There’s still 169 days to go until the election. I think people are going to struggle with that  period  of  time  because  it’s  been  such  a  long  election  campaign.  The  reality  is  that  we  will   provide Australians with a plan for the future, we will say to them this is the way in which we  can take the country forward instead of concentrating on the internal warfare within our own  party which doesn’t exist — we’re united and disciplined. We will get on and do that and that  will be a stark contrast to what Labor is providing.

KIERAN GILBERT  David Bradbury, are you worried that what you’re seeing here though is a reaction post the  announcement of the election date — that voters might have been wavering prior to that, but

now that they’ve locked it in. Certainly, all of the surveys that we have seen subsequent to  that announcement have been all in the one direction.

DAVID BRADBURY  Kieran, I’ll let observers make their own judgements. In the end, it’s the people in electorates  like  mine  and  electorates  all  around  the  country  that  will  form  judgement  on  that  in   September.  I  make  this  point  that  you  alluded  to  the  fact  that  people  have  grave  concerns   about  a  change  of  government  and  I  see  Mr  Andrews  there  holding  up  this  little  booklet.  I   want to make this point, that no amount of glossy booklets makes up for an absence of clearly  articulated and costed policies. I have never seen anything so ludicrous as Mr Abbott fronting  up in front of the camera every second day holding this silly little booklet in front of him. It’s  about time someone actually read the booklet and if you actually look at the booklet there are  no  plans,  there  are  no  costed  policies  and  the  only  things  that  have  gone  on  the  record   indicate they are going to rip money away from people —

KIERAN GILBERT  They do have unity and discipline — something that’s eluded your side. How does the Prime  Minister saying this is a line under this debacle last week and so on, but how do you retain  discipline with numbers that suggest you’re all heading off a cliff?

DAVID BRADBURY  We’re getting on with the job of governing. We’re preparing a budget that is going to be a  significant  statement  in  terms  of  where  the  government  is  heading  moving  forward.   Obviously, we’ve got a big job ahead of us — that’s something we are very much focussed  upon  —  and  that  is  going  to  be  an  important  part  of  the  platform  that  we  take  to  the  next   election.

KIERAN GILBERT  Even on the budget you’ve got problems because you’ve got Joel Fitzgibbon, now Kim Carr,  expressing concern about this plan that hasn’t been repudiated by senior figures, in fact, the  Prime Minister indicated yesterday that sustainability is something that the government needs  to achieve on superannuation. It looks like you are going to raid people’s super.

DAVID BRADBURY  Kieran, give the Australian people a little bit more intelligence. Don’t insult their intelligence  by  remouthing  the  words  of  Tony  Abbott.  This  idea  that  we  are  raiding  superannuation,   Kieran, what are you talking about?

KIERAN GILBERT  Let me put to you —

DAVID BRADBURY  No, what are you talking about?

KIERAN GILBERT  — Joel Fitzgibbon —

DAVID BRADBURY  That’s a talking point.

KIERAN GILBERT  — the proposal is, you can clarify for us then, is the government considering increasing taxes  on super contributions and earnings for those people on high incomes. Yes or no?

DAVID BRADBURY  We are in the process of preparing a budget and I’m not going —

KIERAN GILBERT  So, you are.

DAVID BRADBURY  —  no,  Kieran,  Kieran,  you  can  ask  me  any  range  of  propositions  in  terms  of  what  may  or   may not be in the budget, but the minute we start ruling things out you move onto the next  thing. The point is that we are the champions of superannuation. We introduced it. Before we  came along, in a previous form, in the Hawke/Keating governments, the only people that had  access to superannuation were the well healed, the wealthy. We extended —

KIERAN GILBERT  Let me read to you what Pauline Vamos from the Association of Super Funds says. She says,  and  this  is  not  me  with  talking  points,  this  her  and  her  quote.  “We  are  concerned  that  the   current  government  may  make  changes  to  the  super  system  that  are  about  a  short  term   revenue  need,  rather  than  a  long  term  retirement  incomes  policy.”  That’s  her,  the  Super   Funds Association, what do you say to the concerns from the industry itself.

DAVID BRADBURY  She shouldn’t be concerned because we are approaching all policy areas with a view towards  the long term interests of this country. If that’s her concern, she’s got nothing to be concerned  about. We are getting on with the business of preparing a budget, whether it be in areas such  as retirement savings or more broadly. It will be a budget for our nation’s future, it will be a  budget that recognises that the days of the money flowing in the way in which it did a decade  ago have well and truly passed. We will need to be a government that has an eye to the future  and  investing  in  those  areas  where  it’s  most  significant  for  future  productivity  and  that’s   things like skills, it’s education, rolling out the NBN, preparing for the Asian Century, these  are things we will be doing and we will be doing that in a responsible way.

KIERAN GILBERT  I  want  to  go  to  Kevin  Andrews.  Kevin  Andrews,  on  this  issue  of  sustainability  of  the   superannuation system with an ageing population, it’s something that Martin Parkinson, the  head of Treasury has discussed the need to rein in some of the tax concessions when it comes  to  super  contributions  and  earnings.  What  do  you  make  of  this  debate,  particularly  in  the   context of the ageing population. Is it something governments need to look at?

KEVIN ANDREWS  It’s interesting that David as the Assistant Treasurer has had the opportunity this morning to  absolutely rule out any further taxation or increased taxation of superannuation and he hasn’t  done that. What’s also interesting is the people coming out and saying that Labor shouldn’t  be touching super are people like Simon Crean, people like Bill Kelty. The people who were  there in the Hawke/Keating times who thought superannuation was a flagship policy of that  Hawke/Keating  government  but  what  we  see  is  their  fear  that  this  government  is  walking   away once again from the legacy of what Labor put in place in the 1980’s and early 1990’s.  No  wonder  people  are  concerned  about  the  direction  that  Australia’s  going  when  you  have   people  come  up  to  me  and  say  in  their  fifties  who  have  put  their  kids  through  school,  who   have  just  managed  to  pay  off  their  mortgage  and  now  want  to  put  away  a  bit  more  money   over  the  next  ten  or  fifteen  years  and  say  there  are  no  incentives,  in  fact  the  incentives  are   being slugged by Labor. These are the people who are concerned about it and we haven’t had  a clear answer from David this morning.

KIERAN GILBERT  I will go back to David in a moment Kevin Andrews, but I want to ask you on that issue of  sustainability  in  an  ageing  population,  tax  concessions  valued  at,  depending  on  who  you   listen to, anywhere between $16 billion and $32 billion annually, do they need to be looked  at?

KEVIN ANDREWS  We  have  to  ensure  that  people  save  for  the  future.  Saving  is  not  just  money  going  into  the   bank. It’s money that goes into investment in the future of this country. What we have to go  back to in Australia are the three P’s which Peter Costello identified in the intergenerational  report. We need to grow participation, we need to grow productivity, and we need to look at  how our population will continue to grow because that’s a major driver in itself of economic  growth in the future. We need a government which is going to look to these things over the  next two or three decades, rather than one that’s just concerned about the next two or three  weeks in surviving.

KIERAN GILBERT  What do you say to that David Bradbury, that particularly the argument about Simon Crean,  Martin Ferguson, Kim Carr now, Joel Fitzgibbon all worried that this government is going to  trash the legacy that you spoke about before in terms of establishing super?

DAVID BRADBURY  We  won’t  be  trashing  that  legacy  and  Mr  Abbott  was  the  one  when  super  was  introduced,   said it was the biggest con job every foisted on the Australian people. Two points to make:  Mr  Andrews,  Mr  Abbott  they’re  out  there  saying  ‘we  won’t  make  any  changes.’  That’s   rubbish. They have already announced that they will rip away tax concessions to the lowest  income workers in this country. They’re going to rip concessions away from them. The other  thing  that  Mr  Abbott  has  not  confirmed,  and  he’s  using  weasel  words  here,  but  will  he   confirm  that  when  he  says  there  won’t  be  any  adverse  changes  that  that  means  that  he  is

absolutely  committed  to  increasing  the  superannuation  guarantee  from  nine  to  twelve  per   cent. That’s what we are doing for Australians. That means for a thirty year-old Australian  across their working life, we will deliver an extra $100,000 in retirement savings. Now, this  was a previous plan that Labor had when Howard came in, he stopped it dead in its tracks. Mr  Abbott has not said that he will allow that nine per cent to go all the way up to twelve per  cent. It’s about time he gave the guarantee on that. He’s using weasel words.

KIERAN GILBERT  Joe Hockey said they’d back it —

DAVID BRADBURY  No, no, no —

KIERAN GILBERT  — they won’t reverse that. They’ve been very clear —

DAVID BRADBURY  They won’t reverse it. If it’s not up to twelve per cent, will they cut it dead in its tracks or  will they allow it to increase all the way to twelve per cent?

KIERAN GILBERT  Suppose  people  want  certainty  from  the  government  as  well.  That’s  the  issue  here.  About   super,  you  know  David  Bradbury  that  certainty  and  constant  changes  around  people’s   retirement  —  that’s  a  big  issue,  that  creates  a  lot  of  angst  and  anxiety  within  the  working   population  if  you  are  changing  these  retirement  setups.  Do  you  concede  that  certainty  is   important here?

DAVID BRADBURY  We will be providing certainty in a range of policy areas when we hand down the budget. The  point  here  is  that  we  are  being  asked  questions  about  speculation  upon  speculation  upon   speculation. There should be questions being asked of Mr Abbott about his plan to rip money  away from our lowest income workers and on top of that simple proposition and you’re even  missing  the  subtlety  here  yourself  Kieran,  they  are  saying  they  won’t  reverse  any  changes.   Are they committed to increasing compulsory superannuation all the way from nine to twelve  per cent.

KIERAN GILBERT  Okay, let’s go to Kevin Andrews. I don’t think there was much uncertainty in the statement  that  I  read  from  Joe  Hockey  which  said  that  they  were  going  to  not  unwind  that  nine  to   twelve per cent increase. But Kevin Andrews, your response to that and also, I will give you  the opportunity to respond to the criticism levelled there by David Bradbury when it comes to  the low income tax offset for super contributions as well.

KEVIN ANDREWS  What Joe Hockey said is on the record, so I don’t think there is any doubt about that —

DAVID BRADBURY  No, no, no, be clear about it. Don’t use weasel words Kevin. Are you absolutely committed to  going all the way to twelve per cent?

KEVIN ANDREWS  I’m saying Joe Hockey has made this absolutely clear David —

DAVID BRADBURY  Weasel  words!  No,  weasel  words,  Kevin!  Put  it  on  the  record.  Will  you  go  all  the  way  to   twelve per cent or not? Simple question.

KEVIN ANDREWS  —  listen,  for  a  bloke  that  was  ducking  questions  about  super  a  moment  ago  I  don’t  think   you’re —

DAVID BRADBURY  Simple question! Yes or no?

KEVIN ANDREWS  — in any position to actually talk about this. Let me get to the substance of this. The reality  —

DAVID BRADBURY  You won’t rule it out.

KEVIN ANDREWS  — is that you were talking about the certainty in your budget, I’ll tell you what — for the last  five  years  if  there  was  a  prize  for  a  political  category  of  fiction  in  Australia,  then  Wayne   Swan’s budget would be the winner each year. This is a budget that has hardly stacked up for  a week or two after it has been brought down. There is no certainty and that’s what the people  of  Australia  are  concerned  about.  You’re  in  government,  you  can’t  give  us  any  guarantees   this  morning  and  yet  you’re  asking us  about  something  which  we  know  will  probably  be  a   work of fiction again this year —

DAVID BRADBURY  About  a  policy  you’ve  already  announced.  You’ve  already  announced  this  policy.  Let’s  be   clear  about  what  it  means.  Are  you  going  to  give  a  guarantee  that  you  will  go  all  the  way   from nine to twelve per cent or will you do what Howard did and come in and cut it dead in  its tracks at whatever rate it’s at. So if it’s 9.25 per cent, 9.5 per cent are you going to cut it  there or are you going to give a commitment to go all the way to twelve per cent.

KIERAN GILBERT  Kevin Andrews, your response just quickly.

KEVIN ANDREWS  David, let’s get a guarantee that you’re going to deliver a surplus this year —

DAVID BRADBURY  So you won’t do it? You’re leaving it open.

KEVIN ANDREWS  — no you can’t give us the bottom line of what the books will be. Everybody knows that it’s  probably going to be a puff piece anyway, a piece of fiction so far as the finances of Australia  are concerned. What Joe Hockey said is clear but the reality is that —

DAVID BRADBURY  If it’s clear then why don’t you repeat it. If it’s that clear?

KEVIN ANDREWS  — you blokes are leaving this country in a total mess. David, you should have a look at what  you’re doing yourself, you’re the Assistant Treasurer and you can’t answer these questions.

KIERAN GILBERT  We’ve got to go to a break, David, we are taking a break. We will be right back. Stay with us.

— Commercial Break —

KIERAN GILBERT  This  is  AM  Agenda,  thanks  for  your  company  with  me  now,  Kevin  Andrews  and  David   Bradbury  continuing  our  discussion.  Now  onto  the  issue  of  asylum  seeker  boats.  The   Coalition last night issued a statement, David Bradbury, relating to the 600th boat to arrive  since the Labor government changed its border protection policy back in August of 2008. It’s  an indictment on the government, isn’t it?

DAVID BRADBURY  Is anyone surprised they’re now issuing press releases to welcome the arrival of boats when  they’ve had the opportunity to support our plan in terms of the Malaysian arrangement. It’s  now been out there for them to support for a couple of years and frankly we’ve had our expert  panel  that  handed  down  their  recommendations,  we’ve  sought  to  implement  all  of  those   recommendations. The one significant one that still remains outstanding is to put in place the  Malaysian arrangement. We continue to have from the Opposition a view that they want to  stop the boats, they just don’t want to vote for policies that will actually achieve that.

KIERAN GILBERT  Do you really believe that policy would work now, given that the 800 genuine refugees that  Labor  would  send  to  Malaysia  —  wouldn’t  that  be  swamped  by  the  number  arriving  in  a   couple of days at the moment or a week?

DAVID BRADBURY  I  believe  that  all  of  the  measures  that  were  recommended  by  the  expert  panel  should  be   implemented  and  frankly  on  what  possible  basis  is  the  Coalition  with  such  a  determined   position of stopping the boats standing in the way of this particular policy proposal? On what  possible basis?

KIERAN GILBERT  But there is this question mark as to whether it would work now given the number of arrivals  and  you’ve  got  people  in  the  community  unable  to  work,  not  even  able  to  earn  a  living,   released in the community. It’s a debacle, isn’t it?

DAVID BRADBURY  If people are so confident that it’s not going to work, give it a go.

KIERAN GILBERT  Kevin Andrews, what do you say to that and also, I want to put to you that the Coalition has  talked up a big game here and if you do win, as many expect you will, in September, it’s not  going to be as easy as you’ve said it is to stop the boats, is it?

KEVIN ANDREWS  Let’s go back to the Malaysia solution. David talks about 800 people being swapped. We’ve  had 600 boats, at this rate, we will have 800 boats, let alone 800 people. 35,000 people, 600  boats coming here at a rate of two to three times what they were even a year or so ago. 800 is  just a drop in the ocean. Anybody who looks at this knows that is not a solution. This needs a  total  solution  —  things  like  we’ve  said  about  working  in  conjunction  with  other  countries,   about  putting  back  in  place  proper  temporary  protection  visas  and  suite  of  measures  that   would do it. In the last couple of days we had one of the leading people smugglers in Asia  come out and say that John Howard’s policy was right. He would know, because it was his  trade that John Howard’s policy stopped. We can stop the boats, but we’re not going to do it  by the Mickey Mouse measures from the Labor Party. Yes, it’s going to be a big problem, a  big  challenge  for  us  in  the  future,  but  only  by  having  resolute  policies  such  as  we  have   announced will we be able to turn this around.

KIERAN GILBERT  But Kevin Andrews, my question is, is it going to be done in the short term or is this going to  be something that would take a term of office to do?

KEVIN ANDREWS  This  is  about  putting  the  policies  in  place  and  sending  an  absolutely  unambiguous  clear   message to the people smugglers that their trade is over. We did that in the past — when I  was the last Immigration Minister in the Howard Government, we had just a trickle of people  coming to Australia because we had proper policies in place. We can do that again and we  will.

KIERAN GILBERT  Gentlemen, we have got to go. Kevin Andrews, David Bradbury, appreciate your time.

[ends]

*

