Joint Press Conference, Launceston, Tasmania July 16, 2013

Subjects: The Coalition’s commitment to upgrade Invermay Park; The Coalition’s discussion paper on economic development for  Tasmania; Kevin Rudd’s carbon tax con; Tasmania’s unemployment; GST; Kevin Rudd’s border protection failures.

EO&E...........................................................................................................................................

TONY ABBOTT:

It’s good to be here at Invermay Park in the electorate of Bass. It’s good to be standing next to Andrew Nikolic, our candidate for

Bass; someone who has served our country with distinction in uniform and is now seeking to serve the people of Tasmania in the  Parliament and I know he is going to do a very good job if he is to receive that honour at the forthcoming election. I am going to

make a local announcement. I am going to ask Andrew to support the announcement. We will take local questions and then I  might have something to say about the announcement that Mr Rudd has just made.

This is a very important local sporting facility. The park out there hosts hundreds, if not thousands of young and not so young

sportsmen and women every week. At the moment it is often out of action because it is too wet. It can't be used at night because  there is inadequate lighting. So the Coalition will make available, should we win the election, $1.25 million to the city of

Launceston to ensure that this park is properly upgraded, that the drainage is fixed, that the lighting is fixed and this becomes  something that can be used by the football clubs, by the cricket clubs, by all of the various sporting associations and recreational

associations to its full advantage. It is the most used sporting ground in Northern Tasmania. We have got to make sure that it is a  sporting ground fit for the people of Tasmania.

I am here today, primarily to support Andrew, by making this announcement which we’ll fund from savings in the Budget, but I

don't want people to think that I believe that sports facilities are the key to a better Tasmania. They are part of it, but they are  certainly not the key to it. Last time I was in Tasmania, I released our discussion paper on economic development for Tasmania.

At the heart of our plan for Tasmania is duplicating the Midlands highway; establishing an Antarctic research centre in Hobart;  maintaining the freight equalisation scheme and fully reviewing freight between Tasmania and the mainland and Tasmania and

the world; ensuring that Tasmania gets to keep its existing GST revenues; most of all, trying to ensure that money that is spent  here in Tasmania, Government money that is spent here in Tasmania, is about creating jobs and retaining and expanding

industries, not closing jobs down and closing down industries like the forestry industry which has been so good for Tasmania in  the past and should be good for Tasmania in the future.

Our focus is on the economic development of this great State. This is a great State with great people and it should have a great

future, but it will only have a great future if we have a focus on developing the economy.

We know it is a beautiful environment but the stronger the economy is, the easier it will be to maintain the beautiful environment of  Tasmania. Again, I want to say how proud I am to be standing here with Andrew. He was our first candidate to be selected for the

2013 election. I am tempted to say the original and the best, certainly a really fine Australian, someone who can make a great  contribution to our Parliament, to this State and to our country and I would now ask him to support the announcement.

ANDREW NIKOLIC:

Ladies and gentlemen, can I just say how thrilled I am to have our leader, Tony Abbott, in Tasmania again; his 13th visit since

becoming Opposition Leader. I think by any measure that demonstrates an intense interest in the aspirations of our community.  Can I thank him, also, for today's announcement.

As a former head of the army recruit training centre where we trained 5,000 recruits a year, I know the difference that local sport

can make in the lives of young people. This facility, with the money that has been put in today will make it easier for kids in our  community and young people in our community to develop their skills, to develop the team work that they need to become better

people in our society. I am also thrilled that Tony is here and that we have had some 28 of his colleagues visit me since I was  preselected to talk about our problems and there are many. Most recently, the 8.1 per cent unemployment rate; the fact that we

are on the bottom of the national health care statistics; the fact that our business confidence and investor confidence is very low.  And part of what I am trying to do with those visits is establish the conditions, if I am lucky enough to be the next member for

Bass, to hit the ground running on day one in Canberra.

So Tony, thank you again for supporting Tasmania.

Tony Abbott Federal Member for Warringah | Leader of the Opposition

Page 1 of 4 Joint Press Conference, Launceston, Tasmania > Tony Abbott

12/11/2013 http://pandora.nla.gov.au/pan/22487/20130903-0148/www.tonyabbott.c...

TONY ABBOTT:

Thanks so much Andrew. Ok, well look Mr Rudd has just made an announcement about the carbon tax and I thought I should  offer a few observations about that before taking questions. What Mr Rudd has announced today is not the abolition of the carbon

tax, all he has done is simply brought forward Julia Gillard's carbon tax changes by 12 months. He is not the terminator, he is the  exaggerator. He is not the terminator, he is the fabricator. He has changed its name but he hasn't abolished the tax. All he has

done is given Australians one year only of very modest relief. He has turned a $64 billion tax into a $58 billion tax. What he has  done though is that he has essentially conceded the Coalition's criticism of the carbon tax. He admits that the carbon tax is hurting

families' cost of living. He admits that the carbon tax is costing jobs. He admits that the carbon tax is damaging the economy, but  he hasn't actually got rid of it. He hasn't actually got rid of it.

In fact, he doesn't even understand his own policy as was obvious in the press conference that he has just done with the

Treasurer, where he made claims about benefits that people would receive every year when in fact it is simply a one-off benefit  and the Treasurer repeatedly had to correct him. I want to make it absolutely crystal clear that the only way to get rid of the carbon

tax is to change the Government. This will be a very clear choice in the coming election. On the one hand, a Government that  believes in a carbon tax which is going to go up and up and up and up; and a Coalition that will abolish it, lock, stock and barrel.

On the one hand, a Government under Mr Rudd, which has given us debt and deficit, stretching out as far as the eye can see; on

the other hand, a Coalition that was the last Government to actually give us a surplus and to pay back the debt. Fundamentally, a  Government led by Mr Rudd which started the boats versus a Coalition which stopped the boats and will stop them again. Mr

Rudd is not just the best friend that the people smugglers have had; he is actually their travel agent - that is what he is doing - and he has turned the Australian Navy into a virtual taxi service for people smugglers. Well I say to Mr Rudd, it is just not good

enough. The Australian people can see through you. That is why I am very much looking forward to the election contest,  whenever Mr Rudd cares to call it on.

I will take questions first of all about our local announcement and then obviously questions about other issues. So, questions

about Tasmanian issues first.

QUESTION:

Kevin Rudd has said that he wants to meet with the Premier on the high unemployment rate. You have come to Tasmania and  you are not meeting with the Premier, how would you help Tasmania with this high unemployment rate?

TONY ABBOTT:

Well I have already talked about our plan for Tasmania but added to our plan for Tasmania, is our overall plan for Australia, which

will help Tasmania, just as it will help the country at large. We will abolish the carbon tax, not just re-badge it; we will abolish the  mining tax; we will cut red tape; we will establish a one stop shop for environmental approvals; and we will actually get productivity

up by bringing the workplace relations pendulum into the sensible centre. I am offering real change to the Australian people. All Mr Rudd is offering is more talk.

QUESTION:

Can you name your candidate for Denison here in Tasmania?

TONY ABBOTT:

I am afraid I am here in Bass, and I am talking with our candidate for Bass, and I am afraid you have got me on that one.

QUESTION:

Her name is Tanya Denison and she says that Tasmania won't need such a large share of GST under an Abbott government, do  you agree?

TONY ABBOTT:

Well what I want to make absolutely crystal clear is that Tasmania's GST is safe under the Coalition and I want to say that

Premier Giddings should stop telling lies about the Coalition's position; and if there is any fairness in this State Labor Government,  it should take down those mendacious billboards that it has put up in this city and elsewhere. I want to make it absolutely crystal

clear that Tasmania's GST is safe under the Coalition. I also want to remind the Premier and everyone else that the only way the  GST can be changed is with the consent of all the States. So, unless Premier Giddings has a secret plan to reduce Tasmania's

share of GST, well, Tasmania's GST is absolutely safe.

The final point I want to make on this though is that in the end, Tasmania is not going to be great on the back of money from  elsewhere. Tasmania is going to be great on the back of a stronger local economy. That is what I want to help create, a stronger

local economy. That is what Will Hodgman and the Tasmanian Liberal Party want to create, stronger local economy. If Andrew  Nikolic is the Member for Bass, yes, he will fight for justice for the people of Tasmania, but he will also fight for the kinds of

policies that will make the economy of Bass and the economy of Tasmania much stronger.

QUESTION:

Page 2 of 4 Joint Press Conference, Launceston, Tasmania > Tony Abbott

12/11/2013 http://pandora.nla.gov.au/pan/22487/20130903-0148/www.tonyabbott.c...

There are reports out today that kids at Pontville Detention Centre, which is near Hobart, are resorting to self-harm. What is your  stance on kids in detention?

TONY ABBOTT:

The only way to ensure that there are no kids in detention is to stop the boats. That is the only way to do it. As long as we have

people coming illegally by boat we will have to have people in detention. I regret that but that is the reality. Stop the boats, you  end the detention, as the Howard Government did and there will be no self-harm.

QUESTION:

The Indonesian Foreign Minister overnight came out on TV last night with Bob Carr and criticised the way that you might be

stopping the boats. What is your response to that?

TONY ABBOTT:

I just don't accept the premise of your question. I simply don't accept it. I have standing beside me a senior military officer who  understands the reality that the Australian navy turns boats around in the Persian Gulf;  the US Coast Guard turns boats around in

the Caribbean; the Sri Lankan navy turns boats around in the Indian Ocean; it is a standard operation. It is not beyond the  professionalism of our navy to do it. They are Indonesian boats, Indonesian crewed, Indonesian flagged, Indonesian home-ported.

There is no reason why they can't return to ports in Indonesia. Andrew, I might ask you to add to those comments.

ANDREW NIKOLIC:

In my last job as the first assistant secretary of international policy division I was responsible for the day to day management of  Australia's global defence relationships, including co-chairing annual defence policy talks with Indonesia. Brigadier Gary Hogan,

the head of Australian defence staff and the others attaches around our region used to respond back to me. It is very clear to me  that it is illogical to say that can’t do something that has actually been done before and it has been done before. If you listen to

Vice Admiral Ritchie, if you listen to Brigadier Hogan, they quite clearly tell you that it has been done before and it can be done  before (sic). I respect their judgement.

QUESTION:

Do you agree with Scott Morrison when he says Bob Carr is verbally pressuring his Indonesian counterpart?

TONY ABBOTT:

I haven't seen the footage but the fact is I watched the Foreign Minister of Indonesia on television yesterday afternoon say that  Australia was entitled to do what was in Australia's national interest and that is my position, always has been, always will be. We

will maintain the best possible relations with our friends and neighbours, always have, always will; but we have the right to act in  our national interest and it is overwhelmingly in the national interest of Australia, just as it is in the national interests of Indonesia,

that this evil trade cease. It must cease. It will cease under the Coalition. We will do what Labor hasn't ever been able to do; we  will take the sugar off the table, to use President Yudhoyono's expression; and we will put in place the policies that are necessary

to stop the boats. We have done it before. We will do it again. Kevin Rudd can't do it. Labor can't do it. Their heart just isn't in it.  As I said, Mr Rudd is not only the best friend the people smugglers have ever had, he is now their travel agent and he has

reduced the Australian navy to a virtual taxi service for people smugglers.

QUESTION:

Will a Labor poll surge make it harder for you to win seats in Tasmania under Kevin Rudd?

TONY ABBOTT:

I am very confident that we will do well here in Tasmania. We have got some excellent candidates. We’ve got Andrew Nikolic,  we’ve got Brett Whiteley, we’ve got Eric Hutchinson, we have got Bernadette Black and as you’ve reminded me Sir, we have

recently chosen an excellent candidate in Denison. So, we have good candidates, all of whom have been working very hard and  in the case of Andrew and Eric, they have been working very hard for a long time now. I accept that just at the moment Mr Rudd is

enjoying a bit of a publicity surge. That was always going to happen. We always expected it. We always thought that the polls  would tighten and we always knew that the Australian public would be relieved to see the back of an unpopular Prime Minister,

would give the new fellow a fair go because that is the Australian way. In the end, the people understand that the last time Mr  Rudd was Prime Minister, he was so arrogant and he was so incompetent, he was sacked by his own colleagues; and just under

three weeks ago, fully one-third of the Cabinet refused to serve with him. I know what politicians are like. I know how loathe  ambitious politicians are to surrender their political careers. It is an extraordinary indictment of the Prime Minister that fully one-third of his cabinet colleagues refused to serve with him.

QUESTION:

Do you endorse the public sector cuts outlined by Kevin Rudd this morning?

TONY ABBOTT:

Page 3 of 4 Joint Press Conference, Launceston, Tasmania > Tony Abbott

12/11/2013 http://pandora.nla.gov.au/pan/22487/20130903-0148/www.tonyabbott.c...

I would want to carefully study what Mr Rudd has announced before making specific comments on it. I note that the Government  had previously said that savings were scraping the bottom of the barrel. So let's have a good look at these and see what we

should make of them. I note that the Coalition has already announced some $15 billion worth of savings over the forward  estimates. I also note that there have been more than $10 billion worth of budget blowouts as a result of the Government's border

protection failures. If we weren't spending $80,000 for every single illegal arrival by boat obviously we would have a lot more to  spend on the kinds of services, the kinds of better schools, the kinds of better hospitals that the Australian people want.

QUESTION:

You campaign on a return to Howard era prosperity and policies, why not the ETS, a scheme he championed?

TONY ABBOTT:

Well, the point is that we have got to have the right policies to address climate change, not the wrong policies. We have got to

have a smart response, not a dumb response and our policies are very practical. They make obvious sense. We will plant more  trees; we will produce better soils; we’ll use smarter technologies; these will produce a better environment here in Australia. What

Mr Rudd will do with his tax, whether it is floating or fixed, is clobber the Australian economy, and he has admitted that. He has  admitted that the carbon tax is clobbering the Australian economy. Whereas we will save the average family some $500 a year by

abolishing the carbon tax. So, he has admitted that his policies are clobbering the economy. What he wasn't prepared to tell you  today is that the Government has not actually negotiated entry into the European scheme, that will take months and months and

months. He hasn't told you today that that will put tax policy and economic policy in Australia at the mercy of bureaucrats in  Brussels. Let’s face it, they haven't been so good at managing the economies of Europe. He hasn't told you that the European

carbon price has gone up to almost $50. He hasn't reminded people that even under Treasury's modelling, the floating tax goes  up to $38 a tonne by 2020, to an almost unbelievable $350 a tonne in the years beyond that. He hasn't told us that the Eurocrats

are now looking at schemes to increase the European price of carbon to some $70 a tonne by 2020. He hasn't told us any of that.  He has been deeply misleading with the Australian people and I suspect on the basis of his performance at the press conference

today, he doesn't understand his own policy. He is not the terminator, he is the exaggerator, he is the fabricator. That is why the  Australian people don't trust him.

[ends]

Â© Tony Abbott MHR 2010 | Authorised by Tony Abbott MHR, Level 2, 17 Sydney Rd, Manly NSW 2095

www.tonyabbott.com.au

Page 4 of 4 Joint Press Conference, Launceston, Tasmania > Tony Abbott

12/11/2013 http://pandora.nla.gov.au/pan/22487/20130903-0148/www.tonyabbott.c...

