THE HON BRENDAN O’CONNOR MP  MINISTER FOR EMPLOYMENT  MINISTER FOR SKILLS AND TRAINING

E&OE TRANSCRIPT  ABC CAPRICORNIA   MORNINGS

WEDNESDAY, 31 JULY 2013

TOPICS: NEW ENERGY TRAINING CENTRE FOR GLADSTONE, ELECTION



KALLEE BUCHANAN: The Employment, Skills and Training Minister, Brendan O'Connor, is in  central Queensland to announce new funding for the Gladstone TAFE. We'll take a closer look at  that $21 million facility in the moment but first, the Minister has met with stakeholders involved  in the CQ University and TAFE merger. Brendan O'Connor, good morning.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Good morning, Kallee.

KALLEE BUCHANAN: What was the detail of your discussions on the CQ University and TAFE  merger?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Well, that merger will ensure that central Queensland has the only dual-sector university in the state and it provides great opportunities for young people and indeed  others, to acquire the skills they need to be work-ready. And that crossover between technical  training and degrees really provides that flexibility and it's - I think it's a great opportunity and I  had a very good conversation with the university.

KALLEE BUCHANAN: How does this $21 million facility at the Gladstone TAFE campus fit with  that merger plan?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Well, that merger is of course pending and it still has to be signed off by  the State but it'll take effect once that's done on 1 July. The actual training centre that we  announced yesterday is an energy training centre. It's providing 140 places for people to acquire  the skills needed for the energy sector. At the moment you have a situation where people are  travelling as far as Western Australia or the Northern Territory to acquire those skills. Well,  Gladstone and the region will actually now have this state of the art centre that will equip young  people and existing workers with the skills needed for the industry. So it's responding to  industry need and it's also responding to the needs of young people to acquire skills and locals  to get the jobs.

KALLEE BUCHANAN: What's your understanding of when the State Government might sign off  on the merger?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Look, I'm advised that's just a matter of course. It won't be too long for  that to happen. As I understand it, the Premier and the Government has in principle approved  the merger so it's really a formality. We at the Federal level provided an extra $73.8 million as a  sort of structural adjustment to make sure that the merger goes well and as I say, there are  dual-sector universities around the country. This is the first in Queensland and it really is a good  opportunity for students and apprentices and others who'll be looking to acquire the skills and  respond to industry need. So, I think that we should be very excited about it.

KALLEE BUCHANAN: In the next 24 to 48 hours we're expecting the details of the 200  redundancies being proposed by the university. Do you anticipate that this merger might lead to  further job cuts?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Well, I don't think the merger - I understand that there's been a fall in  enrolments both of local and overseas students which has led to some of the declining staff  levels. I also understand there has been no forced redundancies. It's been through natural  attrition. And I'm also advised that there'll be an incline, an increase in employment levels once  the merger takes place.

I know it's always difficult when you see any job losses but nobody has been forcibly retrenched  and that's important. And second, you have to allow two very significant organisations - the  university and the TAFE to work their way through this restructuring. And of course you make  decisions putting students first.

But the good thing about the centre that we announced yesterday is there'll be an immediate 67  effective full-time jobs in the construction phase. There'll be new jobs for trainers and  administrative staff. So, we're seeing if you like that investment increasing employment  opportunities and that's something to be welcomed.

KALLEE BUCHANAN: You're listening to ABC Capricornia. Brendan O'Connor, the Employment,  Skills and Training Minister is your guest. As Employment Minister, the Stanwell Power Station  west of Rockhampton announced yesterday it is cutting up to 29 positions. This is despite  people paying higher charges when it comes to electricity. The company claims it needs to  reduce costs. What will you do to support these 29 people?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Well, we'll always provide the dedicated employment services for people  who have found themselves without a job. I mean it's a terrible experience for anybody to lose  their job and therefore it's important that governments are there to respond so there'll be job  service providers and other support to respond quickly. What's really important, if existing  workers find themselves without a job, is responding very, very quickly because they do have  the skills. It's really important for them to reconnect to employment as quickly as possible.

So, I'm very happy to be involved in employment providers - working with them, assisting them  to find work. As I say it's always a very difficult time for anybody if they've lost their job.

KALLEE BUCHANAN: Power and education are some of the biggest employers in this region and  they're both shedding jobs. The mining industry cut 8000 in the last 12 months, are you  concerned about how this looks for Labor's economic management credentials heading into an  election?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Look, there will always be fluctuations in different sectors of our  economy. It's not static and therefore we have to rise to the challenge. One of the reasons why  we established that training centre and announced it yesterday is because it will be responsive  to industry need. What we'll see is, we'll see there'll be areas of our economy, our labour  market, that might fall and there'll be others that rise and we need to make sure that we have  the requisite skills and anticipate the growth in certain sectors of our economy and make sure  workers have those skills to fill the demand.

So, whilst you might see some sectors suffer or decline in some way, you'll see opportunities  elsewhere. And I think we need to be responsive to that. There's no doubt that with the fall in  the Australian dollar, there's increased opportunities for trade exposed industries like  manufacturing and tourism. So where we've seen areas that have had real challenges in recent  times, there'll be I think new opportunities. But I think the investment in this region is very  significant.

What we have to make sure is that the local workforce and young people get the opportunities  for those jobs and that's why it's important I think that we talk to those that run those projects  and we work with employers to connect them with local workers.

KALLEE BUCHANAN: There are reports that the Government looked at boosting Newstart  payments but in light of the expected economic statement on Friday, that you're now looking  for savings not boosting. Is this true?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Look, that has been of course in the forefront of our mind - what we can  do. The first thing I'd say as Employment Minister is our priority is to make sure that we find  someone a job. This Government has created  - working with business - 966,000 jobs since we  were elected in 2007. That is a pretty remarkable figure in light of the fact that we were  confronted with the Global Financial Crisis. When you look around advanced economies they've  been shedding globally millions of jobs and we've been growing. And that's important.

And so for those recipients of Newstart, I'd say this. Firstly, our obligation is to make sure we  give them opportunities to find work. That's the first thing we have to do. Obviously we have to  be fiscally responsible so it is always a difficult thing to increase income support but we know it's  really tough and, as I say, I'll be focusing on job opportunities for job-seekers and making sure  that they're not left indefinitely on Newstart.

KALLEE BUCHANAN: Now of course, it's up to the Prime Minister to name an election date but  you've been travelling around the country, when would you like to go to the polls?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Whenever the Prime Minister says so.

KALLEE BUCHANAN: Brendan O'Connor...

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Really, it is the privilege of the Prime Minister to make that decision.

But I think we've got a very good record. We've had some tough times but we've come through  some tough times I think quite well. And we've got a plan for Australia's future and I think we're  very happy to present both our record and our plans for the Australian people and that will be  relatively soon when the Prime Minister makes that decision.

KALLEE BUCHANAN: Do you need to go to the election soon or are there other things that you  still need to put to the community to give that picture of what you're offering this country?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Well, as you've seen in recent times the Prime Minister attend to a  number of issues that have been really challenging for the Government, responding to that very  difficult area of asylum seekers and working out how we respond to that so we see fewer deaths  at sea and we see fewer people enticed on unseaworthy vessels. We've seen also the  termination of carbon tax from July 1 next year - again a decision that will provide relief to  Australian families, picking up around just under $400 for the year. And that may not sound like  a lot of money but that can really help with families that might be struggling with cost of living  expenses. So we've been attending to these very important things but ultimately as I've said we  have a good record, we haven't been perfect but we've got a good record and most importantly,  we've got a future plan for this country.

Whether it's the rolling out of the NBN, whether it's the reforms in the Better Schools initiative  to make sure that all kids get a great education, whether it's dealing - comprehensive way, not  through a slogan, the asylum seeker issue, we have got I think a comprehensive plan for  Australia's future and we're - and I'm very happy at any time the Prime Minister chooses to  present that to the Australian people for them ultimately to make the decision.

KALLEE BUCHANAN: Brendan O'Connor, the Minister for Employment, Skills and Training, thank  you very much for your time this morning.



