



THE HON RICHARD MARLES MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER  PROTECTION  MEMBER FOR CORIO

E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TV INTERVIEW  ABC LATELINE WITH EMMA ALBERICI  MONDAY 11 NOVEMBER 2013

Subjects: Asylum seekers; Carbon tax; Economy.

ALBERICI: The Government intends the number one agenda item of the new  parliament to be the introduction of the Carbon Tax Repeal Bill, but the Opposition  will want immigration to dominate the debate. During the campaign, Tony Abbott  promised to turn asylum seeker boats around when it was safe to do so. That hasn't  quite gone to plan, with Jakarta announcing that it's only taken people back from  two boats, not the four or six that have left Indonesia bound for Australia since the  election.

Richard Marles is the Opposition's Immigration spokesman and he joined me from  our Parliament House studio.

Richard Marles, thanks very much for joining us.

MARLES: Good evening, Emma. How are you?

ALBERICI: Good. Now, Jakarta has confirmed that it has taken back two asylum  seeker boats since the federal election. Now it appears to be refusing to take any  more. What do you think's changed?

MARLES: Jakarta has taken back people from vessels previously and it did so  during the Labor era as well. But Indonesia has been consistent all along in saying  they didn't want to see boats turned back, which was why we always felt that Tony  Abbott going to the election this year with a policy of turning the boats back was

simply pie in the sky. It was never going to happen as an ongoing policy because  Indonesia didn't want it. This is not a surprise. So I think what we've seen play out  over the weekend shouldn't be a surprise to anyone. And when I hear Scott Morrison  on the radio this morning saying that he cannot see any rhyme or reason to the  behaviour of Indonesia, that simply doesn't add up. Indonesia are being entirely  consistent about the fact that it is not their preference to see boats turned back. And  this is an area where you can only work in cooperation. It is impossible for Australia  to dictate terms to Indonesia on this. They are our neighbours. It is the country from  which the boats come. It is plain common sense that our authorities and the two  countries need to work together on this issue.

ALBERICI: But isn't Tony Abbott right when he insists that Indonesia has a  responsibility to take asylum seekers back who are rescued in Indonesian waters?

MARLES: I'm not sure that is right. What there is is a responsibility for a vessel  which gets a distress message to go and help a vessel in distress and that's of  course what occurred over the course of the - well that's what occurred on Thursday  and that is the principal situation here. There's been a lot of talk over the years in  terms of trying to assist Indonesia in building its capacity to deal with rescues within  its search and rescue zone. But the fact of the matter is that if on the high seas you  are in the vicinity of a distress call, there is a legal obligation to go and deal with it.  Now as soon as that has happened, it is then going to have to be a matter -  whichever way you look at this, it has to be a matter of working cooperatively with  Indonesia. And you see, Emma, I think this situation in terms of the diplomacy on  asylum seekers between Australia and Indonesia has gone from bad to worse. This  is a government which talked about having a foreign policy more based on Jakarta  than Geneva. This is a government which said that it wasn't going to engage in  megaphone diplomacy. And yet today we hear our own Prime Minister talking on the  airwaves about Indonesian obligations here. Now that sound a lot like megaphone  diplomacy to me and it does not seem like a policy which is more about Jakarta than  Geneva travelling very well. So I think it has been a bad few days for the  Government in relation to this and I think it's been a bad few days for the  relationship between Australia and Indonesia.

ALBERICI: But in practical terms - I'll return to the previous question - isn't it right  that people rescued from Indonesian territorial waters should be taken back to  Indonesia?

MARLES: Well, I think the right question in terms of practical terms is that  practically we have to work cooperatively with the Indonesians and so we need to  have ...



ALBERICI: But can I draw you back to that specific issue? Doesn't it make sense to  deliver them back to Indonesia rather than travel those thousands of kilometres  back to Australia?

MARLES: But it doesn't - well it doesn't maybe sense to do something that the  Indonesians are not prepared to do. And so we can sit here in Australia and tell  Indonesia what we think they should and what they shouldn't do, but in terms of

resolving this problem, the only way forward is to act cooperatively with Indonesia.  That is just plain common sense. And the Australian Government at the end of the  day has to play with the cards that it's been dealt here. Now one of those is to work  cooperatively and closely with Indonesia, and adopting a protocol of that kind may  be something that they seek to do through a dialogue, but none of that is occurring  through the conduct and the behaviour that we have seen by the Abbott  Government over the past few days. In fact, building the trust and a platform for  that kind of dialogue I think is precisely the opposite of what's been occurring over  the last few days.

ALBERICI: Now the Immigration Minister Scott Morrison says there were no boats  at all in the nearly three weeks before this last weekend, before Thursday. Doesn't  that suggest the Government's tough stance is in fact working and therefore people  aren't dying at sea, which should be the endgame?

MARLES: Well certainly stopping people dying at sea is absolutely the endgame and  that's what we are all seeking to do. What it says is that there has been real success  in the policy that Australia's entered into, or the arrangement that Australia's  entered into with Papua New Guinea. That is the substantive piece of policy which  has actually changed the game here. And it changed the game of course when  Labor was in power under the then Rudd Government. If you look at the substantive  pieces of policy over the last few months and marry those up against the reduction  in boat arrivals, you see the graph of boat arrivals slow not from 7th September, but  from 19th July and 19th July is the day on which the PNG arrangement came into  place. Now there's been no matter of substance which has been introduced by this  new government. As far as we're told, no boat has actually been turned around, that  was something they were going to add to the equation. As far as we know, no  fishing vessel in any Indonesian village has been purchased by the Australian  Government. That was a suggestion of Tony Abbott to help address this situation.  None of that has occurred. The numbers are dropping because of the PNG  arrangement, which was introduced by the then Rudd Government.

ALBERICI: So you give no credit at all to this government's policies?

MARLES: Well I actually think if you look at what this government has been doing  since it's come into power, there has been a whole lot of bells and whistles. We've  seen language edicts to the Department of Immigration. We've seen Operation  Sovereign Borders established. We've seen a number of press conferences now held  with a general standing next to the minister and with the minister talking a lot about  operational circumstances as a basis upon which he cannot answer questions. But if  you actually look at matters of substance, there is nothing new, there is nothing  new. The thing that has changed is the PNG arrangement and that is what is  stemming the tide of boats.

ALBERICI: Given Scott Morrison's reluctance to provide details about asylum seeker  boats, the Greens say they'll use the powers of the Parliament to reinforce  transparency. What exactly can be done in that regard?

MARLES: Well we're interested in having a look at what the Greens are suggesting

there and we'll have a good look at that proposal and work out our attitude toward  it. But I do think that it is important to be using whatever levers we can within the  Parliament to try and get as much information from this government as possible.  Because one thing which has characterised the way in which this government has  gone about its business on this issue and indeed I think a whole range of other  issues is secrecy. We've seen precious little information flow through to the  Australian people and we are now in the very absurd situation in relation to this  weekend of having got more information from the Jakarta Post in relation to this  particular issue and event than we have from our own government. So I think  whatever tools we can use in the Parliament to get greater transparency and more  information from the Government are certainly worth exploring.

ALBERICI: The fact that we are hearing a lot in the Jakarta Post, does that suggest  to you that Jakarta is playing to a domestic audience in the leadup to its elections  next year?

MARLES: Of course Indonesia has its own domestic political situation, just as we  have our own domestic political situation. I think the fact that we are so reliant upon  the Jakarta Post at the moment says more about the lack of information which is  coming from our own government. First and foremost, that is the issue here. And it  really isn't good enough that we are hearing about these events as we did on  Thursday night, first from Indonesian authorities rather than from our own  government.

ALBERICI: Tony Abbott says the carbon tax is socialism masquerading as  environmentalism. Isn't Labor setting itself up for more electoral pain by continuing  to oppose what seems to be the mandate that's been given to this government to  change - indeed, repeal the carbon tax?

MARLES: Well, our position in relation to the carbon tax is that we support its  repeal on the basis that what's put in its place is a legislated scheme which puts a  cap on carbon emissions and which stops carbon pollution. That is the position that  we take and we actually think that this is a position which is accepted by the  Australian people and I think there is a mandate to deal with the issue of carbon  pollution for both sides of politics, because both sides of politics maintain that as  their position. So that's the situation that we - that's the position that we hold.

Tony Abbott of course is seeking to put in place the Direct Action Plan. There is it  not an expert beyond the Liberal Party who regards Direct Action as anything other  than a lemon. Indeed, it is hard to understand what Direct Action will actually entail.  I think Greg Hunt would have the very hardest job in politics today because he has  been asked to sell a policy which in his heart he must know makes no sense  whatsoever.

So we have a mandate as well on behalf of all those people who voted for Labor to  take a sensible path here. And it is a bipartisan position to deal with the issue of  carbon emissions in this country and we're going to deal - we're going to put a  position of dealing with that in the most sensible, efficient and cost-effective way   possible.



ALBERICI: Now tonight the head of Tony Abbott's Business Advisory Council  Maurice Newman has blamed Labor for the country's poor economic performance.  Maurice Newman said spending on the Better Schools Plan and the National  Disability Insurance schemes, while they were worthy, were reckless, given the state  of the public finances. What do you say?

MARLES: Oh, well, I simply don't agree with that at all. The National Disability  Insurance Scheme and the Better Schools program are really important measures.  They're very important social measures, but they're actually very important  economic measures for this country. When the Productivity Commission put down its  report in relation to the National Disability Insurance Scheme, one of the reasons  that it advocated for such a scheme was that it would unlock the productive capacity  of people with disabilities in this country. There'll be a great economic benefit  associated with that. And similarly, making sure that every child in Australia has the  ability to reach their full potential and contribute to the nation's economic  development is very important as well. So, I couldn't disagree more with the  comments that have been made and I actually think that the economy and the state  that it was in at the time of the election was very good.

ALBERICI: Maurice Newman says the reason it was very good was mostly on  account of China's voracious appetite for our resources rather than anything Labor  specifically did, which he says was categorically six years of bad economic  management. So he's also questioned the wisdom of the minimum wage in this  country, which is set at US$33,000 for a 38-hour week, which he says is $10,000 or  thereabouts more a year than in Canada, Europe and New Zealand and it's actually  more than double the US minimum wage. So he's saying the cost of doing business  in this country is out of whack.

MARLES: Well, firstly, that says a lot about the kind of advice which is going to be  going to this government in relation to industrial relations policy. It says a lot about  the way in which we can expect Tony Abbott to go in relation to deregulating the  labour market and attacking the minimum wage I think would be a very regressive  step, but it would be completely in step with the philosophy of Tony Abbott as he's  articulated it throughout his political career. If you look beyond that specific  question, sure, our relationship with Asia and specifically China has been an  important part of Australia's recent economic story, but it's not been the only part as  well. The stimulus packages that we put in place during the height of the global  economic crisis were a critical part of what got Australia through the global economic  crisis in circumstances where we didn't go into recession - one of the only two  countries in the OECD which didn't - and which have seen our employment levels  remain at comparatively high levels compared to countries in Europe and compared  to countries in North America. So, yes, Asia is an important part of it, but it's not the  only part of it.

ALBERICI: Richard Marles, we're out of time. Thank you very much for joining us.

MARLES: Thank you, Emma.

ALBERICI: And we invited the Immigration Minister Scott Morrison to join us on the  program tonight, but he was unavailable.

ENDS

MONDAY 11 NOVEMBER 2013  MEDIA  CONTACT: SOPHIE ANDREW 0401443524

