KATHRYN ROBINSON, PRESENTER: Hello. I'm Kathryn Robinson. Welcome to  Meet The Press. Just three months after taking office, Tony Abbott is facing a  diplomatic crisis of epic proportions. The fallout from revelations Australia allegedly  spied on Indonesia is intensifying, with the nation's immigration officials now  reportedly refusing to help stem the tide of asylum seekers to our shores. And a  hostile Senate isn't making issues here at home any easier either - axing the carbon tax  and increasing the debt ceiling still major problems for the Abbott Government. Our  guest today - Finance Minister Senator Mathias Cormann.   But first this morning - his boss is dealing with an international crisis threatening our  military and trade arrangements with Indonesia. And his colleague, Treasurer Joe  Hockey, warns we have less than three weeks to lift the debt ceiling before facing a  US-style government shutdown. Our guest today is Finance Minister Mathias  Cormann, and our panel - News Corp's National Economics Editor Jessica Irvine, and  National Political Reporter for News Corp, Lanai Scarr. Good morning to you all.

LANAI SCARR: Good morning.

KATHRYN ROBINSON: Senator, Tony Abbott has been depicted on the front page  of an Indonesian newspaper overnight in a very lewd situation. To you, is this  relationship with Indonesia sinking to a new, unmanageable low?

MATHIAS CORMANN: We are totally focussed on building and strengthening our  relationship with Indonesia. Obviously there's been some strain in recent days as a  result of media coverage. I mean, the Prime Minister has been very clear in expressing  his very strong commitment to continue to strengthen our relationship with Indonesia.  It's a relationship that is important for both our countries. Of course, we have  expressed regret for the embarrassment caused by the media reports in recent days,  but it is really matter, from our point of view, of looking forward.

KATHRYN ROBINSON: But what is your reaction to this newspaper cover?

MATHIAS CORMANN: Look, I'm not going to commentate on media coverage in  Indonesia. Our focus is on strengthening our relationship with Indonesia. It is a very  important relationship for both of our countries. And, I mean, the last thing that I'm  interested in doing is being a commentator.

LANAI SCARR: Do you think Tony Abbott - Senator, do you think Tony Abbot has  handled this in the best way possible? Why didn't he pick up the phone on the very  first day that media broke about - news broke about this issue? I mean, he was so  intent on trying to get Julia Gillard and Kevin Rudd to pick up the phone to their  international counterparts. Shouldn't he have done more?

MATHIAS CORMANN: The Prime Minister has handled this in the absolutely  appropriate way, completely focussed on our national interests. Of course, whatever  way you look at this, this is no doubt one of the more challenging periods in our  relationship, but our focus is on strengthening our relationship moving forward and  that’s what we're getting on with doing.

JESSICA IRVINE: If you really want to strengthen the relationship, I'd have to put it  to you that you're failing. Quite clearly this relationship has not been strengthened in

the last few weeks. And if we want to look at how we should conduct our diplomatic  affairs, we do have a precedent for this situation, which was when it was found out  that the US had tapped the phone of Angela Merkel, and Obama picked up the phone  and he said sorry. What is the harm in just saying sorry? Why are we dancing around  with regret? Why aren't we just sorry?

MATHIAS CORMANN: Well, we're dealing with this situation in an Australian way,  according to our judgements, as to what is our national interests - that is what the  Prime Minister is doing. That is what he will continue to do. And of course, all of us,  in the national interest, strongly support our Prime Minister's efforts in this regard.

LANAI SCARR: How is this going to affect everyday Australians? I mean, are you  confident Australians travelling to Bali or elsewhere in Indonesia are going to be  safe?

MATHIAS CORMANN: Yes, I am.

JESSICA IRVINE: Okay. You’ve mentioned that this is a very important relationship  for us - not only diplomatically, but economically. We've already had agriculture  minister Barnaby Joyce - has now cancelled a trip to Indonesia, where he was going  to talk about Indonesia investing and taking about 100,000 heads of cattle as exports.  What are the economic consequences of this?

MATHIAS CORMANN: Well, I mean, what he has done - he hasn't cancelled, he has  deferred. And of course, that trip will still take place. The trade relationship with  Indonesia will strengthen into the future. But of course, right now, there are a number  of issues to resolve. The Prime Minister has written to the President of Indonesia in  the last few days, as he said he would. Let's just continue to work through this process  of fixing the relationship from where it is, moving forward, strengthening the  relationship from where it is, moving forward, rather than to continue to look  backwards.

LANAI SCARR: What implications do you think this is going to have for the Bali  Nine and, I guess more pressingly, Schapelle Corby, whose parole is up in a couple of  days?

MATHIAS CORMANN: Look, I think you’re well and truly stretching, you know,   my area of responsibility now. I mean, I came here to talk about economic matters  and Budget matters and these sorts of issues. I mean, this is very much not in my area  of responsibility. I will let the Prime Minister and the Foreign Minister and others  continue to comment on these matters that are obviously of a sensitive nature, as  appropriate.

LANAI SCARR: You are a Cabinet minister, though, so you obviously are aware of  all the considerations that are going on in the Government.

MATHIAS CORMANN: Well, indeed I am, with responsibility for the Finance  portfolio. And these are matters that are very much in the province of the Prime  Minister's and the Foreign Minister's area of responsibility, and given the very

important and sensitive nature of these issues, I will let them comment on these  matters as appropriate.

KATHRYN ROBINSON: Senator, I can assure you that we will be going to issues  pertaining to your portfolio, but if we can just stick with something a little bit more  broader in this segment in asylum seekers and border protection - how is it  conceivable that Operation Sovereign Borders is still going to work, given the  Indonesian government has said they are no longer cooperating with us on that issue?

MATHIAS CORMANN: Well, we are totally committed to stop the boats. We've  inherited a situation on our borders from the previous government that was in a mess.  There are many facets to Operation Sovereign Borders. Obviously it is preferable for  strong cooperation with Indonesia to be part of the implementation of our policy  there, but there are many facets to Operation Sovereign Borders. We will continue to  do everything we can to stop the boats, as we said we would do in the lead-up to the  last election.

KATHRYN ROBINSON: Do you think we'll see more boats now as a result of this  relationship breakdown with Indonesia?

MATHIAS CORMANN: I'm not going to speculate on this. And our focus is on  strengthening our relationship with Indonesia and getting the situation back into a  position where we're working together strongly, in our mutual interest, to stop the  boats, because it's not in Indonesia's interests, as it is not in our interest, for the boats  to keep coming.

KATHRYN ROBINSON: But if you look at the numbers alone, I think since  September, there was something like 1,150 people who were stopped getting on boats  in Malaysia, Sri Lanka and Indonesia - the bulk coming from Indonesia. And that was  majoritively disrupted due to Indonesian authorities on the ground there.

MATHIAS CORMANN: You're quite right - that since the election, there's been a  significant reduction in the number of boats arriving on our shores, and we will  continue to do everything we can to further accelerate that trend of stopping the boats.  I mean, our determination is to stop the boats. We will do everything we can to make  sure that happens. And obviously strengthening our relationship with Indonesia  moving forward is part of that.

LANAI SCARR: You're obviously in control of the Budget bottom line, though. Are  you making contingency plans for the fact that we may have to accommodate more  asylum seekers?

MATHIAS CORMANN: Well, Jessica, our Budget estimates will be updated in the  usual way in the Mid-Year Economic and Fiscal Outlook. Obviously we're looking  right across Government right now as to what the various pressures on the Budget are  that we’ve inherited from the previous government. And we’re making this judgement  in the orderly fashion and we’ll provide the updates in the usual way at the Mid-Year  Economic and Fiscal Outlook.

KATHRYN ROBINSON: Okay, we are out of time for this break. But do stay with  us. We'll have more with Finance Minister Mathias Cormann, next.



KATHRYN ROBINSON, PRESENTER: You're watching Meet The Press. Jump  online and give us your thoughts via our Facebook page or with the Twitter hashtag  #mtp10. Back now to our guest today, Finance Minister Mathias Cormann. Senator,  there are reports in the papers today that suggest former PMs are asking - requesting  more perks. In Julia Gillard and Kevin Rudd's case, they want not one office, but two  offices. Is it right? Does a former PM need two offices?

MATHIAS CORMANN: Well look, I mean, I'll let them work that out through the  usual process. I'm not going to go for some gratuitous political shots here. I'm sure  that this is going to be sorted out in an appropriate fashion.

KATHRYN ROBINSON: As Finance Minister - two offices, they enjoy a six-figure  pension. Is it fiscally responsible to be signing off on something like this?

MATHIAS CORMANN: Well, obviously we don't think they do need two offices, I  mean, but these things are currently being worked through, and you know, once it's  finalised, we'll let you know what the final arrangement is.

KATHRYN ROBINSON: Okay, thank you.

JESSICA IRVINE: Minister, you're refreshingly good at succinct answers, so I've got  a ‘yes’ or ‘no’ question for you, which is - does Australia still have a Budget  emergency, as you suggested in Opposition? Do we have a Budget emergency?

MATHIAS CORMANN: Yes, we do. I mean, we inherited a budget in very bad shape  from the Labor Party - a $30 billion deficit at the time of the election and  deteriorating. Net debt heading for $200 billion, gross debt heading well beyond $300  billion on the P4 figures. And of course, the trend that we inherited was a  deteriorating trend. But what Labor has suggested at various times is that, somehow,  there wasn't an emergency because we weren't dealing with things in the panicked,  chaotic fashion that they would have in the past. Yes. So the short answer is yes, we're  dealing with a Budget emergency. But we're dealing with it in a methodical, orderly,  purposeful fashion, and of course the Mid-Year Economic and Fiscal Outlook will be  a very clear indication on where the true state of the Budget is at once we've taken all  of the hidden problems into account that we've found out about since the election.

JESSICA IRVINE: So when will you be releasing the mid-year update?

MATHIAS CORMANN: Well, as we've indicated, we'll be releasing it before  Christmas. So, I mean, we're currently working our way through it. We're keen to  ensure that the revenue data, in particular, is as accurate as possible, which is why we  want the September national accounts data reflected in the Mid-Year Economic and  Fiscal Outlook. That will come out in early December. So, then there are some  processes to go through after that, and as soon as possible, once we've gone through  all of that, MYEFO will be ready for release.

JESSICA IRVINE: So, a Budget emergency, we need to do something about it,  economic update in December - will there be nasties in that December update?  Because if there's an emergency, you need to do something about it, and it seems like  the Government is ruling out quite a lot of things - no changes to super taxes, no  changes to health and education spending, not increasing the aged pension. There's  going to need to be cuts. Where are you going to get them from? And are we going to  see them in December?

MATHIAS CORMANN: Well, we're going through a proper, orderly process. I mean,  we've already started a - well, we've started to implement the savings measures that  we've taken to the last election. That's one. We've also ensured that there is some  appropriate scrutiny over the discretionary grants spending that Labor engaged in in  the shadow of the election, so that's going on as we speak. And furthermore, we of  course have announced a commission of audit, which has the job of identifying  opportunities for structural efficiencies over the medium to long term, which is going  to report to us by the end of January with its interim report, and by the end of March  with a final report. The commission of audit very much will look at the size, scope  and efficiency of Government, and we will reflect the recommendations from the  commission of audit that we accept in the 2014-15 Budget. So, if you want to look at  it at a high level, the mid-year economic and fickle outlook will clearly articulate the  problem that we have inherited from Labor's last Budget, with Labor's last Budget,  and the 2014-15 Budget will be our plan, the first Coalition Budget will be our plan,  to fix the Budget emergency that we have inherited from the Labor Party.

LANAI SCARR: One of the key things that still needs to occur is the raising of the  debt ceiling. If you don't get that passed, are we going to be facing a US-style  government shutdown?

MATHIAS CORMANN: Well, we're dealing, again, with a mess that we have  inherited from the previous government. There is one more week until the Senate  comes back to sit and consider the debt ceiling legislation again, and I guess that's one  more week for Bill Shorten and Chris Bowen and the Labor Party to consider the  national interest in this. The Labor Party over there, six years in government, kept  kicking the dead can down the road. They came back every year or so, increasing the  debt ceiling from $75 million to $200 billion to $250 billion to $300 billion. At the  time of the last Budget, Labor knew that the legislated debt limit would not be  sufficient to meet the requirements - the financing requirements of the  Commonwealth just for this calendar year. They knew then that by the end of this  calendar year, they would reach and exceed the legislated debt ceiling. That was quite  reckless and irresponsible, the way they dealt with this - not legislating to increase the  debt ceiling at that time. So we are doing what needs to be done responsibly, to  provide the debt ceiling that is required to fund the operations of Government over the  forward estimates - that is the responsible course of action, and we call on the Labor  Party to stop this political posturing and to start putting the national interest first.

LANAI SCARR: But is it a possibility that we could face a government shutdown?

MATHIAS CORMANN: Well, I'm not prepared to entertain that thought. We're  going to put the legislation back to the Senate to increase the debt ceiling to $500  billion, which is a responsible course of action, and we call on the Labor Party to

reflect on the national interest over the next week and to support that legislation when  it comes back to the Senate in unamended form.

LANAI SCARR: Another thing that's been in the headlines this week is the retirement  age. The Coalition has ruled out raising the retirement age, but there's still not been  anything said about accessing equity in people's homes. What are you going to do  about that? Is that a possibility?

MATHIAS CORMANN: Well, the Productivity Commission made certain  recommendations. The Coalition doesn't have a policy to increase the retirement age.  I mean, the Productivity Commission is an advisor to Government, and of course they  are independent and free to express their view. We are conscious of the fact that there  are fiscal pressures that come with the ageing of the population, and of course that's  why we have a commission of audit consider the issues around size, scope and  efficiency of Government so that we can position ourselves for that in the best  possible way. Our intention is to reflect our approach to these sorts of challenges in  the 2014-15 Budget.

KATHRYN ROBINSON: Just finally, Senator, if we can take you to the Senate,  where it's responsible - a lot of legislation is to be passed, the carbon tax being one of  them. If it's defeated there twice, giving you the trigger for a double dissolution, given  that we're in a Budget emergency, would you be happy with sending Australians back  to the polls?

MATHIAS CORMANN: Well, again, I mean our preference is that Labor respects the  vote of the Australian people. Our preference is that Bill Shorten and the Labor Party  accept the verdict at the last election. People at the last election voted against higher  electricity prices. They voted for scrapping the carbon tax. They voted for the  strengthening of our economy by not imposing the world's largest economy-wide  carbon tax on our economy. So Bill Shorten and Labor should let us implement the  agenda that the Australian people voted for. So, I mean again, between now and the  end of June, we think that there's a lot of water to go under the bridge, and there's lots  of opportunity for Bill Shorten to remind himself of the national interest.

KATHRYN ROBINSON: So you won't rule out that Australians could head back to  the polls over this issue?

MATHIAS CORMANN: Well, we will do whatever needs to be done in order to  implement our commitment at the last election to scrap the carbon tax. That'll achieve  a saving of $550 a year on average for Australian families. It'll also, of course, help  make Australian business more competitive, again by bringing down the cost of doing  business. So we'll do what needs to be done, but Bill Shorten should stop being in  denial about the last election result.

KATHRYN ROBINSON: Alright. Senator Cormann, thank you very much for your  time today on Meet The Press. We appreciate it very much.

MATHIAS CORMANN: Always good to be here.

KATHRYN ROBINSON: And Lanai Scarr and Jess Irvine, thank you for your  insights as well.



