



THE HON GREG COMBET AM MP  Minister for Climate Change, Industry and Innovation

TRANSCRIPT

GC 157/13 24 June 2013



TRANSCRIPT OF INTERVIEW WITH FRAN KELLY - ABC RADIO NATIONAL BREAKFAST

SUBJECT: Polls; Leadership speculation; Labor’s achievements.

E & O E - PROOF ONLY

KELLY: It was three years ago today that Julia Gillard became Prime Minister. To mark that  anniversary, the Government has been showcasing its achievements. More than 580 pieces of  legislation passed by this hung parliament. These include the carbon and the mining taxes,  paid parental leave, DisabilityCare and the increase in the superannuation levy, and by the  end of this week probably also the Gonski school reforms. But for most of this three years  Labor has been seized by the debilitating leadership rivalry between Julia Gillard and Kevin  Rudd. And once again an opinion poll today showcases Labor’s entrenched position with the  voters, on an unwinnable primary vote of 29 per cent. Climate Minister Greg Combet has  been a key minister in this Gillard Government. Minister, welcome back to Breakfast.

COMBET: How are you going Fran?

KELLY: Greg Combet, should Kevin Rudd show leadership this week and test the numbers one  way or the other?

COMBET: Well we certainly can’t have this go on and I think your observation about the  impact of leadership speculation on the opinion polls is certainly fair enough. The absolute  basic of starting to restore Labor’s political position is to not have this type of speculation. So,  I think a few things are clear: one is that the Prime Minister is not about to step down. Two is,  senior Cabinet colleagues are not about to ask her to step down. And three is, I think Kevin  Rudd does need to decide what he is going to do here. But we cannot come out of this final

week of Parliament with this speculation continuing all the way to the election.

KELLY: So the worst outcome this week would be the leadership remains untested?

COMBET: It has just got to be resolved.

KELLY: Is the only way to resolve it to test it?

COMBET: Well, I think Kevin Rudd has to decide whether he is a candidate or not, and then do  something about it, if he wants to do something about it. The preconditions that have been  articulated through the media over the last couple of weeks for that to happen are not going

to occur. The Prime Minister is not going to step down so the ball is in Kevin Rudd’s court, I  think.

KELLY: Well Kevin Rudd has repeatedly said he is not going to challenge. He doesn’t believe  there is going to be a shift in the leadership because he’s not going to challenge.

COMBET: Well if that is the case then we cannot have this type of speculation continue. So it  is important that everyone buckles down and does what is right. And that is we do start,  everyone just starts arguing what we have achieved over the last few years because it is very  substantial.

KELLY: You talk about the preconditions that the backers of Kevin Rudd have put about, the  conditions for him to challenge or to take the leadership. One of them is that you and other  Cabinet ministers to commit to him as leader. Would you consider shifting your support if that  helps unify the party?



COMBET: No, no I’m not. I’ve articulated my position on this many times and I don’t take my  instructions from the Daily Telegraph and neither do my colleagues, that is where we’ve read  these preconditions. There is a simply thing here: the Prime Minister is not stepping aside, the  senior Cabinet ministers are not tapping her on the shoulder to go, if there is a challenger  then the time is to decide it. I think this is a responsibility that is properly vested in the Labor  Party caucus and it is they who ultimately should resolve it. But there is no challenger there.  What we can’t have is this type of speculation though continuing on through to the election.  The impact of that sort of disunity is absolutely evident to anyone with an eye on politics.

KELLY: Do you blame Kevin Rudd for Labor’s position in the polls?

COMBET: No, I’m not blaming anyone. Obviously there is a lot of history to all of this but  we’ve got an election 12 weeks or so away. We’ve got to buckle down, argue Labor’s case.  We’ve got a great set of reforms that we’ve put in place. Probably the single most outstanding  thing is the fact of the matter that the economy is still growing despite all of the difficulties in  the international economy. We’ve weathered our way through the Global Financial Crisis.  We’ve continued to have solid GDP growth. Unemployment is still at 5.5 per cent. We’ve  created nearly a million extra jobs. Interest rates have slowed. The dollar has come off a bit  now. Inflation is under control. It’s a very good macroeconomic environment for investment  to continue in this country and that is the starting point for people in the community.  Everyone is first and foremost concerned about the state of the economy and on any measure  Labor’s management of the economy has been very solid.



KELLY: On the measurement, on that measurement Labor’s management of the economy was  solid three years ago, yet three years ago with Labor’s primary vote under Kevin Rudd at 35  per cent. The party dumped the first term Prime Minister, three years on and just less than  three years out from an election Julia Gillard is pulling a primary vote of 29 per cent. On  consistency, caucus would now vote for change again?

COMBET: No, I’m not going to be making comments about that. I think I’ve said as much as I  need to about it. The PM is not going anywhere. If Kevin Rudd wants to challenge it is  available to him to do so and ultimately that is for the caucus to decide. But we must put this  to bed because we can’t be going towards an election with this type of speculation around. I  for one know that when I am able to stand in front of the members of the community and  argue the case for Labor about our economic management and performance and all of the  other important things we’ve done in recent years, people want to hear that message. They

want to understand what we’ve been doing, what we’ve achieved and how it has affected  their life. That we’ve done such important things for so many people in the community. Often  now even things like the establishment of the Royal Commission into child sexual abuse is  overlooked. That is hugely important for some many people in the community and to make  sure that at an institutional level that issue is addressed. You mentioned the carbon price,  there’s a poll out over the weekend by The Climate Institute showing that only a third of  people now think that it should be repealed. The message is getting through that it is working,  renewable energy is up, emissions are down, Victorian brown coal high emissions generators  - their level of emissions are down. We have introduced paid parental level. We’ve increased  the tax free threshold, improved Family Tax Benefits, pensions are up, SchoolKids Bonus in,  super contributions will be increasing, the education reforms, DisabilityCare, health care  reforms with more GPs, hospital beds and nurses, mental health, aged care, infrastructure - it  is actually a massive list. Plus a whole host of other environmental reforms: all the marine  parks that have been proclaimed, the settlement of the Tasmania forests. These are fantastic  reforms.

KELLY: It’s 16 to 8 on Breakfast. Greg Combet, we are speaking with Cabinet Minister Greg  Combet. And Greg Combet you’ve reminded us of much of that list before on the program but  the point is, which I’m sure is frustrating for you, that people don’t seem to be giving the  Government credit for those achievements because the polls suggest you keep going  backwards. And that’s why I think a lot of people who perhaps in the past have voted Labor  and maybe would like to do so again, given that list you mentioned, are scratching their head  about why is there so much hostility towards Kevin Rudd when the polls show that people  would prefer him?

COMBET: That is an issue for the caucus. I’m not going to be casting judgements on my  colleagues. The Prime Minister has been endorsed by the caucus a number of times. We don’t  even know if Kevin Rudd is a challenger at this point in time. There is not much more I can say  about it.

KELLY: In terms of the PM’s record, and you have given us a long list, three years ago Julia  Gillard gave us a list of three items when she said a good Government had lost its way. Three  main areas: carbon tax, mining tax and asylum seekers. Certainly Julia Gillard has not  managed to slow the boats of asylum seekers coming, we are on track for 25,000 arrivals in  this financial year. Do you agree Labor has failed in this policy area?

COMBET: No. This is an immensely complex policy challenge for any Government. You can’t  solve it either by three word slogans like Tony Abbott is suggesting. It’s going to be a big  challenge for any government, this issue, and the Government has taken numerous steps to  ensure that we try and tighten this up. But you can’t overlook something either. For purely  opportune reasons, Tony Abbott opposed legislation in the Parliament that would have put in  place the agreement with the Malaysian Government that, particularly at that point in time, I  think would have had a significant impact on the way in which these businesses operate in  people smuggling. And he can bear a fair share of the responsibility for that. But any  government is going to have its hands full trying to deal with this particular problem. It’s a  complex one, far more complex than Tony Abbott would have you believe with these silly  three word slogans that can’t possibly lead to any cogent policy outcome. I mean how  ridiculous. We’ve got the Indonesian Government disputing their claim that they will turn  boats back. Tony Abbott's position is just completely absurd.

KELLY: What about one of the other promises that the Prime Minister said needed to be fixed,  mining tax. Now there is a mining tax all right but it only delivered $200 million this year,

down from the $3 billion forecast in last year’s Budget. If you are benchmarking Julia Gillard’s  Prime Ministership against these policies, that's not a success either?

COMBET: Yes but there are a few things to take into account here. Yes, of course the Minerals  Resource Rent Tax was renegotiated sometime back but we have seen commodity prices a  couple of years ago at very high levels, high terms of trade ...

KELLY: Yes but that was known at the time ...

COMBET: Well you might be a futures market analyst ...

KELLY: Well I'm not but there are plenty around.

COMBET: You might have better insight than the Treasury, but the terms of trade have come  off very significantly, that’s affected many, many Government revenues and compounded the  issues about the fiscal outlook. But commodity prices have come off very significantly and  these are profit-related taxes, the MRRT is a profit-related tax, and I think that needs to be  properly understood when you are having any discussion about the MRRT and the revenue  that it pulls in.

KELLY: So Greg Combet just finally, this is an important week obviously for this Parliament and  for this Government. What do you want to happen this week?

COMBET: It’s just imperative that the Labor Party comes out of this week unified, that we  have these issues resolved one way or the other, and that we are able to set our sails for the  election with a clear message to sell about all of our achievements and what our plans are.  That’s just imperative.

KELLY: And given the division that is been on display for nearly three years now, can you see  the Labor Party unifying under either leader, Julia Gillard or Kevin Rudd?

COMBET: Well I think every one of my colleagues would agree with the observation I just  made. We’ve just got to put it into action. We cannot have speculation continuing in this way  right through to the election. Just imagine TV packages every night in the election campaign  with three people vying for the Prime Ministership, that is just a totally unsustainable position  and it must be resolved and we have got to have a clear run at the election with our program  articulated to people, all of our achievements and the things that we want to do for Australia.

KELLY: And it’s not a good sign heading into an election campaign that internal polling is being  leaked is it? Who’s doing that and why?

COMBET: Well how would I possibly know? I don't know. None of these things are good signs,  leaks and backgrounding and what not and it is a discipline that the Labor Party has to relearn.  That stuff just never does you any good.

KELLY: In your mind has Julia Gillard been a good Prime Minister?

COMBET: She is actually an excellent person to work with. She is driven by purpose, making  changes for the benefit of people in the Australian community and I think the list that I ran  through the early is very strong evidence of that. Ultimately all of us in the Labor Party who  have the privilege of serving in Parliament, we are there to achieve things for people  throughout the community, particularly low and middle income earners across the

community. Labor stands for fairness and justice. That’s what we’re there for, that’s what  we’ve got to concentrate on, and the Prime Minister certainly reflects those values and works  very hard to put them into practical policy effect that will help people.

KELLY: Greg Combet thank you very much for joining us on Breakfast.

COMBET: No worries Fran, thank you, bye bye.

ENDS



