

Julie Bishop MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS



Castle Hill lighting announcement and doorstop

20 August 2013

E&OE…

JULIE BISHOP Well I’m delighted to be here in Townsville with the candidate for Herbert,  the local LNP member Ewen Jones.

Ewan is a vital part of the LNP team. He’s been a very effective local member for Herbert for  the last three years and we in the Liberal National Party are very very keen to see Ewen Jones  returned as the Member for Herbert because he’s such an important part of our team.

The reason we’re here today standing at the halfway mark of Castle Hill is to make an  announcement. We know that Castle Hill is an important landmark in Townsville. As you can  see - so many people use this walking, running track for fitness, for exercise it’s a lifestyle  landmark for the people of Townsville. As you can see we’ve got some very fit runners  behind us so we also appreciate the fact that so many people use this. Thousands of people  use this track every week, every day, mainly in the morning, mainly in the evening. We’ve  been advised that visibility is an issue here because of the weather in Townsville and from a  security, safety point of view it’s necessary for there to be lighting. So should the Coalition  be elected to government we will fund a solar powered street lighting proposal here,  $650,000 for this project and in this way we’ll be able to make it more accessible for the  tourists, for the locals, for the people who see Castle Hill as the iconic landmark of  Townsville.

Now I’ll hand over to Ewan to say a few words about this because he’s been fighting for it  and then take some questions.

EWEN JONES Thank you very much Julie. This is a good day for Townsville. This is  something that’s been on the council wish list for a number of years. This is soft lighting, it’s  outline lighting, it’s not going to be blaring across the suburbs of Townsville.

When you live in North Queensland you don’t get a twilight. When darkness comes, it comes  with a thud. This is a great part of Townsville. I know that when Tony Abbott comes to  Townsville he’s always running up here all the time. I know because I’m the one running in  front of him. [Inaudible] and get the shots done properly and that’s why you don’t see me in  those photos.

Part of everyone’s training around here is to do Castle Hill. You are not a true Townsvillian  until you have done Castle Hill and I have done Castle Hill...many times in my car…

JULIE BISHOP You’ll appreciate the lighting..

EWEN JONES I’ll appreciate the lighting as well.

It’s important that we are safe. It’s important that we do enjoy our lifestyle here. This is a  great part of Townsville and I’m very, very proud that we’ve been able to get this project  done. It’s something the council’s been on about for an awfully long time.

We tried to get it up in 2010. We couldn’t get the Labor Government to agree to it. If I’m  returned and Tony Abbott gets in as the Prime Minister of this country, as part of his team I’ll  make sure that these lights come on.

JOURNALIST Ewan we were chatting to the Labor candidate Cathy O’Toole and she was  saying that this announcement is off the mark, the real cost of putting solar lighting in the  area is around $900,000. What do you say to that?

EWEN JONES The amount that came through to us was $650,000. If she wants to pay  $900,000 for it, that’s fine. Is she saying she’s going to do it for $900,000? Or is she just  harping that she hasn’t made the announcement?

JOURNALIST She is saying that that’s the cost of putting in the ..

EWEN JONES The figure that was given to us was $650,000 and if there’s a variation to that  we’re happy to talk about it. The figure that was given to us was $650,000 and that’s the  commitment today.

JULIE BISHOP And the question for Labor is will they match our commitment? It’s all very  well to whinge about the LNP announcement but will they match it?

JOURNALIST She was also saying that the overall management plan, that there needs to be  an overall management plan for other issues in the area. I mean, do you agree with that?

EWEN JONES I don’t know what she’s talking about.

JOURNALIST She just said there were other issues that needed to be addressed in Castle  Hill.

EWEN JONES It sounds like one of those airy fairy things that Labor will come up with  when they’re trying to make spit(?) It’s one thing to come out and say something. It’s another  thing to come up with an alternative.

We’re making the announcement today. I’m very proud of the announcement that’s been  made. If Cathy O’Toole wants to come out and say something about it, then let her come  forward with her plan.

JOURNALIST How long will it take for lights to get installed up here?

EWEN JONES We’ll work straight with the council. I understand that the footings are  already in. It’s a matter of getting the work done. The footings are already there. It’s a matter  of getting the poles up, the [inaudible] panels on and turning them on. We’ll work with the

council on that all the way through.

JULIE BISHOP The people of Townsville can trust a Coalition Government to deliver. We  won’t make a promise before the election, we’ve committed $650,000 to this project and we  will deliver it.

JOURNALIST There’s already so much demand on the hill already. Do you think potentially  lighting it could cause more problems? People [inaudible] and people walking later at night  as well?

EWEN JONES I think it will actually stretch things out. I think when people are forced  around that twilight time, around the dawn and the dusk that’s when people have to come.

I think if you have that soft lighting people will be able to stretch their time out. They’ll be  able to come up at a different time of day. You’ll have some coming up at 8pm at night  because you’ll still have that lighting.

My wife, comes up here at 4.30 in the morning, it’s black. They all walk with torches.

JULIE BISHOP You’re usually here about 6am?

EWEN JONES Normally! But I think it will actually spread the activity over the hill, over the  full 24 hours. I think the good thing about this, and this is a good thing for parking, for people  trying to get here, for people on push bikes as well because we know that when we do come  down here, they do come down at a rate of knots.

JOURNALIST …an emphasis on soft lighting for the local residents as well?

EEAN JONES Emphasis on soft lighting. You certainly don’t want spotlights going out over  Yarrawonga and over North Ward. I think that’s the sensible thing to do. That’s what the  council came to us with. That’s what the council’s ask for and that’s what we’re going to  deliver.

JOURNALIST What about arsonists? I mean there have been a few instances recently where  they’ve been lighting fires on the hill. Do you think that this would discourage people from  doing that?

EWEN JONES Anything… sorry I’ll start that again… if you light something up, chances are  people won’t be out and about with it there. But if someone is desperate to start a fire, I  don’t… they start fires at the IGA at the Upper Ross and there’s plenty of light out there.

JOURNALIST Ms Bishop, just on some other issues, have you or Tony Abbott been briefed  about the boat capsizing near Christmas Island?

JULIE BISHOP I am aware of this matter. I understand Scott Morrison, as the Shadow  Minister for Immigration, is getting a briefing on it.

This is another tragic outcome from Labor’s change of policies in 2008. Since Labor  unpicked the policies that had stopped the people smuggling trade and effectively stopped  boats we’ve now seen about 1000 deaths at sea, over 50,000 people taking that treacherous

journey to Australia and an $11 billion blowout in the detention network.

Until such time as Kevin Rudd admits that he got it wrong and puts back in place the policies  that he unpicked then the boats will continue to come.

This is also evidence that the PNG ‘solution’ has not yet worked and the boat people will  continue to come while-ever the people smugglers take on this government. They know this  government is a soft touch. It’s a battle of the wills between the people smugglers, the  criminal syndicates and the Labor Government and so far the people smugglers are winning.

JOURNALIST Just on the issue of Kevin Baker, the Liberal candidate for the seat of  Charlton, there’ve been calls for him to be disendorsed. What’s your take on that?

JULIE BISHOP I understand that Tony Abbott was getting a briefing on the matter.

JOURNALIST Would you be supporting calls for him to be disendorsed?

JULIE BISHOP I’m not aware of the details of it, only what I’ve read in the paper and I  understand that Tony Abbott was going to get a briefing on it. It’s a call for Tony Abbott.

JOURNALIST The details that you’ve read in the paper, were you offended by the comments  made on the website?

JULIE BISHOP I understand that it’s a website some years old and that some people were  adding to the website. He’s apologised for it and now it’s a matter for Tony Abbott to be  briefed on.

JOURNALIST Do you think it’s a case that the Liberal Party needs to do more rigorous  vetting of its candidates?

JULIE BISHOP I think we do appropriate vetting. If there’s something that was in  somebody’s past comes to light and they apologise for it well then we can look at it once the  details are known but I only know what I saw in the paper.

JOURNALIST Ms Bishop, going back to a local issue here as, I guess the second most senior  member of an incoming Coalition Government, we were just wondering if you would be  throwing your support behind Townsville’s push to get a brand new tailor-made $300m super  stadium and convention centre in the CBD?

JULIE BISHOP I can understand how important this project would be for Townsville. Ewan  Jones has certainly made me very well aware of the demand for a new stadium and  entertainment complex here in Townsville.

This is an exciting part of Northern Queensland and given that the Coalition is committed to a  plan to develop Northern Queensland and the Northern Territory and Northern Western  Australia - Our Plan for the Development of Northern Australia- this would be an important  part of it.

I understand that there is a feasibility study underway and until we see the details of the  feasibility study we’re not in a position to commit. It’s not an election where we’ll be able to

make a formal commitment because the feasibility study hasn’t been concluded but I do  understand the need for it.

In fact, Ewen took me out to the North Queensland Cowboys training one day and I took a  photograph of Johnathan Thurston and he is now my screensaver! So I understand how  passionate people in this part of the world feel about their players and their need for a  stadium.

Over in Western Australia, likewise, we’re seeking to build a new stadium and looking for  Federal funding. There is a precedent for Federal Government’s to support the building of  stadiums in States around Australia and so as long as Queensland gets its fair share.

I think the feasibility study will be something that we’ll be looking at very, very closely and I  know this guy, Ewen Jones will be fighting hard for it because he hasn’t stopped talking  about it since I got in the car.

JOURNALIST Even without signing on the dotted line of the cheque is it something that the  Coalition can give in-principle support, considering all the rhetoric of developing Northern  Australia?

JULIE BISHOP This will be one of the things that we’ll look at. I can’t give a commitment  now. That would be reckless of me to do s, particularly given we know as a result of Labor’s  economic statement that was released Friday before the election was called that the budget  was $33 billion worse off than they’d admitted in May. Labor is addicted to debt and  borrowing and wasteful spending. We will have to be prudent in our expenditure.

The point I’m making is, Ewen Jones has been fighting for this and we’ll have a look at the  feasibility study but there is a precedent for the Federal Government to give funding for the  building of stadiums in other states so I think you’ll get an indication of where I stand on the  issue.

Any other questions?

Thank you.



