



Transcript

The Hon Malcolm Turnbull MP  Shadow Minister for Communications and Broadband

Wednesday 7 August 2013

Interview with Mark Dreyfus and Mark Ferguson   Channel 7 Two

Subjects: National Broadband Network and Federal Election

EO&E...........................................................................................................................................



MARK FERGUSON:  Mr Turnbull to you first. It would be cheaper to build but slower to use under the Coalition. Is that a bit  like buying a hatchback rather than a people mover?

MALCOLM TURNBULL:  Not it’s not. Look what it is, our approach is one that is genuinely cost effective. The problem with  Labor’s plan of running fibre optic cables into 93% of Australian premises is that it’s just taking far too  long. They’ve missed their June 30 targets by about 90%. At this rate it will take decades. And it’s likely  to cost, well we estimate, $94 billion. Some people think that’s conservative. And, you know, I got a good  important question for Mark Dreyfus, who’s apparently running the Labor campaign. And Mark’s a  distinguished lawyer. How does he feel about these Labor ads? Right here, here they go: ‘Under Labor’s  NBN everyone is connected for free. Labor thinks that everyone should have the NBN at no cost. Not just  those who can afford it.’ Now that’s a shocking falsehood Mark. And he’s a lawyer. You know if one of  your clients did that in the corporate world, they’d have the ACCC all over them, with a lot of very  unpleasant law enforcement personnel. Now this is outrageous. They’re telling people they’re going to get  free Internet under the Labor Party it’s shocking.

MARK DREYFUS:  I hear Malcolm trying this on this morning. And he know that the shocking falsehood is actually coming  from him…

MALCOLM TURNBULL:  Well there it is… there it is… there it is…

MARK DREYFUS:   I also hear Malcolm saying, I also hear Malcolm saying, that it’s going to cost thousands of dollars to  connect your place, your house, your business, up to the node and that’s the point. He also said that he  didn’t think many people would be interested in it. I think he’s got to think again. People know that the  NBN is about faster speeds. The Liberal Party’s got a second rate plan. They’ve had to be dragged  kicking and screaming to get to even recognition that the NBN’s the way to go. I’m actually looking  forward to the implementation of the rest of the NBN which is fibre to your house, fibre to your business  and that’s what matters.

MALCOLM TURNBULL:  Well you look like a man in good health Mark you’ll probably live to see it possibly, you may be around  in some decades but you never know. The fact is it is proceeding so slowly and what you haven’t  addressed is this literature that you are authorising all around the country which is telling lies. It is saying

MARK DREYFUS:  It is absolutely not -

MALCOLM TURNBULL:  It is saying Labor believes everyone should have the NBN at no cost. You’re saying at no cost. That’s a  lie.

MARK DREYFUS:  And Malcolm himself proved the truth of this this morning by accepting, admitting that it’s going to cost  thousands of dollars to connect your house up to this node idea that they’ve got which is thousands of  boxes on street corners around Australia.

MARK FERGUSON:  Gentleman can we move on? Can we move on to another issue?

MALCOLM TURNBULL:  No seriously we cannot allow the Attorney-General to tell lies. Everyone will be connected to the node.  Everyone will be connected to the node, that’s the whole point of our system -

MARK DREYFUS:  And then you’ve got to pay under your plan Malcolm thousands of dollars to connect up to your house  and that’s a disaster.

MALCOLM TURNBULL:  No you are really, I am shocked that the Attorney-General of Australia would be telling these terrible  falsehoods and you are not being prepared to disown your propaganda.

MARK DREYFUS:  I’m shocked to hear you say these things Malcolm and I think you need to own up to what you did this  morning which is that thousands of dollars to connect to your house up.

MALCOLM TURNBULL:  The difference between me and you Mark is that I tell the truth about our policy. It’s been published for  four months. Every detail is there. And you are allowing false statements, trying to get people to think  they’re going to get free NBN, free broadband under Labor to be published with taxpayers’ money and  it’s a disgrace and as Attorney-General you should be ashamed.

MARK DREYFUS:   The bottom line here is second rate plan from the Liberals, first rate plan from Labor. I’m looking forward  to it.

MALCOLM TURNBULL:   Well if it’s so good why do you have to lie about it?

MARK FERGUSON:  Gentlemen, plenty of passion here tonight. We’ve seen in recent days how a candidate knew the slogans  but embarrassingly didn’t know the policy details. Is that a problem on this campaign trail? Is there the  danger that it might all be about slogans for some?

MARK DREYFUS:   Well I think it’s pretty representative of the Liberal campaign, they haven’t got much policy in most areas  so it’s no surprise when their candidate for Greenway wasn’t able to explain their policy about asylum  seekers. That’s because it’s practically free of detail. But it was very embarrassing and I think they should  be thinking again about the candidate they’ve got in Greenway.

MALCOLM TURNBULL:   Well I think that’s pathetic bullying, he’s a talented young man, he’s a lawyer, he just froze up in front of  the cameras. Everyone’s done that -

MARK DREYFUS:   [Inaudible]

MALCOLM TURNBULL:   Well, you’re the Attorney-General of Australia, give the guy a few kick more kicks Mark. I mean, why  don’t you pick on someone your own size?

MARK DREYFUS:   Why did the Liberal Party Pre-select this man?

MALCOLM TURNBULL:   Have a go at a candidate who has a bit of stage fright in front of the cameras. Our border protection policy  is very well understood by all Australians. Above all, the thing they understand the best is that there was a  border protection policy left by John Howard which had stopped people smuggling. Your government  undid that and we’ve just had our 50,000th unlawful arrival. So think about it, this people smuggling  disaster is the creation of Kevin Rudd.

MARK DREYFUS:   And there’s the voice of someone that doesn’t want our change of policy to work any more than Tony  Abbott wants it to work. He said that he agreed with the arrangement that we’ve struck with Papua New  Guinea but he’s spent the past two weeks undermining it. And we’ve seen the first few indications that it  is in fact working.

MARK FERGUSON:    Malcolm Turnbull and Mark Dreyfus we’ll have to leave it there thank you very much for your time.

MARK DREYFUS:   Very good to be with you, thank you.

MALCOLM TURNBULL:   Great to be with you.



Media Contact: Jon Dart, 0457 999 879

Members of the media wishing to subscribe or unsubscribe to Coalition Campaign Media announcements please email  CoalitionMedia@chq.liberal.org.au

Authorised and printed by Brian Loughnane, Cnr Blackall and Macquarie Sts BARTON ACT 2600



