THE HON BRENDAN O’CONNOR MP  MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP

E&OE TRANSCRIPT  BREAKFAST  RN  TUESDAY, 14 MAY 2013  7.45AM

SUBJECTS: BUDGET; 457 VISA PROGRAM

FRAN KELLY:       Yesterday on the program we heard from the Migration Council of Australia about  their review of the 457 skilled migration program. This followed highly disputed claims by the  Immigration Minister, Brendan O'Connor, that 10 per cent of the scheme was being abused by  unscrupulous employers hiring foreign workers over Australians and then underpaying them.

The Migration Council says the real rate of non-compliance in the visa program is closer to just two  to four per cent. Immigration Minister Brendan O'Connor joins us now. Minister, welcome back to  Breakfast.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR:  Thanks Fran.

FRAN KELLY:       Before we get to the 457 visa issue, can I ask you about the Budget tonight. Do you  have a personal forecast on the Budget deficit?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR:  Look, today's the Treasurer's day. I won't be making any comments on the  Budget. I'm very happy to talk to you after today in relation to my portfolio, but as you say I've come  on to respond to the Migration Council of Australia's report and I'm happy to do that.

FRAN KELLY:       Nevertheless in relation to your portfolio, the Opposition says that the  Government's underestimated the blowout in your portfolio in terms of the costs of asylum seekers  by more than $5 billion. Will this be revised tonight given the recent increase in arrivals?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR:  Well let's just wait for the Treasurer to hand down the Budget and then I'm  happy to talk to you about those matters.

FRAN KELLY:       But it's clear there will be a blowout because the number of arrivals has blown out.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR:  Well as I say I'm not going to be talking to you about that issue. I'm here to  talk about the report that was commissioned by the Migration Council of Australia on a very  important scheme. One that's been subject to public debate because I think there's a real question  that we need to ensure: that is, that there are genuine shortages in the labour market if we're to use  a temporary skilled scheme.

FRAN KELLY:       Well Minister let's go to the 457 issue. Yesterday on the program we spoke with the  Migration Council of Australia's CEO Carla Wilshire. She says the real rate of non-compliance in the  457 visa program is somewhere between two to four per cent, with 85 per cent of employers and 88  per cent of visa holders satisfied with the way the program is operating. Let's have a listen.

[Excerpt]



CARLA WILSHIRE:             On the whole the program is performing well, particularly a program of its  size and its significance. And in particular when we look at both satisfaction levels for employers and  for visa holders, we see quite high results.

[End of excerpt]



FRAN KELLY:       That's Carla Wilshire from the Migration Council. Business groups have seized on  that survey, Minister, saying it debunks your claim of systemic rorts. You claim 10 per cent of the 457  scheme is being rorted.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR:  Yes.

FRAN KELLY:       Do you still stand by that?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR:  Look I do. I say that there is a significant - illegitimate uses is the term I've  used - and in fact the report that's been handed down by the Migration Council Australia accords  with the Government's view. If you look -

FRAN KELLY:       Not with your figures does it?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR:  Yes it does, and in fact honestly whilst I respect Ms Wilshire's comments and  I agree with her that it's a very important scheme and the Government's always said it's a very  significant scheme and needs to be used in a manner that will help the economy, the facts are the  data in fact doesn't reflect the narrative that's been outlined by the Migration Council and I'll go to  that.

Firstly, there is no nexus between the estimated two to four per cent and the data. But let's just look  at some of the data. Seven per cent of people are claiming that they're paid less than the people  they work next to who are local workers. That means there is seven per cent that is suggesting there  are breaches. Two per cent say that they're paid less than is allowed. And the most important and  alarming figure for me, Fran, in this report which I have to say with all due respect to Carla Wilshire,  she seemed to bury the lead, 15 per cent of employers said they had no problems whatsoever  employing locals but they just chose not to do so.

Now that to me - that is actually a higher estimate than what I was suggesting. Fifteen per cent have  suggested they have no difficulty at all in employing locals but they have not done so and they've  used this scheme.

That is not the base upon which this scheme has been constructed and that is exactly why the  Government has said we need to reform the scheme and in fact on top of that, we will happily  consider some of the recommendations by the Council which of course include extending the period  of time a person will be protected before they would, you know, have to find a job - at the moment  it's 28 days. And also - there was also a suggestion we need to look at the costs.

FRAN KELLY:       But Minister just to that statistic there, 15 per cent said they have no problem  employing local workers but have chosen not to do so. As I understand it there could be many ways  that that could be explained that are not outside the rules. For instance mining companies might be  very happy to employ local workers but it's so difficult to get the workers across to remote parts of -

BRENDAN O'CONNOR:  No they're not saying it's difficult - that’s not the point. The point is the  employers here are asked could they find local labour and they're saying they had no problem.

They're not saying they had an issue or had some barriers to local employment, they're saying  they're not even looking at local employment.

In fact if you look at the actual questionnaire it goes to whether you've got any difficulty, some  difficulty, no difficulty and 15 per cent said they had no difficulty. Am I saying that these are  deliberate regulatory breaches? I'm not. I'm saying that they are illegitimate uses in so far as they  are not fulfilling the intentions of the scheme and it's exactly why, Fran, we've sought to reform it to  say you must show a genuine requirement to bring in 457 applicants to replace the shortage that  exists.

Remember this scheme is to respond to genuine shortages. Now that in my view is - that result in  the data in fact contradicts a number of commentators and in fact confirms the Government's view  we need to reform the scheme.

FRAN KELLY:       So just to the 10 per cent that you talked about, are you saying the 10 per cent  figure, which has been reported, and maybe it's a shorthand, 10 per cent of this being rorted. You're  not talking about 10 per cent of deliberate regulatory breaches there?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR:  No, I've said all along -

FRAN KELLY:       You're just talking about general bad behaviour?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR:  Well, what I - in fact, you know, I've been watching the commentators verbal  me throughout this. I've said it is an illegitimate use insofar as it's not fulfilling the intention of this  scheme. I'm not suggesting that there's unlawful behaviour in each and every occasion. What I've  said is this is not consistent with the reason for the scheme. It's why we need to ensure that there  are regulations to enable local employees to be considered. Now, I agree -

FRAN KELLY:       [Talks over] So it's not just - to be clear, Minister, not 10 per cent of unlawful  behaviour, that's not what you were alleging?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR:  I've said that there's an illegitimate use of it, and I've said that. This report  confirms that 15 per cent do not even look to employ and say they have no problems if they did look  to employ locals. That is not the reason for this scheme's existence. It is to say if you cannot, if you're  having difficulty finding labour, you should be able to, you know, obviously seek to find that skilled  labour elsewhere. We totally agree with that. In fact, I've said there should be no caps on the  scheme. It should be, you know, based on the genuine demand of skill needs.

FRAN KELLY:       It seems to me, though, Minister, that on the one hand, yes, some of the changes  you're putting in place are supported by everyone, better compliance measures, for instance. Carla  Wilshire was very keen to back that yesterday. But you're getting these headlines for these  comments which then you walk away from.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR:  Well, I'm not - this is not my report. I've said to you that 15 per cent, in this  report, have said they don't even look to employ locals, even though they'd have no problems  employing them. That is not consistent with the intent of the scheme. That's what I'm saying.

And that 15 per cent is not even referred to in the narrative by the Migration Council of Australia,  and I think that is unfortunate because that underlines, to me, that there are employers suggesting  they only use the scheme and are not willing to contemplate employing locals when they have no  difficulty employing locals.



Now, that is not the base upon which this scheme was constructed. It's different, again - and I'm not  suggesting, Fran, if there are barriers to local employment, if there are suggestions - for example,  you referred to miners. If a mining company had difficulties because of local employment in given  areas, I understand that, and that's in perfect use. If there are people in local communities in the  regions looking to employ doctors and nurses and so on, and whether in big urban centres or small  regional towns, that's a perfectly legitimate use of a 457 and we should continue to use it in that  matter.

But what we should not do is have a temporary scheme to respond to genuine shortages and then  suggest there is no obligation whatsoever for employers to contemplate employing local people if  they're there. That's the point of the Government. This report affirms our concerns and the two to  four per cent that's referred to by Ms Wilshire has no bearing on the analysis of the report itself.

FRAN KELLY:       You're listening to RN Breakfast. Our guest this morning is the Immigration Minister  Brendan O'Connor. Minister, the two per cent that Ms Wilshire was referring to also didn't seem to  have concerned itself with the same sort of breaches that you were worried about -

BRENDAN O'CONNOR:  That's right.

FRAN KELLY:       But you did recently announce more powers for the Fair Work Ombudsman to  investigate possible reports.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR:  Yes.

FRAN KELLY:       Last year the Ombudsman dealt with only 157 complaints in relation to working  conditions.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR:  Well, I can explain that, and people know why this is. I mean, even the fact  that you've got - even though this survey was anonymous, the fact that you've got that many 457  applicants saying that - seven per cent of them saying they're not paid the same as workers working  next to them is, to me, one, shows it's well in excess of two to four per cent -

FRAN KELLY:       Can I just interrupt you there, though? They're not saying, are they, does that  necessarily mean they're being paid less than the guaranteed minimum under the scheme of  $51,000?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR:  They're being paid - as I take it, they're being paid less for the same work  than people working next to them who are local employees. That's how that is, and that, to me, is a  concern. And secondly, the fact that that's not even part of the 15 per cent of employers.

And the other thing to note too, Fran, and we're drilling down further on this data, 25 per cent of the  applicants that were, you know, filling out this survey anonymously, 25 per cent refused to answer  what they got paid. So I think it's even a greater number than the seven per cent, and the reason for  that is that there's many applicants who know that they're being exploited but are concerned about  making admissions because they're fearful of being delinked by the employer and losing their job  and being deported.

FRAN KELLY:       But, again, you're just surmising that. You don't know that.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR:  Well, I'm not surmising that seven per cent are saying they're paid less, and  I'm not surmising that 25 per cent refused, in an anonymous survey, to say how much - what they  were being paid.

FRAN KELLY:       And Minister, just finally, there is also talk of an advertising campaign coming from  the Government on your Aussie jobs first slogan. Can you tell us more about that?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR:  No, I haven't - I have no - I've not contemplated any advertising in relation to  this matter.

FRAN KELLY:       Brendan O'Connor, thank you very much for joining us on Breakfast.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR:  Thanks Fran.

FRAN KELLY:       Brendan O'Connor is the Minister for Immigration and Citizenship.

ENDS

