Australian Agenda 2 June 2013 Bob Carr

Sky News

Australian Agenda

Bob Carr

2 June 2013



Interview with Foreign Minister Bob Carr

Australian Agenda program, 2 June 2013



Peter van Onselen:  Foreign Minister Bob Carr, welcome to the program.

Bob Carr:  Pleasure to be here.

Peter van Onselen:  Can we start on this ASIO issue. At the end of the day is there a security concern here  or not?

Bob Carr:  I can't comment on matters of security, intelligence, espionage. It makes sense to have  that - to have that policy, otherwise you'd have - you'd have Ministers denying or  confirming and allowing people overseas to make assessments about what we know  and what we don't know. So I would adhere to that. I just underline that there are  some - not the best advice - but there are some things made in the 'Four Corners'  program that were simply not right.

Paul Kelly:  Let me ask a more general question here Minister. Is there a sense of concern among  governments in the west - Australia, the United States - about China's activities, the  fact that China doesn't play by the rules; that if one looks at its attitude towards  intellectual property, its attitudes towards cyber warfare in terms of what the Chinese  Government itself does, that China has got to undergo a transition here that its  international activities in a general sense are unacceptable?

Bob Carr:  Let's separate rule of law, intellectual property, from the bigger question about  maligned cyber activity. It was once said to me that China's undergoing the sort of  transition that America underwent in many respects in the 19th century when it comes  to the treatment of intellectual property: a developing country getting there fast,

Australian Agenda 2 June 2013 Bob Carr

prepared to cut corners. But gradually as it matures - in fact, rather rapidly as it  matures accepting international norms, there's evidence that this is happening with  China. And the new leadership in China and indeed their predecessors spoke about rule  of law. I think that's important. Let's deal with cyber separate from that. What we do  need - what we do need is accepted by all parties, binding international norms on  malevolent cyber activity. I might say this: when it comes to the sort of speculation  around what has happened on the cyber front, China is not the only country that's  engaged the attention of the west. And second, China points to - points to western  countries that have had fairly robust cyber activity. But what we do need to get to is a  point where you've got the sort of agreement that governs chemical weapons or  nuclear weapons and that is we won't devastate one another's systems.

Greg Sheridan:  Mr Carr though, in that answer you're displaying the Government's unwillingness to bell  the cat. The American Government will say, quite explicitly, that China is the biggest  and a massive cyber intruder, not only stealing intellectual property but acquiring the  ability to disable key American infrastructure. I asked the former British foreign -  Defence Minister about this, Liam Fox. He responded perfectly straightforwardly. The  former Australian Defence Minister, Joel Fitzgibbon says "Yes, China is the threat in  this". It seems the only Government in the western world which is either too scared of  China or believes its relationship with China is so brittle that it dare not mention China's  name is the Australian Government. So can I ask you in a straightforward way: is China  the leading cyber threat to Australia?

Bob Carr:  Greg, I'll go as far as the evidence takes me at the time. I'll go as far as the evidence  leads me. I think it's got to be said that we addressed cyber as seriously as anyone in  Australia would want it addressed in the national security white paper earlier this year.  So it's on the record that we see malevolent cyber activity as a threat to Australia.  We've elevated that. No Government in Australia has been as definitive in saying cyber  activity is a threat. I'll go as far as the evidence takes me at the time and, again, I'm  bound by that convention we stumbled across a moment ago, and that is that it's not  helpful if Ministers aware of a lot of evidence collected by our own security and  intelligence agencies start pontificating about what we know.

Greg Sheridan:  So are the Americans telling us lies when they say China...

Bob Carr:  No, no, no.



Greg Sheridan:  ...is the leading cyber hacker of western defence and security agencies?

Australian Agenda 2 June 2013 Bob Carr



Bob Carr:  Greg, when I've sat down with my American counterparts, first Hillary Clinton, then  John Kerry and with others in the American system, the two directors of the CIA I've  dealt with, cyber has been on the list and I think - I think in some of those meetings  we've galloped towards the issue faster than the Americans.

Paul Kelly:  Well, can I just ask you Minister, is it your view that China's cyber warfare tactics pose  a degree of threat to the bilateral relationship, that unless this is addressed it's got the  capacity to do damage to the Australia/China relationship?

Bob Carr:  Well, that's a speculative question. If the Chinese...

Paul Kelly:  It's a very direct question. It's a very direct question.

Bob Carr:  If the Chinese mounted cyber attacks on Australia, of course it would do damage to the  Australia/China relationship. That's common sense. But again that's speculative and  you're trying to draw me to say things about securing an intelligence that I'm really  bound by convention not to talk about.  Otherwise if that convention weren't there,  you'd have Ministers giving away to foreign players...

Paul Kelly:  Minister...

Bob Carr:  ...what we know and what we don't know.

Paul Kelly:  I think we're kidding ourselves a bit here, aren't we? I mean, we all know that China  involves itself in this form of cyber attack and I think that's a very fair question. It's not  just a speculative question at all. It's based on a reality. So let me ask you again: given  the reality are you concerned that this has got the potential to damage the bilateral  relationship?

Bob Carr:  I said a moment ago, yes, were China to be engaging - were it to be proven that  China's engaging in cyber attacks on Australian facilities, of course it would undermine,  apart from anything else undermine the trust that we want to be the foundation of the  Australia/China relationships.

Australian Agenda 2 June 2013 Bob Carr

Greg Sheridan:  So is China engaging in cyber attacks?

Bob Carr:  Well listen Greg, I said a moment ago I'm not going to talk - I can't talk about the  things we learn from our...

Greg Sheridan:  But how come the British and the American...

Bob Carr:  ...from our intelligence.

Greg Sheridan:  ...Governments can do it?

Bob Carr:  Well, you spoke about talking to a former British Minister.

Greg Sheridan:  No, when he was defence secretary.

Bob Carr:  Right. Well Greg, I can't comment on that. But I can comment on - I can explain a  convention, I can invoke a convention that protects Australian Ministers from blurting  publicly the things they learn in intelligence assessments.

Peter van Onselen:  Minister...

Bob Carr:  It strikes me as a common-sense position. If I've got ASIO and ASIS and the ONA  briefing me on a certain situation, I've got to be very wary about then doing a -  subjecting myself to the sort of searching interview you guys do and...

Peter van Onselen:  Sure but...

Bob Carr:  ...and blurting out what in the media reports about this are true or untrue.

Peter van Onselen:  Can I ask...



Australian Agenda 2 June 2013 Bob Carr

Bob Carr:  I've got to be careful about that.

Peter van Onselen:  Can I ask you this.

Bob Carr:  There's a national interest argument here.

Peter van Onselen:  Underlying some of these questions, I guess, is the notion that perhaps our robustness  of response to any potential security threat in relation to China is impinged by the  growing economic relationship we have with China. How do you react to that?

Bob Carr:  I can assure you it's not. It's not. It's not remotely compromised. And again I can say  that based on the briefings I receive, about which I cannot talk because it's a  common-sense position. But I can assure you, look at the national security white paper,  it put cyber up there as a concern in a way that no previous Government had done.

Paul Kelly:  Well, Australian Ministers such as yourself interact with your Chinese counterparts. Is  cyber warfare one of the agenda items?

Bob Carr:  Yes, it is. Yes, it is.

Paul Kelly:  It is.



Bob Carr:  And our goal...

Paul Kelly:  So in other words - so in other words this is an issue in the bilateral relationship. You've  just said that.

Bob Carr:  Yes, it is raised when we talk to the Chinese.



Paul Kelly:  How concerned are we about this item?

Australian Agenda 2 June 2013 Bob Carr

Bob Carr:  Well, again the answer to that is to venture into the territory of what I learn from our  security agencies in briefings and I can't provide a running commentary on that  because we're signalling to China, to other nations what we know and what we don't  know.

Greg Sheridan:  Mr Carr, perhaps a final question on this matter. I'm just confused that the American  Government can say this to its people, the British Government can say it to its people.  We're not asking you here to detail any detail about intelligence matters. We're simply  saying yes or no, does China engage in cyber attacks on Australian facilities? Other  Governments can say yes because it's obviously the situation. Every national security  official in Canberra will say yes off the record. But for some reason the Australian  Government is so scared that the relationship with China is so brittle that if it even  brings the Australian people into its confidence on this matter there will be a crisis.

Bob Carr:  Well, no-one can say the relationship between Australia and China is brittle. You've just  had the Chinese agree to an Australian bid for regular meetings, annual meetings  between our leadership at the highest level. And the Chinese - the Chinese promoted  the notion that we describe this as a strategic partnership, something we embraced.  Everyone acknowledged that that visit by the Prime Minister - and it was her idea, it  was her concept, she put it forward - was a great success and points to a robustness in  the Australia/China relationship...

Peter van Onselen:  But the guts of the question goes to the comparison.

Bob Carr:  And then I've got to say - well, again I've got to say to you, I'm bound by that  convention; it's a sensible convention that protects the Australian national interest. I  get briefings, as does the Prime Minister and my colleagues, on what we know about,  for example, cyber assaults on Australia. I'm not going to enter a public debate that  says - that has me saying yes or no to questions about where it's coming from or what  it's done.

Peter van Onselen:  Okay, I'm sure we'll move on...





Bob Carr:

Australian Agenda 2 June 2013 Bob Carr

What I've got to say, I've got to underline again the Prime Minister said there were  things alleged in that 'Four Corners' report that might have disturbed people that are  simply untrue.

Peter van Onselen:  But the guts of the question that came from Greg Sheridan, what is the reason for a  cultural difference in Australia about not talking about it because of convention, as you  put it, versus in the United States and Britain? Is that because we're a middle power  and they're not?

Bob Carr:  Well, we are a middle power. But I'm not saying that that is the key to this. I believe  our response to the threat of cyber has been - has been very, very strong. A white  paper elevated it as a threat to Australian security in a way that had never happened  before.

Paul Kelly:  But do we see any sign whatsoever that China is responding to our concerns?

Bob Carr:  I believe that all the world community will have to arrive at this landing spot, that  unless we're prepared to run the risk that cyber activity - cyber assaults from Iran,  from North Korea, from anyone can be allowed to demolish the banking system, cripple  a country by taking out its banking system or do other substantial damage, looting  intellectual property for example as you referred to a moment ago, we need to  entrench in international agreements the sort of norms that label us - that minimise  this risk as treaties and minimise the risk of nuclear warfare and chemical warfare. This  is a threat. We recognise it as a threat and we need to get to a situation where the  world entrenches in treaty form conventions on how we approach it.

Paul Kelly:  If we just move to Syria, this is clearly the major humanitarian and political crisis in the  world today. Your assessment of the situation that seems to be an entrenched  stalemate, is there any particular way forward from here as far as you're concerned?

Bob Carr:  Certainly there's been, according to reports - all reports, an entrenchment, a  strengthening of the Assad position. They've strategically concentrated on the  Damascus/Aleppo corridor, they're being rearmed by Russia, by Iran. And the third  ingredient is that they've got Hezbollah fighting for them, moving its forces from  Lebanon to fight in Qusayr and I believe around Damascus in support of the regime.  This means a long war of attrition. It raises for the west the question of military  support for the opposition forces on the defensive as they appear to be, and divided as

Australian Agenda 2 June 2013 Bob Carr

they may be and compromises as may be by the existence fighting alongside them -  fighting alongside the Free Syrian Army of extremist elements.

Greg Sheridan:  Mr Carr, we're moving towards hopefully a peace conference in Syria...

Bob Carr:  Yes.

Greg Sheridan:  Do you think the west is being unrealistic in its demand that Assad must go - as a  precondition that the Syrian President Bashar al-Assad must leave office as a  precondition at that peace conference.

Bob Carr:  Well in Baalbek, talking to the Baalbekian in Lebanon, talking to refugees, hearing of  their experiences, weighed down by the stories they told me, one woman who spoke  about crossing the border overnight, with everything behind her. She lost her husband,  their cows, their home, their car, lost everything. And she's got younger children.  They're living in a box in effect, and the kids are crying because they've lost their  home, they've suffered trauma and their kids can't go to school, even night school. I  formed the view that anything's got to be better than this drawn-out humanitarian  catastrophe. You just look at some of those figures. By the end of the year it's said that  of the 22 million people of Syria, 9 million will have had their homes destroyed. An  observer looking at this from Mars would see a country on the planet surface where the  Government is setting out systematically to demolish the housing stock of its  population. In addition to those who fled over the borders, including those refugees  from Qusayr, there are numerous, numberless Syrian families crowded into the  apartments, the homes of neighbours, friends, anybody. And this is - and I'll just  complete this Peter, by the end of the year Lebanon, poor suffering Lebanon and  Jordan and Turkey as well, but Lebanon and Jordan will be hosting refugee populations  equivalent to one third of their population. And a final point as a measure of the  humanitarian disaster, if fighting intensifies around Damascus, I was told by two  politicians in Lebanon, intensification of fighting around Damascus, so close to the  Lebanese border you could have half a million, the others said one million Syrian  refugees simply present at the border.

Greg Sheridan:  So on the question of Assad?

Bob Carr:  On Assad - I'm setting the scene but on Assad I would say if - if he can bring the two  parties to a ceasefire and to talks about a peaceful political transition leave Assad  there, I would stick him - if it were to end the suffering of these millions of Syrians I'd

Australian Agenda 2 June 2013 Bob Carr

stick him in a gilded palace with peacocks strutting on the lawn to see the refugee flow,  the destruction of housing, the wounding and torture of men, women and children, the  murdering of prisoners, the mass atrocities came to an end.

Peter van Onselen:  Is that realistic though, for him to in a sense remain and a ceasefire to be possible?

Bob Carr:  I'm not advocating it but I'm saying, if you need - if you need a shift in the western  position to get Russia to bring Assad to the conference table, accept that he should be  there for the start if not for the finish of that process, and therefore if you can say at  the end of the process he'll no longer be President but Ba'athist elements, his allies will  be part of the Government, a coalition Government taking their chances in facing the  Syrian people at an election, push him out on the side, as I said, install him in a gilded  palace somewhere on the earth.

Paul Kelly:  But is there any support...

Bob Carr:  The overwhelming priority, just bring an end to the suffering of these people.

Paul Kelly:  Sure, sure. I mean, I know you've tried to separate the humanitarian and political  dimensions in this crisis.

Bob Carr:  With a colossal lack of success I've got to say.

Paul Kelly:  Sure.

Bob Carr:  This has been a lesson for me in international relations.

Paul Kelly:  In terms...

Bob Carr:  I put the proposition for a medical pact, to get medicine into the country and doctors  and nurses protected in the country, I've raised it with secretaries of state, foreign  ministers, Ban Ki-moon and others at the UN. It's gone nowhere.



Australian Agenda 2 June 2013 Bob Carr

Paul Kelly:  But in terms of what you've just said - in terms of what you've just said which is that  maybe we ought to look at leaving Assad in place, surely there's not much support for  that from the United States or from the Europeans, or have I got that wrong?

Bob Carr:  No, you are right. There has been - there has been some suggestion of America  acknowledging the position that he could be there at the start of the process but not at  the end.

Peter van Onselen:  Can you see that grow, that American position?

Bob Carr:  Well, the key, Peter, is to get Russia - get Russia to talks in Geneva and beyond that to  get Russia to deliver Assad - if anyone can it is Russia - to a process - a process under  a ceasefire of political transition within the country. To have that transitional authority  with full executive powers, if the country moves towards agreement on a new  constitution and elections under that constitution with the Ba'athist party of President  Assad agreeing to take its chances at a free and democratic election within the ruins of  this devastated nation state.

Greg Sheridan:  Mr Carr, the other big question has been arming the opposition, and I think you've  given us a very eloquent ambivalence about this which I must say strikes me as  immensely sensible. Isn't there a tremendous danger that if the west starts arming the  opposition these arms will fall into Al Qaeda hands, they could be used by anybody?  What's your view at the moment of the state of play of this question?

Bob Carr:  Our position can be expressed as a serious reservation about arming the opposition,  and indeed William Hague said that as part of his statement. He said there's no  immediate plan to do that, and like all my best lines, Greg, what you're giving me credit  for was stolen, was plagiarised. It was a very worldly and charming Arab Foreign  Minister who said "Arm the opposition".  He said "If you can give me the CV, the names  and addresses of the people who are going to end up carrying the arms, it's something  I'll look at".

Paul Kelly:  So what you're saying is you're concerned about the risks and dangers involved in  arming the opposition.





Australian Agenda 2 June 2013 Bob Carr

Bob Carr:  Indeed. It seems, the evidence we've got, that Al Nasra - effectively, I think, Al Qaeda  has grown stronger under the opposition umbrella or in alliance with the opposition as  fighting has gone on. And in the turmoil that is Syria there seems a little doubt that  they will end up with a share of the weaponry that would be released into the country.  And I think it's very sensible for William Hague to say that there are no immediate  plans to get arms to the opposition and I know that's disappointing to the democratic  and secularist and out elements in the Syrian opposition, committed to a pluralist  future, a multi-faith future for their country, but the regrets we would have if weaponry  we supplied ended up with Al Nasra would be profound.

Peter van Onselen:  Bob Carr, can I ask you, you're a wily political veteran from way back. You're focussed  on foreign affairs now, but as NSW Premier, as frustrated as you might have been you  had a deal with your Opposition counterpart and they pulled out. Given where public  opinion stands, surely you can see that the Prime Minister expressing that frustration  about Tony Abbott and trying to paint him as someone who can't be trusted, on an  issue where he's back-flipped right into the meaty part of where public opinion sits, is  not a political tactic that she can win.

Bob Carr:  Yeah, except for this Peter: just consider that the public reservation about Tony Abbott  is we don't know what he would do were he to become Prime Minister.

Peter van Onselen:  Well, they now know he would do what they want, because he's gone in their direction.

Bob Carr:  Take the broader question though. We know he wants $70 billion in cuts. We don't  know how he's going to achieve them. No-one knows that. And he's just demonstrated  here that he can backflip out of a commitment very, very quickly.

Peter van Onselen:  If the public don't like it, that seems to be the message.

Bob Carr:  I think the public is going to say "We had reservations about what you were going to  do in Government anyway. Now we've got deeper reservations".

Paul Kelly:  We've had a very big debate about racism in this country over the course of the last  week with a lot of emphasis on what's called casual racism. I'm just wondering how big  a problem do you think this is, and as Foreign Minister is Australia seen as a racist  country?

Australian Agenda 2 June 2013 Bob Carr



Bob Carr:  I think - I think without it being an active impression of Australia there are people  around the world who would think we're very much a European, a whitey readout. But  I don't think - I honestly don't think we've got more to be jumpy or edgy or anxious  about than other countries. But what's striking to me is that when we brought UN  ambassadors from various countries down to see Australia in the lead-up to that  Security Council ballot that we won so handsomely, they were struck by the  multiculturalism of Australia. They didn't expect to see such an ethnically and culturally  diverse place. It surprised them, which suggests they've got old-fashioned - an  old-fashioned view about Australia being an outpost of the British Empire. This sort of  thing I don't think gets an echo overseas. I think we've got to be very careful about  racial jokes. I think - and stereotypes. I think if you look at the history of racism, if you  go to the various holocaust museums around the world you can see that German  anti-Semitism was - I'm not drawing a comparison between what happened here and  something as monstrous as what I'm talking about now, but I was just struck by all of  my visits to these museums by how German anti-Semitism in the '30s and being fed by  racial stereotypes and jokes about Jews back in the '20s and earlier, we've got to be  very careful about...

Greg Sheridan:  But Mr Carr, on this question of casual racism though, aren't we in danger of getting  into a kind of overwrought hysterical kind of political correctness? My sons routinely kid  me about the dumbness of Irish people, you know, "Hear about the Irish man who  drowned trying to do the river dance?". For goodness sake, if I was to regard that as a  serious example of racism; I also know from my sons that kids at school joke with each  other in racial terms hilariously all the time. Isn't there a danger that we're going to get  to this kind of overwrought...

Bob Carr:  Yeah, none of us want the thought police bearing down on us. If I were - if I were an  indigenous Australian though, I'd feel a bit sensitive to what was said here. I think -  let's just absorb the lesson of this. Let's just absorb the lesson of this. Acknowledge the  sensitivity of people who have been subject to racist taunts for a long time, absorb the  lessons and move on. I think that's the best advice. Look, for example an Aboriginal  colleague of mine, Linda Burney, State Parliament - I recruited her for the parliament -  said once that when she was a little girl growing up in a country town in NSW a white  woman looked her in the eye and said "You're trash, you will never amount to  anything". The fact that she remembers it all these decades later shows how deeply it  hurt her. I think we can be a bit alive to the impact casual references can have on  youngsters while taking into account Greg's point that by over-focusing on it we can  make it worse all round.



Australian Agenda 2 June 2013 Bob Carr

Paul Kelly:  Can I just check Minister, will you serve out your current Senate term?

Bob Carr:  I'm looking at the term after that. I'm going to beat Strom Thurmond.

Paul Kelly:  So you will seek a second term as well as completing the current term?

Bob Carr:  And a third.

Paul Kelly:  No, sorry, will you complete the current term?

Bob Carr:  Yes.

Paul Kelly:  And will you seek another term, because I think you indicated you would at the press  conference with Julia Gillard when your appointment was announced.

Bob Carr:  Yes, that's right. That's right, I did, very eloquently and I'm glad you remember.

Paul Kelly:  But you didn't answer the question. Will you seek a second term as you indicated then  you would?

Bob Carr:  Yes, yes.

Paul Kelly:  You will?

Bob Carr:  A second term, you mean one after - a term after the one that I'm going to be elected  to, I hope is number one on the party ticket, on September 14, one after that?

Paul Kelly:  That's right.

Bob Carr:  Six years, seven years beyond that?

Australian Agenda 2 June 2013 Bob Carr



Paul Kelly:  That's right.

Bob Carr:  Yeah, and then I'm going to keep seeking them.

Paul Kelly:  Are you serious or not serious?

Bob Carr:  I'm as serious as the question warrants.

Paul Kelly:  No, no, no, well, what I'd like to ask you...

Bob Carr:  I said yes. I said yes in block letters.

Paul Kelly:  Is there a deal that Sam Dastyari, the NSW...

Bob Carr:  No, emphatically not.

Paul Kelly:  ...Secretary takes your Senate place?

Bob Carr:  No, emphatically not.

Paul Kelly:  Has no deal.

Bob Carr:  There is absolutely not. Absolutely...

Paul Kelly:  So he won't take your Senate place?

Bob Carr:  ...not. Absolutely not. And let me say this. He is one of the most talented - talented  young leaders I've encountered in the Labor Party or anywhere else but I think we're  all saying to him in the Labor Party we want a long-term general secretary. And by the

Australian Agenda 2 June 2013 Bob Carr

way there's more clout, more power, more prestige, more influence in being a  long-term authoritative general secretary in the NSW ALP, rebuilding the party at the  state level, consolidating the upset win we're going to enjoy on September the 14th  federally, there's more clout in doing that than being just another one of those former  party secretaries, Liberal or Labor, who ends up sitting in the Senate. We've got to get  beyond that cliche.

Peter van Onselen:  Can I ask you on that though, Senator, so there's no deal emphatically. What about  discussions?

Bob Carr:  No, no.

Peter van Onselen:  Have you and he at least had informal discussions?

Bob Carr:  I saw Simon Benson's report and Simon Benson's a very penetrating journalist with a  lot of contacts. No, it is - it's simply wrong. There were no such - there have not been  such discussions and we want Sam Dastyari, who we all see as a great asset for NSW  Labor, to be a long-term serious contributor to state and national Labor Party politics  because he's got the talent to do it. I don't want to see his talent wasted by him  becoming another party secretary serving in the Senate because the Liberal Party and  the Labor Party have been doing that to the point where it's a bit of a political cliche, a  cliche - a political career.

Peter van Onselen:  Can I just go back to Syria for a moment while we've got time on this. You were talking  about the idea that the west might need to in a sense accept that Assad may have  some role, albeit diminished, if they want to...

Bob Carr:  At least at the start.

Peter van Onselen:  At least at the start of some process towards a ceasefire. Do chemical weapons come  into this equation because obviously there's a lot of discussion about whether he has  stored chemical weapons, indeed has access to them and what it might mean to those  stores if some of the rebel forces were to get hold of them. Is that an issue as far as  this equation?





Australian Agenda 2 June 2013 Bob Carr

Bob Carr:  Well, there's been well-publicised intelligence that points to the possibility that chemical  weapons were used. I think it's fair to say it's not conclusive, and as a wily journalist in  Beirut pointed out to me a week and a half ago, you'd expect to see footage of Assad  forces with gasmasks if they were using chemical weapons, and there have been no  reports of that. So I think we're entitled to look searchingly at the evidence of this. I  think the world would be horrified if shells containing chemical weapons were being  lobbed into opposition forces or into population centres and it would represent some  kind of red line, as the President has said. But we're a long way - it strikes me we're  somewhat short of that kind of evidence.

Greg Sheridan:  Mr Carr, could I ask you a broader question about the Middle East. It seems to me that  one of the great unremarked historic tectonic plate shifts and tragedies of the Middle  East is the effective cleansing of the great historic Christian communities out of the  Middle East. The Christian communities now across North Africa and across the Arab  Middle East in Iran and in Turkey are tiny minuscule shadows of their former selves.  The same really in Lebanon. How do you think minorities are faring in the Middle East  and is this an issue which exercises you?

Bob Carr:  Yeah very much so. In fact, coincidentally after this I'm going to worship with the  Coptic community in Arncliffe in Sydney. I've maintained contacts with them, with the  Armenians and with other Christian groups throughout the Middle East and indeed -  and we should use the term 'other minorities' - in Jordan in the middle of last year I  was able to convene a meeting of a range of confessional groups. And we spoke  about - we spoke about a Middle East where groups have lived as they did in Jordan at  peace together, where an Arab would have responsibility for managing the keys to the  Holy Sepulchre in Jerusalem because the quarreling Christian sects could not be trusted  to treat one another fairly when it came to access to this most holy of Christian sites. A  Christian said to me - a Jordanian Christian said to me - you said religious - "In  religious terms I'm a Christian, but culturally I'm a Muslim". You had in other words  this, what King Abdullah has referred to as an overlap of cultures in the Middle East. So  we've got to think about this huge process of - I think it's fair to say, a basically Sunni  Arab spring, or Arab awakening and how it treats minorities. I made representations  when I met President Morsi for example on behalf of the Coptic minority in Egypt.  We've got to maintain this vision of a culturally and religiously pluralistic Middle East.

Greg Sheridan:  It's not treating minorities too well at the moment.

Bob Carr:  No, it isn't and President Morsi gave me an encouraging answer. He said "I want to be  President of all the Egyptians". He said "I don't want to head a theocratic state". I think

Australian Agenda 2 June 2013 Bob Carr

one of the tragic effects of the 1979 revolution in Iran has been an absolutist or a  purist view of this region's religious future. Instead of an acceptance of all that  diversity, that splendid cultural diversity that was once a feature of life in the Middle  East, you've got a cleansing purifying frenzy. And that I should quickly add mistreats  Islamic minorities and non-Christian minorities, Kurds, Alawites, potentially.

Greg Sheridan:  The Druze.

Bob Carr:  The Druze as it threatens - well, there were once robust Jewish communities in these  lands and still a Jewish population in some of them. I visited a little synagogue I think -  I think for a long time abandoned in the heart of Cairo, a reminder of this.

Greg Sheridan:  Can I ask you one question about our region. The Malaysian election recently, a lot of  hysterical comment in Australia, not least by Senator Nick Xenophon that Malaysia is a  dictatorship and Anwar Ibrahim was the Nelson Mandela of Southeast Asia. Do you  regard the Malaysian elections as credible and do you regard the Malaysian  Government as a credible Government for you to deal with in its re-elected form?

Bob Carr:  They certainly are a credible Government. I rang my friend Foreign Minister Anifah only  on Friday to congratulate him and to say I look forward to working with him at Brunei  at the East Asia Summit and in other forums, but they were the Malaysian elections. As  I said in the Senate talking to - answering a question from Senator Xenophon, we're  not the Electoral Commission for Malaysia and we can't be, making decisions about the  fairness or unfairness of its distribution. And we're not the Court of Disputed Returns,  able to make a determination whether someone with ink on their fingers after voting is  capable of making another vote or not. We can't get into these things. These were  Malaysian elections conducted under rules different from those Australians would  understand, but the Government - we simply cannot drive ourselves into what are the  domestic affairs of a country with which we enjoy friendly relations. The Malaysian  people themselves will make decisions in the future about the rules under which their  elections will be conducted and Australia won't have a role in that.

Peter van Onselen:  Can I ask you about this idea of turning boats around that Tony Abbott has talked  about. The Indonesian ambassador to Australia has expressed more doubts during the  week about the likelihood of that actually being able to happen. Do you see any  circumstances under which an elected Abbott Government would be able to turn boats  around to Indonesia with the agreement of the Indonesian Government, because that's  what it would take for it to happen?

Australian Agenda 2 June 2013 Bob Carr

Bob Carr:  Yes, it would, but Tony Abbott is playing with fire here. The Australian/Indonesian  relationship is in good working order. Our Prime Minister has a superb working  relationship with President Yudhoyono who takes relations with Australia very, very  seriously. Our biggest embassy, our biggest aid program, high level of cooperation on  account of terrorism and police work. As the Indonesians see it, they're a transient  country and people are drawn to Australia, they pick up people smugglers in  Indonesian ports and they regard it as profoundly unfair that some Australian  Government will say "Well, this is your problem, the boats are going back". Even if that  could be done how do you force them to go back without putting at risk the lives of the  Australian law enforcement agencies on the high seas? This is really high risk stuff and  I think again the reliability or otherwise of Tony Abbott, he seems to be beating a  retreat from it and saying "return them if possible, if safe". So the broadbrush promise  delivered to Liberal audiences "We will return the boats" becomes a muted offer to  return them "if possible, if safe". Again the unreliability of the Abbott broadbrush  message.

Peter van Onselen:  Senator, can I ask you about the aid budget now. All elements of the budget have  come under pressure obviously in the last budget round. Aid hasn't been exempt from  that. In fact, some of our aid budget is being used to pay for asylum seeker costs. Is  this appropriate?

Bob Carr:  Yes, it is. But it has been capped. Wayne Swan responded to representations I made  and the aid community made so that 374 million that goes to look after asylum seekers  on Australian soil, that could just as legitimately be used to look after them in refugee  camps in Jordan or Afghanistan, but spending on Australian soil is capped. And the aid  community welcomed that.

Peter van Onselen:  Why is the cap important?

Bob Carr:  Because we didn't want more of the - the money that's going for programs for  maternity or programs to get rid of avoidable blindness or programs to get rid of polio  from the world to be going on support of asylum seekers or refugees in general. But  the aid budget has gone up and it is an instrument of Australian foreign policy. If I'm  ever challenged about what is a generous aid budget, one that was increased I think by  7% in the last budget, despite all the pressures, I say we do it because, one, it's the  right thing to do, that we should be providing blankets and tents for those desperate  refugees I spoke about, doing so through reliable international agencies, UN agencies  and others, Red Cross. And second - we do it because it's the right thing and, second,  we do it because it's in Australia's interest.

Australian Agenda 2 June 2013 Bob Carr



Peter van Onselen:  Can I just ask generally - sorry to interrupt - but is there a problem with the political  rhetoric of this idea of cuts in Australia, and both sides are to be held accountable for  it, because on the one hand Tony Abbott gets accused of cutting the health budget  when he was Health Minister; in fact, he just reduced the size of the increase. We're  talking about the same sort of thing here with aid, indeed with higher education. Does  political rhetoric need to take stock of this, do you think, going forward?

Bob Carr:  Yeah, I was relieved, I've got to say, with how many people out there, as advocates for  aid - they're wonderful people, I welcome their support - I was pleasantly surprised by  how many of them acknowledged that despite a bit of rhetoric about cuts to aid it was  going up, going up rather steeply. Again I think it's 7%, but not quite at the trajectory  that would have got us to 0.5% of gross national investment when we hoped to get it  there. I think most people in the aid community acknowledge that there were, in fact,  increases. But it is annoying when people talk about cuts but they really mean the  trajectory of growth is not going to be as ambitious as we contemplated when  Australian Government expenditure was growing fast.

Greg Sheridan:  Mr Carr, I thoroughly acknowledge that you're increasing the aid budget. In fact, I  would say you're increasing it way too much and there's a huge literature  internationally about how ineffective it is in the long term. But how is it that the overall  department, budget for Australian diplomacy is so pathetically low? We run a foreign  service about the size of Slovenia. We run the smallest per capita foreign service of any  OECD country in the world. The Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade is smaller  today than either the Department of Foreign Affairs or the Department of Trade were  when they were amalgamated in 1986, yet their consular workload has increased by  hundreds and hundreds of per cent. The embassy in Beijing has not had an increase in  resources in 12 years. This budget, we closed another embassy, Budapest. We have a  smaller public diplomacy budget in Indonesia than Germany, France or Britain do. We  have a smaller Asian diplomatic representation than Germany France or Britain do, and  yet we claim this is our core business. Isn't this a case where your Government, like the  two Governments before it, has neglected a core national interest responsibility  because it's not sexy to give money to diplomats?

Bob Carr:  No, our budget was increased. Our spending was increased in the last budget. That's  why we're able to build a secure embassy building in Nairobi, open an embassy in  Senegal, open the consulate in Chengdu which I'm going to cut the ribbon on shortly,  thus expanding our footprint in China. But there are - there has been a period of  restraint in government expenditure. I'm going to wield you into the Expenditure  Review Committee where you can add force to my arguments. Obviously I as a

Australian Agenda 2 June 2013 Bob Carr

spending Minister want to be able to increase it further. I've got to say, I'm not - I'm  inclined to reject your arguments. I'll get further details on our representation through  Asia. I think I've been to eight or nine out of the 10 ASEAN countries. We're not  understaffed there. And Europeans beat a path to our embassy in Jakarta to get  insights and to use our language skills...

Greg Sheridan:  We have fewer consulates in China than Britain or France or Germany.

Bob Carr:  Our representation throughout Asia is stronger than those European nations...

Greg Sheridan:  It's not. Not in numbers.

Bob Carr:  Okay, well, I'll interrogate that. But all nations are beating a retreat when it comes to  budgetary pressures.

Greg Sheridan:  The US and Britain are expanding in Asia, in numbers.

Bob Carr:  Yeah, I'd - let's discuss that further. Well, we simply live with pressures on budgets. I  think - I think the restraint - I don't like to see an embassy close. We're closing one in  Budapest, the workload was pretty modest. If we've got to close one, sadly, closing  that one was the one to do. There's force in your argument. I don't think this process  can be carried much further. I'm not aware that our embassies are short of staff. My  impression is that they're properly staffed.

Paul Kelly:  This Government has launched a massive political campaign against foreign workers on  457 visas, claiming that the system is riddled with abuse. Independent studies suggest  this is wrong. As Foreign Minister what's your feeling about this issue? Are you  comfortable with this campaign?

Bob Carr:  No, I've been quite persuaded by the argument of my colleague, the Minister for  Immigration, that this is a matter of tackling abuses and when cabinet colleagues have  spoken about this, I think they've been quite convincing in referring to pockets of the  economy where this has been abused. We want employers to make a decision to go for  Australian workers, where they're available, and to go to foreign workers where that's  necessary to have the project go ahead. I think most Australians would see that as a  common-sense position.

Australian Agenda 2 June 2013 Bob Carr



Peter van Onselen:  We are right out of time. Senator Bob Carr, we appreciate you joining us on Australian  Agenda. A lot more we could talk about on 457s; maybe we'll get you back for a whole  show on that. Appreciate Greg Sheridan joining us as well, as well as Paul Kelly. Thank  you very much for your company. We'll see you at the same time next week.

