THE HON BRENDAN O’CONNOR MP  MINISTER FOR HOUSING  MINISTER FOR HOMELESSNESS  MINISTER FOR SMALL BUSINESS

E&OE TRANSCRIPT  ABC24  SATURDAY, 2 FEBRUARY 2013  T4.10PM

SUBJECT: CABINET RESHUFFLE

HOST: Brendan O'Connor, welcome to ABC News 24. Your new portfolio is regarded as one of the  most difficult in Government. Is it congratulations?

BRENDAN O’CONNOR: It is always an honour and great privilege to serve a Labor Government and to  be a Cabinet Minister in any Australian Government. There's no doubt this can be a challenging  portfolio but sometimes I think people forget the breadth of the portfolio. This country was built on  immigration. It's made this nation a great success. I'm a migrant myself, came here when I was a  young boy with a family that wanted to have an opportunity in life and have an opportunity for their  children and I feel that I'm a great beneficiary of our immigration policies of years gone past. As I  say, it is a great honour and it will be challenging.

HOST: When did you hear from the Prime Minister and was there any hesitation in accepting the  job?

BRENDAN O’CONNOR: Look, the Prime Minister makes these decisions. I'm always happy to serve. I  think it is the prerogative of the Prime Minister to determine the portfolios of her Cabinet and she  asked me to take on this role. I felt honoured that she had the confidence in me to do so. As such, I'll  be sworn in on Monday with the rest of my colleagues.

HOST: You've had some experience with the asylum seeker part of your portfolio as Home Affairs  Minister. Today, the day it’s announced you've got this job, there's been a transfer of asylum seekers  to Manus Island, the news that the first permanent facility has been built on Nauru and another 60  people arrived by boat. Do you accept there's still more work to do to achieve the Government's aim  of deterring people coming by boat?

BRENDAN O’CONNOR: Absolutely. Our primary concern is we do not want to see further people lose  their lives at sea. When I was Minister for Home Affairs and Justice I saw too much of that and I will  be working with Minister Claire to reduce the chances of that happening. I would like to pay tribute  to Minister Bowen for what has been a very difficult time for him. He has put in place very important  initiatives arising out of the Eminent Person's Report, the Houston Report. Not all of that has been  done for parliamentary reasons. We know the composition of the Parliament has not allowed us to  do it all. What we have now got in place are the fundamentals that can see a reduction of people  getting on unseaworthy vessels on perilous journeys. That’s what we do not want to see happen and  we continue to work on ways how we can fix that.

HOST: .This is an issue in which the Opposition puts in amongst its top priority. How important is it to  get it right in an election year?

BRENDAN O’CONNOR: It is an important area. Nobody in this country wants to see people perish at  sea. Nobody wants to see people getting around the system. Having said that, we also are a  generous nation and we believe as signatories to the Refugee Convention we have an obligation like

other countries, like the United States, Canada and Europe to assist people. We need to get the  balance right. Let’s remember, we are one of all other first world nations that deal with this  problem. The scale of this problem is much greater for many other countries. That's not to say we  don't have some challenges here.

What I wouldn't like to see is people distort what's going on here for political purposes. What I  would not like to see is people use the deaths of people at sea for political purposes. I don't think  people want to do that. I will extend the hand of bipartisanship, if you like, to the Shadow Minister  Scott Morrison. I would like to see us work more closely together on these issues and see if we can  solve these problems.

The one thing I'm sure of is that Australians are sick to death of seeing politicians argue over these  matters. We should be able to find a consensus because this is about people's lives and we've an  obligation to do what we can to ensure that.

HOST: It’s been a tumultuous start to what is an election year, including the arrest of Craig Thomson,  the Prime Minister announcing the election date nearly eight months out from the elections. Today  you've lost two Cabinet ministers, losing a fair degree of experience that goes on with that. The  Prime Minister says she wants to get on with the governing. Does this have the perception of some  instability ahead of being able to get on with the governing?

BRENDAN O’CONNOR: Maybe some perception. My view is that this is a natural progression in any  Government. You have people moving on for personal reasons. I'm glad to say in the case of both  Senator Evans and Nicola Roxon, you've had some fine examples of Labor ministers doing great  work, but also people will now be filling their portfolios who are also very, very capable. Chris Bowen  has already shown his capacity for hard work and working through complex issues and he'll do very  well. Of course, Mark Dreyfus, a Queen's Counsel and indeed someone who has been sitting around  the Cabinet table for some time, as Cabinet Secretary, is a very appropriate person to be Attorney-General of this nation.

HOST: What's the task for the Government? Is it as the Prime Minister said,getting on with the  government and trying to ensure there are no more resignations, no more distractions?

BRENDAN O’CONNOR: As the Prime Minister made clear, she was aware of the decisions of Ms  Roxon and Senator Evans some time ago. Obviously we wanted to get these things sorted for the  beginning of the year. That's been done.

There can be things that might arise - some that are unforeseeable - but we are going into this year  very confident that we can show the Australian people that we have a good Government and we  make important decisions in the interests of all Australians. That we focus on the things that matter  whether it is education, health, and those other matters that matter so much to people. I think we  can show that and I think if we just get about governing and doing our work, I think Tony Abbott's -  the paucity of his policies will be exposed for all to see.

HOST: .Brendan O'Connor, thank you very much for your time.

BRENDAN O’CONNOR: Thank you very much, Lyndal.

ENDS

