

THE HON RICHARD MARLES MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND  BORDER PROTECTION  MEMBER FOR CORIO  E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW  ABC NEWS RADIO WITH MARIUS BENSON  FRIDAY, 8 NOVEMBER 2013  Subjects: Government’s relationships with Indonesia, asylum seekers.

Host: Australia’s already tense relations with Indonesia may be facing a new test  with reports that an Australian ship is now trying to return 56 asylum seekers to  Indonesia. The asylum seekers were reportedly rescued from a wooden boat in  Indonesia’s search and rescue zone. There are conflicting reports over the  incident. The Immigration Minister has provided no information beyond a  statement saying “Australian authorities are liaising with the Indonesian  counterparts in relation to a vessel that’s requested assistance”. Richard Marles is  the Shadow Immigration Minister, he’s speaking here to Marius Benson.  Benson: Richard Marles, there are really no details about the operation that’s  been conducted in Indonesian waters but the Immigration Minister says that the  Australian authorities are helping Indonesian officials with an asylum seeker boat  rescue. From that little information is that appropriate?  Marles: Well it’s certainly not appropriate Marius. The point here is that it  appears as though HMAS Ballarat may have been involved in assisting an asylum  seeker vessel, it’s possible under some other reports that a customs vessel may  be involved but it’s hard to know. But what information we first received about  this was from the Indonesian authorities. Now the idea that the Australian media  first learns from Indonesian authorities about the participation of an Australian  Navy vessel and other Australian assets in an asylum seeker rescue is completely  inappropriate. I mean this just highlights how preposterous this information  management program is being undertaken by Mr Morrison really is. We ought to  be knowing straight away exactly what involvement Australian assets have had  in any asylum seeker vessel intervention and we ought to know that straight  away.  Benson: It is a bit of a guessing game because of that lack of information that  the impression is that Australia is negotiating with Indonesia to return to  Indonesia these people who are picked up in Indonesian waters is that the  proper cause of action, if that is the case?

Marles: Well it is appropriate that the Australian government works where it co-operates with the Indonesian government when it comes to dealing with asylum  seeker issues and asylum seeker vessels and that was of course the course that  Labor undertook when we were in government. It’s what ought to be happening  between the Abbott government and the Indonesian government now. The  concern from an Australian point of view and from our own national interests  point of view is the way in which the Abbott government has sought to dictate  terms to the Indonesian government since coming into office around this issue.  It’s not good enough to simply tell Indonesia how it’s going to be. It is  appropriate that there is a negotiation with Indonesia given that there needs to  be co-operation on the high sea about how to deal with vessels of this kind.  Benson: And is it appropriate that people who are picked up in Indonesian  waters go back to Indonesia?  Marles: Well that’s a matter for negotiation between the Australian government  and the Indonesian government and ultimately that’s going to be a matter for  both governments to sort through. Our point always was that this needed to be  done in a respectful way between Australia and Indonesia, I mean the way in  which we take Australia off the table and the way in which we discourage vessels  landing in Indonesia and coming to Christmas Island in the first place is through  the PNG arrangement, that has been the game changer and that has been the  public policy which has been a significant decline in the number of boats leaving  Indonesia in the first place. That of course was put in place by Labor but there is  a point of needing to work co-operatively with Indonesia and doing that in the  respectful way and to this point in time that’s not what we’ve seen from the  Abbott government. So what we really need to see is that and we also need to  see a culture of transparency rather than a culture of secrecy when it comes to  managing information about the involvement of Australian assets and Australian  Navy vessels in border protection.  Benson: More broadly, do you think the evidence is that the Coalition approach  incorporating the PNG approach that Labor introduced is working?  Marles: Well the Coalition doesn’t really have an approach other than bells and  whistles, changing language, doing weekly press conferences, that’s all that  occurred. If you look at the most important change in the way in which Australia  has gone about doing the issue it has been through the PNG arrangement which  was implemented by the then Rudd government. That is what has actually  changed the flow of boasts from Indonesia. Tony Abbott went to the last election  with a central policy of turning the boats back, of going to and buying fishing  vessels from Indonesia, as far as we know no boats have been bought and as far  as we know no boats have been turned back, But the flow of boats has seriously  declined and that’s because of the PNG arrangement.  Benson: Richard Marles, thanks very much.  Marles: Thank you Marius.  ENDS  FRIDAY, 8 NOVEMBER 2013

MEDIA CONTACT: HALEY BAMFORD (03) 5221 3033

