

THE HON RICHARD MARLES MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER  PROTECTION  MEMBER FOR CORIO



E&OE   TRANSCRIPT  SKY NEWS AUSTRALIAN AGENDA  SUNDAY, 10 NOVEMBER 2013

Subjects: The Coalition’s failed turn back the boats policy, emissions  trading scheme, the Coalition’s Direct Action con, entitlements,  manufacturing, skilled migration.

PETER VAN ONSELEN: We’re joined now live out of Melbourne by the Shadow  Immigration Spokesperson Richard Marles. Welcome to the program.

RICHARD MARLES: Morning Peter, how are you?

VAN ONSELEN: I’m very well. I want to go straight to this issue I suppose before  perhaps talking about some wider issues in the political mix at the moment. The tow  backs policy, Tony Abbott described it there in that package as a setback, you’ve  said that it’s a bit of a debacle in broad terms. Are you prepared to declare this the  death of tow backs or is it simply a setback?

MARLES: Well tow backs are not happening, that is completely plain, and you know  this isn’t rocket science. Foreign relations isn’t rocket science. We have had  Indonesia from day one saying they won’t accept tow backs. Now you need to be  operating in cooperation with our neighbour, with the country from where these  boats come.

So there’s not really a way around that, and that’s just plain common sense. So  when Tony Abbott’s policy of saying ‘we will tow the boats back to Indonesia’ comes  up against an Indonesian position which says ‘we won’t have those boats come  back’, it was inevitably going to fail. And that’s what we saw yesterday. So there is  no towing back boats to Indonesia. Turning back the boats was always a furphy. It  as silly as suggesting you will go to Indonesia and buy fishing vessels as a strategy  for stopping the boats coming.

And all of these are being done in a way which is really trying to dictate terms in an  embarrassing way to Indonesia and in a way which has ultimately failed. For a  government which said at the outset that its foreign policy was going to be based far  more on Jakarta than Geneva, its foreign policy is in a state of disarray today as  well.



VAN ONSELEN: Be that as it may though, do you acknowledge Mr Marles that  since they’ve come to government, for whatever reason, there have been a lot less  boat arrivals, and it does appear that Operation Sovereign Borders is starting to at  least do what it said it was going to do, even if some of the elements of how it  achieved it don’t seem to be working in and of themselves?

MARLES: Well I’ll absolutely acknowledge that there has been a reduction in boats,  but I’ll tell you the reason, the reason is because of the PNG arrangement that was  introduced by the then Rudd Government. I mean, in the month after the PNG  arrangement was put in place, we saw a reduction of boat arrivals of 40 per cent. If  you look at the graph in the reduction of boat arrivals, the change point is not  September 7, the change point is July 19, which is when the PNG arrangement -

VAN ONSELEN: Can I ask this though, why did the previous government take so  long to get to the PNG solution. Because my understanding is that the advice to do  so, and some of the internals on that, had been mapped out well in advance of  Kevin Rudd putting it in place. Why hadn’t Julia Gillard done it, why wasn’t it put in  place early enough so that you didn’t end up, let’s face it, in the political situation  that you’re in now, which is that you’re trying to claim credit, perhaps rightly, for a  policy that has helped to stop the boats, but of course politically that’s a problem  because the Coalition are now in government and they can argue that it’s them  being there that has had the effect.

MARLES: Well it is not them being there which has had the effect. As I said, you  look at the graph, it is a matter of demonstrable fact that it is that policy, the PNG  arrangement, which has seen the stop in flow of boats and the consequent saving in  lives. So this is beyond debate. But in answer to your question, this is a difficult area  of policy and it’s one which has moved and it’s certainly moved since when the  Howard Government were in place. And I think one of the real issues that we face  today is that the Abbott Government are in a sense caught in a time warp of  thinking that the policies which may have worked in 2002 are going to work in 2013.  But as the situation evolves, policy needs to evolve with it.

Now we went through a process of having an inquiry into exactly how we should  best go about this, headed by Angus Houston and Paris Aristotle, there was a range  of recommendations that came out in relation to that, of course the Malaysia  arrangement was one of those. We sought agreement from the then Opposition to  try and implement the entirety of that report and they refused to do that. Ultimately  we came to the PNG arrangement which has made a real difference.

VAN ONSELEN: But you only came to that Mr Marles, you only came to that once  Kevin Rudd came to the leadership. The proposal and the idea was on the table well  before then, and Julia Gillard never embraced it. So was there some sort of in-principle opposition to the PNG idea as opposed to, for example, Malaysia?



MARLES: No I don’t think that’s right. I think what you see in the policies that we  put in place is an evolution through an issue which in turn was evolving, which  arrived at that policy. But at the end of the day, we came up with it, we negotiated  it with PNG and we’ve implemented it, and it is what has made the difference. And  what you have now is a government which went to the last election saying that at  the heart of its policy was turning back the boats and going and buying Indonesian  vessels, well we now know no boats have been turned back, no boats have been  bought, but the numbers continue to decline, that is because of the PNG  arrangement.

That is the one piece of substantive policy that has occurred in the last few months  which has seen a reduction in the boats. You can have a General standing next to  you while you do your weekly news briefings, you can try and say the word  ‘operation’ as much as possible in a 30 minute period of time, you can send out a  language edict to the department, but none of that amounts to a hill of beans  compared to the change in policy by having the PNG arrangement which has actually  seen a cessation in the boats coming from Indonesia.

VAN ONSELEN: How would you respond to the claim though, that whilst the idea  of the PNG solution may have been put in place in broad terms before the Abbott  Government came into power, it’s only the resolve of the Coalition being in  government, coupled with the stronger rhetoric I suppose, then when your side of  politics were in power, that has had a more profound impact on slowing down the  boats, albeit as I say, with the policy that was already in place.

MARLES: Well I think the idea that there is resolve on the part of this government,  after what we have witnessed in the last 24 hours, is completely shot to pieces. It’s  totally shot to pieces. So the idea that what we’ve got is a government with a firm  hand on the rudder, anyone who voted for that on September 7 would yesterday  have felt sorely disillusioned. So that as a proposition is entirely dead. If you look at  what has changed such that the boats have stopped coming, or at least the flow has  decreased significantly, that is because of the PNG arrangement, it’s because of  what Labor put in place.



VAN ONSELEN: Moving onto the issue of the carbon tax repeal, last Friday the  Shadow Cabinet position was announced by Bill Shorten immediately after Shadow  Cabinet broke. Your side of politics will be sticking broadly with the policy Kevin  Rudd took to the last election, which means not agreeing to repeal the carbon tax  unless it is replaced with an emissions trading scheme. My understanding however is  that wasn’t always Bill Shorten’s preferred option. He had a very open mind to going  in another direction, indeed a direction that Nick Champion had floated publically,  you had said that that was something worth considering in broad terms as well as  putting the other side, in fairness to you, when being interviewed about that after  the Champion interview. Any word from Shadow Cabinet, is there any truth to this  idea that Bill Shorten in a sense has been dragged to the current position he is in by  other sections of his party?

MARLES: No that isn’t right Peter, and if you look at the position Labor took, we  have been very consistent first of all. The position that we took to the election, as

you rightly say, is broadly the position that we now hold as a result of the Shadow  Cabinet decision, and what was announced last Friday week. Bill Shorten’s position  has been very consistent on this as well. If you look at this statements pre-election,  if you look at all the statements that he made during the Labor leadership contest on  this issue, they were consistently about supporting the position that Labor took to  the election. Now that is actually about getting rid of the carbon tax and replacing it  with an emissions trading scheme.

VAN ONSELEN: So there was no suggestion ahead of Shadow Cabinet that he was  floating the idea of possibly not connecting the support of the repeal of the carbon  tax to the emissions trading scheme?

MARLES: Well I can tell you the position that Bill Shorten took to Shadow Cabinet  was the position that Shadow Cabinet ultimately adopted last Friday week, and was  then announced as we all saw. He took the position, which is basically the position  that Labor had at the last election, and that is that we support the repeal of the  carbon tax. What we want to see is a replacement of it by an emissions trading  scheme, by a legislated cap. And that is the position that we will be prosecuting over  the coming weeks in the Parliament.

VAN ONSELEN: Alright last, yesterday I should say, the Special Minister of State  Michael Ronaldson came out of hiding and had a press conference and took us  through what he plans to do in relation to adjustment of entitlements. This of course  came off the back, I mentioned this in the opening, of Tony Abbott saying that  nothing needed to change. It appears that something does need to change, they’ve  got a new policy, it’s been argued in some quarters that it doesn’t go nearly far  enough, it’s been described as ‘weak’ by one political scientist. What’s your view,  what’s the Opposition’s take on this announcement from yesterday?

MARLES: We welcome what the Government did yesterday. It was important I  think that the Government come forward and try and put a clarification if you like of  the way in which entitlements should be used, I think there is always room, and I  think it’s important that we try and pursue greater confidence in the entitlements  system within the public, and might I say as a politician who has to obviously work  within the entitlements system, it’s important from our point of view that it be clear  as well. So we welcome the statement that was made by the Government. We do  want to want to go through it in some detail, but we’ve also said that we are very  happy to sit down with the Government and work with them cooperatively on  coming up with a system around entitlements if it can be improved, which does  improve public confidence in the system which is important.

VAN ONSELEN: Industrial relations has been in the mix in terms of both what’s  going on with the car industry out of South Australia with withdrawal perhaps of  support with Holden, and therefore withdrawal of Holden from producing cars here  in Australia potentially. We’d already seen obviously in a decision that directly  affected you in your electorate just outside there of Melbourne in the Geelong  region, when Ford made the decision that it would be pulling out, we’ve now got  also the decision in your electorate by Qantas to change its operations of its  maintenance fleet and as a result having an impact again as I say on your  electorate. What’s your reaction to this? Is this just an inevitability of a changing

dynamic because of a high Australian dollar or is there more that government can do  to stop this happening? How inevitable is the force I suppose?

MARLES: Well firstly it is right to observe the value of the Australian dollar. There is  no doubt that is putting a pressure on manufacturing and export-based  manufacturing in this country, but the answer to your question is there is nothing  inevitable about it, and government can play a role, and it’s really important that we  do have…



VAN ONSELEN: But isn’t that throwing good money after bad? I mean one of the  reports that I saw coming out was that it’s about $300,000 of government subsidy  per job saved is the estimate when you do the maths on that, Paul Kelly referred to  it in his column in the Weekend Australian. That just doesn’t sound like it’s money  well spent in terms of taxpayers’ dollars.



MARLES: Well I think often the mistake in the analysis when we talk about the car  industry is to see this simply as about jobs. It is about jobs, but it’s not just about  jobs. It’s actually about our industry capacity, and when you wind it all back it’s  about whether or not we do have a fundamental commitment to manufacturing in  Australia and to having a diverse economy and that includes manufacturing as part  of it. Labor absolutely believes in that. But if we’re going to have that, then we  actually need a manufacturing industry which is going to climb the technological  ladder, which is going to be making things here which aren’t made elsewhere or at  least competing on the basis of quality in the rest of the world, rather than on the  basis of price. And that is about climbing the technological ladder and making high  value products.

Now the thing about not investing in the car industry is that the highest tech  manufacturing that we do in Australia today is making cars. And if we lose the car  industry, well the day after we’ve lost it, we’ve actually become a dumber  manufacturing country, we’re going in precisely the wrong direction, so I like to  think this is as much about jobs as it is about industry capability. And it’s really  important that we don’t lose that capability.



VAN ONSELEN: But Mr Marles, it might be the highest tech manufacturing that we  do in the country, in large scale terms, but nonetheless if it’s not viable it’s not  viable, and clearly for decade after decade it’s been proven to not be viable by the  amount of government subsidy required.

MARLES: I don’t accept that either Peter in this sense, making cars is a very high  tech thing to do, and it comes with a whole lot of benefits to your economy more  generally, in terms of the capability that it provides. For that reason, countries  around the world like to have a car industry. Wherever you have the car industry,  basically what you have is a public-private partnership. The car industry is  subsidised, if you want to use that word, in a form in every country in which it  exists. And if you look at the level of subsidy, again if you want to use that word, in  Australia compared to other countries, it’s actually much less.

So it isn’t right, you’re not comparing apples with apples if what you say is that the  car industry ought to survive without any public involvement in it, because there’s

not a country in the world where that occurs, and I think we need to be aware of  that. And the reason why it is important that a government commits to it, and why  governments around the world do it, is because they want to have that capability  within their economies, so they can be a high tech manufacturing economy. That is  what we are going to have to be if we want to do manufacturing in Australia, and if  we want to export goods into Asia, and take advantage of the enormous  opportunities that come with that market. And I genuinely believe that Australia has  a future in relation to that.

But it won’t have that future if the federal government isn’t prepared to partner with  industry, and I do hold very grave fears about the willingness of the Abbott  Government to do that. And I mean, a lot of the lines that you’ve just articulated  emanate from the Abbott Government as well, and it does give me concern about  whether they do have the metal to stick with the car industry, and indeed  manufacturing more generally. And if they don’t, we are talking about tens of  thousands if not hundreds of thousands of Australians looking for work. This will be  a very negative thing for our economy indeed.



VAN ONSELEN: So it does come back to jobs primarily, but I want to move on…

MARLES: But jobs beyond the car industry is my point Peter. It’s not just about jobs  in the car industry. The presence of the car industry by virtue of the capability it  brings to our economy helps build jobs more generally and that’s the point I’m  making.



VAN ONSELEN: Alright, well something else that impacts on jobs, at least as a  political barrier to looking at higher immigration is indeed that issue of higher  immigration. Now Bill Shorten during the leadership showdown against Anthony  Albanese talked about supporting higher immigration. I just want to come to this if I  can before we let you go, and go to our panel discussion about wider economic  issues.

Immigration is something all politicians say they support, but when Kevin Rudd said  he supported a ‘big Australia’, there seemed to be some back down from that, Julia  Gillard significantly deflated the rhetoric after she became Prime Minister. What  would you like as the Shadow Immigration Spokesperson, Labor’s position to be on  this going forward? Because it’s a delicate subject isn’t it, Mr Marles, like it or not,  the xenophobic fear of yesteryear isn’t so much the issue that it is today. It’s more a  fear around jobs, foreigners coming to Australia and taking jobs.

MARLES: It’s a good question, and I think ultimately what I would like to see is a  debate first of all which is free of any trace of xenophobia, but which does try and  intelligently unpack this from ultimately the point of view of what’s in our national  interest, and what’s in it for us to grow Australian jobs. But allowing immigration to  play a role in terms of skilled immigration, fixing gaps which exist in the Labor  market where the skills aren’t present is something which helps jobs here, and I  think that’s a point that fundamentally we need to understand, and it’s really  important that that be prosecuted.

Now, 457 visas of course play that role, and the confidence in the system of 457  visas can be undermined when they are abused, which is why it was important that  put the protections in that we did when we were in government earlier in the year.  But I think it is important to try and have an intelligent discussion about the role that  skilled migration can play in boosting our economy and boosting our overall jobs  market. That actually is our history, if you look at the way in which we had  immigration in the immediate aftermath of the Second World War, we had mass  immigration which was welcomed by the union movement of the time. Bob Hawke  often describes this as being, the partnership between the union movement and the  then Menzies Government, as being one of the things that most characterized  modern Australia today. And I think that kind of intelligent understanding of the role  that immigration can play in building our economy is ultimately what I would hope  characterizes the debate.

VAN ONSELEN: Alright a lot in that space to come back to. I suppose the longer  you are in the portfolio, the more we’ll be able to discuss the emerging position of  the Opposition on the wider issue of immigration, not just in relation to asylum  seekers. Richard Marles, Shadow Immigration Spokesperson, we appreciate you  joining us on this episode of Australian Agenda. Thanks so much for your company.



MARLES: Thanks Peter.



ENDS



