

SENATOR PENNY WONG  LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION IN THE SENATE   SHADOW MINISTER FOR TRADE AND INVESTMENT  SENATOR FOR SOUTH AUSTRALIA



E&OE TRANSCRIPT   TELEVISION INTERVIEW   SKY PM AGENDA WITH DAVID SPEERS   THURSDAY, 14 NOVEMBER 2013

Subjects: Debt limit; Senate motion on the Coalition’s failed border  protection policies; Kevin Rudd’s resignation.

DAVID SPEERS: Penny Wong, thank you for your time.

PENNY WONG: Good to be here.

SPEERS: Now you were Finance Minister in the last Government. Just to clarify,  what was the advice you received on the sort of debt limit we needed?

WONG: Well, as you can see from the Pre-Election Economic and Fiscal Outlook  where the Treasury Secretary and the Finance Secretary made clear to the  Australian people the state of the books, we did need an increase in the debt cap.  That around 2016-17 we were looking at a debt on issue of about $370 billion which  is certainly a lot less than what he is asking for now -

SPEERS: But you had advice there was a buffer required on top of that.

WONG: That's true. That’s true and we released that publically.

SPEERS: And that said $40 billion to $60 billion on top of that. So that would clearly  go beyond $400 billion.

WONG: That was in 2016-17. I mean there was a very interesting moment today in  the Senate where we voted on this, as you probably know, and I asked Senator  Sinodinos - who is the Assistant Treasurer, Minister representing the Treasurer - I

said ‘when will we hit $400 billion? Like you don’t want to go to $400 billion because  you need a buffer… when will it be?’ And he wouldn't answer it.

SPEERS: No, but you've just admitted though that your own numbers said you  would hit $370 billion and you need a buffer on top of that.

WONG: At 2016-17. Where are we now?

SPEERS: Well we’re in 2013.

WONG: Correct.

SPEERS: Why do you have to come back and do it twice?

WONG: Because I think it is absolutely appropriate that when a government seeks  this sort of scale of increase in the debt cap, they are upfront with the Australians  about what the Budget numbers are. That is what we did.

SPEERS: Why set the cap lower than what you know is going to pass?

WONG: Hang on. Because the position is from the Opposition, we said we will give  you $100 billion, here you go, bang, without sight, unseeing, a very generous offer,  certainly we never got that from the Liberal Party when we were in government,  never got it so easily. But we have said here it is, $400 billion, we pass the  amendment in the Senate today, Joe Hockey could have another $100 billion up his  sleeve this afternoon if he passes it through the Lower House. Our point is this: if  you are going to ask for that scale of increase to the debt cap, to half a trillion  dollars, I do think the minimum level of information you should give people is an  explanation as to why and your budget numbers.

SPEERS: But you know the explanation.

WONG: No I don't.

SPEERS: You know the budget numbers are $370 billion, you know there's a buffer  required on that.

WONG: In 2016-17, and I think it is entirely reasonable for Australians to say ‘well  show us the Budget numbers so we understand why it is you are seeking something,  such a big increase in the debt limit.’



SPEERS: Where is this going to end up? Are you prepared to see some level of  government shut down?

WONG: Well, if there is any government shut down it is because Joe Hockey has a  dummy spit. That is what this is about.

SPEERS: Would you rather see that than raise it to $500 billion?



WONG: No, I am not of the view that any responsible Opposition, nor the people of  Australia, should respond to childish threats like that from the Treasurer. I mean,  you know what that shows? He wants a fight. He doesn't want an outcome, that's  what it shows.

SPEERS: But again, the question is are you prepared to see any level of shut down  or not?

WONG: There is no need for a level of shut down. We have passed an amendment  in the Senate that delivers a $100 billion increase.

SPEERS: Can you say to public servants that you will do whatever you need to  avoid that shut down?

WONG: We’ve done that. We have already done that.  We have given $100 billion.  It will be very interesting when the midyear review is released, and see if you  remember this David. If the midyear review is released and it demonstrates that we

weren't going to get to $400 billion for two years, then Joe Hockey will be shown to  have done nothing but play politics this week.

SPEERS: Can I ask you on boats, the Senate passed a motion today to force the  Immigration Minister to reveal boat arrivals within 24 hours and incidents at sea as  well. What happens if he says no?

WONG: There are a range of consequences in the Senate and there is a range of  things we can do in relation to that order. That order is an order, which shouldn't  have been required if Scott Morrison was actually telling Australians what happened.  We have got this extraordinary position, haven't we? We have got to look to  Indonesian press to find out what is happening in our own country. We get the  Northern Territory News reporting on a boat arriving that magically Ministers can't  talk about. It is absurd.

SPEERS: If he says no to this demand, it goes to the Privileges Committee  presumably.

WONG: There are a range of options. It actually relates to Senator Cash because  she is the Minister representing in the Senate chamber -

SPEERS: The responsible Minister.

WONG: And there have been various things done in the past. I understand that in  the past, for example, the Senate has chosen not to deal with any legislation in the  portfolio for a period of time.

SPEERS: Would that be a good idea do you think?

WONG: Well I’m just saying there are various things that the Senate can do.  Ultimately there are censure motions, ultimately it could be considered a contempt  but there are a range of things we can do between now and then. And I think that  the political point here is that the Government hasn't worked out that the Senate is  not the House of Representatives and they don't have the numbers.

SPEERS: Sure but they say this is an operational matter. This is the advice from the  military.

WONG: Right, so we are going to simply class everything an operational matter and  we won't tell Australians anything about it? I mean, that line was used today in the  Senate chamber. I didn't see the House because obviously we’ve got a Question  Time -

SPEERS: (inaudible) there as well?

WONG: No but in the Senate Chamber to justify not answering a question about  asylum seekers on the mainland, actually in Australia, now if someone can explain to  me how a question about asylum seekers at blatant point on the Australian mainland  is somehow an operational matter that will flag something really significant about  our policies, well, let's hear it.

SPEERS: And finally, Kevin Rudd, are you sorry to see him go?

WONG: Look, I am very sorry to see the pain that so much of this last period has  caused him and his family. I think it has been a very difficult thing to observe and,  you know, I think it has been very sad also to see the sort of insults which is were  thrown at Prime Minister Gillard. I said this morning I'm really grateful personally to  Kevin, he gave me an opportunity to be a Cabinet Minister in the Labor Government  and that’s what you come into Parliament to do. And he gave me that opportunity,  both by winning the election and by putting me in the Cabinet. I wish him well. He  achieved enormous things not only leading us to Government but as Prime Minister,  many of which were spoken about last night.

SPEERS: Penny Wong, thank you.

WONG: Good to speak to you.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: SACHA FENTON 0467 784 528

