Transcript

Hon Christopher Pyne MP  ABC 891  27 June 2013

SUBJECTS: Labor in chaos

E&OE................................



Journalist: Christopher Pyne good morning to you.

Christopher Pyne: Good morning gentlemen.

Journalist: Christopher Pyne, does this now change the game? One person we spoke to this  morning said there were a lot of glum Liberal faces in federal Parliament yesterday.

Pyne: Well there weren’t. What this does is vindicates the Opposition’s view about the  Government for the last three years which is that they are a divided, dysfunctional rabble.  The  Labor Party has panicked in the face of the polls and executed another leader.  So in 2007  people voted for Kevin Rudd and got Julia Gillard, and in 2010 they voted for Julia Gillard and  they got Kevin Rudd.  And there is no guarantees that if they vote for Kevin Rudd in 2013 they  won’t get Bill Shorten after the election.  The truth is far from having long faces the Opposition  feels that it has been vindicated in its view that the Government is a shambles and we need to  have an election and get adults in the room.

Journalist: So you don’t think that 8% swing that the polls have been saying consistently for  some time will be eroded now that Rudd has taken over from Gillard?

Pyne: Well who knows, that remains to be seen.  But the truth is that it was Kevin Rudd that  changed the policy from the Howard Government about the boats which has led to 45,000  illegal boat arrivals.  It was Kevin Rudd that said that he would turn the boats around and then  never did.  It’s Kevin Rudd that opened the door to a carbon tax through an emissions trading  scheme campaign which he then dumped. It was Kevin Rudd that started FuelWatch and  GroceryWatch both of which he dumped. He said he would take, he would fix the public  hospitals or take them over then he dumped it.  He said he would deliver surpluses over the  economic cycle and then didn’t. I mean all the problems that beset the Government started  under Kevin Rudd and…

Journalist: You are going to have to change your game plan though, are you not? You are going  to have to change your game plan.  Kevin Rudd is not Julia Gillard and…

Pyne: No, he certainly isn’t.

Journalist: And you fought trench warfare with Julia Gillard, you know, and Tony Abbott of late  modified his style but for much of his time in Opposition has been running a negative campaign.   You are going to have to change that, you are going to have to change that though, are you  not?  And how are you going to do that?



Pyne: Well we will continue to apply the pressure to Government that we applied to Kevin Rudd  that caused Labor to panic and execute him, that we then applied to Julia Gillard which caused  them to panic and execute her, now the Labor Party expects with seven Cabinet resignations in  24 hours that they will be able to pretend they can paper over the facts and present a united  front.  They simply can’t do that, the public are not mugs.  We have Cabinet Ministers who have  as recently as last week were saying he doesn’t have the strength and courage that is required  to do his job; all he can do is spread confusion, what he can do is get himself into the media,  what he can do is create a lot of torment - that was Gary Gray, he’s still sitting in the cabinet as  the Minister for Resources.  They are a violently split group of people, who as Mark Butler just  said, they are in a precarious position, they have acted in self-interest, not out of the interests of  the public.

Journalist: Christopher Pyne, thank you.  Federal Liberal MP for Sturt and the key tactician for  the Liberal Party and federal Coalition.

ENDS.

