The Hon. Scott Morrison MP  Minister for Immigration and Border Protection



Incident on Manus Island, illegal maritime  arrivals, Operation Sovereign Borders  Monday, 21 October 2013

Interview with Kieran Gilbert, Sky News, Canberra

Kieran Gilbert: Immigration Minister Scott Morrison, thanks very much for your time.

Scott Morrison: Thanks, Kieran.

Kieran Gilbert: First of all, this incident last Friday on Manus Island, what went on?

Scott Morrison: Well, effectively, there was an incident between the Papua New  Guinea Defence Forces and some in the Royal Constabulary, and that event, I  suppose, blew over, and - for a short period of time we ensured people were  prepared to be taken away if that was necessary, that wasn't necessary, and the  centre resumed to normal operations fairly quickly.

Kieran Gilbert: When you say you prepared to take people away, was that just the  Australian officials? Because the report today in the West Australian newspaper is  that those asylum seekers there felt they were abandoned.

Scott Morrison: Well that's not true, and that's not the case, and no one was  actually evacuated from the centre. So, there have been a lot of quite extreme claims  that have been made by some. But we've provided the reports on what we've  received in terms of what took place, I issued that both on Friday and on Sunday,  and that information is there for everybody to review.

Kieran Gilbert: But the suggestion is that the officials went to the ship side of the  island, ready to go, the Immigration Department, the Salvos, and other Australian  officials there, but the asylum seekers were essentially told to fend for themselves if  this did blow up.

Scott Morrison: That's not consistent with the reports I have.

Kieran Gilbert: That's not right?

Scott Morrison: That's not consistent with the reports I have, no.

Kieran Gilbert: Okay, so are you comfortable with the PNG authorities playing a role  in the processing still, given this internal feud, which apparently - is potentially  lethal?

Scott Morrison: Neither of the agencies you've just referred to have any role in the  processing of people's claims, so that's a completely separate issue.

Kieran Gilbert: Well, providing the security then?

Scott Morrison: Well, that's a matter for the PNG Government, and there have been  no issues that have presented that would suggest to us that we should change any  of those arrangements. But how this incident occurred, and what was relevant to that  incident, that is something that I'm sure will be reviewed by the PNG authorities.  That's not a matter for the Australian Government, it's between their authorities and  it's not for us to intervene in those matters.

Kieran Gilbert: But it's a matter for you in the sense that you've got a processing  centre there and people who we are responsible for.

Scott Morrison: Sure, and we took the appropriate precautions on the day. People  weren't put at risk and we had the procedures in place if we did have to take those  steps. They were not necessary and the centre went back to operations fairly  promptly.

Kieran Gilbert: So no plans for changes or…

Scott Morrison: I have no plans to make any changes based on the reports that I  currently have.

Kieran Gilbert: You've issued a directive to your department to adopt the term illegal  arrivals to describe asylum seekers.

Scott Morrison: Illegal maritime arrivals for persons who have illegally arrived in  Australia by boat.

Kieran Gilbert: Once they're here, they're asylum seekers, aren't they?

Scott Morrison: What my term is used to do is to describe the manner of their entry  to Australia. No stage either in the last few weeks or in the last four years have I ever  said it's illegal to seek asylum. That's not the case, but it is illegal to enter Australia  by that method and the people smuggling convention talks about illegal entry by sea.  That's what I'm referring to and Kieran, that's what I'm trying to stop. See, the  Coalition is not internally divided or constrained over these issues. We have no  issues to resolve there. We're fairly upfront about what we're trying to do and what  we're trying to stop and I'm not going to sugar coat it, we're trying to stop people  arriving illegally by boat. That's what they're doing and we want to stop it.

Kieran Gilbert: But you've said - you said in this interview just a moment ago and  you've said it before that it's not illegal to claim asylum. So…

Scott Morrison: That's not my point. My…

Kieran Gilbert: But given the complexity of the situation, these people and the  defining who they are, whether it's an illegal arrival or an asylum seeker, why adopt  the pejorative term?

Scott Morrison: Because I don't want people to come illegally to Australia by boat,  Kieran, and that's what it is, and I'm trying to stop it. I'm not going to make it sound  something that we want to accept or something we're going to support or something  we want to facilitate. We don't. We want it to stop and we're not going to be involved  in this sort of politically correct language to try and gloss over what is occurring here.  Fifty thousand people illegally entered Australia by boat under the previous  government and we're not going to put up with it.

Kieran Gilbert: Labor says it's the opposite, you're doing the opposite of the  politically correct. You're demonising the group of people and it's for a political  purpose.

Scott Morrison: Well, I reject that absolutely. I'm just being upfront. I mean, I've  used this term for four years. It should come as no surprise to anyone that I would  continue to use that term. What I'm trying to stop here is people coming to Australia  illegally by boat. People die on their way. It undermines our immigration system and  it's something that the Australian people have made pretty clear they want to stop  and that's what I'm going to do.

Kieran Gilbert: Article 31 of the convention, you refer to it, that says that - it refers  to illegal…

Scott Morrison: I was referring to the people smuggling convention. Article 31 of the  Refugee…

Kieran Gilbert: It does refer to the illegal entry of asylum seekers.

Scott Morrison: Their term.

Kieran Gilbert: But it also says you should not impose penalties on these people.

Scott Morrison: And we're complying with that, but the United Nations convention  uses the term illegal entry, the United Nations uses the term illegal entry in the  people smuggling convention. I am referring to illegal entry by sea.

Kieran Gilbert: But once they're here…

Scott Morrison: That's called an illegal maritime arrival.

Kieran Gilbert: Once they're here they're asylum seekers, aren't they?

Scott Morrison: No, look - Kieran, you're entitled to your view.

Kieran Gilbert: It's not my view.

Scott Morrison: Others…

Kieran Gilbert: I'm just putting…

Scott Morrison: Others are entitled to their views, I'm putting to you the  government's view.

Kieran Gilbert: Okay, I…

Scott Morrison: And that is that people who have arrived illegally by boat will be  referred to as illegal maritime arrivals.

Kieran Gilbert: Yeah, it's - for the record it's not my view, I'm just putting to you the  counterpoint to your argument.

Scott Morrison: Well, they're entitled to that view. We had an election and the  Coalition's views on these issues received very strong support right across the  Australian community and we're acting in accordance with that.

Kieran Gilbert: You've been accused of bringing down a cloak of secrecy by not  providing more regular updates when boat arrivals happen. Information seems to be  getting out there anyway.

Scott Morrison: Well, people are getting it wrong all the time, Kieran.

Kieran Gilbert: [Indistinct] …the Christmas - well, that's the point, isn't it?

Scott Morrison: They're getting it wrong.

Kieran Gilbert: Well, that's the point. Why not fix it up? Why allow that confusion?

Scott Morrison: Because for operational reasons, we've decided to convey this  information on a weekly basis by the commander of the JATF [Joint Agency Task  Force] for Operation Sovereign Borders. Now, again, this shouldn't come as a  surprise. I made it very clear before the election that we would be leaving the release  of information to the operational decision of the commander of the JATF, and that's  exactly what we've done.

Kieran Gilbert: Advocates are filling the void, anyway, aren't they? And you're  saying misinformation's getting out there, why allow that to happen? Why not get on  the front foot and deal with it?

Scott Morrison: We are on the front foot. Operation Sovereign Borders is on the  front foot in the fight against people smuggling. That's the front foot that matters.  That's what we're doing. We're running a military led border security operation and  we are insuring that the sort of protocols you'll expect to see in an operation like that  are being applied and the commander of that JATF has been making the decisions  how that is conducted.

Kieran Gilbert: So no, quote, secrecy here.

Scott Morrison: No, that's the hysteria of the Labor Party and others who disagree  with the changes we're making as a government. The Labor Party did it differently, I  agree. They did it very, very differently.

Kieran Gilbert: You also did it differently in Opposition, didn't you?

Scott Morrison: No, I was…

Kieran Gilbert: Because you were willing to seize on every boat arrival…

Scott Morrison: The government…

Kieran Gilbert: …talk about every boat arrival…

Scott Morrison: The government released that information, they set the rules for  how it was done under the previous government. This government is setting the  rules for how it's done under this government. We're not running shipping news  services for people smugglers or anybody else. What we're doing is stopping the  boats and we're running a military led border security operation and when I said that  at the time, the government then, opposition now, derided this and frankly failed to  understand what was involved with an initiative such as that.

Now, the reality of that initiative is now in place and most importantly it's in place for  those who are trying to run criminal people smuggling operations to Australia.

Kieran Gilbert: Have any boats been turned around?

Scott Morrison: Again, that's - they're operational matters which we don't go into  because it can prejudice current and future operations.

Kieran Gilbert: Will you ever reveal though whether boats are turned around?

Scott Morrison: Well, what history may record many years from now is a different  matter, just as it was in the case under John Howard.

Kieran Gilbert: But this was a big part of your policy going to the election.

Scott Morrison: I've said, Kieran…

Kieran Gilbert: Surely you should be transparent about that.

Scott Morrison: Let me finish. I have said the full arsenal of measures that we  presented are available to the government for deployment as part of Operation  Sovereign Borders, but I'm not going to prejudice or risk any of those operations and  particularly the Australians who are involved in those operations, whatever they  might be, by getting into a running commentary with the media.

Kieran Gilbert: Yeah. But that might have validity in the short term over the weeks…

Scott Morrison: No, it does have - no, it has validity.

Kieran Gilbert: Okay. But yeah, but sure. What about months down the track once a  boat's been turned around? How does that impact an operation underway?

Scott Morrison: Well, I reserve the right to, and the judgement, to release at any  subsequent time what might be released.

Kieran Gilbert: But shouldn't you do it because it was such a big policy commitment  before the election. The Australian people won't know whether you've honoured it or  not.

Scott Morrison: What the Australian people asked us to do at the last election when  they gave us their mandate was to stop the boats and that's the outcome we're  focused on and that's the outcome that matters and it's the outcome we're looking to  achieve. Now, we're being transparent at our weekly briefings about what the arrivals  are and people can make their own judgements about that. Now, as you would know  from those briefings that we've already had something in the order of about a 70 per  cent decline in the first month of operations, of Operation Sovereign Borders.

Kieran Gilbert: It's mostly Labor's policy though, isn't it?

Scott Morrison: No, no, not at all.

Kieran Gilbert: What have you changed?

Scott Morrison: Not at all. We have implemented our Operation Sovereign Borders  arrangement and we are deploying across the full range of things that we have  available to us to deploy where we choose to do that and for the government to say  they stopped the boats when they were in government by a press conference is  absurd. The only thing the Labor Party can claim credit for are 50 000 illegal arrivals  by boat and over $11 billion in cost blow outs. That's what they can claim credit for,  that's what they achieved, and that's why the Coalition was elected to fix up their  mess.

Kieran Gilbert: Mr Morrison, thanks for your time.

Scott Morrison: Thanks a lot, Kieran.



See: Index of Speeches

URL:http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/sm/2013/sm208951.htm   Last update: Tuesday, 22 October 2013 at 10:24 AEST



