CHRIS BOWEN MP

INTERIM LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  MEMBER FOR MCMAHON

TRANSCRIPT

TUESDAY, 17 SEPTEMBER 2013





SUBJECTS: Abbott Ministry, women in Cabinet, Budget, asylum  seekers.

MARIUS BENSON: Chris Bowen, Good Morning.

CHRIS BOWEN: Good Morning Marius

BENSON:  The absence of women, the absence to a large extent of women in  the Cabinet and from the ministry as a whole, 6 out of 42 in the entire line up of  the ministry, the shadow ministry and parliamentary secretaries, that’s been the  major criticism of this. You’ve made that criticism yourself, looking beyond that,  when you look at this ministry, a pretty solid line up?

BOWEN: Well I think this Cabinet and this ministry’s most notable for what it’s  lacking Marius. You’ve made the point about the lack of women and I think that’s  a sad indictment. We have 6 talented women, chosen on merit, in our outgoing  cabinet, even John Howard’s first cabinet 17 years ago managed to get two  women into that cabinet. We now have more women in the cabinet of  Afghanistan than we do in Australia.

Cabinet members should be chosen on merit but I think it’s a sad indictment that  Tony Abbott feels he could only find one woman out of his entire party room, the  Liberal and National party rooms, to fulfil a senior role at the cabinet table.

The other point that I’d make about this Cabinet and ministry is what’s lacking in  terms of portfolios. For the first time since 1931, no science minister. James  Scullin as Prime Minister knew that science was important to Australia’s future  and should have a dedicated minister.

We’ve seen talented….

BENSON:  Can I just interrupt you at that point because I’m going to be  speaking to Ian Macfarlane in about half an hour and I think science falls into his  portfolio and into the education portfolio of Christopher Pyne.

BOWEN: It’s all very well to say someone’s responsible, but as someone who’s  held a number of portfolios over Government I know Marius that actually having  a specific responsibility for important policy areas is an important part of  government outlining its priorities.

Now I think if you talk to the science community, they’d say having someone like  Barry Jones as Science Minister was important, having someone like Kim Carr  with clear responsibility for science and research was important. Lumping it in  with a mega-portfolio without specific responsibility is unfortunate.

Disability Care, no Minister; Seniors and Aging, no Minister; Multiculturalism, no  Minister. A whole range of areas: financial services, resources and energy, I  mean again the resources and energy sector has had talented Minister’s like  Martin Ferguson and Gary Gray completely focused on their needs to grow the  important resources industry. Now we find that portfolio just gone, lumped in  with other responsibilities. Now that same person is responsible for, who is  responsible for scientists, who is responsible for resources. I think this is an  unfortunate step backwards on a number of levels.

BENSON: But if you look past the titles to the personnel it looks, to the  assessment of many people, a moderate team, it’s certainly doesn’t look like the  slash and burn that you warned of during the election campaign in fact that  actions of the Abbott-elect Government to-date don’t look like they intend any  slash and burn as you warned.

BOWEN: Well we were told there was a budget emergency, we were told there  was great crisis in our budget books, now we’re told we might need to spend  more, now we’re told the mid-year economic forecast can wait until everybody is  on January holidays, when the press gallery are not at their desk but with their  board shorts on at the beach. I mean we’ve been told a number of things before  the election and we seem to be getting different responses after the election.

I’ll continue to monitor the Government’s actions closely, and we’ll continue to  hold them to account but I think this announcement yesterday says more about  what’s lacking in the Cabinet and the Ministry line-up then what’s actually there.

BENSON: Tony Abbott nominated Operation Sovereign Boarders, the plan to  stop Asylum seeker boat arrivals, as a stand or fail issue for his government. Do  you think there will be a reduction in numbers? Tony Abbott is talking from day  one people smugglers will notice a different world they’re dealing in.



BOWEN: A couple of points Marius, we’ve seen a reduction in arrivals after the  introduction of the Papua New Guinea Agreement, that’s clear. Now we were told  a number of things again Marius, we were told Tony Abbott would be going to  Indonesia in his first week as Prime Minister, now we’re told that Julie Bishop will  catch up for a coffee with Marty Natalegawa in New York and that will be the key  engagement. We were told we would have a Jakarta-based foreign policy instead  of a Geneva-based one. We have had the Indonesian Government completely  reject the new Government’s approach, as we warned that they would.

Now we will wait and see on how this policy is implemented. We think there are  fundamental flaws in the turning back the boats policy and the buy back the  boats policy. We have a policy of having an agreement with a nation like Papua  New Guinea. We want to take asylum seekers to a country that agrees. We don’t  think that the risk to life of Australian Navy personnel or asylum seekers of a turn  back the boats policy, or the damage to the bilateral relationship with Indonesia,  is justified. But this Government seems intent on going down this road and we  will be monitoring that and providing commentary as it goes.

BENSON: An immediate decision for Tony Abbott is whether to keep or dismiss  senior public servants. He has said that there won’t be a night of the long white  envelopes such as what John Howard had in 1996, but there is a general  expectation that Labor loyalists like Don Russell will go. A few heads to roll, is

that fair enough?

BOWEN: Well again, we will need to see what happens here. Public servants  should be appointed and maintained based on merit. Dr Russell is a first class  public servant; he was the secretary of a department I was responsible for for a  period, and I found him extremely professional, non-partisan and dedicated. And  I have worked with another secretaries from various departments over the years  and I’ve always found them to be in that mould. So we will wait and see what  they are actually do here, but I think that every department head should be  considered on their merits, and on their performance, and that’s what the new  Government should be doing as well.

BENSON: Chris Bowen, thanks very much.

BOWEN: Pleasure Marius.

Ends

