

Julie Bishop MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS



ABC Radio National Breakfast

5 August 2013

Subjects: Election date announcement, policy costings, pitch to voters, Kevin Rudd’s track record,  opinion polls, Daily Telegraph front page

E&OE…

FRAN KELLY Julie Bishop welcome back to Breakfast.

JULIE BISHOP Good morning Fran.

FRAN KELLY When will we get full costings of your election policies?

JULIE BISHOP We’ll be releasing all of our policies and our costings in time for the election. Now that  it’s started obviously that process will begin.

This election will be about trust and confidence - who the Australian people trust to better manage the  economy and to safeguard the nation’s finances.

Labor’s own economic statement released last week is a damning criticism of its performance in  government. It certainly doesn’t deserve another term. They’ve been given an opportunity to govern  but they blew it. The waste, the mismanagement, the incompetence has been unprecedented. FRAN  KELLY So releasing in time for the election is a phrase that has a lot of wriggle room within it. How  will it work? With every policy the Coalition launches over the next 33 days, will we get accompanying  costings and savings required for that?

JULIE BISHOP Well Fran, you’ll see it as we do it over the next five weeks. These policies will be  released, there will be costings and the Australian people will be in a position to judge.

But of course how could anyone trust any promise that Labor makes when they’ve missed virtually  every forecast over six years and each time it results in more government debt, more spending, more  taxes.

FRAN KELLY Well Chris Bowen asked the question, made the point, the government’s released an  economic statement, they’ve updated figures, which as you acknowledged he’s happy to concede.  There are some pretty tough admissions in it. He said how can you be taken seriously as an  alternative government if you don’t do the same?

JULIE BISHOP Well I’m confident the Coalition has the policies, they will be costed, we have the  team, we have the leader, we have the discipline and the competence necessary to win the trust of  the Australian people.

But Chris Bowen is being quite misleading, revenues have been increasing but it’s been dwarfed by  Labor’s spending which is out of control. They have introduced three new taxes in the last few weeks  - the FBT changes, a tax on cigarettes, a tax on savings. If this is what they do before the election  imagine what they’ll do after.

Mr Rudd’s three word slogan, ‘A New Way’, is utterly ridiculous given their record. What, a new way of  increasing debt? A new way of increasing unemployment?

Fran with Labor there’s only one way - spend, waste, borrow and tax. Australia can’t afford another  three years of Labor.

FRAN KELLY And in order to make that point and really drive it home don’t you need to say how  you’re going to do it, what you’re going to spend and how you’re going to pay for it and whether there  will be new taxes required? And if you don’t go to Treasury with your numbers, why would voters  believe what you tell them when it comes to your budget figures?

JULIE BISHOP Fran, Labor put out an economic statement just last Friday and it showed a $33 billion  deterioration in Australia’s finances.

FRAN KELLY Not Labor’s fault though, is it?

JULIE BISHOP Fran, revenues are increasing. This isn’t about revenue write downs. Revenues have  been increasing.

FRAN KELLY There was a revenue write down according to Treasury.

JULIE BISHOP If the forecasts are so wildly out and you say you’re going to raise far more than was  ever conceivable it’s ridiculous to say that this is not about Labor’s spending.

It took the Coalition 10 years to pay off Labor’s last massive debt. The Rudd/Gillard/Rudd  Government will leave behind debt almost double that amount.

Only the Coalition can be trusted to start paying down that debt. Mr Rudd is incapable of the  necessary discipline and Labor spends taxpayer’s money like water.

FRAN KELLY Just finally on this - who will be doing the costings for the Coalition?

JULIE BISHOP All that will be revealed over the next few days. Joe Hockey is the shadow treasurer  and they are announcements that Joe Hockey, in that role will be making.

FRAN KELLY Will it be the same audit company who did it last time? WHK Horwath?

JULIE BISHOP I’m leaving that to Joe Hockey. He’s the shadow treasurer.

FRAN KELLY It’s 12 past 8 on Breakfast. Our guest is the Deputy Leader of the Liberal Party and the  Coalition Julie Bishop.

Julie Bishop, day 1 of this campaign, what is your pitch to voters? Why should people vote for you?

JULIE BISHOP We have the policies, the team, the leader and the discipline and the competence  necessary to win the trust of the Australian people. Only a Coalition can provide the real solutions, the  plans to deliver a stronger economy and a safe and secure nation.

FRAN KELLY If that’s the case, why is Labor tracking 50-50 two preferred vote pretty much?

JULIE BISHOP Well the Newspoll today was 52-48 and Mr Rudd has called an election earlier than  he planned given the repeated statements about attending the G20.

FRAN KELLY You’ve been urging him to call that election. You keep saying he’s stealing voter’s time.

JULIE BISHOP No, I said Mr Rudd had made repeated statements about attending the G20 so clearly  Labor’s internal polling have revealed that the public are seeing through Mr Rudd’s manic and erratic  behaviour, where he creates this storm of activity to give the impression he’s actually doing something  when in fact he’s running around in circles achieving nothing.

FRAN KELLY You know Kevin Rudd pretty well. As he reminded us yesterday, voters know him warts  and all. Voters have seen him at the highest of highs and the lowest of lows and the experience has  made him a better person.

Do you agree with that self-assessment? Is ‘Kevin Rudd mark 2’ better than ‘mark 1’ in your view of  him?

JULIE BISHOP I haven’t seen any difference in his political behaviour. He’s still making grand  announcements that unravel as soon as the lights and cameras move on.

For example, the announcement he made about Nauru. It’s a misleading claim about the nature of the  agreement he says he reached with that country. Mr Rudd claimed that asylum seekers whose claims  are processed in Nauru will be resettled permanently in Nauru. Now we find that’s not true. It’s been  contradicted by the Nauru Government. Exactly what happened with PNG. So it’s the same old Mr  Rudd making grand statements but then not following through. He’s all talk, no delivery.

FRAN KELLY Is the Coalition guilty of some policy backflips though? I mean on Thursday night I think  it was Christopher Pyne, your shadow school’s minister, was describing the better schools policy as  ‘Conski’. The next day Tony Abbott’s saying the Coalition Government are a unity ticket on Gonski  reforms.

JULIE BISHOP No Tony Abbott said that we would be a unity ticket on funding. What the government  is delivering is not Gonski. Christopher Pyne is right, Gonski called for far greater funding than Labor  has promised.

Our point is, the difference in approach will be on teacher quality, on educational outcomes, on  principal autonomy, on community engagement with schools, but the funding envelope will be the  same.

FRAN KELLY Voters clearly still do have some concerns about Tony Abbott. We can measure that  only, I guess, by the opinion polls. Kevin Rudd is currently leading Tony Abbott 54 to 31. That may  have changed slightly this morning. I’ll try and find that before I finish this. What does the Coalition do  to overcome people’s concerns about Tony Abbott? Can you understand them? What are they?

JULIE BISHOP Leaders of the opposition invariably carry the burden of scrutinising the government of  the day. The leader of the opposition has a job to hold the government to account day in day out and  Tony Abbott has done that superbly.

But his approval ratings are not dissimilar to those of John Howard in 1996 and we know that John  Howard went on to become our second longest serving and one of our most respected Prime  Ministers.

So if the Coalition is able to win the trust and the respect of the Australian people, if the Coalition is  elected, I am more than confident that Tony Abbott will earn the respect of the Australian people by  presiding over competent, united and disciplined government.

FRAN KELLY The latest figure in today’s newspoll just to update that is 47-33 in terms of better Prime  Minister so that gap has tightened a little. But I ask you again, do you understand why it is that Tony  Abbott hasn’t really been able to get his approval ratings with the voters up higher?

JULIE BISHOP Tony Abbott has been an effective leader of the opposition. That means he has to  hold the government to account and that means criticising the government of the day and goodness  knows this governments given us plenty to criticise them over.

I had no idea we’d have so much material to work with. It’s been a litany of failures. Mr Rudd has had  numerous failures - FuelWatch, Grocery Watch, but two of the worst policy failures in a generation  which led to a loss of life are also Mr Rudd’s worst failings. The pink batts scheme where four young  Australians died, hundreds of house fires, a massive clean up bill and where Mr Rudd ignored  repeated warnings. I mean these are the issues that Tony Abbott has had to focus on.

Mr Rudd weakened the border protection laws which reinvigorated the people smuggling trade. Under  Labor there’s been 1000 deaths at sea, 50,000 people coming by boat and a multi-billion cost  blowout.

That’s Mr Rudd’s legacy - incompetence on a grand scale with the clean up bill being met by the  Australian taxpayer.

FRAN KELLY So you sound pretty confident the Coalition will win.

JULIE BISHOP I am confident that the Australian people will see through Kevin Rudd and I’m  confident that they’ll see Tony Abbott as authentic and Kevin Rudd as fake. They’ll see the Coalition  as competent and united and able to deliver stable and united government and a strong economy.

That’s what the Australian people are looking for - a strong economy and a secure nation and I am  confident that the Coalition can deliver that.

FRAN KELLY The front page of the Daily Telegraph says today, I quote, “Finally, you now have the  chance to kick this mob out”. Is that the sort of partisan media coverage that concerns you or delights  you?

JULIE BISHOP I’m prepared to be subjected to the scrutiny of the media. Mr Rudd should be  prepared to be subjected to the scrutiny of the media and the media is free to make up its own mind  as are the Australian people.

I believe the Australian people will see in the Coalition, a disciplined united team, that’s competent,  that’s experienced and able to deliver a strong and prosperous economy.

FRAN KELLY Julie Bishop, thank you very much for joining us.

JULIE BISHOP It’s been my pleasure Fran.

- Ends -



