

THE HON MARK DREYFUS QC MP  Attorney-General  Minister for Emergency Management  Special Minister of State  Minister for the Public Service and Integrity



TRANSCRIPT

23 July 2013



TRANSCRIPT OF INTERVIEW WITH JON FAINE - ABC MELBOURNE

SUBJECT: Regional Resettlement Arrangement with Papua New Guinea.

E & O E - PROOF ONLY

FAINE: Well, as you may have been hearing on AM, Tony Abbott's opposition say that  the agreement struck between Kevin Rudd and the Government of PNG is of little  substance and, in fact, may not even be legally binding. Already immigration and  refugee lawyers have said they'll look at challenging the PNG agreement in the High  Court. The Attorney-General in Kevin Rudd's Government, Mark Dreyfus QC is out this  morning trying to persuade everybody that this is, in fact, a binding agreement of some  substance.

Mark Dreyfus, good morning to you.

DREYFUS: Good morning, Jon.

FAINE: What is the legal status of the two page document signed the day before  yesterday?

DREYFUS: This is an arrangement between the governments of Australia and Papua New  Guinea.

FAINE: So not an agreement, just an arrangement?

DREYFUS: It's a signed document which records what the Government of Papua New  Guinea is going to do and what the Government of Australia is going to do. We've

already declared months back Papua New Guinea to be a regional resettlement country  under the Migration Act and it's very important. We've got the opposition...

FAINE: It is important. And you deal in legal obligations all the time, does this create  legal obligations on PNG or not?

DREYFUS: This is an undertaking by Papua New Guinea to Australia, and I'm not  mentioning - I'm not fencing around here about the words - this is the way countries  relate to each other in international relations.

FAINE: Is it an agreement.

DREYFUS: Yes, it is an agreement and Papua New Guinea have undertaken to take an  unlimited number of refugees. That's the important thing here. An unlimited...

FAINE: An unspecified number.

DREYFUS: An unlimited number of refugees and the Prime Minister of Papua New  Guinea, Peter O'Neill, has made that clear. And what we've got is the Opposition  disgracefully attempting to undermine, to deliberately undermine, this arrangement  with Papua New Guinea having said initially that they would support it. And you've  really got to wonder about the fitness for office of Tony Abbott if that's what he's  prepared to do.

FAINE: Okay. Let's go back to the actual document. The obligations that PNG have are to  take for an initial 12 month period. Confirmed?

DREYFUS: Yes, and it's subject to annual review.

FAINE: A twelve month period, but at the same time they acknowledge it will take more  than 12 months to even build the facility. So the facility won't even be built when the  agreement or arrangement expires.

DREYFUS: Well, I'm not sure why you're talking about “the” facility, Jon. We've got the  whole of the country of Papua New Guinea potentially available, multiple locations  potentially available. All of them are being looked at now. We're in day three of this  arrangement, Jon, and already people are saying ridiculously no one has yet been sent  to Papua New Guinea.

As the Prime Minister said, as Mr Burke said, when the arrangement was announced on  Friday, there would be initial health checks carried on anyone before they were  transferred and they are now being undertaken.

FAINE: So this will last maybe 12 months or is it only designed to last for 33 days?



DREYFUS: On the contrary. This is a permanent arrangement with Papua New Guinea,  which is subject to annual review, as is again appropriate in relations between countries.

FAINE: So if after 12 months, though, PNG says look, this isn't working for us, they can  end it, can't they?

DREYFUS: Well, it's our job to make sure that it works and it should be the job of anyone  who wishes this arrangement to work - and it's pretty clear that the Opposition doesn't -  to support it. It's very important that there be clear messages sent to people smugglers  and to people thinking of using the services of people smugglers that henceforth, you  will be sent to Papua New Guinea, if you arrive in Australia by boat without a visa.

FAINE: And what about people who are genuine refugees and find themselves in PNG,  Mark Dreyfus? How do you feel, not legally, but morally, how do you feel about that?

DREYFUS: I feel that Papua New Guinea is a signatory to the Refugees Convention and  that Papua New Guinea will be giving all of the rights available under the Refugees  Convention to anyone that is transferred from Australia and that Australia will be  supporting Papua New Guinea in fulfilling those obligations. That's the important thing.

FAINE: Why shouldn't Australia fulfil its obligations? I've just had a look back at your  maiden speech when you first entered the parliament. Can you remember what you  said about refugees?

DREYFUS: I've often spoken about refugees in the parliament, Jon, and it's a very, very  difficult question. You know that. I know that. I know also that we're taking 20,000  refugees. Australia is in the top three countries in the world for taking refugees. We've  increased the number by 7000.

FAINE: You said in your maiden speech, Mark Dreyfus, Australia provided a refuge to my  father and his family as it has to millions of others.

DREYFUS: And it's something that we...

FAINE: There are many Australian stories like mine.

DREYFUS: There are, and it's something that we can be very proud of, but all Australians  I think want to see this dreadful, dreadful event end. More than 800 people drowned -  men, women, and children drowned coming to Australia in the last few years. Drowned  because they were sent on unseaworthy boats.

FAINE: Dreadful, but what about those who, in fact, start a new life like your family did  itself? In your speech you go on to say that you hope by the time you leave the

parliament, you can look back at what you said in your maiden speech with pride. Do  you really think as being part of a government that's doing this, you'll be so able to do?

DREYFUS: Jon, I want to see a resolution of the refugees issue worldwide. It is an  international problem. I want us to continue to work on it. I'm very proud that we've  increased ...

FAINE: But we can't run the world, although Kevin Rudd looks sometimes as if he wants  to.

DREYFUS: We can't...

FAINE: You can control Australia's law.

DREYFUS: We can't run the world, but we have to recognise that it is a regional  problem. Ridiculously, Tony Abbot said last week that it wasn't an international problem  but something that can be unilaterally dealt with by Australia. It can't be. It has to be  dealt with at a regional level. That's what we're doing.

We've not only reached this arrangement with Papua New Guinea, we've had a  tremendous step forward from Indonesia in saying that they were going to end visa on  arrival for Iranians, which is going to do something about the flow of people from Iran,  and we're going to continue to work with Indonesia and with Malaysia and with other  countries in our region.

FAINE: Anna Burke yesterday on this program - and she's your neighbour, electorally -  said that she thought this move would cost her votes. Do you think it'll cost you votes  too?

DREYFUS: I think it's entirely possible that it'll cost votes, but we are the government  and we have to make decisions now in the interests of Australia, in the national interest.  We have to make decisions that we think will bring this people smuggling trade to an  end with the dreadful drownings that it involves. And we don't want our immigration  program, our refugee program, completely overcome by tens of thousands of people,  an increasing number, arriving by boat via people smugglers. That's what we're trying  to...



FAINE: Are you happy for unaccompanied minors to be sent indefinitely to PNG rather  than being resettled in Australia?

DREYFUS: Prime Minister and the Immigration Minister have made it clear that we will  not be sending anyone other than to places which are safe, where there is appropriate  accommodation. That is now what is being worked on, but equally, we are not going to  rule out any group of people being transferred to Papua New Guinea under this

arrangement because to do so is an invitation to people smugglers to start sending that  group.

We'll have testing of our resolve in every way by people smugglers. That's why the key  matter in this arrangement with Papua New Guinea is that it is an unlimited number of  people who will be sent.

And I'm very much hoping that the message will get through to the people smugglers  and people proposing to come do not come by boat without a visa because you will be  transferred to Papua New Guinea.

FAINE: And finally, is it just a coincidence that the lead barrister in the High Court  challenge on the Malaysia solution, Debbie Mortimer, was recently appointed by you to  the Federal Court and thus no longer there to challenge the PNG solution?

DREYFUS: It's very good to be able to speak of the excellent appointments that we've  been able to make to the Federal Court, including Debbie Mortimer, and of course it's a  complete coincidence. I can't think of anyone more able to serve on the Federal Court of  Australia than Debbie Mortimer. She's had vast experience in the Federal Court and in  the High Court.

FAINE: Well, she stopped the Malaysia solution. You appoint her to the court, that gets  her out of the way.

DREYFUS: I think you might find that the court gave the ruling, Jon, not the barrister. I'm  very much looking forward to the contribution that Debbie Mortimer's going to make as  a judge of the Federal Court of Australia.

FAINE: Thank you for your time this morning.

ENDS

