Tony Burke MP  Minister for Immigration, Multicultural Affairs and Citizenship  Minister for the Arts

Asylum seekers, people smugglers  Monday, 08 July 2013

Interview with Ray Hadley, 2GB

Ray Hadley: As I mentioned earlier, 753 boats carrying 46 241 people have arrived  in Australian waters under Labor. Since the program finished on Friday, the  Government has announced the arrival of six more boats. One of those was brought  to Christmas Island despite the fact it was picked up 42 nautical miles south of Java.  Now, while I was away, the Foreign Minister Bob Carr admitted what I'd been saying  for many, many years. The majority of the boat people who can afford to pay a  people smuggler and bring themselves to our country are economic refugees.

The Rudd Government now plans to send anyone who destroys their passports to  the back of the queue. I don't think it'll work.

The Immigration Minister is Tony Burke.

Minister, good morning.

Tony Burke: Good to be with you, Ray.

Ray Hadley: Well, firstly can I thank you? You're the first Immigration Minister in  over three years to talk to this program.

Tony Burke: I've been talking to this program on good days and bad days for a long  time.

Ray Hadley: I appreciate the fact that you don't hide, but I can get an admission  from you. I've heard the things you've said this morning on Sky News or elsewhere.  Can I get an admission that despite what you say this morning that the policies of  this government, the Kevin Rudd Government, was to blame for the initial outbreak  of boat people coming back to this country after the problem had been previously  solved by the previous government?

Tony Burke: I'll phrase it slightly different, but it's not far from what you've said.

Ray Hadley: Okay.

Tony Burke: And that is that in 2009, things started to change around the world and  we needed to change our policy setting straight away, and we didn't. It actually took  us more than a year before we came back with the Malaysia agreement from Chris  Bowen. Had we moved quickly in 2009 when the situation around the world started  to change, I don't believe we'd be facing the problem now and I think we need to be  completely up front about that.

Ray Hadley: Okay. And the Malaysian solution, despite what you say as a  government about the role of the Opposition, is denied in the High Court, but it's still  only 800 for 4000. We're still taking the 4000, as we should, because they are  legitimate refugees from Malaysia. Correct?

Tony Burke: That's right. And at the time that it was first announced, we had a much  smaller flow of boats back then and the 800, I actually think back then, would have  done the job and would have been enough to stop it. The problem since then is  we've now had something escalate massively and the longer it goes on, the tougher  the job becomes. That's the nature of these networks.

Ray Hadley: How do you think people react in Australia when they pick up the  papers over the course of the weekend and this morning and listen to this radio  program and see that one of our Naval vessels, HMAS Larrakia, I think it was,  assisted a boat that wasn't in trouble 42 nautical miles south of Java and travelled  over 200 nautical miles to Christmas Island. What do you think people think about  that?

Tony Burke: People are understandably frustrated. I don't think there's anyone  who's not.

Ray Hadley: Why didn't we simply take them to Indonesian waters? Why didn't we  take them to an Indonesian port, as we should under international maritime  conventions?

Tony Burke: To take a Naval vessel into someone else's territorial water, you need  their permission, and even Scott Morrison has been acknowledging on the weekend  that when they say they'll tow the boats to Indonesia, they'll actually only go to the  edge of Indonesian territory. They say they won't go into Indonesian territory  because you can't take a military vessel into someone else's country...

Ray Hadley: Yeah, but we've got the Prime Minister talking to Bambang Yudhoyono,  surely part of the process would be look, Bambang, this one's 42 nautical miles from  your joint, it's about 250 nautical miles from our nearest territory, being Christmas  Island, wouldn't it be preferable for you to look after the matter opposed to us carting  them all the way back?

Tony Burke: They're the sorts of conservations we need to have around the whole  region and some - there are some arguments as to whether or not it's actually  quicker to get people back on planes rather than boats. There's different arguments  as to how you do it, but the principle that you're saying there I don't disagree with,  which is you can't have a situation where no matter where someone's picked up the  answer keeps being Australia.

Ray Hadley: You see, because I spent a week in the US, I did a bit of reading about  it. In 1994, the US Coast Guard - it's a long time ago - prevented 63 000 people  from entering the US using a total of 55 US Coast Guard vessels. They turned them  back. They didn't arrive there. Now, people say that's, you know, inhumane, that it's  sending people, you know, into a peril, it - but we don't know [indistinct] for that, how  many perished then or now by not making land in Australia. I mean, do we have any  idea how many thousands of people are dead, the result of what's happening at the  moment?

Tony Burke: No, and this is where I get very frustrated with some people who will  say to me that because I'll talk about the need to stop this, they say you live in a  multicultural area, you don't understand, you know, you're going against your own  local area. And I get very frustrated about that because, you know, I've been in the  room of 15 people sitting around the room who took phone calls from relatives  getting on a boat and never heard from them again.

And I've seen very directly just how appalling this is and that's why there'll be times  in this portfolio where I have no doubt we're going to have agreements and massive  disagreements, but you won't get slogans from me on this. This one is far too  important.

Ray Hadley: But do you also understand because you reside in that electorate that's  multicultural that the biggest complaint I get on this program is from either first,  second, or third generation Australians who came here after the war who are  absolutely incensed that these people come here, they're given money, they're given  relief, they're given housing, public housing in front of Australians who've been here  for a long, long time, and those that are most incensed about the policies of your  government are, in fact, almost recent arrivals of the country who came here through  the checks and balances. And they're incensed that it becomes a dumping ground  for people from other parts of the world. We don't know who they are.

Tony Burke: Look, I get people at the moment - one the areas where a lot of people  in part of Sydney have got relatives is in Syria and they will have relatives in a  terrible situation hearing bombs go off around them at the moment and they're try...  they're waiting their turn to come through the proper system, they're terrified for their  relatives, and they see the rest of this and they're furious about it. The reason I refer  to the other example is when you're looking straight in the eye of someone who, you  know, remembers the last phone call from their brother, that's, I think, the strongest  of, you know, memories that I'll never lose. But what you've just described, I get as  well.

Ray Hadley: I don't question your sincerity because I believe you to be a fair and  decent man. I've said that publicly before, okay? And, I mean, not everyone in the  Labor Party's crook, not everyone in the Coalition's good, and I acknowledge that,  and if there is a change in government, I regret that you won't be part of an incoming  ministry. But I've got to say to you, Tony, what we look like here is that we're talking  about slogans and Frank Brennan has spoken about that in the paper this morning  suggesting it's no more than just a bit of a PR solution, this - the fact that you're  announcing that you don't come with papers, you go to the back of the queue.

Well, that still guarantees people without temporary protection visas and other  safeguards that they'll eventually get here anyway in terms of being granted  permanent residency or granted some sort of visa. What we're doing is we're putting  a holding pattern here, Tony, until the election is called by the Prime Minister either  in September, or now it looks like October, to try and pretend that we're stopping the  flow of boats when, in fact, we're doing exactly what Chris Bowen did, what Chris  Evans did, and what the last minister did. We're stalling for time.

Tony Burke: Can I say on the back of the queue issue, I think there is something  quite significant going on that that does make a difference to. There's a review that  had kicked off before I arrived. I'm hoping it's not going to take too much longer.

Ray Hadley: Yeah.

Tony Burke: But to look again at how we do our determinations. You've seen the  statistics about the difference in people getting over the line in Australia compared to  the United Nations knocking people back.

Ray Hadley: Yeah.

Tony Burke: And what that means is people who, by not being processed now,  means by the time they are processed, those new rules will be in place. Now, I  haven't had that review come back to me yet, but, you know, I think you can pretty  much guarantee it's going to look very, very strongly at why it is that we're getting  very different rates to what a lot of other international organisations get.

Ray Hadley: I - can I tell - don't worry about the review, the Admin Appeals  Tribunal? I mean, the Federal Court? I mean, Tony, fair dinkum. You're a fair dinkum  sort of bloke. I mean, you know that there are lawyers out there working pro bono or  because you've paid them a lot of money as a government to work, one or the other.  I don't question their morality, I don't question what their motives are. But there are  that many avenues of appeal. I mean, we've got a bloke at the moment at Villawood,  a very violent individual who didn't come here on a boat. He was born elsewhere in  the Pacific Islands and I read a judgement just before I went away from the Admin  Appeals Tribunal that said oh look, yes, he bashes police officers, he bashes prison  officers, but I'm going to give him another chance.

Well, I don't want to give him another chance and you can't give him another chance  as minister unless you intervene in a decision made by the Admin Appeals Tribunal,  which is - I mean, that's the reason why we don't enjoy the same level of sending  people back, and this has got nothing to do with boat people, we're weak-kneed and  lily-livered.

Tony Burke: When you change your determination rules, which is what this is  looking at...

Ray Hadley: Yeah.

Tony Burke: ...that should have an impact on the appeals. It should. Now, you  know, there will always be frustration with lawyers and every government will have  that, but I think you can't in the face of that just say well, we're going to keep all our  processes the same...

Ray Hadley: Have you...

Tony Burke: ...and just cop it.

Ray Hadley: Have you got knowledge of this one I just threw to you know? I mean, I  know you've only been there for a twinkling, but this case is just absolutely ridiculous  and I'm happy to provide your department, I've already probably provide - but you as  the minister with all the details, because it's just abhorrent. We've got a very violent  individual who served a long prison sentence who someone's decided from, you  know, some quasi judicial body that he's going to repent and be a really good bloke

so we'll give him another crack at it to bash young police officers in the skull and  prison officers in the skull if he comes into contact with them as well.

Tony Burke: After you've finished the program today, could you get your researcher  just - don't go to the department, call my office directly...

Ray Hadley: Yeah.

Tony Burke: ...and that way I can follow that up.

Ray Hadley: Just to clear something up, I mean, is the ultimate power resting with  you in those matters? I mean, can you simply say well look, I'm sorry, I've looked at  this, this bloke should be sent back to whence he came. We don't need this bloke  here.

Tony Burke: There are times when legally I am the final person and no court can  review it and there are times when it can still be reviewed. So I have to have a look  at the specifics of the case.

Ray Hadley: Okay, but I go back to my original point to you. You're questioning why  we have, you know, a policy, it appears, of letting people stay here come what may  and I'm simply saying to you it's because we allow them the opportunity to keep  appealing and appealing and appealing until they find some weak-kneed person who  says oh yeah, look, you know, yeah, I believe those psychological reports. You've  repented. You're a fantastic person. The fact that you may have bashed or killed  someone or done something which is repulsive to our community, but we think you  deserve another opportunity despite the fact you're not a citizen here.

Tony Burke: Yeah. And look, can I say the endless appeals are a frustration even  when you've got a relatively well - you know, even when you've got a completely  well behaved person who doesn't have the right to stay in Australia. Because I've  seen situations where people end up going through the court system, getting held up  for eight or nine years before they eventually have to leave, by which time their kids  have made all their friends at school, it's that much harder than if it had happened  earlier. So, yeah, I need no convincing on the challenges that we get from the courts  on this.

Ray Hadley: Just one final things, we've occupied enough of your time. About this  queue, putting people at the back of the queue.

Tony Burke: Yes.

Ray Hadley: The Coalition policy is they wouldn't be in the queue. The policy is if  your name's Ook McGlook because you told us you're Ook McGlook and you threw  all your details overboard when you jumped on the boat in Indonesia, you're not in  the hunt. You're not part of the process because we don't know who you are. So why  should they be entitled to be in the queue anyway when they decided for whatever  reason to throw their documents overboard once they got on that boat?

Tony Burke: Part of the problem, as I understand it...

Ray Hadley: Yeah.

Tony Burke: ...is that people don't come to us and say yes, I destroyed my  documents. You get some people who genuinely, because of the nature of how  quickly they've had to get out when you get some people genuine, that they actually  don't have documents and they cooperate with the Government in trying to get new  ones.

Ray Hadley: No, no. They con the Government.

Tony Burke: No, no.

Ray Hadley: No, no, no.

Tony Burke: We do have some - no, no.

Ray Hadley: Yeah.

Tony Burke: Honestly, because I was surprised to hear this. You get people -  there's no doubt you get people trying to con you. I'm not pretending you don't get  that. You do get some people actively helping get fresh travel documents and getting  fresh...

Ray Hadley: How do they get into Indonesia if they, you know, what - the  Indonesians were trusting as well and said oh yeah, you're Ook McGlook, you've  come from Iran, Pakistan, that's fine. In you come. They had travel documents when  they arrived on the plane into Indonesia, Tony.

Tony Burke: It depends on how they got into Indonesia and...

Ray Hadley: Well, you're not suggesting...

Tony Burke: We've had some people come direct from Sri Lanka as well.

Ray Hadley: You're not suggesting they walked?

Tony Burke: No, no. We had some people arrive direct from Sri Lanka.

Ray Hadley: Well, they all...

Tony Burke: What I'm only repeating something that surprised me when I received  the advice.

Ray Hadley: Yeah. You're far more trusting than I am. We'll leave it there. Thank  you for your time.

Tony Burke: Good to be with you.

Ray Hadley: Thank you. Tony Burke, the Immigration Minister.





