

Julie Bishop MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS



Channel 7 Sunrise

29 June 2013

Subjects: Kevin Rudd’s comments re Indonesia, Coalition’s border protection policy

E&OE…

SAMANTHA ARMYTAGE We are joined now by Deputy Leader of the Opposition, Julie  Bishop.

Ms Bishop, thank you very much for your time this morning.

JULIE BISHOP Good morning.

SAMANTHA ARMYTAGE Now tell us honestly, were you disappointed to see Kevin Rudd  replace Julia Gillard? because the election campaign is now well and truly on. It is much  more difficult for the Opposition.

JULIE BISHOP We had expected Labor to dump yet another unpopular leader and reinstall  Kevin Rudd and so we have expected it, we have planned for it. And Kevin Rudd, true to  form, is acting as he did as Prime Minister the last time around. His reckless and irresponsible  statements about triggering a war with Indonesia people smuggling just brought back the bad  old days of Kevin Rudd.

But the test for Kevin Rudd is whether he can come up with solutions to the problems that he  caused last time he was in the job - the debt and deficit, the fact that the people smuggling  trade is back in business, the wasteful spending. These were all issues that began under Kevin  Rudd, got worse under Julia Gillard and the test is whether he’s got any plan, any solution for  the Australian people now.

ANDREW O’KEEFE Just a very quick politifact check here. He didn’t actually say it would  cause a war with Indonesia, he said it may cause conflict with Indonesia. Now the Indonesian  Ambassador has said he is untroubled by those comments it’s a matter for Australian internal  politics so it’s a bit of a beat up.

JULIE BISHOP No I’m afraid that’s not right. He said there could be a conflict with  Indonesia, he then tried to say he meant a diplomatic conflict and then he invoked a military  conflict with Indonesia from the 1960s, a konfrontasi, in which Australian soldiers died. For  Kevin Rudd to even mention that conflict from the 1960s was alarmist. It sounded absolutely  desperate and it shows Kevin Rudd knows he is responsible for changing the laws in 2008  which started up the people smuggling trade again.

Let’s not escape the facts here. 45,000 people have tried to come to Australia by boat since  then, hundreds of people have died at sea because of this change in policies in Australia and  there’s been a massive blowout in the cost of managing the offshore and onshore processing  centres.

Kevin Rudd has to take responsibility for changing the laws and he can’t try and invoke some  sort of military conflict with Indonesia and blame the Coalition, because it was his policy that  reinvoked the people smuggling trade in the first place. Indonesia doesn’t want the people  smuggling trade operating in its country.

It was a change of laws in Australia under the Howard Government that stopped the boats the  first time and it was a change of laws under Kevin Rudd that started the boats coming again.  And if the Coalition is elected in September or whenever the election is it will be a change of  laws that stop the boats again.

SAMANTHA ARMYTAGE Our relationship with Indonesia is well and truly in the spotlight  again and it is so tricky. The Indonesian Ambassador is in the paper today and has criticised  your policy of turning back the boats. Will you continue to stand behind that even if it really  does endanger our really important relationship with Indonesia?

JULIE BISHOP Of course it won’t endanger our relationship with Indonesia. They are  exactly the same policies that were in place under the Howard Government. They worked  then and they will work again. What is endangering our relationship with Indonesia is when  Prime Minister Rudd uses our relationship as some kind of base political weapon for internal  politics.

ANDREW O’KEEFE Most people would think both sides of Parliament are very guilty of  that.

JULIE BISHOP Well I’m sorry, I didn’t raise the question of a military conflict with  Indonesia, that was Kevin Rudd.

ANDREW O’KEEFE Yeah but you’re the ones who put the word war into the Prime  Minister’s mouth. You used the word war and that’s what the Coalition has been doing.

JULIE BISHOP No I’m sorry, please, why did he raise the konfrontasi with Indonesia from  the 1960s? Why was that put into a discussion about people smuggling? Tell me why he  raised a military conflict with Indonesia in this precise context.

ANDREW O’KEEFE Well that is a question we will ask the Prime Minister, but he didn’t  use the word war.

Now just on a larger context on this, I think most people are very worried about the asylum  seeker problem. But then many people acknowledge that is not one of the larger problems  that Australia faces.

We had ex-Prime Minister Malcolm Fraser on last week who during his time as Prime  Minister accepted 250,000 people from Indo-China and did so on a humanitarian basis and  did so in a much smoother way than is currently occurring now with people seeking asylum  in this country.

What, apart from turning back the boats, is the Coalition going to do to stop the trade in  people? Are we going to have a more effective camp system in the countries of origin as the  Liberal Coalition did under Malcolm Fraser?

JULIE BISHOP Well see, that’s precisely the difference. What has happened now is  Australia’s immigration laws have been subcontracted out to criminal syndicates in the  people smuggling trade. These are criminals who are running these people smuggling  businesses out of Indonesia and elsewhere. That’s why the Howard Government policies  stopped, dismantled that people smuggling trade, and we could get back to an orderly  humanitarian intake, an orderly immigration system.

Australia is one of the most welcoming countries in the world. We want to return to the  situation where the Australian Government is in control of our immigration system.

ANDREW O’KEEFE Well that is just rhetoric. What actual steps you are you going to take  to do that?

JULIE BISHOP First we have to change the laws in Australia, so that as the Indonesians say  we ‘take the sugar off the table for the people smuggling trade’ in other words we have to  smash their business model.

We change the laws in Australia which reintroduces temporary protections visas, we turn the  boats around where it is safe to do so - and this is in no breach of Indonesian territorial  sovereignty, it’s in Australian waters or international waters - and we continue with the  offshore processing until we can clear out the detention centres as we did the last time.

When we were last in office there were only four people who had arrived by boat in the  detention network. Now there are literally thousands. And we continue with the Bali Process  that was commenced by the Howard Government to work with countries in our region to  resolve the issue, we work cooperatively with Indonesia, as we did last time, we work  cooperatively with Malaysia and other countries back up the pipeline. We did it under the  Howard Government and we will do it again.

SAMANTHA ARMYTAGE Alright Julie Bishop we are out of time but we do thank you for  your time this morning.

- Ends -



