

Senator Michaelia Cash   Senator for Western Australia Deputy Manager of Opposition Business in the Senate Shadow Parliamentary Secretary for the Status of Women  Shadow Parliamentary Secretary for Immigration  Media Release International Women’s Day 7 March 2013  International Women’s Day is celebrated on 8 March each year. It is a day on which we recognise the economic and social achievements of women past and present and how their contributions, whether to the arts, sport, politics, community or other areas have shaped our country. IWD is a reminder to all Australians that we need to continue to work together to ensure that, globally, the contribution of women to society is properly valued and appreciated.  It is also an opportunity to remind ourselves that we must continue to be cognisant of those areas of women’s lives in Australia where more can still be done. In the lead-up to IWD it has been revealed that the Australian Bureau of Statistics’ Work, Life and Family survey, which was central to the formation of evidence-based policy that assisted women and families has been scrapped because of the Government’s cost saving measures. “This announcement proves that the Government is strong on rhetoric but weak on delivery and results for Australian women”, Senator Cash said. “How can a government formulate evidence-based policy that will deliver choice and better balance for Australian women and the population more generally, when this kind of data is not being collected”? “The Government can no longer pretend that it is actively engaged in creating better outcomes for Australian women when it has scrapped the very survey that informs its own policy decisions. This is a disappointing outcome for the policy makers and academics who rely on these statistics as well as the women who would benefit from the resulting policy”.  “The Gillard Government needs to show the women of Australia, by its actions rather than rhetoric, that it is committed to furthering the cause of women in Australia”, Senator Cash said.  “Ensuring a strong economy is the best way of providing financial security and prosperity to women.  The Coalition has a proud record of strong economic management”.  “Under Labor a strong economy is a distant memory”.  Media Contact Jonathan Heron: 0431 293 672  44 Outram Street   Parliament House Canberra WEST PERTH WA 6005  CANBERRA  ACT  2600  Phone: (08) 9226 2000  Phone: (02) 6277 3387

