

Transcript of interview

Sky News Saturday Agenda

Posted on July 13, 2013

SUBJECTS: Education funding; independent public schools; Liberal ad campaign

E&OE…………………………..

Hon Christopher Pyne MP: Good morning David.

David Lipson: As you just heard there all of a sudden Campbell Newman is using the  word agreement in his answers as this comes of course after the independent  schools last week agreed to the reforms, it seems that the Government may have a  bit of momentum here.

Pyne: Well look far from it David. The Government’s new school funding model is in  complete disarray and no longer resembles the model that was taken to the Budget  in May. Queensland requires to sign up, money to start next year, extra hundreds of  millions of dollars which the Federal Government simply doesn’t have. They want  them to dismantle the federal interference powers that are part of the model.  Victoria wants exactly the same but they want the Government to lift its offer from  $3.5 billion to $7 billion and they want to start see that money start flowing next  year. Now as we know the Governments model is a cut to spending over the next  four years of $325 million and in years five and six apparently rivers of gold flow.  Tasmania got a secret deal where they their indexation that they have to put in has  been discounted. New South Wales doesn’t need to reach the student resource  standard until, of 100% in four years, they only have to reach 95%. The ACT was  given an extra $90 million. South Australia was given an extra $83 million. Now all of  these secret deals, side arrangements and special agreements that the States and  Territories have been offered mean that the Government surplus is basically blown  and you have to believe that Labor will be able to deliver that. You have to win  three, Labor has to win three elections to deliver that, so far from being close to  being landed the Government’s program is in complete disarray and I think they are  a long way from securing it.

Lipson: You would have to admit though that Campbell Newman’s language is a lot  more positive and open to the possibility of signing on?

Pyne: I think Labor, if Labor is putting that out there then Labor is grasping at  straws. Campbell Newman, Denis Napthine, the Premier Colin Barnett and Adam  Giles in the Northern Territory have been absolutely clear, they do not want the  Federal Minister for Education interfering in state schools. The Federal Government  doesn’t run any state schools; they should be run by the State Governments. Now all  this extra money that the Labor Party is claiming they’re putting into schools it starts  in years five and six. In years five and six the Government’s planning on putting  billions of dollars into schools. But between now and that time there’s a cut of $325  million. Now if you believe that Labor will deliver three election wins and then billions  of dollars in five or six years from now then you have to suspend everything you  know about the Labor Party. Suspend the fact they promised not to introduce a  carbon tax and then introduced one. Suspend the fact that they promised not to  dismantle John Howard’s border protection laws in a way that would allow asylum  seekers in and then since that time since Kevin Rudd did it 45,000 boat arrivals at  least have come. So you can’t believe what Labor tells you in five years, you have to  only believe what you see in the Budget papers, in black and white and that’s a cut  to school education.

Lipson: Okay. So what will you do if you win government and there is only  potentially let’s say, just WA that hasn’t signed on, that’s a hypothetical of course  but I’m trying to lock you down on this, if one State hasn’t signed on, the rest have,  will you keep this agreement?

Pyne: Well David it’s very hard to ask me hypothetical questions. I mean you could  go back to Bill Shorten and say to him what if only four jurisdictions out of eight  have signed on and you have a special arrangement with each of those four that is  different to the others, will you persist with pretending that you have a new school  funding model when you clearly don’t, that is just as a legitimate question to Bill  Shorten. If we win the election if we’re fortunate enough to win we will examine the  situation that the Labor Party has left us, which at the moment is chaotic in terms of  school funding. If a majority, if an overwhelming majority of States have agreed to  it, then we‘ve said that we won’t create more uncertainty, if not we will persist with  the current model which is fair, which is equitable which means that money gets to  where it’s needed which is based on objective data and it rewards private  investment.

Lipson: But, well that overwhelming majority you have said that before but I’m just  trying to work out exactly what that means, does that mean…

Pyne: Well it means more than four out of eight.

Lipson: Sure sure, but how many more?

Pyne: Well, let’s wait and see if any more sign up.

Lipson: There’s four left and you know, are we talking one more or are we talking  two more States to sign up? If for example Queensland and Victoria do sign up, will  you keep it?

Pyne: Look David it’s not fair to play a hypothetical game with a Member of  Parliament, I mean you should go back to Bill Shorten and say to him ‘don’t you  think your model is in complete disarray when only four jurisdictions have agreed to  it and each one has required a special agreement that is different to the others, do  you really want to persist with pretending you have a new school funding model?’  Victoria for example, I’ve been through what Queensland wants, Victoria wants the  Government to double its offer from $3.5 billion in five years’ time to $7 billion and  they want the $7 billion to start flowing next year. They also want the Government  to dismantle the school funding model. Now if the Federal Government agrees to  that, then basically the Federal Government is happy to dismantle the new school  funding model, hand the money to the States in five years from now and even  starting next year, money it doesn’t have and basically give up. Now they will be,  they will vindicate the Coalition’s position that they didn’t know what they were  doing from the start and it will show that the Government isn’t fit to stay in office if  it leaves school funding in such extraordinary disarray.

Lipson: Well this week you actually said if most the rest of the States signed up well  then you won’t get rid of it. Has that position changed, or is that still your position?

Pyne: Well that’s an overwhelming a majority isn’t it?

Lipson: Yeah, so okay, so you will keep it in place, okay. Well let’s say you do tear  up this agreement, what would replace the funding model that is now in place and  expires next year? Would you just replicate the current funding arrangements  exactly?

Pyne: Well we’re in the fortunate position David of knowing that the current funding  model has been in place since the year 2000 and it works. We know that we are the  only political party that can promise every single school in Australia will be better off  if they vote Coalition because they’ll get the same quantum of funds they have now,  plus generous indexation, which the government can’t promise. In fact there are  hundreds of schools across Australia that will lose money under this new school  system. Villanova in Brisbane where Tony Abbott was only on Friday would lose 17  % of its funds next year, so the Coalition is the only Party that can promise that  every school from next year will get the same quantum of funds plus indexation at  the current levels which means no school can be worse off. Labor can’t promise that  so Labor is trying to sell a con on the Australian people and I think most of the  States have worked it out.

Lipson: Well what about the States that have signed up, would they be compensated  if you win government and scrap this plan?

Pyne: Well they won’t need to be compensated David because in fact the  Government is cutting school funding over the next four years, including those  States.

Lipson: So no compensation will flow?

Pyne: Well how could there be compensation when in fact the Coalition’s policy is  more generous than the Governments? You see David, people need to pay bills next  year, not in 2017. In 2014 schools will receive bills and have to pay them. Schools  need to know next year how much money they will get and that is why neither Peter  Garrett nor backstabbing Bill Shorten have been able to tell people how much money  every school will get in 2014, 2015 and 2016 because he knows if he tells them he’ll  have to admit he is cutting their funding next year.

Lipson: In Chris Bowen’s new book released yesterday he called for Labor to adopt  the British model of free schools. This is where parents, teachers and communities  can actually set up schools that are government funded but not government run,  would you consider following the British conservatives down this path if you win  government?

Pyne: Well I’d like to see Chris Bowen get that policy passed the Australian  Education Union at Labor conference, but putting that to one side; well we already  have a model in Western Australia called independent public schools which is a one  line Budget item in the Western Australian state Budget. The money is provided to  the school, the school is run locally by the principal, the bursar, his or her leadership  team and a local governing council. It isn’t exactly a charter school system because  there is still an element of state education department control over those schools but  they are very very autonomous and I think that is an excellent model in Australia. I  would like to see the independent public school model rolled out around Australia,  and I know that it works because, we don’t need a conference on the Gold Coast or  another paper to tell us, to advise us about this or another review, we know it works  because Western Australia is the only jurisdiction in Australia since 1977 where there  is a movement from non-government to government schools of students being  moved by their parents. So parents are saying we like that model and we think we’re  getting what we would otherwise pay for in a non-government school which is more  principal autonomy, more local control, more local decision making. That’s the  Coalition’s policy.

Lipson: Okay so that is something that you would allow federally, you would roll out  as official Coalition policy?

Pyne: There’s no doubt about it, if we get elected, if we’re fortunate to win the  election we will be rolling out independent public schools as our preferred principal  autonomy model around Australia, in concert with the states, we’ll work with the  states, but we provide a lot of funding federally and we believe given the  extraordinary results that are being achieved in Western Australia, while money is

one important element of the equation, the other important elements are principal  autonomy, teacher quality, a robust curriculum and parental engagement. Labor  talks endlessly about spending more money, which in five years from now by the  way, but in fact the Coalition is focussed on the things that parents, teachers and  principals know that are important, which is the quality of the teaching, what you’re  teaching the students, the engagement of parents and the level of autonomy of the  principals.

Lipson: But would that autonomy fit within the national curriculum though or would  those schools be allowed to go off the script as such?

Pyne: No the national curriculum covers four subjects at the moment and has been  extended and will cover many other subjects over the years ahead and that is the  curriculum that is expected to be taught. So charter schools, not charter schools as  Chris Bowen would call them, but independent public schools would not be able to  go off the reservation so to speak, that’s why there has to be some element of  control, there always has to be oversight of what our children are being taught. But  we don’t need the heavy hand of the education bureaucracy that has stifled  innovation and invention in education for decades.

Lipson: And just finally before I let you go, the Coalition today is launching a fresh  round of ads, one is positive, one is more of an attack ad at Kevin Rudd’s record.  This is two and a half weeks after Kevin Rudd regained the leadership. It’s almost a  week after he released his own ad calling for a positive polity. Why’s it taken so long  for the Coalition to hit back?

Pyne: Well David, we had ads on the television within days of Kevin Rudd coming  back into the Prime Ministership…

Lipson: But it wasn’t a full prime time ad campaign as Kevin Rudd’s was…

Pyne: I’m not going to argue with you about it, but Kevin Rudd’s ran once for 45  seconds and I wouldn’t describe that as an ad campaign, I’d describe that as Kevin  Rudd wanting to get himself on television yet again because of his Napoleonic sized  ego. We do think Kevin Rudd in 2013 needs to be exposed for his record. 2007  Kevin Rudd ran on the basis that he was John Howard-lite. Once he got elected he  started spending, he racked up the debt, he gave us the five biggest deficits in  Australia’s history, he dismantled the border protection laws of the Howard  Government having said he wouldn’t, having said he’d turn back the boats in 2007,  in 2013 we’ve now had over 45,000 arrivals because of Kevin Rudd. He voted for  and supported the carbon tax, he introduced the mining tax. So he has a record and  it’s important the Australian people realise Kevin’s been in power for six years, he  has a record and they need to know what it is, he’s not just Howard-lite like he tried  to claim in 2007 and then claimed afterwards that he was a Christian Socialist, so  Kevin needs to be exposed. On the other hand we have a positive ad about the  Coalition’s team which is united and stable and has been the same for four years

and the fact is if we’re elected we will have more experience in our frontbench than  any new government coming into power, I think since Australia’s federation because  16 members of Tony Abbott’s Cabinet were Ministers in the Howard Government.  At the moment you’d probably find there are less people who are Ministers, Cabinet  Ministers than there were in Kevin Rudd’s current Cabinet than there were in John  Howard’s leaving Cabinet because of the eight members that resigned only two  weeks ago and refused to serve with Kevin.

ENDS.



