THE HON BRENDAN O’CONNOR MP  MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP

E&OE TRANSCRIPT  INSIDERS  SUNDAY, 23 JUNE, 2013

SUBJECT: DEATH OF SOLDIER, 457 VISAS, ASYLUM SEEKERS, LEADERSHIP

BARRIE CASSIDY: We'll go straight to our program guest now and it's the Immigration Minister  Brendan O'Connor, he joins us in Sydney, good morning, welcome.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Thanks, Barrie.

BARRIE CASSIDY: That there, right there, is a reminder of - that it's still a dangerous place,  Afghanistan.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: That's right, Barrie. As we look to withdraw troops there are still, of course,  great dangers and again we've seen a tragic loss of life of one of our personnel.

BARRIE CASSIDY: Now, I want to start on the 745 visas issue with you.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: 457.

BARRIE CASSIDY: Sorry, 457 visas issue.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Sure.

BARRIE CASSIDY: Can you persuade Tony Windsor at this late stage to support the tightening of the  regulations?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Well, Tony's open to the argument I think because this is really about  ensuring that employers look local first.

It's about ensuring that we respond to legitimate shortages in sectors and industries across the  country, using the 457 scheme, which by the way is a vital scheme, but we don't allow for the misuse  and I think a simple way of testing that is making sure that employers look locally first and I think  Tony would be open to that.

But look, I'll have further conversations with him and other cross-bench members and see how we  go.

BARRIE CASSIDY: I'm sure you saw the 7.30 report on Thursday and it talked about an IT company  with links to Qantas. A staff of 211 and the suggestion was nearly 200 of those are on 457s. Can that  be right?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR:  Yes, it can be right and there are companies, of course, that use 457s in large  numbers.

That's not to say they're being misused in every instance where that would occur but we need to be  vigilant.

The problem is that the current undertakings required of an employer are not enforceable. So you  can attest that you've looked locally but if you've found not to have looked locally at all, there is no  infringement notice.

This is really just providing something enforceable. But we have to keep it quite simple.

We don't - we need to be light touch and I think a job ad would be something that would be a  reasonable thing to do and the Department would be satisfied that there's been an effort to look for  local skills.

We have 660,000 unemployed Australians. We have young people going through trade training and  through, of course, university.

We want to make sure they get opportunities in those skilled jobs and I think most Australians  overwhelmingly agree with us.

BARRIE CASSIDY: If you find though that that IT company misused the system are you able to  dismantle the arrangements and make some room for some local jobs?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Well, that's why we need the reforms, Barrie.

We need to make sure we, for example, have the capacity to bar employers who misuse the scheme  from future applicants.

We need to make sure that the penalties which are not changing by the way, but they can be  imposed on employers if they've misused it.

Because the reality is this. Overwhelmingly, employers do the right thing and they do actually look  locally but without the reforms, we're not - there's no level playing field because there are a  significant number of employers who choose not to do that and that can put them at a competitive  advantage against those doing the right thing.

BARRIE CASSIDY: But if you insist they advertise what's to stop them from ignoring the local  applicants anyway?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Look, I think we need to make sure this is done reasonably. There is an  employer prerogative in this country and whilst there might be qualifications we need to ensure that  the person or persons are suitable.

The department can look at that and make sure an effort's been made and I think we need to get  that balance right about the way that's done.

But right now, Barrie, you do not have to advertise, you do not have to look locally and I think that's  undermining the confidence in what is a very significant scheme.

Remember, I've been called upon to cap this scheme and I don't agree with capping it because it  should go up and down based on legitimate shortages.

And on top of that, people forget of course we have 300,000 student visas - are used in this country  to help supply labour and 130,000 holiday-makers.

So there's other ways to provide labour but this is not just about the reforms we're looking to put in  place, it's about the stark choice because the Opposition are on the record of saying they want to  remove the current protections.

Not just not support these reforms but remove the current protections and expand the access of  457.

Now I think that liberalisation would undermine confidence in the temporary skilled stream.

BARRIE CASSIDY: Yeah, that may be the Opposition's position but then others probably think maybe  you don't go far enough because if you saw that 7.30 piece there was a company in the United  States coaching on how to advertise locally but find no-one.

You can do that by ignoring the applicants, you do it by advertising it below market rates on wages.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Well, look I think we've got - I think the reforms will actually attend to most  of these problems and, as I say, being able to bar employers from future applications if they do the  wrong thing, imposing infringement notices, we've expanded the inspectors to include Fair Work  inspectors so we go from 30 to over 300 inspectors.

I think the combination of reforms will do, I think, the right thing.

BARRIE CASSIDY: Provided the department can drill down far enough and investigate whether these  ads are just bogus ads.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR:  Well, they'll have that power to - because the department has to be satisfied  that there's been an effort and we're not alone either.

The Canadian Government, Stephen Harper, the Prime Minister of Canada, just a month ago has  introduced labour market testing in their skilled stream so there's nothing new in this.

It's just the Opposition has chosen not to support it and I think that's a crying shame.

BARRIE CASSIDY: Okay. I want to talk about Manus Island now and of course you've relocated a lot  of women and children to Christmas Island. Why was that decision taken?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR:  Look, decisions to transfer people from regional processing centres occur  from time to time. It's not the first time.

There's been a series of transfers and it's not just families or women and children. It also includes  single adult males.

We're looking to use the regional process centres in a way that will deter people getting on  unseaworthy vessels.

The department make these decisions and of course we also sometimes - we're required to return  people to the mainland for health reasons if there's any issues with somebody's health and in this -  on this occasion this is just about ensuring that we can use the regional processing centres in a way  that will, as I say, reduce that likelihood that people will get on those unseaworthy vessels.

The people who've been transferred to Christmas Island could just as likely be returned to the  regional processing centres or returned when there's a permanent facility and that's, of course, in  keeping with the experts' recommendations in putting in place a deterrent to reduce the people -  reduce the deaths at sea.

BARRIE CASSIDY: Yeah. But there's no permanent facility there now. This is an admission, surely,  that the conditions there are not adequate for children, the amenities are not there.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR:  Look, I've always said that the amenities are adequate. I've been there and  I've spoken not only to the - those that are on the island.

I've spoken to the providers, I've spoken to the transferrees.

Their biggest concern, Barrie, has always been ensuring that they have an assessment of their  claims.

I've been working very hard to make sure that both in Nauru and in PNG we have the assessment of  their refugee status determination.

I'm happy to say that's on foot now. We need to make sure they have those opportunities because  the one thing that's I think most difficult for people is an indefinite position of not knowing how your  claims are being assessed.

That's why we've focused on those issues. But we have to also look at ensuring we reduce people  dying at sea.

The experts of course recommended the RPCs but they've also recommended other issues too  including the Malaysian Arrangement and it really is a shame, we have a safe way to return  transferrees to a transit country on the table and you have a situation where the Opposition refuses  to support it, and they...

BARRIE CASSIDY: Are you saying on this Manus Island arrangement then this has nothing to do with  the reassessment of how children should be treated and you have no change of mind on how  children in detention ought to be treated and how many ought to be kept?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Well, they should always be treated well.

They should always be looked after, there should always be sufficient services provided to them,  there should always be people both - that attend to any health needs, there should be people  providing education services to children and there has been no change of policy.



You will know that the - one of the difficulties in this situation is if there is a situation - if there's a  decision that would remove certain demographics, certain people from a particular processing  centre, it increases the lure of people of that demographic, that is children and women, getting on  boats.

And this is why this area is so challenging. Because if you look [indistinct]

BARRIE CASSIDY: [Talks over] But it's not working. I mean you're detaining children you say as a  deterrent and yet the numbers are increasing.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR:  the argument is of course that we'll see even greater proportions. Now  we've seen this before with temporary protection visas.

When they were introduced under the previous government, there were very significant numbers of  women and children, hundreds of whom perished in one vessel alone - SIEV X.

And that was because they were looking to reunite with their families because there was no capacity  to do so.

So some of the domestic policy decisions you make have a bearing on what happens and who gets  on those vessels.

I have to as Minister look at the consequences of decisions we make all the time.

That's not to say, Barrie, we do not assess the physical and mental health of people when we are  considering these issues and we have transferred those families off Manus - the Manus regional  processing centre and we'll continue to assess people but we have to be sure - ensure that we deter  people getting on those vessels and dying at sea. And they run into the hundreds.

BARRIE CASSIDY: Alright. So you detain children as a deterrent. People released into the community  are not allowed to work.

That again is a deterrent and yet you're facing a sort of a I guess a potential humanitarian crisis. But  it's not working. The numbers are increasing. Over the last three weeks more than 2000 asylum-seekers have arrived.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR:  And but let's be clear here. The experts - Angus Houston, Paris Aristotle and  Michael L'Estrange put forward 22 recommendations and they have not been implemented, they've  been prevented from being implemented.

Now I think it's fair to test the Government and say, well, your plans have not worked if they've been  enacted but they cannot be implemented without the support of the Opposition and I again say to  you, even if there's any doubt in the minds of the Opposition in relation to the Malaysian  Arrangement, why would they not support it going ahead?

Instead they put forward this absurd proposition that they're going to turn back boats filled with  families on the high seas endangering the lives of those people, endangering the lives of our  personnel, instead of taking a safe fly-back transfer to Malaysia which will deter people getting on  vessels.

Now the reason I would put to you that the Opposition refuse to actually support Malaysia's not  because they think it won't work, it's because they're afraid that it will. And that to me is an  unconscionable position for the Opposition.

And this absurd proposition about the turn back the boats of course has been exposed by the  Ambassador of Indonesia, the Vice President and other spokespeople for the Indonesian  Government.

BARRIE CASSIDY: Well, you blame the Opposition. Does the problem go back to Kevin Rudd as the  Opposition says he was the one who initially dismantled the Howard Government policies that were  working.



BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Well, people do forget that the changes that occurred in this country were  done with the support of the Opposition.

The recommendations coming out of the inquiry were affirmed by both members of the  Government and the Opposition.

I guess we can go back and find out all - who's to blame. I think the point right now is that we have  got heads of agencies in this country, the same agencies that advised the Howard Government  about the best approach that we could take to prevent people dying at sea and it's not being  realised because it's been stymied in the Parliament.

Now the Parliament has to act in the national interest and also quite frankly, in the interests of those  people that are in great danger on the high seas because they're being lured onto these vessels.

Now it seems to me we should be putting those interests first and I'm afraid I say the Opposition are  blocking it for purely political reasons, Barrie.

I mean as we see it they're looking to want more boats to come and they refuse to support the  recommendations of the experts.

BARRIE CASSIDY: Just finally on the leadership. Have you any idea how this week might unfold?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR:  Well, I know this, Barrie. That if we don't unify we're going to be marked  down by the Australian people.

We will not be able to I think highlight what's been a very good record of this Government.

Responding to the global financial crisis, nearly a million jobs created, low unemployment, low debt,  low interest rates, that is a good record, best-performing economy in the advanced world.

We've got plans for Australia's future - education, disability care. This cannot be properly prosecuted  however, without unity. And...

BARRIE CASSIDY: How do you demonstrate that? How through this week can you demonstrate  unity?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: There needs to be a growing and universal understanding that we cannot  move forward without coming together.

I've been through some pretty significant leadership tussles in my 12 years in Parliament. They've  always been reconciled.

They've been reconciled where people came behind the leader whether it was Mark Latham or Kevin  Rudd.

There has to be a time and it should be now that people come behind the Prime Minister so that we  can not only put forward our plans clearly, not only talk about the record as well that we have  economically, but also, Barrie, expose the deficiencies in the Opposition's policies. Nothing on  education, nothing on health...

BARRIE CASSIDY: Yeah.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: ... a slogan on border protection.

BARRIE CASSIDY: Can that only be done though convincingly with a vote?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR:  No. It can be done with an understanding that people be unified. I mean the  caucus determines these things and if the caucus needs to resolve it that way they can, Barrie, you  know that.

But it seems to me it really is - there is the status quo, people want to challenge that then that's I  suppose up to them otherwise really they have to - we have to unite.

Disunity's death in politics and if we don't unite, then we can't present ourselves as a Government  and I think a good Government without that support and without the support of the Prime Minister.

BARRIE CASSIDY: Brendan O'Connor, thanks for your time.

Media contact: Glen Atwell 0439 437 218

