Scott Morrison MP

Minister for Immigration and Border Protection

People smuggling venture returned to Sri Lanka

Saturday, 29 November 2014

The Australian and Sri Lankan governments have worked together to disrupt a  people smuggling venture carrying 38 Sri Lankan nationals who attempted to travel  illegally by boat to Australia, Minister for Immigration and Border Protection, the Hon.  Scott Morrison said today.

The suspected illegal entry vessel (SIEV) was intercepted by Border Protection  Command (BPC) North-West of Cocos (Keeling) Islands on 15 November 2014. All  persons aboard the SIEV were safe and accounted for and at no stage was the  vessel in distress.

Thirty-seven Sri Lankan nationals were transferred at sea from a vessel assigned to  BPC to Sri Lankan authorities on Wednesday evening, in mild sea conditions East-South-East of Galle.

Consistent with Australia's international obligations, all persons intercepted and  returned were individually assessed under an enhanced screening process, as also  practiced by the previous government. Interviews were conducted in person, on  board the vessel assigned to BPC, by trained protection officers, supported by  qualified Tamil and Sinhalese interpreters.

In one case a referral for a refugee determination process was recommended. In  such cases, the Government's policy is to transfer these persons to either the  country of Papua New Guinea or the country of Nauru for processing. The individual  remains in the care of Australian Government authorities and will be transferred to  an offshore processing centre.

Australia will continue to work closely with its regional partners to combat people  smuggling.

The Coalition Government's policies are stopping illegal boat arrivals, preventing  deaths at sea and restoring integrity to our immigration programme. The  Government will not be deterred from the continued successful implementation of  these policies despite constant opposition from Labor and the Greens.



