

THE HON RICHARD MARLES MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND  BORDER PROTECTION  MEMBER FOR CORIO



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW  ABC RADIONATIONAL INTERVIEW WITH WALEED ALY  WEDNESDAY, 11 JUNE 2014

SUBJECT / S: Cornall Report; Salvation Army evidence.

WALEED ALY: Joining me now is the Shadow Minister for Immigration Richard  Marles thanks for your time. I’m a bit confused here because at the time that this  report came out the Salvation Army released a statement, they released a media  release, saying that these were findings of the report, now they’re suggesting  that this is something that Scott Morrison cherry picked and it is not a finding of  the report. How do you see it?

RICHARD MARLES, SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGATION AND  BORDER PROTECTION: Well I understand it’s in the report but what is  important here I think is the Senate Inquiry itself because it’s allowed the  Salvation Army to provide the evidence that it did today, the report in itself isn’t  conclusive. There remain a lot of questions which are unanswered and of course  that’s why we were keen to establish the Senate Inquiry which has enabled  today the Salvation Army to make the public the very important points that it’s  made. I think what is important here though is that we don’t jump to conclusions  about these matters we do need to get to the bottom of it. We’ve seen the  Minister previously jump to conclusions which has got him into hot water in  relation to this issue but it’s also got in the way of getting to the bottom of  what’s occurred with Reza Barati’s death which is what we need to do if we’re to  be able to learn the lessons from this and ensure that this is a facility which

ultimately provides accommodation to asylum seekers which is safe, dignified  and humane.

ALY: That report that was authored by Robert Cornall suggested a whole lot of,  millions of things, but one of the things it suggested was one of the transcripts  of these interviews be handed over to the PNG Police to investigate, including  the transcript of the witness who said, that the Salvation Army worker was  involved. So presumably Robert Cornall thinks there is some validity to that, or  some reliability or integrity to that evidence otherwise you wouldn’t recommend  that it be handed over to the PNG Police. Do you agree that it should be handed  over to the PNG Police and if so what are you doing to assist that process?

MARLES: Well it absolutely needs to be handed over to the PNG Police and I  understand that it has been, that all of the material that was done in relation to  the report has been given to the PNG Police. From the outset when we called for  an independent inquiry into this matter which we did immediately, we said that it  had to be done that it had to be done in cooperation with the authorities in PNG  because obviously they have sovereignty in relation to this matter and it’s

important that they are empowered to take the steps that need to be taken to  ensure that justice is afforded in this matter. Now we need to let this run its  course in PNG of course but it really is important that at the end of the day  people are held to account for Reza Barati’s death, it is important that at the end  of the day charges are laid in relation to this and I’m sure that will occur but it is  very important that the authorities in PNG have the power to do that and  ultimately to do that because I think given this occurred in an Australian funded  facility, we would all want to have a sense that justice has occurred in relation to  Reza Barati’s death.

ALY: Richard Marles thank you very much for your time, I’m actually about to  speak to Clive Palmer over reports that he’s going to support the repeal of the  carbon tax, any question you want me to ask him?

MARLES: Well I think we would like to know which way Clive Palmer is going to  vote on that issue and a range of issues.

ALY: Okay, well hang on the line right now I’ll speak to Clive Palmer but thank  you very much for your time, the Shadow Immigration Minister Richard Marles.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: LIDIJA IVANOVSKI 0427 051 563

