Minister for Immigration Scott Morrison

Transcript: Press Conference - Operation Sovereign  Borders Update

17-01-2014 -

E & OE

FRIDAY 17 JANUARY 2014

SCOTT MORRISON: At our briefing on Wednesday I said that when the Government had  something to say on Operation Sovereign Borders we would say it and hold briefings as  required. That is why we are here today.

I should note that it had been our preference to hold this briefing early last evening, however,  given the need to seek to make further contact with the Government of Indonesia on the  matters we are about to report, this briefing was scheduled for this morning.

At the outset I wish to make clear once again that the Australian Government takes our  shared commitment with Indonesia to mutually respect the sovereignty of each of our  countries, very seriously.

As a consequence it is the clear policy of this Government not to violate the territorial  sovereignty of Indonesia in relation to any operations conducted under Operation Sovereign  Borders. This remains our firm policy and commitment.

Furthermore we take any operational failure to comply with this policy extremely seriously as  a Government.

It was brought to my attention at just after 4.00pm Wednesday that Border Protection  Command assets had, in the conduct of maritime operations associated with Operation  Sovereign Borders, inadvertently entered Indonesian territorial waters on several occasions,  in breach of Australian Government policy.

I should stress that this occurred unintentionally and without knowledge or sanction by the  Australian Government.

After verification of this information, the Government took the initiative to make contact with  the Government of Indonesia to advise them of these events at the earliest opportunity.

Late yesterday afternoon Australia’s Chief of Navy Admiral Griggs had a phone conversation  with his counterpart in Indonesia to advise him of these events and to provide an  explanation.

Following this conversation Foreign Minister Bishop sought to speak to her Indonesian  counterpart Foreign Minister Natalegawa last night, to advise him of this conversation and to  offer an unqualified apology on behalf of the Australian Government for inadvertently

entering Indonesia’s territorial waters, in breach of Australian Government policy, and to  provide an assurance that such breaches of Indonesian territorial waters would not reoccur.

A similar apology and assurance was also provided by Admiral Griggs during his  conversation yesterday afternoon with the Indonesian Chief of Navy.

Foreign Minister Natalegawa was travelling last night and as yet the Foreign Ministers have  been unable to speak. A message of apology however has been provided personally to  Minister Natalegawa from Minister Bishop and a formal apology will be provided on behalf  of the Australian Government by our post in Jakarta today.

I also note that the Government of Indonesia were advised of this morning’s media  conference in advance.

I will ask Lt. General Campbell to comment on these issues, but before I do I wish to make it  clear that the Government has full confidence in the men and women who serve in difficult  circumstances with courage, distinction and professionalism within Border Protection  Command and that these events have not changed this view.

The maritime border security operations being conducted by Australia are being undertaken  to protect Australia's territorial sovereignty from the incursions of criminal people smuggling  ventures originating outside of Australia.

Combined with our other actions, these operations are having a significant impact on the  activities of people smugglers, with arrivals of potential illegal immigrants into Australia and  Indonesia both in decline.

We deeply regret the events, however, the Australian Government remains committed to  continuing to implement our policies to stop the boats.

We will ensure that the issues that led to these inadvertent breaches of Indonesian territorial  sovereignty are rectified and do not reoccur.

We will seek to work with our partners in the region and elsewhere, wherever possible to  achieve this outcome.

What the people smugglers and anyone they are trying to get on a boat need to understand is  that this Australian Government will take the actions necessary to protect Australian  sovereignty and stop the boats.

I note that while there will be interest in the precise nature of these or any other reported  maritime operations, the normal policy will continue to apply in relation to public disclosure  or confirmation of any such matters, for the reasons we have consistently stated and followed  throughout this operation.

I also note that on Tuesday this week I wrote to the Opposition Spokesperson for  Immigration and Border Protection, Mr Marles, offering him and the Leader of the  Opposition a confidential briefing on Operation Sovereign Borders, including our maritime  operations.

This follows an earlier briefing received by Mr Marles last year from Lt. General Campbell.

Mr Marles office confirmed to my office this week that he would be available to receive the  briefing from General Campbell in the second week of February and that Mr Shorten would  not be attending.

A transcript of this media conference will be issued as soon as available, and will stand as the  Government’s response on the matters we have reported today.

I will now ask General Campbell to make his statement. After that we will both remain to  take questions on the areas that relate to our respective responsibilities.

ANGUS CAMPBELL: Good morning.

As I have previously stated, I am committed to ensuring the Australian public is informed of  significant events relating to Operation Sovereign Borders, as, and when, they occur.

On Wednesday afternoon it came to my attention that Australian vessels operating under the  control of Border Protection Command unintentionally sailed through Indonesian waters on  several occasions.

This is clearly a very serious matter.

I was advised of these events after a routine vessel report was examined by a Border  Protection Command official. The Minister for Immigration and Border Protection was  notified immediately.

I would like to make it very clear that, as I understand it, the personnel on these vessels  believed they were at all times operating outside Indonesian waters.

And at no time were Australian vessels authorised to enter Indonesian waters.

Over the course of Wednesday evening and yesterday morning, the Joint Agency Task Force  and Border Protection Command officials sought to confirm this report.

Yesterday afternoon, the Chief of Navy, Admiral Griggs, also speaking on behalf of the CEO  of the Australian Customs and Border Protection Service, contacted his Indonesian  counterpart, Admiral Marsetio, Chief of Indonesian Naval Staff, to inform him and  acknowledge our error.

I have since written to the CEO of the Australian Customs and Border Protection Service and  the Chief of Defence Force, who have co-responsibility for Border Protection Command,  requesting that they jointly review the circumstances leading to the passage of Australian  vessels through Indonesian waters.

Again, I would like to reiterate that, as I understand it, our people on these vessels believed  they were at all times outside Indonesian waters.

As I said during Wednesday morning’s press conference, which was held well before I was  aware of these events, we have never intended for our assets to enter the sovereign territory  of another nation.

I, and I am sure all those involved in the conduct of Operation Sovereign Borders, regret any  affront to Indonesia these events may have caused.

As Commander of the Joint Agency Task Force, I am responsible for the conduct of  Operation Sovereign Borders in all its aspects.

I am determined that such errors, innocent as I believe they were, will not occur again.

I note reports in the media this morning that include claims from asylum seekers interviewed  in Indonesia.

I remain confident that our personnel have conducted themselves to the highest professional  standards.

Thank you.



