

THE HON RICHARD MARLES MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND  BORDER PROTECTION  MEMBER FOR CORIO



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW   CAPITAL HILL, NEWS 24  THURSDAY, 19 JUNE 2014



JULIE DOYLE: This week the government has marked what it’s describing as a  milestone, six months since the last asylum seeker boat reached Australia. The  Immigration Minister says it shows the government’s policies are working. But  the opposition disagrees. It says the biggest factor affecting boat arrivals was  Labor’s PNG resettlement deal negotiated before the last election, I spoke to  Labor’s Immigration spokesman Richard Marles a bit earlier today.

Richard Marles, thanks for joining me. I wanted to start by talking about the  government reaching a milestone as it is describing it saying that no asylum  seeker boats have reached Australia in the past six months. Doesn’t this show  that the government’s policies are working?

RICHARD MARLES, SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND  BORDER PROTECTION: Well look, we have seen an end to the loss of life at  sea, we hope, is obviously a good thing and Labor unequivocally supports that  and we support it because from a position of compassion we have always  wanted to see an end to the loss of life at sea and that’s the way in which we go  about our business, quite unlike the government or the Coalition who have  approached this from a very political perspective from day one. But I would  make the point that the single most important measure that has been taken to  see a decline in the number of asylum seeker vessels to see a decline in the loss  of life at sea was the arrangement that the former Labor government entered  into with the government of PNG last July. The regional resettlement  arrangement which took Australia off the table more than anything else -



DOYLE: And how do you measure that Richard Marles? How do you judge that?  How do you make that assumption?

MARLES: Well we can make that assumption, well it’s not an assumption we  can measure it. We can measure because there is data around the arrival of  boats and people who were on those boats over the past few years, if you look  at the number of boats that arrive or were arriving at time that the regional  settlement arrangement was put in place so 19th July last year, by the time that  we get to the election that flow has been decreased by 90 per cent and it stayed  the same right through until the middle of December. Now there was no  substantive policy that was put in place by the government during that period.  No boats were turned around before the 19th December, no fishing vessels were  bought in Indonesia. The only public policy measure that had been taken which  applied to this area was the regional resettlement arrangement and it reduced  the flow of asylum seeker vessels by 90 per cent.

DOYLE: But what about the last six months in particular from December to now,  we know the government has been turning back boats and putting in place those  other measures. Would you acknowledge that that has had an impact here?

MARLES: We have seen the government engage in turnarounds, we have seen  that occur, I might say, in the context of a suspended relationship with  Indonesia. That’s an important point to make here because the real test of the  efficacy of that policy is going to be how it survives a situation where we have a  more normal relationship with Indonesia and where we have a more cooperative  relationship with Indonesia. Our concern all along has been that the policy of  turnarounds has been eroding our relationship with Indonesia and it’s plain  common sense that if we are going to have a resolution to this, not last month  and this month, but this year and next year we need to be doing this hand in  glove with Indonesia -

DOYLE: But hasn’t the turning back though, hasn’t that affected the numbers  though in the past six months?

MARLES: Sure, but the question there is how does it go forward in a context  where this is a policy which erodes our relationship with Indonesia and Indonesia  needs to be a critical player with us going forward. But a number which we will  not hear come from the government’s mouth is that on Wednesday it was a  thousand days since we had in the Parliament legislation which would have  enabled the Malaysian arrangement. Legislation which would have seen an  effective turnaround of 800 people, now by the Minister’s own logic in the last  two days that is a measure which three years ago would have brought an end to  the flow of asylum seekers -

DOYLE: Well I want to talk about what’s happening now though -

MARLES: But a thousand days ago, a thousand days ago this Minister teamed  up with the Greens on Malaysia to keep the boats coming -

DOYLE: Well let’s talk about the Labor’s policy now though and talking about  offshore processing now we’ve seen at this week at Labor Caucus. The Western  Australian MP, Melissa Parke, put forward a motion calling on Labor to end its  support for offshore processing, that motion was defeated but Richard Marles.  What kind of support was there in the Caucus for that kind of motion?

MARLES: Well we had a very dignified debate within the Caucus around this  matter and can I say what characterised the debate and what made it  completely different from the way in which the Coalition goes about this business  is that we spoke from the perspective of values, of values of compassion, values  of fairness, values of generosity and it’s on that basis that we emphatically  continue to support offshore processing in the Caucus resolution on Tuesday and  it wasn’t close -

DOYLE: What kind of support level was there? What kind of [inaudible]

MARLES: I’m not going to go into the details of that, but it was not close, it was  a clear statement on behalf of the Caucus that this is a party which is supporting  offshore processing from a position of compassion because we want to see an  end to the loss of life at sea and hopefully that is now what has occurred.

DOYLE: Richard Marles we’ll have to leave it there, thank you.

MARLES: Thank you

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: LIDIJA IVANOVSKI 0427 051 563

