Minister for Immigration and Border Protection Scott Morrison

Visit by Malaysian Minister for Home Affairs, Manus Island

Thursday, 20 February 2014

Remarks and Press Conference, Sydney

Joint Press Conference with Scott Morrison - Minister for Immigration and  Border Protection, Ahmad Zahid Bin Hamidi - Minister for Home Affairs,  Malaysia and Michael Pezzullo - CEO of Australian Customs and Border  Protection Service.

Minister Morrison: Well, ladies and gentlemen, it's my great pleasure to be here  today with Minister Zahid, the Minister for Home Affairs from Malaysia, my good  friend who I had the opportunity to meet in Malaysia last year and it's great to have  him here with us here today, not only to ACV Storm Bay, but also to be engaged in  the meetings that we've been holding both yesterday and today across a whole  range of fronts.

Before I make a few remarks about that, I'm going to ask Mike Pezzullo, the chief  executive of the Australian Customs and Border Protection Service, just to give a  brief overview of where we are and what we do here and particularly to acknowledge  all the fantastic staff here from the Australian Customs and Border Protection  Service who do an outstanding job protecting our borders and to acknowledge them.

So I'll ask you to do that, Mike, and then I'll make a few comments, as will the  Minister, and then we'll take it from there.

Thanks, Mike.

Michael Pezzullo: Well, Ministers, Admiral, distinguished visitors from Malaysia,  and, of course, to my own hard working officers in the Customs and Border  Protection Service. Friends, we're gathered here at the Sydney based national  operational training centre for the Customs and Border Protection Service. Here is  where we train our mariner skills, small boat handling, ship search, boarding vessels,  and, in some cases where that's required, use of force, defensive, and weapons  training activities.

Obviously it's a very important part of our national capability and, as you can see  behind you, we can also mount, as required, a very large port security effort if it ever  was required here in Sydney Harbour with the Bay class vessel, ACV Storm Bay.

Ministers, we are delighted to be here today recognising the close collaboration  between the Customs and Border Protection Service of Australia and our wonderful  partners that we have in the Malaysian Maritime Enforcement Agency. We are  delighted and thrilled to be able to be here today to acknowledge that collaboration  and, of course, now we are about to embark on a new stage in that collaboration with  the gifting of the ACV Storm Bay. Ministers, thank you very much.

Minister Morrison: Thank you very much, Mike.

Well, I mentioned before that not only are we here today to give the opportunity not  just for the Minister, but also Admiral Amdan, who heads up the Malaysian Maritime  Enforcement Agency, to view firsthand the vessel here, but it also to mark what has  been several days of very constructive meetings.

Bilateral meetings have been held this week between Malaysia and Australia,  including the Malaysia-Australia Joint Working Group on Transnational Crime, which  met yesterday, and that meeting is continuing today. That is a working group which  has evolved into that format based on the meeting that Minister Zahid and I had in  Kuala Lumpur last year.

There has also been the seventh Malaysia-Australia Immigration Cooperation  Working Group that was held on Tuesday of this week and the fifth Senior Officers  Meeting between the Malaysian Maritime Enforcement Agency and the Customs and  Border Protection Service, and that was held also on Tuesday of this week.

Now, the Working Group on Transnational Crime provides an opportunity to find the  best way forward with regard to transnational crime and the cooperation we have,  including a sustainable regional response to people smuggling, but not just people  smuggling. We're all very familiar in this country of the challenges that we have in  terms of border protection and people smuggling and we are very pleased that we  are now entering - we're in our post-nine weeks of not a single successful people  smuggling venture making it to Australia.

And one of the reasons we've had this success to date is the incredible work which is  being done by the Australian Customs and Border Protection Service at sea together  with the Australian Navy as part of those Maritime Operations, but it has also been a  factor of the regional partnership which we've had in focusing single-mindedly on  deterrence, and there has been no better and more enthusiastic partner than  Malaysia in that process.

It was only a few weeks ago I was on the Malacca Strait with the Admiral and the  MMEA team seeing firsthand the work they're doing in Malaysia and in that strait,  which is a key pathway for people not only to be coming to Australia, but, more  broadly, for various other forms of criminal activity which needs to be policed, and  Malaysia is doing the heavy lifting when it comes to patrolling the Malacca Straits.

And so it was a great pleasure to be able to see the work that is being done up there  and it is our great opportunity to further support that work with the handover of two  Bay Class patrol vessels next year. And so that will further boost that capability of  the MMEA. It is a highly professional and highly effective organisation having seen it  in operation first hand. And when we make our region's borders stronger, we make  Australia's borders stronger and the relationship that we have with Malaysia is all  about furthering that strong partnership.

There are challenges that go well beyond people smuggling, and those are matters  that go principally to the areas that the Minister also has responsibility for in  Malaysia. People trafficking, not just smuggling. Issues of narcotics and other forms  of organised criminal activity. This is where, as a region, we have to work together to

ensure we have the deterrence measures in place to ensure that each day we are  getting the better of those who want to get the better of our own borders.

And by continuing to work in partnership, the sharing of information, the sharing of  intelligence, to be able to make available assets like the one which sits behind us,  and other forms of cooperation, not only with the Customs and Border Protection  Service and Immigration, but in areas such as the Federal Police, who have had an  outstanding relationship with the Royal Malaysian police, for whom the Minister has  responsibility.

So I want to think you, Minister, very much for coming and visiting us here today. It's  a great pleasure to host you here in my home city on a beautiful, beautiful Sydney  day. The only thing I'd say, as a proud resident of the Sutherland Shire, is it's equally  as good if you go a bit further south to the shire. As I note, there are a lot of Customs  and Border Protection Service staff who live in the shire, but the northern suburbs  haven't done too badly today, I can say.

So Minister, it's wonderful to have you here in Sydney. Thank you so much for your  cooperation and your friendship.

Ahmad Zahid: Thank you so much, Minister Morrison.

Mr Morrison, Admiral, members of media, I would like to express my gratitude on  behalf of the Government of Malaysia to the Government of Australia for  contributions of two Bay Class vessel to our Malaysian Maritime Enforcement  Agency, especially for people smuggling operations. MMEA is one of the  enforcement agencies under Anti-Trafficking in Person and Anti-Smuggling of  Migrants Act 2007 that counts under my portfolio purview to collectively deal with  trafficking in persons and people smuggling.

And I would like to inform the members of the media that we have been enjoying our  close cooperations, especially in security cooperation, and there has been regular  exchange of visits, not only Minister Morrison, but the other officials from Australia  and from the states in Australia. And both countries have worked very closely in the  area, namely immigration cooperations, people smuggling and trafficking in person,  including terrorism through the establishment of several joint working groups since  2007.

I would like to emphasise that transnational crime will remain and continue to be one  of the main threats of sovereign nations worldwide. Malaysia and Australia need to  ensure that both countries will be well prepared and be in a good position to deal  with this matter effectively. And Minister Morrison and me have agreed to broaden  the scope of existing working groups between Malaysia and Australia to cover a  much wider spectrum of transnational crime besides focusing on human trafficking  and people smuggling.

I'm pleased to announce that I'm looking forward to receive Minister Morrison in  Malaysia by the middle of this year for the signing of an MOU in the field of  transnational crime between our two countries.

Thank you.

Minister Morrison: Thank you very much Minister.

We've got time for a couple of questions, if we could keep the questions at first, if  you like, on the matters we've just discussed and there may be time for one or two  others on other issues.

Ahmad Zahid: Let's throw all the questions to Minister Morrison.

[Laughter]

Question: Minister, we've seen that Australia's campaign to combat people  smuggling has led to a drop in people entering Indonesia seeking asylum. Have you  noticed a similar drop in Malaysia?

Ahmad Zahid: Yes, indeed. We have been collaborating in terms of reducing or  [indistinct] some foreigners who are seeking asylum in Australia and we have been  collaborating very closely with Indonesia as well in putting our extra efforts for  helping Australia in [indistinct] that particular citizen from that particular country to  Australia.

Question: But can you quantify at all the drop in people entering Malaysia with  [indistinct]?

Minister Morrison: Look, at this stage, being able to quantify it is still difficult, but I  can give you these examples. After the meeting we had in Malaysia last year, the  Minister took the initiative to tighten visa on arrival restrictions for those groups that  may be seeking to come and transit through Malaysia on their way to Indonesia and  to Australia, and I want to thank the Minister for his initiative in that area.

Last year we also, as a result of that meeting, we undertook a joint operation on the  Malacca Strait called Operation Kangaroo and the Admiral briefed us when we were  in Malaysia a couple of weeks ago and told us on that occasion that one of the  smuggling ventures that was intercepted was actually one coming back from  Indonesia, coming back up the chain through to Malaysia. And they did that because  they knew that the way to Australia was closed. So we are seeing that happen.

And those figures which the UNHCR are published in relation to Indonesia, I think,  underscore that point. I recited some of those figures some weeks ago. So getting  our borders secure in Australia and stopping the people smugglers has significant  regional benefits, but we have to keep working up the chain, and that's why our work  won't stop once the boats stop coming to Australia. These partnerships, these  memorandums that we are seeking to conclude over the next few months, this work  will go on, because the threat will always be there and the deterrence must always  be there.

Any other questions on today's announcements?

Question: Are we likely to see any return to Labor's idea of a Malaysia people  smuggling solution? Have you discussed the possibility of that at all?

Minister Morrison: No. There is no discussion of those matters. We have a very full  agenda of things and the working agenda is very productive.

Question: Can you explain briefly where these boats are going to go? Are they  going to - where exactly will they [indistinct]…

Ahmad Zahid: I would like to invite my Admiral to explain it in detail.

Datuk Mohd Amdan Bin Kurish: Thank you, Ministers.

Well, in fact, we have seen a number of attempts for those boats that have failed to  make it to Australia retracting back and later seen as the possible destination for  them to retreat to. Being most of these people are identified either from the Middle  East or from the South Asia region. So we are taking every precaution that we can to  track these people down. In the last number of - a few months back, we have  managed to intercept these people returning back from the adventure that they are  trying to undertake to go to Australia, which they fail, and they retract back their  position into Malaysia through the Straits of Malacca.

So we have seen this trend is moving - quite dramatically increasing, from time to  time, in the Malacca Straits.

Minister Morrison: Thank you Admiral, thank you. Any other questions?

Question: Minister Morrison, on Manus Island, if we may?

Minister Morrison: Sure.

Question: How are you going to establish the truth or otherwise of these claims that  this week's trouble may have been started by local people, possibly employed by the  security contractors?

Minister Morrison: Well there is no evidence to support those assertions and  allegations at present. But there are two reviews that are underway - two  investigations I should say, are underway.

The Papua New Guinea authorities will be conducting an appropriate police  investigation, particularly into the matter of the person who is deceased, which is  entirely appropriate, and we've had those assurances from none less than the Prime  Minister. And our Attorney-General will be liaising with PNG to provide whatever  assistance they need, if they request it, to ensure those investigations are thorough  and complete and get to the heart of those matters.

The other review, which has been instigated by my department secretary, is exactly  the same process, I stress, as was undertaken following the meltdown on Nauru, the  meltdown on Christmas Island, and the meltdown at Villawood. They were actual  meltdowns, because those centres burnt to the ground.

Now, what has happened on Manus Island is quite different. That centre is operating  today. And the incredible work done by our people up there ensured that that facility

was able to operate the morning after. And I think that was quite a considerable  achievement.

Now, that review doesn't have any constraints on it. That review will be done by an  independent person, as those other reviews were, and they will be charged with  determining what the facts were around those incidents that took place over Sunday  night and Monday. Now, we're going to have to be patient to get to the bottom of this  issue. The report into the Nauru incident, that report has only just been concluded  and worked through with the Nauruan Government, and we intend to release that  shortly.

So that incident took place some time ago. So this will take a while to work through,  and we'll be patient in getting to the facts.

Question: Is there going to be any form of supervision, or processes there to ensure  that there won't be any overreaction by - either police on Manus Island, or our own  security guard, to these kinds of situations?

Minister Morrison: Well, for a start I don't accept the premise of the question, that  there was an overreaction on the part of PNG. There will be a - the appropriate  measures put in place and reviewed, as you would expect after an incident such as  this. It is normal to review what has happened after an incident such as this, and  make such changes you think necessary.

That is one of the reasons I've sent General Campbell to Manus Island, who was  planning to be here with us today, Minister. And he is up there as we speak, and he'll  be making some immediate assessments about what may be necessary, and he's  authorised to act on any measure he deems necessary to be put in place straight  away.

Now, he will also engage with some of the local authorities up there during his visit,  and he'll be able to form a view about some of those other matters which I think  you're touching on.

Question: Will you be reviewing G4S's contract after this, given that they're not  denying that their local people may have been involved in the riots?

Minister Morrison: Well G4S's contract is actually terminating this month. We've  been in a process of transition to Transfield, who will be taking over, and that  decision was taken some time ago, and is completely unrelated to the incidents and  events of this week.  G4S have been continuing to manage their responsibilities at the centre in this  transition phase, and Transfield are in the process of taking them over. And there will  be a full re-tender at the end of this year.

Question: So when you say there's no constraints on the Australian investigation, so  does that mean that - the possibility of wrongdoing by our contractors, or by PNG  authorities, all of that will be investigated?

Minister Morrison: It's there to establish what the facts are. I mean if you look at the  first term of reference on the inquiry into the Nauru incident, which involved, under

the previous Government, the centre being burned to the ground, and I remember  visiting it afterwards - just twisted metal and wreckage. 10s of millions of dollars'  worth of damage, which the Australian taxpayer has had to shell out for.

Now that didn't happen on Manus Island this week. There was a terrible, tragic  incident involving the death of one person, and that is a tragedy. 1,100 people dying  at sea is also a tragedy. And particularly while we're here today, I think, with the crew  of the Storm Bay, Australia Customs and Border Protection staff have been saving  lives with vessels like this for many years.

Question: Do you envisage any asylum seekers being granted asylum when they  may not otherwise have been, because of this [indistinct]…?

Minister Morrison: No, I responded to that yesterday. Individual asylum cases are  considered on their merits in each and every specific case. And those assessments  are done by each reviewer, they're subject to appeals processes, and that will be a  matter for the people who make those decisions at the time of making those  assessments.

Question: The figures out from Indonesia today show that that's dropped 71 per  cent in…

[indistinct]

Minister Morrison: From the UNHCR, yeah.

Question: I guess, would be welcome news to you?

Minister Morrison: Absolutely.

Question: I guess, what's your response? Do you think it's going to continue to drop  now?

Minister Morrison: Well, so long as this Government continues to have strong  friends and partners, like we have with Malaysia and other countries in the region,  and so long as we continue to hold the line on our borders as we are, and  particularly at sea, which I would say is the cornerstone of our border protection  operations - is what we're doing at sea - measures that the previous Government  refused to do, had no interest in doing, then you will continue to see, I think, the  success we've had to date on our borders, with not one successful people smuggling  venture.

Now, what that will mean - for nine weeks - what that will mean is up the chain it will  dry up. And those figures from the UNHCR I think already indicate that drying up of  the pipeline. And that's why, when you stop the boats, you help the region. And that's  why we're so focused on doing that, because if we have stronger borders, then that  relieves the pressure on our neighbours.

Now, one of the things we bring Malaysia though is - one of the areas I think where  we - why we have such strong cooperation, is, like Australia, Malaysia is also a

destination country. And they have their own borders for a whole range of other  pressures that they need to address, and that's why we're very keen to assist. We  share this problem, and we're sharing that burden, and we're focused on deterrents.

Question: Indonesia has been quite critical though. Is it a case of I told you so, that  they should have listened to you, that this was a…?

Minister Morrison: I will - that's your characterisation, I'm not saying that.

Question: How much of that reduction in Indonesia is due to the Indonesians  restricting automatic visas to Iranians?

Minister Morrison: Well I think that was part of it. But so long as people can still  come through and get to Australia, people are going to keep coming through that  pathway.

Now, the way to Australia is closed. And I think the comments of the Minister and the  Admiral I think bear that out in terms of what they're seeing further up the chain. And  that's why these policies are so important.

We've got time for one more, and then…

Question: The security staff - you've increased security on Manus Island…

Minister Morrison: Mm.

Question: The staff that are there, and the ones that have just arrived, where have  they come from, and what kind of training do they have?

Minister Morrison: Well, they are appropriately qualified security professionals, who  are trained to ensure that they can be effective in managing centres such as those  that we have at Manus Island. Another 51 were sent yesterday, I have another 50 on  standby, and we'll be making a decision on that over the next few days.

Question: Can you tell us what extra crimes are going to be investigated, [indistinct]  otherwise have been. So [indistinct]…?

Minister Morrison: Well what this MOU, and the cooperation that we've been talking  about all week is focused on is on the policing enforcement deterrents activities that  we can do together. By working together on the information that we share, by jointly  improving each other's capabilities, by being able to identify the threats that exist up  through the chain, where we both share risk.

This is about improving our capability. Now that - the application of that capability will  lead, obviously, to us identifying and being able to intercept and bring to justice those  who are seeking to threaten both of our countries through criminal activity.

Thanks very much.



