The Hon. Scott Morrison MP  Minister for Immigration and Border Protection



UN Human Rights Commissioner, PNG Regional  resettlement arrangement, Operation Sovereign  Borders, Refugee and humanitarian program,  Manus Island  Friday, 07 March 2014

Interview with Fran Kelly, ABC Radio National Breakfast

Minister Morrison: Good morning Fran, good to be with you again.

Fran Kelly: I'm not sure if you heard overnight Navi Pillay the UN Human Rights  Commissioner gave the opening address to the council in Geneva. She singled  Australia out for a warning urging our government to review the regional resettlement  arrangements with PNG in the wake of that violence a few weeks ago. Will you do  that?

Minister Morrison: Well we are constantly reviewing it Fran and one of the things  that has been a challenge for us as new government has been the resettlement  arrangements that we inherited from the previous government were a blank sheet of  paper. It is hard to review something that largely didn't exist in terms of the details to  how people would be resettled and things of that nature and that is what we have  been working through. The Labor government largely took a bluff to the last election  and we have been working through trying to put these arrangements in place and I  think we are endeavouring to do that consistent with what the Human Rights  Commissioner has said.

Fran Kelly: I'll come back to that in a moment but I am just wondering as our  Immigration Minister are you embarrassed having Australia singled out for mention in  this way in the company of Sri Lanka, Syria, North Korea?

Minister Morrison: Well no Fran, because what she has said, she has said the  recent violence in the regional processing centre has underscored the need to  review the regional resettlement arrangement. Now I think that is a sensible thing to  be doing and that is exactly what I am doing...

Fran Kelly: To ensure that the human rights of asylum seekers are fully protected in  accordance with international law.

Minister Morrison: Well I think that is a worthy goal and they certainly have to be  protected under domestic Papua New Guinean law...

Fran Kelly: So it is a goal, we are not doing that at the moment?

Minister Morrison: No Fran, I think you are misinterpreting what I am saying. What I  am saying is the regional resettlement arrangement that we inherited was a blank  sheet of paper. Every month now I am meeting with my counterparts to work through  the detail of getting an appropriate arrangement in place which respects all of these  things and that is the task ahead of me. We inherited a blank sheet of paper. Now I  note that the Commissioner also said in that speech, she made, was deeply  distressed by the many boat tragedies off the coast of Greece, Italy, Malta and  Spain. Now you all know that it has now been 78 days since we have had a  successful people smuggling venture to Australia. Now I think the fact that we have  been able to have that level of success in stopping boat tragedies at sea I think is to  the government's great credit.

Fran Kelly: Are you claiming victory there, 78 days?

Minister Morrison: No, I am saying we have had 78 days without a successful  people smuggling venture that is just a fact.

Fran Kelly: And just to move to that point for a moment, I want to come back to the  resettlement arrangements but given 78 days without a boat arriving still though  relations with Indonesia remain strained. Has Indonesia's lack of co-operation with  Australia on this issue made any practical difference?

Minister Morrison: Well I can just point to the results and the results are 78 days  without a successful venture.

Fran Kelly: So that's no, has made no difference?

Minister Morrison: Well Fran I have answered the question. You can paraphrase it  how you like. What I am saying is our policies are getting the results that the  Australian people elected us to do and critical amongst that has been two outcomes.  First of all there have been no deaths at sea over the last 78 days, the second thing  is that we have been able to live up to our promise to quarantine 11 000 offshore  places for our refugee and humanitarian program. Now that is an additional 4000 on  the special humanitarian program that the previous government was running.

Fran Kelly: Back to the PNG resettlement arrangements because that is what the  tensions are over. When will the first refugee determinations come through in PNG?

Minister Morrison: Well we are hoping that will be soon, Fran, and that is the  reason why after I met up in Port Moresby last Saturday with my ministerial  counterparts there, the Attorney General Mr Kua and Rimbink Pato the Foreign and  Immigration Minister. Every month we will be assessing the progress both on the  issue of processing and on the issue of resettlement, as well as the delivery of the  aid program boost that was promised by Mr Rudd an extra $420 million in various  projects. Now that is the agenda, that is what we are going to be working together in  partnership to get the outcome of what that arrangement was designed to do but the  way it was set up by the previous government largely left it unanswered in so many  respects because there was just no detail. It was just a press release.

Fran Kelly: Given there is so little detail there why are you continuing to put more  and more people on to Manus Island and given what has happened recently and the  inquiries that are underway, five of them now I think it is, are you still sending people  to Manus Island or have you suspended that to get the results of these inquiries?

Minister Morrison: We haven't been sending people to Manus Island in any great  numbers because there are no boats coming and when there are no boats coming  then that means there is no need for me to be sending people to Manus Island.

Fran Kelly: So the people on Christmas Island won't be sent to Manus Island?

Minister Morrison: What we are doing at the moment is catching up with some of  the transfers that needed to be made to Nauru, particularly in the family area,  because we now have those family facilities in place. But there is no pressing need  on the Manus centre to be sending anyone additional to Manus and that had been in  place for a while.

Fran Kelly: And that is a good idea to keep that in abeyance for a while?

Minister Morrison: Well Fran, there are no boats coming.

Fran Kelly: Ok, alright can you guarantee the safety of asylum seekers sent to  Manus Island?

Minister Morrison: Well again I will repeat what I have said in the Parliament and I  will repeat what I have said in previous interviews. These centres are difficult to  manage and when people are engaged in riotous and disorderly behaviour then the  risk in those centres increases and that is why one of the things we have done is we  have made changes up in Manus Island well before this incident. We sent additional  security people up there, we have changed the contracting arrangements. The  contractors the previous government put in place, we haven't continued their  contracts and we are transitioning out of those service providers to the new ones we  have put in place which gives us a consistent set of arrangements across both Nauru  and Manus. I mean there were...

Fran Kelly: But given everything we have heard and it is coming out every day now  we get accounts from people who were in that detention centre - asylum seekers,  workers, local G4S workers, Australian G4S workers who are contractors there.  Everything we are hearing suggests that it was tensions with the local community, it  was locals involved in this violence. What can you do to ensure that does not happen  again?

Minister Morrison: Well I have just outlined a range of things that I already have  been doing...

Fran Kelly: Well the change in the company decision that was made before this. In  the wake of this...

Minister Morrison: And the reason for that Fran is that we were very aware of the  rising levels of tension in these centres and we were already taking actions to

address it. The centre we have inherited at Manus is the one we were given. As you  know it was always the Coalition's policy primarily to focus on offshore processing on  Nauru. Now the previous government decided to do that on Manus Island as well.  Now we supported that...

Fran Kelly: You have increased radically the number of people there. You could  wind it back completely and just shift back...

Minister Morrison: Fran we continued with the policy of Manus on Manus Island the  previous government had put in place and we moved immediately to try and address  the very significant deficiencies particularly in the security area and they were very  apparent to me in the first few weeks of coming to office and we put significant  investment in place to try and boost the services and resources that we have  available to us there but it is a tense place. I am not going to kid you on that Fran. It  is a tense place and it is difficult when you have inherited an arrangement that has  no details on resettlement and the processing has been difficult. Now they are the  issues we are trying to resolve. They are the issues we have inherited. I think we are  making progress but Mr Barati's death is terribly tragic. It is tragic though as the 1200  other people who died at sea and on that score I am pleased to report good progress  by the government.

Fran Kelly: It is ten to eight on breakfast this morning. Our guest is Immigration  Minister Scott Morrison. Minister I think there is now five inquiries into the events, the  violence on Manus Island. You have said those inquiries will be synthesized. Some  have suggested that means the Australian Cornall report is likely to end up less blunt  in this synthesizing in the interests of not injuring relations with PNG. What do you  say to that?

Minister Morrison: Well I do not know what those comments are based on Fran.  There are three inquiries that I have an involvement or association with and that is  the Cornall report which has been set up by the Department of Immigration, an  independent inquiry which is following exactly the same process the previous  government followed with the riot and the burn down on Nauru and the burn downs  at Christmas Island and Villawood. It is the exact same process. The other two  inquiries, of course the police investigation in Papua New Guinea, that is a matter  totally for them as is the coronial inquiry.

Fran Kelly: There will be a Senate inquiry too Minister. Will you allow those  Senators as part of this inquiry to visit the Manus detention centre and speak with  asylum seekers and staff?

Minister Morrison: Well Fran I do not run Papua New Guinea. Independence came  into place in 1975...

Fran Kelly: Will you advocate that? We do run that detention centre.

Minister Morrison: No, no it is not run by the Australian Government Fran. It is run  by the government of Papua New Guinea and it is their sovereign jurisdiction.  Australia cannot just go around treating Papua New Guinea like a colony demanding

people turn up and walk around wherever they like. Now that is what Senator Sarah  Hanson-Young and the Labor Party seem to be saying. I am going to respect...

Fran Kelly: Well let me ask you differently, would it be a good idea do you think?

Minister Morrison: Fran I am going to respect the decision of the government of  Papua New Guinea as to how they want to handle that matter.

Fran Kelly: Ok. And just finally Minister we spoke earlier this week to the Uniting  Churches Reverend Elenie Poulos who has written to you asking if the Uniting  Church can take unaccompanied children into its care, those who are currently on  Christmas Island who they understand will be sent to Nauru soon. Will you allow that  to happen?

Minister Morrison: Well the offshore processing policy applies to all Fran who have  come after the 19th of July and that would prohibit that from happening but I have  said to the Uniting Church if they want to provide that same offer and work with us  for the more than 30 000 people who Labor left behind on shore and that also  includes unaccompanied minors then of course we are happy to work with the  Uniting Church to that end.

Fran Kelly: Are there a number of unaccompanied minors on Christmas Island that  are about to be sent to Nauru?

Minister Morrison: Yes.

Fran Kelly: How many?

Minister Morrison: There are quite a number but we do not go to specific details of  those numbers. We have been transferring unaccompanied minors now to Nauru for  several weeks and that will continue because that is the policy of the government.

Fran Kelly: Minister thank you very much for joining us.

Minister Morrison: Thank you Fran.



See: Index of Speeches

URL:http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/sm/2014/sm212407.htm   Last update: Tuesday, 11 March 2014 at 09:14 AEST



