Scott Morrison MP

Minister for Immigration and Border Protection

Migration and Maritime Powers Legislation Amendment  (Resolving the Asylum Legacy Caseload) Bill 2014, Treasurer,  Coalition Government

Monday, 08 December 2014

Interview with Ray Hadley, 2GB Ray Hadley Programme

Ray Hadley: Scott Morrison, the Immigration Minister joins me in the studio, a little  later than normal, Minister good morning to you.

Minister Morrison: Good morning, Ray.

Hadley: Now, you are a rare breed. You got your bill for Temporary Protection Visas  and other matters through the Senate. You had to make some qualifications to it and  some changes to it, but take us through how difficult that must have been given the  lunacy - and my words, not yours - of the Senate.

Minister Morrison: Well, look, we've been working on this for six months, and  you've really got to commit to it and it just shows that when you can get people  around a table and doing so in good faith, then there is the opportunity to do that  through this Senate. Now there certainly wasn't that opportunity under the previous  Senate, with Labor and the Greens, they have ruled this out and actually knocked  back TPVs twice. So we went to work on it, we came up with the compromises and  they're all compromises that I'm very happy to support. What we're saying here is  that you stop the boats and then you get your policies in place and you strengthen  things like turn-backs, then that gives you the room to do things like further reduce  the number of children in detention. We've already reduced it by 50 per cent, this will  take us right back to just a small number now and it's my objective to get them all out  eventually. But also, we've been able to increase the intake, which is something that  people have been calling for, but only once we've dealt with the backlog of the  30,000 cases Labor left behind. So I think what people are seeing in this bill is a real  dividend, and it's the dividend of all of these things we were able to convince the  cross-benchers to support.

Hadley: Ricky Muir was critical to it in the end, were you worried, was he wavering,  was there a chance that he would pull the pin on what he thought he would do?

Minister Morrison: I was very impressed with Ricky, because this was probably the  biggest decision that he's had to make certainly in politics - I'm sure he's had other  decisions in his life. There were very real human consequences for his decision and I  was impressed with the way he went about it, the way he engaged with us, he didn't  sort of engage in flapping his mouth around in the media, nor did I, on these things.

Hadley: Why have you got to bring Jacqui Lambie into it? Why have you got to bring  her into it?

Minister Morrison: Well I think what it also demonstrated Ray, is that Jacqui Lambie  has her view on things, but basically in taking that view she made herself completely  and utterly irrelevant to this debate. I mean, she told me that she supported the bill;  she thought it was a good idea, but she voted against it, so she'll have to size up the  Tasmanian electors on that.

Hadley: Will you accept now, that's it's a complete - well not a complete futility - but  it's an exercise that perhaps you shouldn't be going down with trying to deal with  Jacqui Lambie again? I mean--

Minister Morrison: Well that's really up to Jacqui Lambie. If you're going to go and  make this position to the government, you're just going to vote against everything,  well that's not really someone you can have a sensible conversation with. What I've  found with all the other cross-benchers, including Senator Madigan, who voted  against us on the bill, but he engaged with us, he had a sensible conversation with  us and I respect his reasons for doing what he did. But whether it's Senator  Leyonhjelm, and Bob Day and the PUP Senators and Clive, they all came to the  table. My view on these things has always been I'd rather have 80 per cent of  something than 100 per cent of nothing. I think Senator Xenophon in particular  showed a lot of leadership on this. You wouldn't believe - well, I'm sure you would  actually Ray - the level of bitter and vitriolic hatred that was poured out against Ricky  Muir and Senator Xenophon in particular over their decision was just despicable.

Hadley: What, from Jacqui Lambie alone?

Minister Morrison: No, no. Not from Jacqui. From refugee advocates, the Greens  and the left wing of the Labor party--

Hadley: Oh, from outside of Parliament? --

Minister Morrison: It was abhorrent the way they just piled on the pressure and the  abusive texts and emails and various things - going into their offices. They were  basically trying to intimidate them out of making the decision they did. Those  Senators have achieved more for refugees last week than any of those other idiots  have over a very long period of time, and particularly Senator Hanson-Young likes to  go out there and wear compassion on her sleeve, but she was voting against really  good outcomes for refugees last week and thankfully there were some common  sense Senators who were more interested in results than rhetoric and puffing  themselves up.

Hadley: Given you're one of the few to get legislation through the upper house, I was  thinking about a circuit breaker out loud on the programme this morning. I don't know  what the circuit breaker would be, but obviously - a bloke's written to me and said  well it's only one opinion poll. Well it's not one opinion poll, mate, it's a series of  opinion polls that are dire for the Prime Minister. Maybe, he could make you, there's  talk about you being the next Treasurer, maybe he could make you the next Minister  for the Senate?

Minister Morrison: Well I've got to tell you that what we achieved in the Senate  wasn't just me, Ray. We had a lot of support from our Senators there as well.  Mathias Cormann had been enormously helpful through this process. Of course  Minister Cash, my Assistant Minister, she was heavily involved in all this as was  Mitch Fifield and Christopher Pyne was also very helpful in all of this as well. So it  was a team effort. I mean obviously it was my responsibility but I worked with a lot of  people to get this done and look, I've had one enormous job to do on fixing one of  Labor's filthy messes on our borders. Joe has had the other, I would argue, even  bigger job to do, in fixing Labor's other big filthy mess on the budget and the  economy, so he has my full support for that. I'm still working on cleaning up this other  mess and I know Joe will go to work hard as he has been on fixing that mess.

Hadley: Well the difference is, you solved yours, even if you've only got 80 per cent  of it through. He's solved nothing.

Minister Morrison: But he's still in there fighting and that's the thing. He's still in  there fighting and Christopher Pyne's back in there fighting.

Hadley: But it doesn't matter. It's the 12th round, Christopher's in the corner, the  towel is in his hand, ready to be thrown in--

Minister Morrison: Oh I disagree there.

Hadley: And Joe's leading with the left, leading with the right, and the problem is  he's getting punched round the ring, if you'll pardon the expression, mercilessly.

Minister Morrison: You'll see Joe Hockey be the comeback kid I think next year and  for this reason - he knows he has to get this result for the Australian people because  that is what we were elected to do and we will continue to see Joe apply himself to  getting that result. I don't think it is the 12th round at all Ray. I think we are barely  into the second. There is still a lot of fight in all of this and it is a fight we intend to  win.

Hadley: He wants to hope the three knockdown rule doesn't apply because he has  had two knockdowns a third will see him out. If he comes back from this - I will give  you this - the greatest sporting achievement I have ever broadcast in the boxing ring  was Jeff Harding and Dennis Andries in the early 90s for the WBC light heavyweight  title. Andries led by at least ten points in the 12th round and Harding knocked him  out. It was the only way he could win. For Joe to still be Treasurer this time next year  he is going to have to come up with a Jeff Harding type performance I can assure  you.

Minister Morrison: And I am really confident he will because you know when you  are fighting for something you believe in there is a lot more fight in you and we have  got a lot of fighters as a government because we believe what we are doing. Next  year they will see it. You have got to look at - an election is always a contest. I have  read the same polls you have today Ray but as an election gets closer they will start  to look at Bill Shorten's rap sheet when they were in government, they will start to  look at Chris Bowen's rap sheet. They will start to look at Tony Burke's and Tanya  Plibersek's. They were integral to the former failed government under Rudd-Gillard-

Rudd and when people look at their rap sheet of failure as a government I think  when that comes into focus - it wasn't like in Victoria with Bracks and Brumby. The  former Rudd-Gillard-Rudd wasn't like the Bracks-Brumby Government. The former  Rudd-Gillard-Rudd Government was an absolute shocker and Bill Shorten was up to  his neck in it as was their entire front bench.

Hadley: I think the Labor party may well be dabbling in cryogenics. I saw Kate Lundy  I thought wheeled out this morning for the first time since her infamous  announcement with Jason Clare…

Minister Morrison: We all remember that.

Hadley: So where has Kate been, has she been warehoused? Has she been  hidden?

Minister Morrison: Well she is retiring, she is actually retiring from the Senate and I  understand the ACT Chief Minister is coming in to take her place.

Hadley: But was did she wait so long to say something?

Minister Morrison: I don't know but I do know that Bill Shorten is guilty of many  things and one thing he is guilty of is he was guilty of being part of the Rudd-Gillard-Rudd Government and he has to wear that carcass around his neck all the way to  the next election and I can guarantee you we will be making sure he does.

Hadley: Well based on that can you believe the opinion poll today finds him more  trustworthy than your Prime Minister?

Minister Morrison: I think the focus has been on us this year not on Bill Shorten and  that focus will be firmly set on his very glass jaw.

Hadley: Now back to more matters pertaining to your portfolio - a paedophile Ali  Jaffari came here in 2010, remains in detention thanks to you after being sentenced  for accessing child porn while on a community corrections order for accessing child  porn. He is a 36 year old from Afghanistan, assaulted a boy in Geelong last year,  then accessed child abuse material between July last year and May this year. Had a  three month sentence imposed fully suspended if he is a good boy for 15 months.  When can you tip him out of the joint? When can he go back to Afghanistan?

Minister Morrison: First of all there is the sentencing still to come as I understand it  in this case. If you are going to put a character provision for creep into the Migration  Act this bloke would certainly qualify for it. But there is no way I can see, certainly for  me as Minister, where this bloke would ever be coming out of detention with these  very serious issues and the threat he poses in the community. We will constantly  reassess his claim for protection back in Afghanistan. That opportunity will come up  when he ends whatever sentence he serves if he is indeed sentenced to serve a  custodial sentence.

Hadley: They keep suspending it Minister that is the problem. You can't get him  slotted for two years even though he should be slotted for 22 because they keep him  in good behaviour bonds or corrections orders.

Minister Morrison: He won't be leaving any of my detention facilities. The minute  we are able to send this guy back if he doesn't have any legitimate protection  grounds then on a plane he will go.

Hadley: Brings me to Ali Mahmood, the bloke who was featuring in last week's  newspaper claiming the disability support pension for almost a decade - 2004 to this  year - then remarkably the Administrative Appeals Tribunal got it right and said no  that is it for you. He has been, this it the point, he sought asylum from Iraq where he  keeps going back to for 195 days.

Minister Morrison: This is the problem with permanent protection visas and this is  why we introduced the legislation and had it passed last week as we did. A  permanent protection visa is a permanent passport to welfare. They just got on a  boat, came here and got on the dole. That is what this character did. He had come  under previous governments, he had been paid these benefits under previous  governments. But that said that is why I was so focused on ensuring that we don't  have that sugar on the table. The refugee convention is not there to allow people to  come and take advantage of your immigration laws and your welfare system. We  don't want Centrelink seekers coming into Australia. We want people who come and  make a contribution not take one and that is what our migrant communities have  done for generations going all the way back to the first fleet. That is why we put  these protections in place.

Hadley: Just on Jaffari - this has recently come through - he has actually been  sentenced for three months but suspended wholly.

Minister Morrison: Well he won't be leaving immigration detention I can assure you  of that.

Hadley: It makes that point he is in immigration detention but he has been  sentenced, the matter has now been finalised.

Minister Morrison: That's right.

Hadley: Ok. Thanks very much for your time. We will chat to you next Monday if we  get the chance and then we will wind up for the year and catch up with you in the  new year. All the best.

Minister Morrison: Excellent. Thanks a lot Ray, Good to be with you.



