

THE HON CHRIS BOWEN MP

SHADOW TREASURER

MEMBER FOR MCMAHON

E&OE TRANSCRIPT

TELEVISION INTERVIEW

INSIDERS

SUNDAY, 29 JUNE 2014

SUBJECT/S: Cormann ignores Senate report into CBA Financial Planning,  Coalition dismantling the FOFA law s, Tony Abbott’s Budget of broken  promises, climate change, w elfare reform, disability support pension,  Qantas, asylum seekers, offshore processing.

FRAN KELLY: Now to our program guest, the Shadow Treasurer Chris Bowen.  While he joins us, here is the Prime Minister and his response this week to the  Senate committee's call for a royal commission into ASIC and the Commonwealth  Bank.

[VIDEO FOOTAGE]

TONY ABBOTT: We will carefully consider the recommendations of the committee.  We do have an inquiry into financial governance going on now. We want to get to  the bottom of these things and we want to ensure that investors are as safe as they  can be in a market economy.

JEFF MORRIS: At CBA, there are tens of thousands of clients, I believe, who are  entitled to compensation, who probably aren't even aware of it. That's why we need  the Royal Commission, to get to the bottom of that and get justice for those people.

KELLY: Chris Bowen, welcome to Insiders.

SHADOW TREASURER, CHRIS BOWEN: Thanks Fran. Good morning.

KELLY: Does Labor support the Senate Committee's call for a Royal Commission  into ASIC and the Commonwealth Bank?

BOWEN: Fran, this was a good report on a very bad issue. It is a very substantial  report. 61 recommendations including one of those recommendations being a  further independent inquiry, maybe a judicial inquiry, or a royal commission. The  Government's response to this has been very disappointing. For Mathias Cormann to  say he found the six-page dissenting report persuasive over the more than 500

pages in the substantial report was I think offensive to the victims of this scandal.  This does need further investigation.

For the Government to kick it off to the financial systems inquiry is completely  inadequate.

KELLY: The financial systems inquiry, does that have the capacity to hear from all  these tens of thousands, potentially of Commonwealth Bank customers, submissions  have closed for a start?

BOWEN: Submissions have closed. It's a very different process. It's a very different  inquiry. It is about the big picture of the financial structure. It’s not the right place  for these sorts of issues to be examined, so that's a ruse by the Government. This  does need to be seriously considered. There are victims of this scandal and, more  importantly, there are people who want to ensure that there are protections for the  future, including the victims of the scandal. We take this report very, very seriously.  All 61 recommendations. The suggestion for further inquiries needs to remain on the  table in our view.

KELLY: Remaining on the table is all very well but what would you have? If not a  Royal Commission, what about ASIC's suggestion of another ASIC investigation with  tougher penalties?

BOWEN: Royal Commissions can only be called by the government of the day…

KELLY: But you could push for one, you could call for one.

BOWEN: We are saying these options need to be on the table. I'm not ruling out  further statements from the action. Labor Party calling for further action. We are  looking at this very, very closely. We find the Government's response thus far  completely inadequate.  There’s a few things the Government should do. Firstly, the  Government should take the recommendations seriously. Secondly, drop their  outrageous watering down of the future of financial advice reforms introduced by  the previous Government to stop this sort of thing happening. This has happened far  too many times Fran. It is not just the Commonwealth Bank, it’s Timbercorp, Storm,  West Point. The Government are going down the wrong track by watering down the  financial of future of financial advice changes, in the most outrageous fashion. They  should reverse their Budget cuts to ASIC and take every recommendation of this

report seriously, as we in the Opposition are doing, because it is a good report  across the board by the Senators involved which deals with a most disturbing issue  in our financial history.

KELLY: On the cuts to ASIC, the regulator Greg doing the Medcraft said that ASIC is  doing the best it can with the resources it has. There were budget cuts flagged for  ASIC but ASIC also had to have an efficiency dividend under your government. Was  that a mistake?

BOWEN: I draw you to the report which points out big funding increases for ASIC  under our government.

KELLY: They reckon they've had their resources cut by 12%.

BOWEN: There were big funding increases of many millions of dollars, as well as  the efficiency dividend applying to the Treasury portfolio across the board. This  Budget takes $120 million out from ASIC over and above all that. That can't be  afforded and should be reconsidered by the Government in the light of this damning  report, frankly.

KELLY: There were damning comments about ASIC in the inquiry but also from one  of the whistleblowers who said he was shocked by the incompetence - this is a  quote - the venality, the laziness, lack of intellectual rigor the public servants in ASIC  had. That's a damning description of the corporate watchdog. The Senate committee  called it timid and hesitant. When you were Treasurer, were you aware of weakness  in ASIC?

BOWEN: Our regulators, whether it be ASIC, APRA, or the ACCC, have much they  can point to in terms of success but also need to take on board the criticisms by the  Senate committee because they are dealing with very serious issues. The ASIC  Chairman has indicated in his response on Friday that he accepts some of that  criticism. That needs to be taken on board. This is the reason for, I think, further  investigations regardless of the form it takes, and that's something the Labor Party,  the Shadow Cabinet will consider, from the Opposition, both in terms of what we can  push for and promote from Opposition and what we can do if we return to  government at the next election.

KELLY: Is there some urgency to this though? Are you concerned about the impact  on people's attitudes to investing in Australia? If you can't trust a bank as big as the  Commonwealth Bank regulator, if you can't bank on the regulator, it will dent  investors’ confidence won’t it?

BOWEN: There is some urgency about this. The report needs to be taken as a  whole but in a considered fashion. Australia is an attractive place to invest when you  look at the financial performance through the global financial crisis. But there are  serious issues to be dealt with here. They are not issues the Labor Party will walk

away from. If the Government thinks they can flick this off to the financial systems  inquiry and it will go away, they are sadly mistaken. To say a report of six pages by  a Liberal Party senator was more persuasive than a report of 500 pages conducted  over 12 months is I think from Mathias Cormann a most short sighted response.

KELLY: Chris Bowen, I will go the Budget now because all week Labor has been  giving the Government grief over its plans to cut payments in the Budget. You plan  to block more than $20 billion of the government’s predicted budget savings  including the petrol indexation.

Why are you voting against a measure that will not cause individuals any real pain, I  think it adds up to 55 cents a could week for the average family but could add $2.2  billion to the Budget bottom line over four years. Why would you block that?

BOWEN: Well Fran, look at all of the Budget in its entirety, for all the hoopla of this  week and the Government beating its chest about the carbon price, this Budget in its  entirety says to a single income family ‘You will lose $6,000 a year’ in many  circumstances. When you look at the changes to family tax benefit, the changes to  petrol indexation…

KELLY: Petrol indexation is 55 cents a week on entirety average.

BOWEN: The Budget in its entirety Fran. We are taking the responsible approach.  We have said there are many measures we cannot abide by and we cannot support.  There are other measures we don't particularly like but we have indicated we will

support some of those. I am happy to have our fiscal bottom line compared to the  Government. We are not the party proposing a paid parental leave scheme of $20  billion or a Direct Action plan over many billions of dollars. If you take into account  the totality of the Government's position with ours, I am more than happy to have  our fiscal bottom line compared with the Government. But there are changes we will  not support.

KELLY: You planned to drop the tax cuts you promised as an offset to the impact of  the carbon price. When the Abbott Government introduced these again last week,  the plan to cut them, you opposed that. That looks like nothing more opposition's  than Opposition for opposition's sake.

BOWEN: I don't accept the premise of that question. We made it very clear we  would move to a floating carbon pricing - floating carbon pricing scheme. The now  government said they would keep the compensation but get rid of the carbon price.  But what they're doing is actually removing tax cuts which were part of that…

KELLY: You were going to dump them as well.

BOWEN: Our position is very, very clear. We believe in an emissions trading  scheme and we believe in one that is linked to the market and we also believe in

having - I'm bottom more than happy to have our bottom line compared to  Government's across the board when you look at totality of the changes and I don't  accept the premise of your question.

KELLY: Do you accept the Government needs to do something to fix the federation?  Is one of the key issues is States raise insufficient revenue from their own sources  and they should be given more money to either income taxing powers or higher  GST?

BOWEN: We are up for a discussion about the federation. But you don't start that  by cutting $80 billion without notice. You have seen the understandable and  predictable response of Premiers and State Treasurers to those $80 billion worth of  cuts.

KELLY: The Premiers are clear they want more taxing powers, income tax or higher  GST.

BOWEN: What we are not going to abide by is the Prime Minister and the Treasurer  blackmailing the States into calling for an increase in the GST. The State Premiers  have made it clear they are not going to abide by that either. That's not the way to  fix the Federation. We don't support that. I don't support the idea of State income  taxes either and having different income tax rates across State and Territory  boundaries which was contemplated by the Commission of Audit. That's a silly idea  and would take the Federation backwards.

KELLY: Today the Government will release the welfare review conducted by Patrick  McClure. It is going to recommend scrapping the Disability Support Pension and  come up with one unemployment benefit with top-ups, is that a good idea to  streamline the payments?

BOWEN: I am sick of opening the Sunday paper every week and seeing Mr  Andrews demonising disabled people. Labor supports measures to help people on  the Disability Support Pension back into work where it's possible and appropriate.  That's what we did in office with quite positive and remarkable results. What we  don't support is cutting people's benefits on disability support in some brutal and  blunt effort to force them back into inappropriate jobs. We won't support that.

KELLY: Can I ask what you will support in terms of the carbon tax? We know Clive  Palmer will vote with the Government to scrap the carbon tax, he will vote down  Direct Action too which would leave no plan in place to cut carbon emissions in this  country. Will Labor reconsider its opposition interests to Direct Action in the interests  of getting emissions down?

BOWEN: What we'll do is keep the consistent position, despite the hoopla of the  last week and negotiations between the Government and Clive Palmer, our position  will be consistent. That is, we support moving from a fixed carbon price to a floating

carbon price. That's the position we took to the election, that's the position we take  to the Parliament…

KELLY: That's not going to happen. That leaves no mechanism in place to get to  the target you support of 5% reduction.

BOWEN: After that we will consider each piece of legislation before the Senate. The  Shadow Cabinet will consider that. We will consider steps we think should be taken,  we will consider the Opposition's approach to the Government's policies of the day.  The decision we are very clear about is that Australia needs an emissions trading  scheme. If the Government is determined to deny Australia an emissions trading  scheme, then the Labor Party will consider its position after that.

KELLY: The Labor Party today, too, is announcing it will allow the Government to  water down the Qantas Sale Act to allow for foreign ownership you of the airline, up  to 49% but wants, which you won't give Qantas what it wants, which is scrapping  the limit all together. Why won't you?

BOWEN: This is a very sensible and constructive approach being promoted by Bill  Shorten, Anthony Albanese and myself.

KELLY:...Doesn't go close to what Qantas says it needs?

BOWEN: I would suggest it would be of considerable help to Qantas. It the shows  that the Labor Party, as the alternative government, believes Qantas should remain  in Australian hands but that the restrictions beneath that, the 25% and 35%  restrictions, are providing a constraint on Qantas' growth and should be removed.  We will move those amendments. It is a very good offer from the Labor Party to the  Government. I would hope the Government would accept that offer and Qantas can  move on with total majority Australian ownership but with a lot more flexibility  within that in order to attract the investment that they need to survive, grow and  prosper.



KELLY: Just finally, for many years you were the Immigration Minister of this  country. We have the news asylum seekers aboard a boat headed for Christmas  Island. 32 children aboard. They've left apparently from India and are nearly at  Christmas Island. What should happen to this boat?

BOWEN: Firstly can I say there is a lot of speculation here, Fran, which is not  helped by the Minister's arrogant approach and to see a Minister for Immigration say  ‘You work it out’ yesterday about a very serious issue, I thought was very  disconcerting and it shows his arrogant approach to providing information to the  Australian people. We just don't know the full circumstances here. I can say with  some experience, Fran, that Immigration Ministers should turn up on the good days

and the bad and provide as much information as they can and refusing to answer  questions is not an acceptable response from this arrogant Minister.

What needs to happen is he needs to provide a full briefing to the Australian people.  He has clearly got information that he has not provided to the Australian people.  That needs to be fixed. Then what should happen is normal policies and practices in  place should be allowed to be implemented.

KELLY: What does that mean, with 32 children aboard, would you send them  offshore to Nauru or Manus Island?

BOWEN: There has been a consistent approach that offshore processing is part of  both parties' policies for the reason of dissuading dangerous boat journeys. We had  measures in place to ensure appropriate checking and appropriate treatment of  people of all sorts of different backgrounds and circumstances within that frame. We  need to know what is happening here, what is the situation on Christmas Island  would with the boats coming in. I would have thought Scott Morrison should be  more up-front with the Australian people about what's happened and what he  proposes to do from here.

KELLY: Thank you for joining us.

BOWEN: Thank you, Fran.



Ends



