The Hon. Scott Morrison MP  Minister for Immigration and Border Protection



Tuesday, 18 March 2014

Interview with Ray Hadley, 2GB Ray Hadley Program

Ray Hadley: The Immigration Minister Scott Morrison is in our Canberra studio,  Minister good morning.

Minister Morrison: Good morning Ray.

Ray Hadley: Now, before we get any further I need to play this, not just for my  edification but also for yours and our listeners. 7.30 Report last night featured a  report on the use of lifeboats to send boat people back to Indonesia. It focuses  mainly on an Iranian man and his wife who made a number of claims about the  treatment they received at the hands of the Australian authorities. Now this man, the  first words we will hear come from Arash Sedigh. Let's have a listen together:

Arash Sedigh: I stood up. I shouted on them, 'You have to help us! I know you have  to help us! You cannot deny you have got doctor in that Customs ship!' The Customs  crew told me, 'No, there is no doctor, we have no doctor.' I told them, 'I know that  there is doctor in your ship.' He told me, 'No, no.' I couldn't tolerate. I told them, 'I will  kill you if you don't take us to that ship. I have nothing to lose. I will kill you. Believe  me. For Jesus Christ, please help us. Would you please help us?'

Well Minister he goes on and I will play some of it later complaining about his  treatment. Given that his first threat was to kill someone little wonder that he got  short thrift.

Minister Morrison: Well our Customs and Border Protection and Naval personnel  conduct themselves to the highest standards in accordance with their training and  look I think Australians watching that program last night will be very thankful that the  Australian Government has a very strong policy on our borders to ensure that people  don't get to illegally arrive in Australia with that sort of air of entitlement or  expectation and demand. Our policy is to ensure that people waiting in camps  around the world get their place in our program not those who seek to come by that  method.

Ray Hadley: One of my listeners Nigel says that report Ray also showed at the end  of it a number of people on board that vessel saying 'F… Australia' and giving us the  middle finger. The documentary's main subject admitted he deliberately chose to  enter Australia illegally, his words not mine, rather than through correct channels,  threatened to kill an Australian Navy officer as well as threatening that we suffer  something like the USA's 9/11 if we should not look after their actions. In fact what  he said was: 'They put us on this f…ing orange boat, they sent us back to Indonesia.  And the Navy was escorting that ship until today. ... f… Australia. ... I said to them,

'You are criminals'. If later on you said you want to go to America on September 11,  you should know the cause of it and it is your very deeds. Remember 9/11 for USA.  All the world should know why. Australian Government, Tony Abbott, Scott Morrison,  Immigration - they're all smugglers. And then another man 'F… Australia', with the  middle finer.

They are not the sort of people we want here in the first place, I would imagine.

Minister Morrison: I think he made a pretty compelling case for that Ray by his own  words and by his own hands. I suspect he wished he turned up under a Labor  government. Because if he turned up under a Labor government then that boat  would have got to Australia and that is just not what is happening under this  government. It is now 89 days since there has been a successful people smuggling  venture to Australia. Our policy is very clear, it is very firm. If you seek to illegally  enter Australia on a boat, you will be stopped and you will be removed from our  waters and we do it in a way, as we said we would turn back boats where it was safe  to do so. We are doing it in a way which ensures that it is safe and the policy has  been enormously effective, it continues to be so. But we are not letting up, and I  think the program last night demonstrated very clearly that if people seek to get here  the wrong way they won't get here.

Ray Hadley: We spoke last week about passport checks done at Australian airports,  following the disappearance of Malaysian Airlines flight carrying two people on stolen  documents, that appears to not be the cause of it anymore. But it has now emerged  that Australian border officials only accessed Interpol's database of stolen passports  335 times in the last year compared to nearly 250 million checks by the US and 29  million by Singapore. Will you be talking to someone about the way we check  passports?

Minister Morrison: Well I am aware of the way we check it. We use a different  method to other governments and how they do it, particularly in the US and other  places, we do cross reference the Interpol database, I am advised, and there is a  populating of our own alert list which draws on the Interpol list and many other lists  as well. So we use a different system but these checks are done.

Ray Hadley: Ok, just to repeat for our listeners how long since we have seen people  arrive on our shores?

Minister Morrison: Well it is 89 days today and it is six months since I was sworn in  as the Minister Ray and for the majority of that period of time because there was  several weeks before that where we had weeks go past where there were no  arrivals, the majority of that time people have not been coming to Australia illegally  by boat. Now we are pleased with those results. We've still got a long way to go and  I think last night's program demonstrated that people will still try it on but what they  will find is a government whose resolve is absolute. The people who do this job do it  in accordance with their training, they do it in accordance with the standards that are  put in place. They are incredible people serving Australia. And the policies Ray,  these are the policies that Bill Shorten still will not support. I mean four times he was  asked by David Speers on Sky whether he supported turning back boats. Couldn't

give an answer. So who knows what they believe on this. They were a mess in  government and still are a mess in opposition.

Ray Hadley: Well it becomes more difficult for him in a position for power opposed  to when he supported the former Prime Minister Ms Gillard and he kept saying  whatever she says I agree with.

Minister Morrison: True.

Ray Hadley: Now he has actually got to say what he thinks and that may prove to be  a hurdle he can't overcome.

Minister Morrison: Well it is proving to be that on a daily basis. He says one thing in  Perth, he says another thing in Sydney. I mean he needs a map to find his principles  because they seem to be different depending on where he is.

Ray Hadley: You said a GPS yesterday and now it is a map.

Minister Morrison: It was..[laughter] I did say that yesterday in the Parliament. I  don't think he would like that.

Ray Hadley: Now look I will make a statement before I ask a question. Anyone in  government or opposition for that matter, particularly young vital people who think  they have got some sort of contribution to make, who doesn't aspire to the highest  office in the land probably shouldn't be in politics I wouldn't think. They should go  back to local government and trade their wares there. But there was speculation on  the weekend that you wouldn't rule out running at some stage in the future for PM.  Now if you are not intending to do it I would be disappointed on the basis that you  and I don't know ten others from that side of politics and ten others from the other  side of politics aspire to one day be the Prime Minister of the country.

Minister Morrison: Well look Ray when people put that question to me I kindly sort  of respond to them in a way which is look 'thank you for that' but my job at the  moment I think is pretty clear. We are making a very good fist of it. There is a lot  more work to be done here and as I said in that interview look I am up for whatever  challenge there is but the challenge I have now is very clear and that is the challenge  I am focused on and in my political experience, as John Howard gave me the advice  many, many years ago, do the job you are in, focus on that 100 per cent and then  any job that comes down the way of you in the future well that will be determined on  your performance and so my focus is 100 per cent on my performance in this role.

Ray Hadley: Ok but would you agree with me that if you are not ambitious in that  regard you probably don't have a place in politics? I mean there are plenty of people  whose ambitions exceed their abilities and I am not saying that is a bad thing either  but what I am saying is that if you are in politics and you are on the front bench or  you are on the opposing shadow front bench of course you should aspire to  leadership.

Minister Morrison: Well every position in politics I think requires leadership Ray and  ability and performance has to speak for itself. I think that is what defines future  ambitions.

Ray Hadley: When you are Prime Minister will we still have these Monday morning  and Tuesday morning chats or will you brush me?

Minister Morrison: [laughter] Ray we will be doing this for a long time.

Ray Hadley: Ok. Now this 'March in March' protest at the weekend. I have received  a few emails. It appears they are protesting with no particular idea in mind but there  is one that has been sent to me which I will put on our website. There is a young  women and it is hard to guess ages but she appears to be in her late teens/early 20s  maybe and she is holding a sign 'hash tag kill Abbott possible campaign?' And then  the other one that is behind her is another young lady and they are probably fantastic  young people and they are trying to make a statement 'f… Abbott'. But I mean to  incite someone and she hadn't thought about I don't think - I would like to think she  hadn't - 'kill Abbott possible campaign?'

Minister Morrison: Yeah well it is juvenile.

Ray Hadley: Well when I looked at it I thought yeah she is probably a uni student  and probably giving vent to her emotions but I think people have got to start thinking  about - it may be one thing to go on Instagram and to put a hash tag there but to  actually have a sign draped over your head I don't think it brings great credit to the  young lady nor her family or the people there protesting with her.

Minister Morrison: Well I think it sort of characterises the nature of the protests and  that is how frankly I viewed it. People are entitled to express themselves but they  also have to behave themselves I think at the end of the day. People have got to  keep their shoes on and stop throwing them at the government if they think that is  going to change things well they are entitled to that view but I am not sure what they  are protesting about. Are they protesting about the fact that for 89 days we have  stopped people drowning at sea? I mean that would seem to me to be a worthy goal  and we tried the other way. The previous government tried…

Ray Hadley: It didn't work.

Minister Morrison: …the way they wanted to do and almost 1200 people drowned  at sea, 15 000 people were denied visas and it cost the taxpayer over $11 billion.  They want to return to that. Well they are entitled to have that view but I think it is a  pretty silly view and we will not be returning to it because our policies are working.

Ray Hadley: I just ask people to be patient. As I have said on the last two times we  have spoken we are expecting news very shortly on the family of Captain Emad but  you will just have to trust me and the Minister here. There are delicate things  happening that we can't broadcast but as soon as there is some movement at the  station in relation to the family we will let you know here first.

Minister Morrison: That's right Ray. We are working on that issue but I appreciate  people's patience.

Ray Hadley: Ok thanks very much for your time as always.

Minister Morrison: Thanks a lot Ray.



See: Index of Speeches

URL:http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/sm/2014/sm212739.htm   Last update: Thursday, 20 March 2014 at 16:37 AEST



