Minister for Immigration and Border Protection

Scott Morrison MP

Counter-terrorism legislation, ebola

Thursday, 16 October 2014

Interview with Lyndal Curtis, ABC Capital Hill Programme

Lyndal Curtis: Minister Morrison, welcome to Capital Hill.

Minister Morrison: Good to be with you.

Curtis: We'll come to the Ebola virus in a moment but first I wanted to ask you about  the collection of biometric data as proposed in what's called the foreign fighters  tranche of anti-terrorism laws. Under the laws what material could be collected and  who would do the collecting?

Minister Morrison: Well, currently what it relates to is the facial recognition imagery  that we would be collecting as part of the eGate programme that we have in place  and that's what is currently available to us and would be assisted by the legislation  which is currently before the Parliament. Issues relating to fingerprints or other forms  of biometric information would be the subject of additional regulatory requirements  which would obviously be subject to the normal parliamentary processes that apply  to such regulations.

Curtis: But there is the potential in legislation for those regulations to be introduced  and that material to be collected if the technology improves?

Minister Morrison: Well, not just that, but putting that technology in place and that  would require further regulation which would also be subject to the normal privacy  arrangements under the various acts and I think it's important that people take a bit  of a breath here. What we're talking about here is biometric information which is  becoming a common standard in what governments do to protect their citizens and  to work together to protect more broadly against counter-terrorism and transnational  crime and these tools are becoming the basic tools that are really necessary in a  modern age to combat the real threats in a proportionate way.

Curtis: Although it does raise questions about the security of that information  because if your credit card details are hacked or leaked you can replace your credit  card, if your biometric details are hacked or leaked you can't replace your eyes or  fingerprints or even the photograph of what your face looks like?

Minister Morrison: First of all we're only talking about facial recognition imagery at  the present time and as I said these other things would be subject to other processes  and of course there needs to be those secure systems and those secure systems do  exist particularly for this type of information. It's important that those processes and  systems be in place and that's what the Government does.

Curtis: So what are the secure systems that exist in place now?

Minister Morrison: Well, these are the internal systems that sit behind the various  walls that are necessary to contain the security of this type of information and that  relates to a vast array of information that is already captured and collect and  protected and it's important that we have access to these tools, Lyndal. The  Government makes no apology for wanting to ensure that we are giving our law  enforcement and counter-terrorism agencies access to the tools and the data and  the information they need to protect Australians. That's why we're doing this.

Curtis: We've already seen the Immigration Department, your department,  accidentally release details of asylum seekers on its website. We've seen the  Snowden leaks which included some material from Australian intelligence agencies  in this day and age is it possible to absolutely guarantee the security of this material?

Minister Morrison: Well this information and the decisions you take have to be  based on a risk assessment and our systems are very good. The one you referred to  in terms of immigration was in a completely different context and a different type of  information and how that is stored to the one that we're referring to in this  conversation. And on that case the weaknesses that were identified have been  rectified. But if it's being put forward that we should be denying Australian law  enforcement and counter-terrorism agencies the basic tools you need to do the job in  this modern age to protect Australians from terrorists, and to protect Australians from  the impacts of transnational crime and other forms of activity that are nefarious to the  Australian population, well the Australian Government is going to take the steps that  are necessary and that's exactly what we're doing. I think we've got good support for  getting that done.

Curtis: One final question on this issue, will people know when their information is  being collected?

Minister Morrison: They will be walking through those eGates when they're doing  that and there's the normal signage and various other information that's provided at  border checkpoints that will make these things clear as is the case now in relation to  how information is collected from people at airports or at other ports and that's an  important part of the process. But I think increasingly also, Lyndal, travellers these  days are becoming more used to the fact that these are just standard things that are  necessary in this modern age to deal with the global movement of people and the  various risks that present and it's important to say that the legislation requires this to  be a proportionate response and we believe it is a proportionate response and  therefore an entirely lawful one and appropriate one.

Curtis: On the question of Australia's response to the Ebola outbreak in West Africa,  could Australia do more?

Minister Morrison: Well $18 million is the contribution we've made and as the Prime  Minister said, that was described as a quick and effective response by the United  Nations and you cannot put Australians in harm's way without a credible evacuation  plan. That is the clear advice that we have received as a Government that such a  credible evacuation plan for people who would be put in this situation cannot be put  in place, certainly at this current time. I understand the sentiment that Ms Plibersek is

acting on but you can't govern on sentiment. You need to make decisions based on  sensible judgment, based on the reality and the facts, and the Government is  focussing on what we are doing to protect the Australian community and also acting  in concert with regional partners to ensure that we can respond to any regional  escalation of this threat. That's where our focus is, it's here in Australia and within  our region to ensure that Australians are protected from this situation.

Curtis: Is it potentially just fear though that might stop countries we would approach  to help our citizens, countries like the UK, when Australia has spent time and money  and put Australians in some danger to say pluck their citizens out of the Southern  Ocean why wouldn't they help us in this instance?

Minister Morrison: You just don't gamble on these things. You need to have an  assurance and these things are credibly put in place that can guarantee our citizens  the sort of extraction capability that you would have to have as a prerequisite before  making any such decision and I'm frankly puzzled at the naivety of the position being  put forward by Ms Plibersek on this. You just heard it in her own interview then, that  she could not say where she has been advised by anyone credibly that an  evacuation programme could be put in place for Australians who are being directed  in this situation. I understand that there are people who will want to participate with  various NGOs and others who are engaged in that environment at present and the  Australian Government is not preventing them from doing that but there's a big  difference between that and the Government taking the decision to direct Australians  into that very dangerous environment without having a credible extraction plan  should one be necessary and the Opposition has no information on that. They're  acting out of sentiment, and I fear, and it's disappointing, that there seems to be a bit  of politics being played with this.

Curtis: One final question, is Australia prepared for any potential outbreak here and  is there consideration being given to enhance the screening at airports?

Minister Morrison: The screening presently, as you might have noted from an  earlier press conference today by Minister Dutton, over 700 people so far have been  identified and we have sophisticated targeting mechanisms for knowing where  people are coming from and profiling which enables us to address that situation at  present. Now if the Chief Medical Officer has a view that these things need to be  elevated then that can be done and it would be done swiftly. Presently our systems  and processes are working extremely well in relation to this issue and there are  contingencies and further levels of escalation that are available to us, whether it's the  borders where I have responsibility or otherwise that under the Chief Medical Officer  as well as with the Minister for Health we would be able to enact that. So at present I  can say that the Government has got its eyes firmly on focused this issue and firmly  focused at home here in Australia to make sure our systems and response  capacities are in place but also importantly in the region where we would be called  on specifically if there were issues that presented in nearby countries that might not  have the capacity to respond, then we're ensuring that we're in a position to provide  that assistance because that would be our regional leadership responsibility.

Curtis: Scott Morrison, thank you very much for your time.

Minister Morrison: Thanks very much, Lyndal.



