The Hon. Scott Morrison MP  Minister for Immigration and Border Protection



Australia Day, Operation Sovereign Borders, claims of  mistreatment by Navy & Customs and Border Protection  personnel, and asylum seeker access to the internet, mobile  phones and cigarettes

Monday, 27 January 2014

Interview with Ray Hadley, 2GB The Ray Hadley Morning Show

Hadley: Immigration Minister Scott Morrison, as he does every Monday, is on line to  talk to us again. Minister good morning.

Morrison: Good morning Ray.

Hadley: Happy Australia Day.

Morrison: To you too, and to all your listeners I hope they had a great day  yesterday. It was certainly a good one down here in the Shire last night, there were  great fireworks down at Cronulla Beach, and Cate Ceberano and Mental As  Anything, and the Council did a great job. It was a great night for the family.

Hadley: Well you had a couple of the Hadley's children in the Shire yesterday and  last night.

Morrison: Oh, is that right?

Hadley: My two elder daughters and I received photos from Emma being  photographed with Layne Beachley and Mark Occhilupo.

Morrison: Oh, well that's, we had a big surf carnival down there at North Cronulla as  well over the weekend. So it was a very big weekend in the Shire and it was a great  family weekend I have to say. The police did an excellent job, everybody just had a  great weekend and that's what we love to see here.

Hadley: 36 days without any boat people making it to Australia, I guess every day  goes by you think perhaps we have beaten it. But it is too early to say it is beaten is it  not?

Morrison: Well we are in that weather period at the moment of the monsoon and as  General Campbell said, a week or so ago, we will have to wait until the end of the  monsoon when we get sort of into March before you get a real sense of this. But this  is the first time we have gone this long without a boat in five years, and that includes  during weather periods like this.

Hadley: Oh, well, yeah. I want to make that point Minister. Your Labor counterparts  have been you know throwing that up, a furphy, saying it happens every January.

Morrison: No.

Hadley: It does not. There were more than 450 last January.

Morrison: That's right it doesn't happen like that every January, it happens, it only  happens like this in January's when a Coalition Government has been running the  show. But five years ago before it really took off, that was the last time we had such  a stretch but you know, as everybody has noted, Tony Abbott and I are not getting  ahead on ourselves on this. We know there is a lot of work still to be done and we  are doing that work. And we are not being in any way deterred from it.

Hadley: And the record numbers on Christmas Island have been reduced to under  2000 for the first time in heaven knows how long?

Morrison: Yeah that's right. Since February last year, that's the first time we have  got down below 2000. Now that's good because it is reducing the pressure up there  on Christmas Island. At its peak when the border failures were out of control under  Labor it got to over 3000. So, you know, that helps everybody up there, it helps  manage the place. We are moving more and more people off there and into Nauru  and Manus and one of the reasons we can do that is because the boats aren't  coming.

Hadley: Last week we saw the Navy accused and Border Protection officers of  forcing boat people to put their hands on hot engine parts. It appeared to be with no  backing via anyone, via the Somali men who complained to police about this  happening. The ABC decided to broadcast that, and they were unsubstantiated at  the time. The Navy can't defend themselves nor can other officers. What do we do  about this sort of reporting when people can't defend themselves because it is not  allowed under the rules for them to talk to the media?

Morrison: Well what I did last week was go and defend them directly and the  publication of unsubstantiated and incredible accusations I thought was extremely  unfortunate. I mean other media outlets I think showed a lot more restraint on these  sorts of things and that's what I would hope others would do. But at the end of the  day this is a very sensitive operation and it is those who are running the operation as  well who are so keen to ensure we have a sensitivity attached to the information and  how it is managed because that actually helps us do the job. How we deal with  information on Operation Sovereign Borders is not an end in its own right, it is there  to make sure the operations can be done successfully and none of us, particularly  those involved in doing it, want to see that compromised in any way. They want to  just keep getting the job done; they are getting the job done. They are doing an  incredible job and to suggest that Australian Navy officers would torture other people  when they have spent the last five years saving their lives, I just think is a disgrace.

Hadley: Ok. One thing before you go, David listens online from Attadale in Western  Australia. Can you ask the Minister next time you speak to him if there are any plans

to stop providing internet access and mobile phones for those in detention and to  ban the selling of cigarettes? We need to actually show who is in charge.

Morrison: Well they don't have mobile phones in detention centres. That's not the  policy. In terms of internet access, no, they do have that. In terms of cigarettes there  has been some review about where and how they can have access to those things  and I am looking at that a bit more closely as well. Particularly having people smoke  around children and things like that. I mean we don't allow that in our own  community, in public buildings, things of that nature so why would we do it there? So  I think there's, you know, some questions to be answered there and I am having a  look at that but there is no doubt nowadays who people think are in charge when it  comes to running the detention centres, and that's the government.

Hadley: Now just in relation to mobile phones, if they arrive with one is that taken  from them?

Morrison: Yes.

Hadley: It is?

Morrison: Yes.

Hadley: Ok. Appreciate your time, we will talk next week.

Morrison: Thanks a lot Ray.

Hadley: Immigration Minister Scott Morrison.



See: Index of Speeches

URL:http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/sm/2014/sm211175.htm   Last update: Tuesday, 28 January 2014 at 13:04 AEST



