

MICHELLE ROWLAND MP

ACTING SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND  BORDER PROTECTION  MEMBER FOR GREENWAY

E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW  INTERVIEW WITH ANDREW VOSS, 2UE RADIO  THURSDAY, 16 JANUARY 2014

SUBJECT/S: Abbott Government’s Border Protection Secrecy

ANDREW VOSS, HOST: Immigration Minister Scott Morrison held his first media  conference since around about Christmas or a little bit before, but boats - we  have to talk about it. It’s hard to know who to hold accountable and all that with  so little information getting out there and trying to work out what is fact and what  is fiction. Trying to get reports, there’s reports of villages off Indonesia trying to  help out with a rescue of asylum seekers off a boat from the sea, reports of shots  fired off Australian navy ships to turn back boats. That was one of the platforms  of the new Government coming forward back in September they said they would  stop the boats, is everyone satisfied with the way things are progressing? The  spokesperson on this issue, opposition spokesperson is Michelle Rowland, she’s  online now, good morning Michelle.

MICHELLE ROWLAND: Good morning Andrew.

VOSS: What’s your read on the situation at the moment?

ROWLAND: Look, what we have is exactly what you’ve described, unconfirmed  reports that have mostly come from Indonesian authorities and also Indonesian  witnesses, we have a situation where this Government has now said we’ll  determine what people need to know, and whether or not we need to know this I  think is quite clear. I think people have a right to know when these things are  going on and the media plays an important role in that and I think the

Government should be fulsome with the Australian media and with the Australian  people about what’s going on.

VOSS: Do you expect any change to this situation Michelle? I mean there’s no  indication that there will be any information given and as I said we get, basically  we’re getting fragments of information from other quarters.

ROWLAND: Andrew, that’s anyone’s guess, and I think you also highlighted,  very pertinently, we’re getting this information from fishermen, there’s information  about the Navy being involved, about shots being discharged, about children  being in the water, but again, we haven’t seen anything or heard anything from  the Government on this particular matter and this occurred a week ago.  Whether  or not this will change… look personally I think judging from yesterday’s media  conference, I don’t think the Government is interested in giving us any more  information and I think that you and your media colleagues have a right to report  this news.

VOSS: Speaking with Michelle Rowland, opposition Immigration spokesperson,  now look, attack it from this side, part of the platform for the Coalition being  elected to Government was the issue of stopping the boats, so they have a  mandate to do this, do you think its just gone too far that they can’t do it by any  means, is that where they have crossed the line in your opinion?

ROWLAND: Look, they went to the election Andrew saying they were going to  do certain things, buying boats, doing other types of measures in Indonesia in  particular, but they also made it very clear that they would be open and upfront  and Tony Abbott himself said the last thing we want to do is hide anything from  the Australian people.  We’ve been asking Scott Morrison, or trying to ask him  and get answers from him in Parliament, and his response has been along the  lines that look, I hold weekly briefings, I don’t need to provide answers.  I just  don’t think that that’s good enough, I mean, you’re absolutely right, this  Government was elected, that’s a fact. But the other fact is that the policies which  are bringing down the number of arrivals significantly is the PNG arrangement  which Labor put in place when were in Government.

VOSS: Well, Michelle we’ve given you a platform to speak this morning, Scott  Morrison has the same invitation, but we’re not holding our breath! Thank you for  your time.

ROWLAND: My pleasure, Andrew.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: SOPHIE ANDREW 0401 443 524

