

NICK CHAMPION MP

SHADOW PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY FOR HEALTH  MEMBER FOR WAKEFIELD



E&EO TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  SKY NEWS AM AGENDA  THURSDAY, 16 OCTOBER 2014

SUBJECT / S: Ebola, National Security and Border Protection

KIERAN GILBERT: First though on the program on AM Agenda this morning,  I’m joined by Liberal MP, Kelly O’Dwyer, and the Shadow Parliamentary Secretary  for Health, Nick Champion. Nick, can you start by telling us what Labor wants  here in terms of helping to fight this escalating - rapidly escalating - crisis?  NICK CHAMPION: Well, look, it is rapidly escalating - predictions there might  be 1.5 million cases of Ebola in West Africa by 2015, and if the world does  nothing, if we aren’t part of an international effort to help combat this virus, then  we will have a very serious public health problem, not just for West Africa, but  for the whole world. We’re now already seeing cases in Europe and cases in the  U.S, obviously, it’s up to Australia, I think, in part with the rest of the world to  provide assistance to West Africa in the form of medical teams and specialists  who want to go, to try and contain this virus. And it can be contained.  GILBERT: Kelly, the Labor Party’s saying money is not enough in this news  release they’ve put out this morning. They’ve got quotes from a number of  groups and people, The UN, quoting a UN Security Council calling on countries to  do more, including delivery of assistance, including qualified, specialised and  trained personnel. We’ve got that - why don’t we provide it?  KELLY O’DWYER: So I think Labor has been incredibly reckless and deliberately  misleading in terms of what Australia’s contribution has been to date. For  starters, we have been asked to contribute funds and we have done that. We  have delivered more than $18 million dollars directly to making sure we can try  and combat this Ebola outbreak in West Africa and stop its advance into other

countries. We have also, though, contributed more than $40 million into the  World Health Organization, which is doing good work. There is nothing  prohibiting volunteers from going over to be part of not-for-profit organisations  who are doing good work overseas. But what we will not do as a country is we  will not recklessly send Australians into harm’s way where we have a duty of  care to make sure that if they contract Ebola that they are evacuated and they  are treated. We have no guarantees as of today in any country that they would  be asked to be evacuated or treated there, whether in the U.S. or whether in  Europe. It would be simply reckless for us to send people, knowing this, into  harm’s way, and I have a question for the Foreign Minister Deputy - sorry, the  Opposition Deputy Leader of the Labor Party and also for Nick - which hospital  would they like them to be treated in, in Australia? I’d like them to name the  hospitals that they would like us to be treating people in, in this country, if they  think that this is such a simple issue to deal with.  GILBERT: Nick Champion, your response to that? Because I guess this is  something the Foreign Minister herself has pointed to - the lack of capacity to  evacuate, to airlift our personnel if they are deployed to the effected countries in  West Africa.  CHAMPION: Well, arrangements for evacuation, agreements for evacuation are  made with international partners all the time. That’s what happens when we’re  part of international arrangements and the second thing is -  O’DWYER: But we don’t have agreements.  CHAMPION: Well, that’s what governments do. They set out agreements. So  you’re saying to us on one hand that it’s okay for Australians to go serve as part  of, you know, not-for-profit organisations where they might then return to  Australia, as we have seen, and then have to attend local health clinics where  there is an issue as opposed to the Government making sensible arrangements  with international partners for evacuation which would be far safer for the  Australian public, in this sort of you know, higgledy, piggledy arrangement that  you’re proposing, Kelly. And the second thing is, in regards to which hospitals -  well, the Health Minister was out there last week talking about the arrangements  that have been put in place with hospitals around the country in case we do  have cases of Ebola in the country from people arriving here by plane so - you  know, I’m just a bit perplexed by your approach - it seems to be illogical, to be  honest with you.  O’DWYER: Well, no, let me explain it -  GILBERT: I’ll get your response, but I want to ask you, Kelly, as well, if Labor is  being reckless and irresponsible, do you think the AMA is as well because the  AMA says the Government can and should be doing more?  O’DWYER: I’m not going to make a comment on the AMA. The reason I can say  the ALP is being reckless is because I know that they have receiving high level  briefings both from the Health Department and also, from what I understand,  the Defence Department as well. They have access to the same information that  the government has access to. They know that there is no evacuation or

treatment plan or agreement in place in any country and they know that to  deliberately send in Australian personnel - to send them in basically because  they have been told to go in would be quite, quite reckless and irresponsible in  terms of our duty of care to those personnel. Now, if people choose to volunteer,  and there are some incredible people out there who choose to volunteer and to  go into harm’s way, that is a very different question and of course we have all  the appropriate protections in place for the screening of those people returning  to Australia. But what the Labor Party is asking us to do is to deliberately send  people into harm’s way and we can’t guarantee their safety.  GILBERT: Alright, let’s move on. I want to ask Nick about Labor’s apparent  concerns on biometric data capacity of the Immigration Department. This is  related to the next phase of national security laws that so-called foreign fighters  bill. Nick, can you talk us through what Labor is worried about here?  CHAMPION: Well, clearly whenever we’re talking about national security  legislation, we’ve got to get the balance right between overall security on one  hand and individual liberty on the other. And, what we’re, I suppose, looking  forward to, I mean, this has been something that’s new that’s been part of the  consideration of this bill and I guess what we’re looking forward to is the security  committee looking at these aspects and making some recommendations on  them. Clearly, it’s about getting the balance right. We’ve tried to, I guess, get  the balance right in terms of our negotiations in support of the Government in  some instances with the previous bills but obviously we want to make sure  people’s civil liberties are protected while we’re protecting the overall security of  the country.  GILBERT: Kelly, do you have any concerns on this biometric issue - the fact  that tens and hundreds of thousands of Australians on their way in and out of  Australia, completely innocent, potentially will have their photographs and  fingerprints and so on kept on file by the Immigration Department under this  legislation?  O’DWYER: Well, I couldn’t quite work out from what Nick said as to whether or  not he agreed or disagreed with it, which exposes the perfect Labor Party  position in all things. But the point that we make as a Government is that we  have a responsibility to protect Australian citizens. We have a responsibility to do  all that we can do to make sure that if there is a preventable terrorist act,  potentially, on home soil, that we do what we can to prevent it. Now, sometimes  that will mean that we need to properly identify people and in so doing that we  will need to obtain that data that you’ve just mentioned. So we agree that it’s  important to have appropriate protection for civil liberties, but it’s also important  for us to protect Australian citizens, and we think the balance is right which is  why we have brought forward this bill.  GILBERT: And I guess it is going to a Parliamentary Committee, Nick Champion,  so that providing that scrutiny that, in your view, provided the scrutiny needed in  the first tranche of this legislation. Are you confident this will achieve the same

this time around? Obviously, the starting point for Labor has been from the  outset here, to cooperate on all of these things, hasn’t it?  CHAMPION: Well, I think when you’re collecting iris scans and potentially  fingerprints and the like from people, then obviously the devil will be in the detail  of not just the collection of that data but the storage of it, the protocols that  surround it and the protection of people’s civil liberties so, you know, it’s easy for  Kelly to sling insults through the TV camera but we want to be careful and  cautious about people’s civil liberties and we don’t want to give up freedom in  order to protect it.  GILBERT: Kelly, any response given, I mean, obviously this is a key tenet of the  Liberal Party, isn’t it, personal freedom?  O’DWYER: Of course! Of course, it is and I think we’ve done a lot more than  the Labor Party to protect personal freedoms and Nick, if you feel remotely  offended by anything that I’ve said, really I never like hurting your feelings.  CHAMPION: No, no, indeed, indeed.  GILBERT: Well, on that note, on that very nice note, let’s take a break. Back in  just a moment. Stay with us.  This is AM Agenda, thanks for your company. With me, Labor front bencher Nick  Champion and Liberal MP Kelly O’Dwyer. Kelly, the Prime Minister’s comments on  shirt fronting Putin, they continue to reverberate certainly in Russia. The Russian  Prime Minister Medvedev has said that politicians should be choosing their words  carefully. He has said that Mr Putin is quite adept at sports and they could have  forceful debates but then with that swipe suggesting that serious politicians  should be choosing their words more carefully. It’s clearly got a reaction right  from the top there.  O’DWYER: Well, look, a serious government also should respond to the very  natural concerns that Australia has raised. 38 lives were lost. We know very  clearly that the Russians have got very direct influence with Russian-backed  rebels in the Ukraine who downed this plane which saw the loss of those 38  Australian lives. We are very concerned that there has not been full cooperation  in the investigation and we want to see that full cooperation.  GILBERT: Well, Nick Champion, that’s fair enough, isn’t it? And Bill Shorten has  been urging the Government to go tough on Putin. In fact, he said himself he  didn’t want Putin to be here in the first place.  CHAMPION: Well, look, I think it’s one thing to indicate that you don’t want  someone to visit the shores of Australia who has obviously, you know, got some  responsibility, I think, in the way that Russian-backed rebels have been allowed  to behave in the Eastern part of Ukraine. But what we’ve seen, I guess, from the  Prime Minister, frankly, is a bit of a loose language and that’s allowed the  Russians now to trivialise what is a very very serious matter - a very serious  matter in international law and I guess you can tell by Kelly’s response the fact  that she didn’t talk and talk and talk and talk that she was reasonably short with  her answer, that she understands the importance of, you know, serious and  sober messaging on these matters so we don’t want to see him triviliaze, we

certainly don’t want to see sandpit diplomacy where people throw sand at each  other. What we want to see is this matter seriously dealt with on an international  level and we want to see Mr Putin really pursue this matter in his own country to  bring those people who are responsible to justice. And that’s what we should be  saying to the Russians. That’s the pressure we should be applying to the  Russians rather than this loose language that I think we’ve seen in the last week  or so.  GILBERT: And I guess this row, our spat with Russia becomes the dominant  theme of the G20 Leader’s Week in less than a month now, in Brisbane, Kelly.  Which I guess, in many respects, when the Treasurer wants the focus on growth  and so on that if Putin does show up, it’s clearly going to dominate the coverage  certainly here.  O’DWYER: Well, I don’t accept that. I think the Treasurer’s been doing a  fantastic job leading the G20. There are going to be some marvellous outcomes  as a result of all the hard work and discussions that have taken place to date in  terms of how we can increase global growth. Australia has played a very key role  in all of that, particularly in relation to how we can invest more in the  infrastructure that is going to be required not only in Australia but right across  the world and what role that will play in global growth. I think that people won’t  be distracted by this issue. I think people will focus on the key issues and what  the G20’s all about and I think also we’ll focus on the fact that having the  Russian Prime Minister in Australia will be an opportunity for us to put our case  very strongly that we expect and require the Russian government to fully  cooperate with the investigation into the downing of the plane that lost 38 lives.  GILBERT: Indeed. Well, I’ve just got some breaking news there that I want to  repeat words on the screen - Dubbo MP Troy Grant elected as Deputy New  South Wales Premier. That was in the Nationals Party meeting this morning,  Adrian Piccoli remains deputy. So that’s news just out of state parliament in  Sydney this morning. Finally, onto one last issue, Nick Champion, I want to touch  on, and this is a significant development yesterday in the Federal Court, this  ruling that a baby born to asylum seekers at the Mater Hospital in Brisbane. The  ruling the baby would be treated as an unauthorised maritime arrival. What’s  Labor’s view on this ruling? Would you seek to have legislation passed to maybe,  I guess, circumvent the ruling? What’s Labor’s position on it?  CHAMPION: Well no, we respect the decision of the Federal Court. That’s why  you have courts, to make decisions or interpretations of legislation and we’re  quite comfortable with the court’s decision. We respect the court’s decision.  GILBERT: Is this about - Kelly O’Dwyer, preventing what they call in the United  States, anchor babies where someone, many many people, give birth to children  in the United States , they automatically become US citizens and therefore, the  chances of the parents having also having access to citizenship also are  enhanced?  O’DWYER: Well, that’s a good point. And the truth is, you don’t want people  making dangerous boat journeys, who are pregnant, paying people smugglers in

the hope that this will somehow secure them the right to live in Australia. I  mean, that is completely circumventing our laws in this country in order to try  and do that. So the Federal Court ruling is a very sensible ruling. I note that Nick  was very brief in his response. The Labor Party, frankly, is all over the shop on  this particular issue. We know that they’d like to go back to their previous policy  which really opened the borders for everybody -  CHAMPION: Oh, come on, Kelly, don’t roll out the spin -  O’DWYER: Well, you know -  CHAMPION: We’re close to the end of the program. One of the last actions of  the Rudd Government was to basically put in pass the Papua New Guinean  arrangements which have helped -  O’DWYER: After they completely dismantled temporary protection - which  you’re still fighting, which you guys are still fighting at the moment.  CHAMPION: You cannot ignore the actions of the previous Government in stop  of stemming the flow of boats to Australia.  O’DWYER: Well, you opened up the doors, you let more than 50,000 people  came -  GILBERT: Well, that’s true but Nick Champion, if this is not an issue, if this is  neutralised, that’s obviously what Labor is hoping for, is at essentially lockstep  with the Government here?  O’DWYER: Well, they’re not because they don’t support temporary protection  visas.  CHAMPION: Kelly, that was a question to me. I mean, look what I’m saying to  you is that we don’t want people to take dangerous boat journeys in order to  seek asylum. What we want is an orderly migration program which has as a  component of it, an increased refugee intake to make sure that people have, you  know some humanitarian portion of our migration program and that’s an  important thing for Australia, that’s what we did after World War II, that’s what  we did after the Vietnam War, that’s what we should do now but it has to be  orderly and it has to be safe -  GILBERT: And they welcome numbers, of course, the number of people asylum  seekers dying at sea have reduced dramatically in recent years. Of course that’s  welcomed by everyone. The Minister responsible, Scott Morrison, there’s been a  lot of talk about him moving onto bigger and I guess, more challenging although  this is pretty challenging portfolio, but a broader portfolio area like defence is  something that has been talked about. Is there any feeling in the Coalition as to  when this reshuffle is going to happen? Certainly there’s an expectation it will  happen by the end of the year -  O’DWYER: Is this a question to me?  GILBERT: It is, Kelly, yeah.  O’DWYER: Right, sorry I didn’t hear who you addressed that to, Kieran. Look,  obviously I don’t know -  GILBERT: Well, I don’t think Nick would have much of a clue, as much as I do -

O’DWYER: Well, I figure he’d have just as much of a clue as me in terms of  speculating on this because obviously it’s a matter for the Prime Minister to  determine what team he has around him and who is best placed to do what job  but it is very clear that Scott Morrison has done an excellent job in this area, a  very challenging area, the boats have stopped and it’s due to the good policy  work that he has done as Minister.  CHAMPION: The Prime Minister could put Kelly in Cabinet.  GILBERT:  Yeah, well that’s a chance. Maybe an outside chance, get on. I was  going to mention a tab agency but I won’t do it because we don’t want to give  free advertising, but anyway, think Kelly might be good outside chances certainly  for the Ministry, not an outside chance at all I think a red hot favourite. But  anyway, we’ll leave it there, Kelly O’Dwyer and Nick Champion, have a good one.  ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: RICHARD BROOKS 02 6277 4451 / 0409 285 296

