

THE HON. BILL SHORTEN MP  LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  MEMBER FOR MARIBYRNONG

THE HON. ALANNAH MACTIERNAN MP  SHADOW PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY FOR  WESTERN AUSTRALIA  SHADOW PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY FOR  REGIONAL DEVELOPMENT AND INFRASTRUCTURE

FEDERAL MEMBER FOR PERTH



E&OE TRANSCRIPT   DOORSTOP INTERVIEW  EMC HOUSE, PERTH  THURSDAY, 14 AUGUST 2014

SUBJECT/S: Renewable energy; jobs; unfair Budget; humanitarian  assistance to Iraq; public transport

BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: I want to, on behalf of  Alannah MacTiernan and myself, just thank EMC for the work they are doing.  This is Australian ingenuity. It is the vision of smart people, solving problems  which allow our businesses to do better with renewable energy and solar energy.  It is great that they're designing equipment for the Mackerel Island resorts. It is  good there are investors backing in our tourism industry. But of course it is a  business which requires real attention to costs. What we're seeing here is the  solar industry stepping up and providing solutions for tourism, for smaller  Australian communities right across our country. That is why it is important that  we back in our renewable energy sector, that we back in our solar industry.

Solar power is not a matter of science fiction, it is a matter of daily energy  supplies with increasingly cost-effective proposition and reliable supplies of  energy. There’s 1.2 million houses with solar panels. There is 30,000 people who  work in the industry. We do need government decisions and policy to support

Australian ingenuity, Australian investment and Australian know-how. Australia is  one of the sunniest continents in the world. It beggars belief that other parts of  the world are racing ahead with solar power and solar energy and Australian  Government policy is lagging behind. Tony Abbott needs to get over his  resistance to the renewable energy sector and provide certainty. There has been  billions of dollars invested. There’s billions of dollars to be invested in renewable  energy.

We need a Government to show the sort of courage and forethought and respect  for jobs and innovation that people in the industry are supplying. It is important  that the Federal Government gets behind renewable energy rather than leaves it  to wither on the vine. I might ask my colleague Alannah MacTiernan to talk more  about this topic.

What I also briefly wish to do is talk about the Budget. We have seen Treasurer  Joe Hockey flying in and flying out on bended knee trying to get crossbenchers  to accept his unfair Budget. I think every Australian was appalled yesterday to  hear our Treasurer, our financial steward, saying that poor people don't drive  cars, or if they do drive cars they don't drive very far. Treasurer Hockey is out of  touch. It has been three months since the unfair Budget has been brought down  and we see broken promises and lies causing great angst in our community.

Mr Hockey, average Australians, poor Australians, middle class Australians, they  drive their cars, they fill up petrol at the bowser and you're putting new taxes on  them. I think Joe Hockey should apologise to Australians for insulting them by  saying that you don't have to worry about the tax if you don't drive a car. This is  not the way to go. Joe Hockey needs to come back to planet earth from planet  Hockey. He needs to help real Australians meet their cost of living pressures, not  be a further unfair source of pressure on Australians.

I might Alannah to say a few words.

ALANNAH MACTIERNAN, SHADOW PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY FOR  WESTERN AUSTRALIA: Thanks very much Bill. I just want to say that  everyone in Western Australia understands that we need to diversify our  economy. As we move away from the construction boom in mining, we know  that we need jobs in Western Australia and we need jobs that involve innovation  and technology.

Our renewable industry is an absolute natural fit for Western Australia. We have  the world's best solar resources, wind resources and wave resources, and we  have got to have government getting in there supporting that innovation so that  in the next 10 years we will have this as a thriving, booming industry that will be  setting world standards.



SHORTEN: Before we take questions, I might just comment on the breaking  news that Australia's RAAF are delivering humanitarian supplies to beleaguered  citizens and refugees in northern Iraq. I, like the entire Opposition and the  Government, congratulate the professional men and women of our defence  force, the RAAF in this case, but all of those involved in this hazardous operation  to bring relief and support to innocent people caught up in a terrible struggle  well beyond their means to control what is happening.

REPORTER: Do you support offering sanctuary to the thousands of minorities in  northern Iraq?

SHORTEN: Yes, we have seen reports of this. Labor does support providing  support for refugees and the opportunity to come to Australia. It was Labor  policy to bring 20,000 refugees a year. The current Government has reduced  that number of spots for refugees. We are pleased however that the Government  is considering increasing the number of refugee spots. Yes we do support it.

REPORTER: Should there be an escalation beyond the two Hercules?

SHORTEN: I think we need to do whatever the experts say is necessary to  provide humanitarian relief. If you talk about escalation, Labor is very much on  the same page as the Government about doing what we can to provide  humanitarian relief in very hazardous circumstances. Like the Government, like  the Prime Minister has said, we don't see this as being a place where you would  have combat troops engaged in intense military operations fighting a war in Iraq.

REPORTER: What about to protect the delivery of aid?

SHORTEN: Clearly keeping our people safe is a priority. We need to see the  detail of that but if it is for humanitarian relief, Labor is up for that. There is not  a cigarette paper of difference between Labor and Liberal on this matter. But  again, the Government, I understand, and I have spoken to their office, the  Prime Minister's office in the last few minutes, is making it very clear it is not  about combat troops or military operations against the ISIS terrorist  organisation, it is about humanitarian relief.

REPORTER: How well do you know Neville Wran's daughter Harriet and what is  your reaction to her being charged with murder overnight?

SHORTEN: I attended Neville Wran's funeral and I met the family there. I have  nothing to say about this matter which is being dealt with by the police.

REPORTER: Do you know her at all?



SHORTEN: No, but again, I will just say that we don't know what is happening  here. It is in the hands of the police, I’m not going to add to that matter.

REPORTER: You must be sad to hear, though, for the family?

SHORTEN: I don't know what has happened and I am certainly not going to  comment on something which I have no knowledge about.

REPORTER: Mr Shorten, WA residents will be paying the carbon tax until  November it seems because the State Government wasn't prepared, or says it  wasn't ready, for the repeal. Should there be a repeal of these?

SHORTEN: The West Australian Government is asleep at the wheel. It can  hardly be a secret that the Government was endeavouring to repeal the carbon  price. I don't understand why Premier Barnett is not dealing with this matter  promptly. Everyone knows that in Western Australia, the cost of living is a real  issue and I don't understand why the Liberal Government over here is doing  nothing to assist ordinary Australians. I might ask my colleague Alannah  MacTiernan to talk from a Western Australian perspective.

But I would just generally say about Liberal Governments and cost of living, the  wheels have fallen off Treasurer Hockey's unfair Budget. I think it is fair to say  that the Government's run out of petrol in terms of supporting their Budget. It is  an unfair Budget which is putting real pressure on pensioners, on people who are  sick and vulnerable who go to the doctor, and motorists. That we have a  Government who thinks that poor people don't drive cars or that they don't drive  them very much shows no idea how West Australians are organising their lives.  People in the bush have no choice but to use cars. Public transport under the  Abbott Government has been rolled back in Western Australia. So this is a  Government who wants people to pay more tax and doesn't even realise the  harm that they're causing ordinary people.

I might just ask Alannah to talk about carbon.

REPORTER: Just one last question on the Budget, if Joe Hockey can't get much  of his Budget through the Senate, or looks like can’t, should there be a double  dissolution?

SHORTEN: I think that the Abbott Government needs to have a good, hard look  at themselves. This is a Budget which is unfair. It is a Budget which has broken  promises. It is a Budget which is full of lies that were told to Australia before the  last election. The Abbott Government and Joe Hockey should hang their heads in

shame. What they are doing is asking ordinary Australians to pay the bill because  this is a Government who doesn't know what they're doing.

There is no doubt in my mind they should throw the Budget in the bin and start  again. I think if the Government had integrity they would offer this Budget up  and have an election and see if people agree with what they want.

This is a Government who loves to talk about mandates. They have no mandate  to cut the pension. This Government has no mandate to increase petrol taxes.  This Government has no mandate to cut hospital and school funding in Western  Australia or anywhere else for that matter. They have no mandate to make it  hard for middle class and working class kids to go to university. They have no  mandate to force the unemployed on no income at all for six months. It is a  rotten Budget, it is unfair and Australians have seen through the Abbott  Government's Budget.

I might ask my colleague to talk about -

MACTIERNAN: It is an absolute joke. They were so keen and willing to put up  the price of public transport fares, using the carbon price as the excuse. Quite  clearly, everyone knew when an Abbott Government came in, that was going to  go away and they are now refusing to do it.

Two things, that is because they have managed this Budget so hopelessly. They  have lost Western Australia's AAA credit rating. And, secondly, they have no  commitment to public transport. We have seen every commitment that they have  made over the last two elections on public transport be systemically walked away  from.

They have lied about building the Ellenbrook railway, they’ve lied about building  the MAX Light Rail. They made not one ounce of complaint when Tony Abbott  took $500 million of public transport money from Western Australia at the last  Budget. And now they have got some project that they're proposing that they  had to admit they have not had Treasury costings of.

So we’ve got two things here - a Government that has absolutely zero  commitment to public transport and, secondly, is incapable of managing the  Budget.

SHORTEN: Thanks everyone.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: LEADER’S OFFICE MEDIA UNIT - 02 6277 4053

