

THE HON RICHARD MARLES MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER  PROTECTION  MEMBER FOR CORIO



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  INTERVIEW with MARK PARTON  TALKING CANBERRA 1206 2CC  WEDNESDAY 18 JUNE 2014

SUBJECT/S: SIEV 221, Tony Abbott’s Paid Parental Leave Scheme

JOURNALIST - MARK PARTON: Let’s go to the immigration spokesperson for  the opposition, that’s Richard Marles who joins us on the line right now. G’day  Richard.

RICHARD MARLES, SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND  BORDER PROTECTION: Good morning Mark, how are you?

PARTON: Excellent. I’m not sure what we can or can’t say about this at the  moment in terms of where it’s at in Court, but were you surprised that it came  forward in the first place?

MARLES: Yes I think this is an extraordinary piece of litigation. 41 people  survived on that tragic night back in 2010. Of those 41, 40 were saved by the  heroics really, of our Navy and Customs personnel, and these are very rough  seas, a very rocky coastline, only one person made it to shore unaided, and  those personnel really put their own lives in danger in order to save the lives of  others. It’s hard to imagine how you can do any more than that as a human  being in terms of trying to aid another human being, and to have a situation now  where a claim is being made against the Commonwealth is, well I’m kind of  speechless, it’s really hard to know what to say.

PARTON: Richard my first thought was I know there were some people who  risked their lives, who showed enormous courage to save those who could be  saved and I can’t imagine what they must be thinking by this.

MARLES: Well I think that’s right and we shouldn’t underestimate the  experience that they have, I mean not only in terms of risking their lives, but  what they would have seen, the trauma that they themselves would have gone  through. I mean there were really terrible stories that came out of that night as  people can imagine, fifty odd people lost their lives. I remember speaking to  Brendan O’Connor who was the Home Affairs Minister at the time, went up to  Christmas Island a day after the tragedy and he spoke of a community which  was deeply traumatised by this event and the people involved in it were as well  and so if you are one of those people who was serving with our Navy or our  Customs who was involved, who experienced terrible things, put your own life at  risk, and did a heroic thing, saved 40 lives in the process, to now see this  litigation must be astounding.

PARTON: We’ve got another date in Court, Papua New Guinea’s role in  Australia’s offshore detention regime is going to be decided by the High Court in  Canberra today, the Court’s considering whether the law declaring PNG as a  regional processing country is valid under the constitution, and I’m sure that this  is another issue that the Coalition and Labor are actually standing as one on.

MARLES: Well that’s right, and obviously we will see what the High Court  decides today in relation to that matter, but Labor absolutely believes in the  importance of the Regional Resettlement Arrangement with PNG, the role that  Manus is playing in saving lives ensuring the kind of events we saw at Christmas  Island back in 2010 never happen again. And it’s as a result of the Regional  Resettlement Arrangement that we really have seen a significant drop off in the  number of asylum seeker vessels coming to Australia and as a result a reduction  in the loss of lives at sea to a point where, touch wood, we hope we won’t see  that again. But I make this point Mark, we do stand as one in relation to this  today. Three years ago when Scott Morrison had the opportunity to stand as one  with the Labor party to put in place the Malaysian arrangement, after the High  Court made an adverse decision at that time, he voted with the Greens to wreck  Labor’s policy, he voted with the Greens to in essence, keep the flow of asylum  seeker boats continuing and that is a decision of Scott Morrison’s that should  never be forgotten.

PARTON: And when it comes to standing as one, Ian Macdonald, the Coalition  Senator, wasn’t quite standing as one with you guys but gee he did a bit of your  work for you yesterday didn’t he?

MARLES: Well what is clear is that the Liberal National parties are not standing  as one, in relation to their own Budget, I mean they are full of division. But Ian  Macdonald is a politician who has been around for a long time, he can see bad  policy when it comes across him and that’s what is the case here. I mean he’s  complaining about the paid parental leave scheme and why wouldn’t he, this is a  policy which is going to be providing $50,000 cheques to millionaires , and I  think what’s really difficult for me in thinking this one through is that today in my  home town there are reports of 20 people losing their jobs at the CSIRO, that  would resonate I imagine a lot with your listeners Mark, here in Canberra there  will be a whole lot of people who will be very anxious about job losses associated  with cuts to the public service, cuts to our health and our education programs,  and all of that is occurring at a time when the very same budget, cheques of  $50,000 are being paid to millionaires and that I would imagine is deeply galling  and that’s the point that Ian Macdonald was making last night.

PARTON: Well it seems a bit over the top to me too, so we’ll see how that -

MARLES: Can I ask you a question?

PARTON: Please.

MARLES: Talking about the State of Origin, coming from south of the border  and discovering this cultural experience, do we take it as read that everyone in  Canberra barracks for the Blues?

PARTON: No we don’t, there’s quite a few Maroon supporters here and I think  part of that’s because there’s always been a strong link between the Canberra  Raiders in the Brisbane competition, Mal Meninga and others but no it’s not a  given. But I reckon probably 70 per cent of Canberrans are with the Blues.

MARLES: It’s a night where those of us in the AFL look with some envy at  Rugby League because it is an incredible phenomenon, that State of Origin.

PARTON: Well I don’t think you should be envious, although I love my State of  Origin and I think it’s great, I was trying to explain to a mad Rugby League  person I said in AFL we don’t need State of Origin because we can have a game  between 13th and 9th on Anzac Day that packs 100,000 seat stadium, I said  we’ve got State of Origin every couple of months.

MARLES: That is true.

PARTON: That’ll start an argument. Thanks for coming on this morning.

MARLES: It’s a pleasure.



ENDS

MEDIA ENQUIRIES: LIDIJA IVANOVSKI 0427 051 563



