Sun-Herald report on Manus Island incident - Minister for  Immigration and Border Protection

05-01-2014 -

The article published in today's Sun-Herald alleging certain events at the Manus Island  processing centre in October this year does not reflect an accurate account of the events that  took place and misrepresents the government's response.

In particular the article failed to report the detailed response provided by my Department to the  questions and assertions raised by the reporter with my office.

The response provided by my Department gave a comprehensive explanation of the matters  raised by the reporter. I have attached the full text of the response provided by my Department  and facilitated by my office.

My briefings and statements provided on these events were based on the advice and incident  reporting provided to me and my office at the time. As further information was provided I  issued further statements to reflect more recent information.

As advised to me, despite initial incorrect reports, there was no 'evacuation', there had been no  credible reports that there were 'weapons drawn' and the incident involved a dispute between  PNG nationals and was not related to the centre. As such any investigation into the alleged  conflict is and remains a matter for PNG authorities.

Prior to this incident and after visiting the centre in late September with Major General (RET)  Jim Molan, I ordered that a full force protection assessment be undertaken at all offshore  processing centres and at Christmas Island, based on my own concerns about the status of  security arrangements and adequacy of security infrastructure put in place by the former  government.

This assessment was undertaken by an experienced ADF team tasked by Operation Sovereign  Borders commander Lieutenant General Angus Campbell. After receiving the reports of these  assessments a comprehensive set of improvements and security infrastructure upgrades were  identified at the centres and are being actioned.

The cost of implementing these initiatives, in particular the infrastructure upgrades, forms part  of the $1.2 billion funding black hole left by the previous government, that resulted in centres  being under capacity and underfunded. The new government has addressed and is continuing to  address these weaknesses.

The reaction by Labor and Greens to the misleading report in today's Sun-Herald is predictable.

It's time for Labor and the Greens to come down off their grassy knoll and recognise that the  only conspiracy that has occurred on our borders is their tag team effort in government to  remove the successful policies that worked under John Howard that led to over 50,000 illegal  arrivals on more than 800 boats and in excess of 1,100 deaths at sea.

The Abbott Government has restored the policies that worked under the Howard Government,  including cleaning up the mess Labor left behind on offshore processing. Labor never believed  in offshore processing. It is therefore no surprise that so much has had to be done to fix Labor's  muddled reintroduction of the policy that they were forced to implement under protest.



