

THE HON RICHARD MARLES MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER  PROTECTION  MEMBER FOR CORIO



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW  ABC RN DRIVE INTERVIEW WITH WALEED ALY   TUESDAY, 17 JUNE 2014

SUBJECT/ S: Asylum seekers; SIEV 221.

WALEED ALY: I am now joined by Labor’s Shadow Minister for Immigration and  Border Protection, Richard Marles. Richard Marles, thank you for your time. Richard  why did the motion not even go to a vote?

RICHARD MARLES, SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION & BORDER  PROTECTION: Well it did go to a vote. There was clear support for the position of  continuing offshore processing.

ALY: I don’t want to spend too much time on the technicalities but the reporting  about it says there was no vote. There was no formal vote.

MARLES: There absolutely was a vote and the outcome of that was to support the  policy that we’ve had in place now for some time. That we had in place at the end of  the Rudd Government that we have in place now which is to support offshore  processing. And to do that, from the position of needing to do everything we can to  see an end to the tragic loss of life at sea. You mentioned in your intro about a law  suit in relation to the tragedy on Christmas Island in December 2010, which reminds  us of that incident. That really was a turning point in the whole debate around this  issue in Australia. And we’ve got to make sure that that kind of event never happens  again.

ALY: Okay, and I want to come to that law suit in a moment. If there was a vote  what were the numbers?

MARLES: Well it was a vote that was done on the show of the hands, or on the  voices, I should say. It was clearly in support of the position we’ve now had for  some time -

ALY: How clearly though? I am just trying to get a sense of where the caucus sits  on it.



MARLES: Look, I’m not going to go into the precise detail of it, Waleed. It wasn’t  close. This was a clear decision of the Labor Caucus to continue its support for a  policy, which is saving lives at sea, a policy which is absolutely founded from a  position of compassion. But I would want to say in relation to the debate that  occurred within the Caucus, it was done very respectfully and I respect Melissa  Parke and Anna Burke. I know the place from which they come in relation to this  and they absolutely mean the best and, you know, they have very strong values  about this issue and I respect that.

ALY: Is discontent over that policy though beginning to grow? Is there any question  about the Labor party’s resolve on the issue of offshore processing, in a sense that  perhaps it’s adopted this because it was a political necessity but it’s heart isn’t  necessarily in it, in the way that it might be on, I don’t know, the abolition of Work  Choices, or something like that.

MARLES: Our actions in the context of politics and in the context of whether or not  our heart is in it, the answer to the question is very clearly this, we believe in the  necessity of offshore processing in order to save lives at sea. That is a really  important and compassionate objective. And we believe in that as fervently as we

believe in anything. This has been an appallingly difficult issue and all too often  people interpret the decisions that we make on the basis of politics. The truth is that  when you go through the experiences we have over the last few years of seeing  over a period of 30 months more than 1200 people die you cannot but be affected  by that experience. What moved us to take the very difficult decision of putting in  place the Regional Resettlement Arrangement last year was really, to use the words  of Martin Luther King “experiencing a fierce urgency of now.” A fierce urgency of  now in stopping the loss of life at sea and the steps that we took, as difficult as they  were, have seen, we hope, an end to the loss of life at sea.

ALY: Okay, but that whole policy is based on deterrence.

MARLES: Well it’s based on taking Australia off the table and I think there is a  difference in this because we don’t stand for a position of making people’s lives as  difficult as possible in order to deter them from coming to Australia. The

fundamental step that we took last year was simply taking Australia off the table -

ALY: Okay, okay, but what I have never understood about that is, if you are worried  about the humanity of the conditions and the processing of asylum seekers, which  you now say that you are worried about -

MARLES: We are.



ALY: Why would taking Australia off the table but providing a humane and adequate  alternative to Australia, that provides asylum, why would that stop a single boat?  Don’t you actually need the alternative to be so bad that it stops people wanting to  get on boats?

MARLES: Well, that I don’t think is right and I’ve heard this argument on many  occasions and the argument essentially goes that, you know, conditions need to be  worse than what persists in the source countries in order for people not to come to  Australia.

ALY: That the alternative needs to be unacceptable, that’s the point.

MARLES: Well my point I would make is that people have come through a whole lot  of transit countries on the way, which are nowhere near as bad in many instances as  the source countries from which people originated. But that didn’t stop people going  to the transit countries along the way -

ALY: No, but that’s not my argument here, what I am saying is if you are taking  Australia off the table you are providing an alternative. By definition you need to  make that alternative unacceptable if you are going to stop people getting on boats.  Otherwise if it’s acceptable then they will continue to get on boats.

MARLES: Well, I don’t accept that in terms of the baseline you are measuring. But I  guess the point, I’d put it in these terms, Waleed, we had a situation where the lure  of Australia, if you like, the lure of Australia was seeing hundreds upon hundreds of  people drown at sea.

ALY: Was it the lure of Australia or the lure of protection from persecution?

MARLES: Well, I absolutely think it was the lure of Australia because what you can  do  in a whole range of circumstances is provide people with safe refuge and provide  people with protection and of course that needs to happen, I’d be the first to say  that in relation to Reza Berati safe refuge was not afforded to him. So I am not  standing here apologising for the conditions that Manus Island has found itself in,  there is a lot of work that needs to be done there and we have been very vocal in  saying of the Government that they simply have to raise the standards of that  facility.

But you can provide people with safe refuge without having the lure of Australia  there and the lure of Australia resulting in hundreds, more than a thousand people  dying. And so long as it is doing that then we are not reducing the sum total of  global misery per our humanitarian program, we’re adding to it and that’s what we  needed to remedy and that’s why we put in place the PNG arrangement last year. In  saying that it’s so important that Manus not operate as a hell hole, that it simply be  a measure to take Australia off the table. It should be a place that seeks to make  people’s lives appalling. It should just be about taking Australia off the table. What  we know about the way in which Manus is run since this Government came into

power is that for eight months there wasn’t a single conversation between Minister  Morrison and his counter-part in PNG around the question of resettlement and  processing.

ALY: Okay.

MARLES: Now it’s not surprising that in those circumstances tension is going to  build and that’s what Robert Cornall found as one of the, if not the key factor, which  lead to the events in February.

ALY: So let me just pick up Manus as an idea quickly. UNICEF Australia has called  for independent body to monitor the treatment of children particularly in Australian  immigration detention. They want them to publically report on the situation. Do you  agree with that? Would you commit Labor to regular public reporting on conditions?

MARLES: Well I do think that there is a real problem with the level of transparency  that we have seen around the way in which this Government has operated in this  area of policy -

ALY: So how about an independent monitor?

MARLES: Well, obviously all of that needs to be done in the context of our  relationship with PNG or with Nauru, but I do accept that there is a role for  independent review of the Government’s own engagement within these facilities.

ALY: Let me come to the case that I mentioned today, the lawyer George Newhouse  has put forward. He’s arguing that the Commonwealth knew or should have known  that there were vulnerable men and women on the high seas, this is with the  Christmas Island tragedy, and that the Government has failed in its duty of care by  failing to keeps its rescue vessels seaworthy. What’s your response to this action?

MARLES: Well, look I wasn’t the Minister at the time and I don’t have all the details  at hand. But I’d make this observation, Waleed. Of the 41 people who survived that  appalling incident on that night 40 of them were rescued from rough seas off a  rocky coastline by Australia’s Navy and Customs personnel who put their own lives in  danger in order to rescue people in those circumstances.

ALY: None of which George Newhouse is criticising.

MARLES: Well I think that that is a fact when we’re thinking about this action that  people need to bear in mind.

ALY: Why is that relevant? He is saying that the Australian Government didn’t do its  job because it didn’t have rescue vessels that were seaworthy at the time when a  ship entered into its waters and it has an international legal obligation to do  something about it. It’s not at all about the personnel who bravely rescued these  people. It’s to do with the Government and the circumstances, the operations  around it.



MARLES: Well, again, I don’t have all the details at hand; I wasn’t the Minister at  the time. No doubt this action will proceed as it does.

ALY: Do you accept that’s a legitimate thing for them to be arguing in Court about?

MARLES: Well I’m not in a position to make that judgement, not having those facts  at hand myself. But I’m absolutely making the point, and your listeners should be  aware, that it was the Australian Government on that night, and it was people acting  in the Governments name, risking their own lives in the process, who saved 40 of  the 41 people who were able to be saved in that circumstance, and I think that is a  highly relevant matter in the context of this law suit.

ALY: Richard Marles, thank you very much for your time.

MARLES: Thank you, Waleed.

ENDS



