

THE HON RICHARD MARLES MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER  PROTECTION

MEMBER FOR CORIO



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TV INTERVIEW   ABC, CAPITAL HILL WITH GREG JENNETT  FRIDAY, 21 MARCH 2014

SUBJECT/ S: Tony Abbott in PNG, Asylum seekers; Manus Island.



GLEN JENNETT: Now the Opposition’s Immigration Spokesperson, Richard Marles  was  involved  in  laying  some  ground  work  in  the  Papua  New  Guinea  relationship   when he looked after Pacific Island Affairs in the Labor Government so he has more  than  a  passing  interest  in  today’s  talks  and  he’s  in  Perth,  thanks  for  joining  us.   Richard who’s in the stronger negotiating position today? Is it Tony Abbott with his  money or Peter O’Neil with a fairly full and troubled Manus Island detention centre?

RICHARD MARLES, SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER  PROTECTION: It’s a good question and I think what comes from the question is  that this is for the first time a discussion, I think of equals and that’s why this is  actually an important agreement from the point of view of PNG.  PNG is  unquestionably helping Australia through what is a very difficult issue we are dealing  with and its not just a matter of Australian coming to the table with the ability to  provide assistance and money and there is a welcoming PNG on the other side.  It is  actually a conversation of equals and that’s how it has to be approached.  Our  concern is that since the Abbott Government has come into place it has really  dropped the ball on this agreement and the heart of it which is the question of  resettlement.  Its not a matter of getting things started it’s actually resurrecting  what was already in place when we lost office in September last year.  So we

actually need this government, the Australian Government to work in a very focused  way and very seriously towards answering the question as to what assistance they  can provide PNG so that we can actually see resettlement happen and that is the  task of Tony Abbott.

JENNETT: And I will ask you for some ideas on resettlement practicalities in a  moment, but just winding the clock back a little, why didn’t Kevin Rudd lock down  some specifics on this so as to take out some of the uncertainties that Tony Abbott  is now having to try and deal with?

MARLES: Well because this is a dynamic situation.  At the time the agreement was  put in place you could not know how many people would end up in the facility at  Manus Island and indeed potentially other facilities.  It was based on a proposition  that was going to be put to the region and to people smugglers which is that  Australia would now be off the table and the people who came by boat to Christmas  Island would be transferred to PNG and resettled there if found to be genuine  refugees.  Now it’s very difficult to go into the specifics of where and how if you  don’t know how many and that’s the obvious point but what that then says is that  from the very moment Tony Abbott was sworn in and Scott Morrison became  Minister they should have been on the front foot having the meetings which are  happening today they should have been having them back in September about  actively working with PNG around this detail.  Around how people were going to be  processed and how they were going to be resettled in fact none of that occurred  what we saw was only a reaction from Scott Morrison and from the Australian  Government when there was a crisis it was only when Manus Island started to melt  down that you saw Scott Morrison visiting Port Moresby today, that begs the  question why wasn’t all of this being done last September?

JENNETT: Alright well lets look at some of your ideas, practical solutions for  resettlement.  Do you envisage that assistance would need to be given in the form  of housing for these gentlemen?

MARLES: I think there will be a whole lot of details around what resettlement  services are provided in the context of PNG, they will be doing this for the very first  time it’s why they have in place an expert panel to look at exactly how they would  do it.  From an Australian point of view the commitment that we gave last July was  that we would provide the support for whatever resettlement services that they were  going to put in place.  The monetary support for that and any other assistance that  we could provide in terms of the experiences and expertise that we have in  Australia.  Go back to the first point that’s why it needed to be the case that there  was a very intense dialogue with PNG really from the moment the Abbott  Government was sworn in rather than reacting to a crisis when it occurred, they  should have been implementing the PNG arrangement from the day they were  sworn in known that it more than anything else has been responsible for the

reduction in the flow of boats from Indonesia and as a result the saving of lives at  sea.

JENNETT: Well lets just wind forward and imagine that a number of them have  been processed through as refugees, what’s the risk of social and cultural break  down of PNG as mainly Islamic, mainly men try to settle in a tribal and mainly  Melanesian society?

MARLES: Again it goes to the question of where people would be resettled and  ultimately that is a call for PNG and we accepted that as a Labor Government, I  would imagine the Abbott Government would accept that as well and it’s a question  of working through with PNG what decisions they make but I  think that there does  need to be a slightly more sophisticated understanding of PNG from the point of  view of people in Australia.  I mean Port Moresby is a pretty significant city  nowadays, hundreds of thousands of people live in Port Moresby, there’s a Mosque  in Port Moresby there are a number of communities which live in Port Moresby  based on the trade and activity which occurs in that city and around the country.   You can go to mining sites throughout PNG and you will find a range of different  nations working in them and so it is absolutely right to say that PNG is a Melanesian  country but it is also a country like other countries in the world like Australia which is  having a more diverse society within it.

JENNETT: Alright well Richard Marles lets see what these talks yield in Port Moresby  today but from Perth thank your joining us today.



MARLES:  Thanks Greg.



ENDS



