Tanya Plibersek MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND INTERNATIONAL  DEVELOPMENT

Lateline with Tony Jones



THE HON TANYA PLIBERSEK MP

DEPUTY LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION

SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT

MEMBER FOR SYDNEY

E&OE TRANSCRIPT

TELEVISION INTERVIEW

LATELINE WITH TONY JONES

WEDNESDAY, 23 APRIL 2014

SUBJECT / S: Australia’s relationship with Indonesia.

TONY JONES: The Opposition is backing painstaking evidence to get relations with Indonesia back to full

strength after tensions erupted over asylum boats and revelations of Australians spying on the President and his

wife. That phone-tapping operation happened under the Labor government’s watch. The Opposition’s Foreign

Affairs spokeswoman, Tanya Plibersek, is on her first visit to Jakarta and she joined me from there just a short

time ago. Tanya Plibersek, thanks for joining us.

TANYA PLIBERSEK, OPPOSITION FOREIGN AFFAIRS SPOKESWOMAN: Hi, Tony.

JONES: Now Prime Minister Abbott has used the Navy to stop asylum boats without destroying or apparently

severely damaging the relationship with Indonesia. Why couldn’t Labor have done that?

PLIBERSEK: Well, I think it’s fair to say that Australia’s relationship with Indonesia over the long-term is a

very good and sound one. It’s a close friendship and it’s got a lot to offer both Australia and Indonesia. But it’s

also certainly true to say that we’ve seen some significant friction in recent times and one of the reasons has

been that the Abbott Government made announcements about what it would do on Indonesian soil and what it

would do in Indonesian waters without discussing it with the Indonesian Government. Labor, in contrast, when

we were in government, had a very significant change delivered by the Indonesian Government when they

stopped offering visa-on-arrival to Iranians who were transiting through Indonesia on their way to Christmas

Island. We did that in co-operation with Indonesia and I’d say that that’s one of the most significant elements of

the reduced flow of asylum seekers coming to Australia using people smugglers coming from Indonesia. The

changes to visa-on-arrival has seen a very substantial drop in the number of Iranians, for example, coming to

Indonesia.

JONES: But Foreign Minister Natalegawa seems to have moderated any previous criticisms that he’s had.

Yesterday he said the Australian Government’s clamp-down has reduced the number of asylum seekers

transiting through Indonesia and the risk of deaths at sea. Is he now coming to acknowledge the benefits of the

Abbott Government policy?

PLIBERSEK: Well I think there’s been a variety of different reports that have come out of the conference that

you’re referring to yesterday. What I would say is that I would be delighted to see the relationship back on track

as quickly as possible. The fracture in the relationship between Australia and Indonesia has gone on way too

long. I’d very much like to see an Indonesian ambassador back in Australia as quickly as possible, I’d like to see

the steps that have been agreed by the Indonesia and Australian governments pursued and settled as quickly as

possible because our relationship is an important one for both of us. Indonesia’s an important strategic and

economic partner for Australia, just as Australia is an important strategic and economic partner for Indonesia.

And we have a really good history between us. It’s important to get the relationship back on to a much more

normal footing as quickly as we can.

JONES: But in terms of friction, do you accept that in fact much more damage was done to the Indonesian

relationship by spying, the spying operation that tapped the phones of President Yudhoyono, his wife and others

in his circle, presumably with the knowledge of the then Australian Government, your government?

PLIBERSEK: Well Tony, I’ve said to you before that we don’t discuss operational intelligence issues, but I

think it’s fair to say that the handling of those allegations that were made was less - less than it should have

been. When you have misunderstandings between countries or periods of tension, the most important thing to do

is rely on your people-to-people relationships. Pick up the phone, talk these things through, not let them fester.

And what we’ve seen now is the relationship off track for a substantial amount of time. There’s an agreed

process for getting the relationship back on track. I’d really like to see that brought to a conclusion. We’re

running into a period now of presidential elections in Indonesia and I think it would be very important to get the

relationship back on track before a new president is elected because any new president, whoever it might be, of

course will be focused in the first instance on their domestic issues. So, really, the sooner the better.

JONES: Well once again the Indonesian Foreign Minister is saying quite clearly there is a process for a return to

full diplomatic relations. He’s saying that is contingent on both sides agreeing to this code of conduct which will

govern future spying operations. Now, this has been going on for some time. What are the sticking points? Has

he told you?

PLIBERSEK: Well, Tony, I don’t know, I’m not the Foreign Minister. You’d have to ask the Australian Foreign

Minister to give you a report on what the sticking points are from the Australian end. What I can tell you is that

-

JONES: No, I’m talking about from the - sorry, I’m talking about what Dr Natalegawa, the Indonesian Foreign

Minister has said and what are the sticking points from his end?

PLIBERSEK: No, Tony, we didn’t discuss these issues and I certainly wouldn’t tell you if we had because we

had a terrific meeting about a wide range of issues, but we weren’t focused on this. Australia and Indonesia have

a lot in common. We’ve got a lot of -

JONES: I’m sorry, I’m just going to - sorry, I have to interrupt you there because the Indonesian Foreign

Minister himself said yesterday publicly that the agreement must include a commitment to refrain from

employment of intelligence resources in a manner that would be inimical or damaging to the other country. Now

this seems to be the missing clause. He’s saying if this clause is inserted in the document, he’ll sign it and we

can get the agreement back on track. Did he not talk to you about this?

PLIBERSEK: No, we didn’t discuss that, Tony. You’ve got his quote. I mean, you can make of that what you

will. You don’t need me to talk about my discussions with him to interpret that. This - in fact the relationship

between Australia and Indonesia was part of our conversation. We both expressed our hope that it would get

back on track quickly, but that - acknowledging that we’ve got a long and strong and close history together as

nations, that the - that recent friction that we’ve had we certainly hope as a Labor opposition is resolved as

quickly as possible. And I said that to him. But we discussed a range of things. We discussed South China Sea,

Crimea, Ukraine. It was a very good and wide-ranging discussion.

JONES: Well I’ll just make the point that the code of conduct and the completion of this code of conduct

agreement seems to be the key sticking point and this seems to be the line that he wants in it and I’m just

wondering if he conveyed this message to you in any way?

PLIBERSEK: Well no, Tony, and I mean, I think it’s a little unreasonable for you to be asking me about the

negotiations between two other Foreign ministers. You really need to talk to Australia’s Foreign Minister or

Indonesia’s Foreign Minister about their discussions with one another. It’s not for me to be commenting on their

discussions with one another.

JONES: Tanya Plibersek, we’ll have to leave you there. Thank you very much for joining us.

PLIBERSEK: Thanks, Tony.

ENDS

- See more at: http://tanyaplibersek.com/2014/04/lateline-with-tony-jones/#sthash.BIpBZVEk.dpuf

