



1



SENATOR THE HON GEORGE BRANDIS QC

ATTORNEY-GENERAL  MINISTER FOR THE ARTS

AUSTRALIAN HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION  HUMAN RIGHTS AWARDS

MUSEUM OF CONTEMPORARY ART, SYDNEY

WEDNESDAY 10 DECEMBER 2014

I would like to begin by acknowledging the traditional custodians of the lands on which we  meet and pay my respects to their elders past and present. To the President of the Australian  Human Rights Commission, Professor Gillian Triggs with whom I’ve worked closely this  year, to the Human Rights Commissioner, Tim Wilson,  to the Age and Disability  Discrimination Commissioner, Susan Ryan, I saw Mick Gooda over there a moment ago,  there you are Mick, the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Social Justice Commissioner,  other Commissioners, the Secretary of the Attorney-General’s Department, Chris Moraitis,  other distinguished guests, finalists in the Australian Human Rights Award, ladies and  gentlemen.

This is a very appropriate and indeed a joyous occasion, International Human Rights Day,  when we gather to acknowledge the contribution of individuals to human rights in Australia  in 2014. I want to take this opportunity to congratulate, not only the winners, but to all of the  entrants and to thank you for your contribution to the debate and your contribution to our  country. I know that there are some of the finalists who have been critics of the government  of which I’m a member but that’s fine because we are a government which celebrates a  diversity of voices, we accept and celebrate the fact that there is no single, or uniform, point  of view about human rights but we encourage and we celebrate the fact that human rights are  very much on the national agenda. It was one of my objectives as the Attorney-General to  elevate the debate about human rights on the national agenda and if 2014 has been any  indication, the human rights debate in our country is a vigorous and spirited and constructive  one.







2

International Human Rights Day is also a fitting occasion to acknowledge the achievements  of our country in the past year in the area of human rights and I want to take a moment to  reflect upon some of the things that Australia has achieved in human rights in the year past.  And I think there can be no doubt that, of all the achievements that we Australians can  acknowledge in the last year, 2014 is the year of releasing children from detention. The year  of releasing children from detention and I want to thank you Gillian for what you had to say.  It is a shameful fact that when the Government was elected we found that there were one  thousand nine hundred and ninety two asylum seeker children in detention, one thousand nine  hundred and ninety two children in detention. In 2014 most of those children have been  released. There is still too many, at the end of November there were seven hundred and two  but I can tell you this evening that between now and Christmas, in other words in the next  two to three weeks, all of the children in detention on Christmas Island will be released from  Christmas Island and will be returned to the community as soon as possible.

We have been working through the legacy caseload of one thousand nine hundred and ninety  two children in detention, there are twelve hundred fewer today and by the early months of  next year there will be none. All of the children in detention will have been released by the  early months of next year and we will be back to where we were in November 2007 when the  number of children in detention was zero.

And of course the other number zero, which I think ought to be celebrated by all of us, is the  fact that 2014 was the first year since 2008 in which we can confidently say that no children,  and no adults, died at sea on asylum seeker vessels. This has been a year in which there have  been other significant strides forward in the human rights field. We have proceeded to lay the  groundwork for a referendum to be held in 2017 for the constitutional recognition of  aboriginal people - a long, and as the Prime Minister says, unfinished element of our  constitution.

I want to thank the Human Rights Commission as well for its role in the national security  debate this year. The debates about national security are never easy because the issues in  contention are always deeply felt. How do we reconcile the obligation of the government to  keep our people safe with the liberty of the citizen? I’m pleased to be able to tell you that the  Human Rights Commission has, as Professor Triggs mentioned, been a vigorous contributor  to that debate and that almost all of its recommendations to the respective Parliamentary  Committees that consider the governments legislation were adopted. So thank you Gillian,  thank you to the Human Rights Commission, for its constructive contribution in further  enshrining human right protections in our national security architecture.

As we look ahead to 2015, I’m sure that it will be another busy year in the human rights field  and the government looks forward to a constructive engagement with the Human Rights  Commission, as well as Australia’s other custodians of human rights including the Joint  Parliamentary Committee on Human Rights.







3

As well as the important issues that Professor Triggs has mentioned, there are three issues in  particular on which I would hope the Human Rights Commission will focus in the year  ahead. I’m announcing tonight that the government has decided to recommend to His  Excellency the Governor-General the reappointment of Mick Gooda as Aboriginal and Torres  Strait Islander Social Justice Commissioner. Mick, who I have come to know as a friend, has  developed a constructive and effective relationship with both sides of politics and, Mick, we  look forward to you being a very important voice, a very important voice in preparing the  soul and mind of our country for the referendum on indigenous constitutional recognition in a  little over two years time.

Next year we celebrate the 800th anniversary of Magna Carta. I’ve asked Tim Wilson, the  Human Rights Commissioner, to take particular interest in promoting and educating the  Australian people, in particular school children, about the importance of Magna Carta. And to  take that opportunity as well to remind all of us that the human rights that we enjoy in  Australia today are not sourced, or originally to be found, in international instruments which  are a product of the years since the Second World War but have a much longer heritage and  providence, going back to our domestic sources of law and reaching back all the way to the  constitutional and political traditions we inherited.

While I mention Tim Wilson, I also want to thank him for, in a defacto sense, filling what has  been for a long time I think a gap in Australia’s human rights coverage and that is raising the  awareness of LGBTI issues and acting in effect as the sexuality discrimination commissioner  as well.

And lastly, in addition to the important work that Gillian has mentioned, I want to give the  Human Rights Commission another focus in the coming year as well. After discussions, in  particular with my ministerial colleagues, the Minister for Social Services, Kevin Andrews  and the Assistant Minister, Senator Mitch Fifield, the Government has decided to ask to  Human Rights Commission to conduct a major inquiry into employment discrimination  against older Australians and Australians with a disability. I see Susan Ryan smiling; that will  probably build upon the important work, led by Susan Ryan in recent years to raise the  profile of this issue and subject it to comprehensive review and a complete set of  recommendations to the government. I hope the Commission will make that task, a task  which means so much, to so many Australians, an order of first priority in the year ahead.

Ladies and gentlemen it’s wonderful to be in a room with so many people with a commitment  to human rights. I hope I’m in a room full of people with an understanding of the diversity  and variety of the human rights debate. In celebrating international human rights with you,  may I once again thank you for your commitment and in particular congratulate and thank the  winners of the awards which are about to be announced.

[ENDS]

