

THE HON RICHARD MARLES MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER  PROTECTION  MEMBER FOR CORIO



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW   SKYNEWS AM AGENDA  WEDNESDAY 4 JUNE 2014

SUBJECT/S: PM visit to Indonesia; PM visit to White House; Palmer  comments.

KIERAN GILBERT: This is AM Agenda thanks for your company with me this  morning Richard Marles and Jamie Briggs. Gentlemen, let’s look to foreign policy  now, the Prime Minister is on his way to Indonesia, a lot at stake isn’t there  Jamie Briggs to get this code of conduct done between the two countries when it  comes to security arrangements but also to get the relationship back onto an  even keel before the next President is sworn in.

JAMIE BRIGGS, ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR INFRASTRUCTURE AND  REGIONAL DEVELOPMENT: Well I think it’s a very important relationship and  the Government’s been working well to ensure the relationship is as strong as  possible and there’s been some choppy waters obviously the issues that were  revealed late last year from the time the Labor party was in Government caused  us some heartache in that respect.

RICHARD MARLES, SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND  BORDER PROTECTION: You’re not making mileage out of that are you?

BRIGGS: No not at all, I’m just making a point about the timing because others  haven’t made the point about the timing.

MARLES: Nor has Tony Abbott so I’m surprised that you’re talking about that.

BRIGGS: No, no, no I think people should be clear about the timing of these  things

MARLES: Why?

BRIGGS: Because we have a bi-partisan…

MARLES: Because if we do have a bi-partisan approach why does it matter?

BRIGGS: Because others have tried to attack the Prime Minister on this basis,  and I think it’s been unfair but it’s not surprising because there are some who  just seek to use every opportunity they can to attack the Prime Minister, the  point is we have a bi-partisan relationship.

MARLES: We do.

BRIGGS: When it comes to these matters and that’s what the Prime Minister  has maintained very clearly for that time and I think others should be more  respectful of that and that is very clear.

MARLES: Well it is for the Prime Minister to repair this situation.

BRIGGS: That’s exactly what he’s doing.

MARLES: Let’s be clear the villain here is Edward Snowden, no question about  that, and I think that’s something about which think Jamie and I would agree,  Edward Snowden has put an intolerable pressure on relationships between good  friends, Germany and the US, and Indonesia and Australia. But what concerns  me about this is rather than seeing the Australian Government doing everything  that it can to repair this situation brought upon us by Edward Snowden, they’ve  actually been exploiting it, they have been exploiting this situation in terms of  what they have been doing with turning around boats around the asylum seeker  issue.

BRIGGS: That is just not true.

MARLES: It is absolutely true, this has been eroding the relationship…

BRIGGS: How is that?

MARLES: Well because in circumstances where there is nothing on the table,  where there is no co-operation between Australia and Indonesia, the situation of

turning around boats is obviously a much easier thing to do, but something  which does corrode the relationship with Indonesia. I mean if you want to look at  the turn back policy…

GILBERT: Why is it corroded though if you fix a problem and then Indonesia  has less traffic flow of people smugglers and asylum seekers going through their  country? Isn’t that a better case scenario for them?

MARLES: It is right that we have a mutual interest but the best example of why  it’s corroding it Kieran, is because a turn back operation on water ended up  cancelling a Prime Ministerial visit to Indonesia. That’s a huge thing to do.

BRIGGS: That’s just an allegation.

MARLES: It’s absolutely true and you know it as well and the fact of the matter  is this is something that Indonesia does not want Australia to do so the real  question in relation to that specific policy is how it’s going to work when there is  a normalised relationship with Indonesia.

GILBERT: It comes to the point though in foreign policy do you only ever do  what your neighbours want you to do, we’re a sovereign country.

MARLES: You work through a relationship, but you have a co-operative  relationship with that country and in relation to that issue.

GILBERT: But if you’ve got a policy which disagrees with them well, do you  relent or? This is a sovereign country.

MARLES: Of course we’re a sovereign country as is Indonesia, but as two  friends who share a mutual issue which is the point you made before, you do  acknowledge that if you’re going to solve it, not over a period of months but over  a period of years, it’s plain common sense that you’re going to need to have a  constructive, co-operative relationship with Indonesia and this is a government,  an Australian Government which has been exploiting the rift with Indonesia  rather than seeking to repair it so there’s a lot of work for Tony Abbott to do  today.

GILBERT: Let’s get the Minister’s response to that.

BRIGGS: Well I think here you see laid bare the problem Richard’s got being the  Immigration Spokesman on his side of politics as good a politician Richard may  be, he’s trying to bring the far left in his party, and the not so far left together on  an agreed position so he has to find something to criticise us about, reality is our  policies worked, the Labor party hate the fact that our policies worked.



MARLES: That’s not true

BRIGGS: And the Indonesian’s were ecstatic of course in 2008 when the Labor  party softened the rules so they had a flood of people smugglers re-enter the  market place, they were just over the moon about that, and so of course what  we see here is a policy we said for years would work, in fact it was put in place  by John Howard and Alexander Downer previously it worked, we’ve put it back in  place and Scott Morrison’s led the way, it’s working again, the Labor party just  can’t accept this, so much so there’s a caucus debate in two weeks’ time led by  the Member for Fremantle to overturn Labor’s position that they were dragged to  just before the election so this is what you’re seeing laid bare about the  complete split within Labor, about how you actually deal with what is a very  substantial issue for our country, an expensive issue as Scott Morrison said  yesterday. $11.5 billion dollars extra was spent because Labor softened the  borders, over 1000 people died because of that.

GILBERT: As much as there’s a lot to talk about in that area, I do want to ask  you both about the White House visit, because it is coming up next week, first  visit by the Prime Minister to the White House since he’s been PM, is it going to  be awkward on the issue of climate change because Barack Obama has said it’s  one of the greatest national security issues that they face, they’ve really upped  the ante in terms of their response, he wants it on the G20 agenda this coming  November, is this going to be an awkward moment for the Prime Minister to try  and manage given their different world view on that?

BRIGGS: No not at all, I mean they’ll have a discussion about a range of topics  I’m sure, and we’ve got a very strong relationship, we’ve had strong relationships  whether it’s been Labor, Liberal, Republican or Democrat, Bob Hawke and  Ronald Reagan got along very well from different perspectives, I must say Bob  Hawke was obviously a very good Prime Minister in our country’s history and  Ronald Reagan was one of the best US Presidents, I think you’ll see Tony Abbott  perform very well in the United States and he’ll put Australia’s perspective on a  range of issues and I’m sure President Obama will do the same from the United  States perspective. What we of course are doing, is we’ve got a policy which will  work, we’ll reduce our omissions by 5 per cent by a target by 2020, Greg Hunt is  ferociously putting that policy in place and I’m sure he’ll continue to do so.

GILBERT: The big point is though beyond that is you need another plan for  2020 and beyond, but what Jamie Briggs pointed out there is, it is true that from  all sides and stripes, political stripes, it’s been a strong relationship for a long  time now, do you think that they’ll smooth over any differences next week?

MARLES: Jamie is right, that this is a relationship which transcends the politics  of the day, and it’s very important that it do so, and I have no doubt that Tony  Abbott and Barack Obama will act appropriately to each other to do honour to  what has been really important relationship, you asked the question at the start  whether it’s going to be awkward in relation to climate change, well of course  within that broader context it will be, of course it’s going to be, I mean you have  a US President who does see this as the issue that it is, one which needs to be  confronted by the global community and we’ve got an Australian Prime Minister  who thinks it’s all crap and has a policy that makes no sense and which is  essentially spending billions of dollars of Australian tax payer money on  something they don’t even believe in. Now it’s going to be impossible to have a  reconciliation of minds on that issue, but it is true, that will happen in the context  of a very robust and a strong relationship and that will notwithstanding this.

GILBERT: We’re almost out of time, I want to ask you both about the Palmer  intervention this week, he’s copped a lot of flak, I think quite rightly, for the  ridiculous comments he made in the Parliament, but you’ve got to work with him  now in the Senate, well not you personally, but the Government, it’s tough.

BRIGGS: Well look I must say firstly, can I send my best wishes to Penny  Wong, because she’s obviously very unwell she’s suffering from laryngitis  because any sort of suggestion in the last five years which even bordered on  some sort of suggestion on women, Penny’s been rushing out the doors to yell  and scream as loud as she can about it…

MARLES: That’s not fair.

BRIGGS: In the last 48 hours Penny obviously suffering from a major dose of  laryngitis.

MARLES: That’s not fair if you’re going to make this about Penny Wong.

BRIGGS: So I hope she gets well soon.

MARLES: Well firstly, it’s not about Penny Wong, let’s be completely clear, what  Clive Palmer said in relation to Peta Credlin was a total disgrace. Clive Palmer  should be condemned for making the comments that he did in relation to Peta  Credlin, and it goes completely across the line.

BRIGGS: I look forward to Penny saying the same things.

MARLES: Well I’m saying it. Peta Credlin’s private life…

BRIGGS: Terri Butler wouldn’t say it yesterday, why wouldn’t Terri Butler say  that yesterday?

MARLES: I know you want me to stop saying it, but Peta Credlin’s personal life  is hers, it is utterly inappropriate that Clive Palmer go there, and he ought to be  apologising to Peta Credlin today in relation to those comments now that is a  view which is held across the political spectrum and trying to suggest that there  is some divergence on that is simply wrong.

BRIGGS: Well Terri Butler wouldn’t say that yesterday and Penny Wong’s been  utterly silent for 48 hours so hopefully today she can end her silence, get over  her laryngitis and get out there.

MARLES: It’s not about Terri Butler and it’s not about Penny Wong.

BRIGGS: It is.

MARLES: It’s about what Clive Palmer said in relation to Peta Credlin and our  view is completely clear.

BRIGGS: It’s about the hypocrisy of the way they’ve behaved for the last five  years.

GILBERT: We’ve got to go, Richard Marles, Jamie Briggs, gents, we’re out of  time.

ENDS

MEDIA ENQUIRIES: LIDIJA IVANOVSKI 0427 051 563

