

THE HON RICHARD MARLES MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER  PROTECTION  MEMBER FOR CORIO



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW  3AW DRIVE INTERVIEW WITH TOM ELLIOTT AND KELLY O’DWYER  FRIDAY, 31 JANUARY 2014

SUBJECT/S:  Abbott  Government's  failure  to  support  SPC  Ardmona  jobs;   manufacturing; ABC; shark culling

TOM ELLIOTT, HOST: Alright it is time for our fortnightly political debate between  two representatives of the Liberal and the Labor party, firstly - I sound like Bruce  Buffer of the UFC, I’m going to talk about mixed martial arts - fighting out of the  blue  corner  she  represents  the  seat  of  Higgins,  that’s  Kelly  O’Dwyer,  Kelly  good   afternoon.

KELLY O’DWYER:  Good afternoon Tom, great to be with you and your listeners.

ELLIOTT:  And despite the fact he’s wearing a blue tie, representing out of the red  corner, Richard Marles.

RICHARD MARLES:  Happy new year Tom, happy new year Kelly.

O’DWYER:  Happy new year to you too.

ELLIOTT:  Now it’s not a very happy new year for a lot of people who work up in  Shepparton,  because  it  looks  like  the  SPC  Ardmona  canned  fruit  facility  there  is   headed for hard times. Firstly to you Kelly, now I spoke to the Premier of Victoria  Doctor Dennis Napthine before and he said that he had a different opinion to you   and his other federal counterparts.  He said that the money should have been put  into SPC Ardmona, what do you think?

O’DWYER:  Well look I agree with my federal colleagues, and I think we’re getting  a little bit ahead of ourselves here, first and foremost, because those that are  already saying that the company’s going to close down and it’s going to have the  implications of people being out of work, I think we’re getting ahead of ourselves

because the company of course is a very profitable company in that Coca-Cola  Amatil is a 9 billion dollar company, it owns SPC Ardmona, its profit over the last six  months that were previously declared were 216 million dollars after tax.

ELLIOTT:  That’s exactly what Joe Hockey said the other night.

O’DWYER:  Well that’s a good point, it’s actually a critical point, this company was  actually asking for a hand out from the Government, from Australian taxpayers to  help them restructure their company and their operations. Now we think companies  ought to restructure themselves where they’ve got the capacity to do so and when  you’ve got a profit of 216 million dollars, we believe that they have that capacity.

ELLIOTT:  Alright Richard Marles, Kelly’s quite right, Coca-Cola Amatil’s a very large  company, it has made substantial profits, why should it expect a handout from the  Australian taxpayer?

MARLES: Well as Kelly well knows it’s not based on the profit of the parent  company as to what decisions it will make about whether or not the plant in  Shepparton keeps going, they’ll do that on its own terms and what we’re talking  about here was the potential to bring a whole lot more investment from the parent  company to Shepparton which would have in turn assisted the ongoing viability of  that plant, and not only secure jobs, but help create jobs.

ELLIOTT:  Well just on this ongoing viability, I’ve got in my hand a can of, an 825  gram can of SPC apricots. Now when I was young we used to eat this stuff all the  time, not SPC, we ate IXL, but it’s the same, and it was a staple of dessert in our  house.  But I mean Richard, can you tell for us, I mean everybody’s been talking  about if you just had this money up there you could modernize the facility and do  what? Because if it’s just tinned fruit, it’s not what people eat anymore.

MARLES: Well I think there is still a market for it, but the point is this, this is  Australia’s fresh fruit canning industry, like in that one company.  And I think the  broader point here Tom is this, governments make a conscious decision about  whether or not they want to have manufacturing within their country. They certainly  make a conscious decision about whether they want to have certain sectors of  manufacturing such as fresh fruit canning, but also such as the car industry, and  what we’ve seen with this government, is what I think is pretty well a kind of  economic fundamentalism which says there is absolutely going to be no notion of  co-investment, no notion of trying to attract investment to this country and keeping  that manufacturing going, and if it goes, so be it.  But you don’t see the same sense  of liberalism, if I can put it that way, when it comes to investment because they’re  the Liberal Party, I’m sure Kelly wouldn’t agree with the National Party but the  Liberal Party have become captors of the National Party and are now really  struggling with the notion of free foreign investment.

ELLIOTT:  Kelly, can I just ask you, look because we’ve seen it with the car  industry, I mean Ford is pulling out, we know that Holden is pulling out, and it  remains to be seen what happens to Toyota, of course SPC we don’t know what will  happen yet, but essentially has there been an ideological shift of sorts in the

Coalition? Or is it just that the Federal Budget is looking so bad that there just isn’t  the money for subsidies anymore?

O’DWYER:  No we’ve been entirely consistent all along, you know we believe -

ELLIOTT:  All along since when?

O’DWYER:  Well our view is that it is important for companies to be in control of  their own destiny and it is not for governments to restructure companies, that is the  job for the company, we need to create right policy settings in government so for  instance I’ll give you an example which is you know you don’t, if you want  manufacturing in this country, you don’t apply a carbon tax which is going to make it  more expensive to supply energy to add costs to manufacturing in this country. Now  if Richard believed half the things that he was just spouting now, he would  immediately say on radio, right here right now, that he is going to stand up to his  colleagues who are refusing to allow us to abolish the carbon tax, and he will stand  up for manufacturing and allow us to do that.  At the moment the Labor Party are in  fact blocking this in the Senate.

ELLIOTT:  Can I just ask you Kelly, didn’t the Prime Minister Tony Abbott make a  commitment to put federal money into a Cadbury’s chocolate factory in Tasmania?  And if so, why is that different?

O’DWYER:  Well before the election, 16 million dollars was promised to Cadbury, it  was promised because it was tourism investment in Tasmania, it was not for  operations, and look you know, it’s been explained I think quite clearly by the Prime  Minister that that was a very specific case, but this idea about co-investment where  every company will be coming to the Government in order for the Government to try  and change some of the practices the company themselves have put in place, for  instance, in this instance SPC Ardmona have got very different workplace practices  to the awards that are in place in that company, they’re coming to the Government  to try to solve some of the problems in management that they themselves created.

ELLIOTT: Alright, we’ll have calls in a moment for Kelly O’Dwyer and Richard  Marles, if you’d like to join the debate give us a ring.

[NEWS BREAK]

ELLIOTT: Alright, calls for Kelly O’Dwyer and Richard Marles, David good afternoon.

CALLER : Good afternoon, well the red corner's got it all wrong haven’t they  because they don’t understand what the Australian public did last year when they  voted them out because we got sick of all of the handouts for really no gain.  And I  think the blue corner’s probably hit this on the head or kicked it out of the ground  actually because you’re quite right, there is a company that’s worth shedloads of  money, why should we give them any money, and it all comes back to the work  practices?

ELLIOTT: And as David just said, shedloads of money Richard, your response?



MARLES: A big shed of money? The work practices there I don’t think are the issue,  there is a conscious decision as I said earlier about whether or not you want to have  a manufacturing industry in this country, and I can tell you for the thousands of  workers who are going through the uncertainty of whether or not they’re going to  have a job there in the future, I don’t think there is any joy that they’re feeling or  any relief from the result last September.

O’DWYER:  Nobody ever feels joy about that but let’s talk about the work practices  there, you’ve got those that are union delegates, collectively they have each year up  to 40 weeks where they can have paid days training, offsite so not doing their work,  training, now that’s well and truly above any award, now that’s been written into

their EBA you know, that’s not a competitive workplace practice, that’s not  competitive workplace practices to have sick leave paid out in the way that it is in  the EBA there.

MARLES: But ultimately these are matters to be worked out between the company  and the workforce.

O’DWYER:  Correct.

MARLES: Well exactly, so it’s not about us then coming into it and starting to  declare edicts about whether we think what going on in that workplace is  appropriate or not.

O’DWYER:  But we shouldn’t have to subsidise it.

MARLES: Well it’s not about that, it’s about whether or not you’re going to make a  decision about whether you’re going to have a manufacturing industry in this  country, we said that there should be, and it really is a clear difference between  Labor and Liberal at the moment. And I think there is a sense of ideology in this,  and on both sides, we do think there is a role for government in making sure that  we have certain industries in this country and manufacturing is one, because if we  stop making things, we lose so much technology and capacity within this country.

ELLIOTT: Michael, good afternoon.

CALLER: G’day Tom, look I don’t care whether you’re red or blue, black or white,  you two buggers in there, whether you’re in power or out of power you made a  decision a few years ago to bring in open trade market to import fruit. Now last year  a poor old fruit grower in Shepparton actually dug up his whole crop after 30 years,  you know, so let’s not start handballing it like you’re on the MCG, what’s 25 million  in the profits that you got from reaping in from double-dipping on Exxon and tax on  fuel.  Give them the bloody money and help them out. That’s the difference between  them and helping Toyota who’s the last survivor out of the three major car  companies.

ELLIOTT:  We don’t know whether Toyota’s going to get that help or not, in fact  the Productivity Commission this afternoon has recommended against further

subsidies for Toyota.  But just on the issue of free trade, I mean we sort of have it  here, but for example you can’t bring in bananas into Australia but you can bring in  all sorts of other fruit, why is that?

MARLES: Well I must say I’m not sure on the specifics of bananas, but we do have,  free trade is an important principle for a country like Australia, we have a small  domestic market, if we’re going to maintain the standard of living that we would  want to have in this country we’re going to need be able to utilise the markets of the  world particularly of Asia, and so free trade is inevitably going to be in our interests,  and if you look at agriculture, the opportunities that exist in terms of supplying food  into, and fresh food, into Asia into China, are enormous and that’s really I think one  of the great economic opportunities of this country going forward.

O’DWYER:  And Richard’s exactly right on free trade, I completely agree with  everything he’s just said and I would add to that, with agriculture particularly, it is  critical to understand that in Australia, we don’t consume more than we produce, we  actually export much more than we consume here.

ELLIOTT:  We export 60 to 65 per cent.

O’DWYER:  Correct, and it is critical that we open up those markets for our  agricultural producers.

ELLIOTT:  Just on another issue, we’ll go back to another calls in a moment, the  ABC, Tony Abbott said the other day, that the ABC often batted for the other side,  he wasn’t calling into account its sexuality, but whether or not it actually supported  Australia, all about the different accounts of how the boat people burnt their hands  and so forth. Yesterday he has announced what he calls an efficiency drive in the  ABC, then Malcolm Turnbull got on the ABC last night and said no, no, no, no, the  ABC’s independent, we’ll leave it alone, what’s going on is it time to punish the ABC  for being anti the Coalition Kelly?

O’DWYER:  No that’s not what’s happening. The ABC really has been the only  government department exempt from an efficiency dividend since 1997, now that’s  highly unusual, that’s at a cost of around about 15 billion dollars potentially if you  were to take into account an efficiency dividend over that entire period of time.   We’re simply saying that like any other government organisation or department,  they need to be responsible with taxpayers money and this review is not about a  witch hunt, it’s not about trying to change the editorial policy, far from it, it’s simply  saying that, you know, when you have circumstances like what happened with me in  the Higgins by-election, I remember there was one occasion where we had four ABC  cameras turn up and Channel 7, Channel 9 and Channel 10 had one pooled camera.

ELLIOTT:  Can I just tell you a funny story about that, when I used to do shows on  the ABC we’d have a sound guy, a lighting guy, a producer, a camera man, I think  there might have been someone else too and when I did the same sort of interview  on BSkyB, there was one person who filmed, recorded and set it up, so ok Richard,  how do you see it, is there a witch hunt going on at the ABC?

MARLES: Look I’m not going to walk down that path, but this is just a clear  example of another broken promise, I mean before the election it was explicit on the  part of Tony Abbott that there would be no cuts to the ABC, I do believe the  importance of a strong public broadcaster, now they’re going to cut them, and this is  a clear example of Tony Abbott saying one thing before the election and doing  another after.

ELLIOTT: Trisha, good afternoon.

CALLER: Good afternoon Kelly, Tom and Richard. I’m a conservative voter Kelly, but  I find the Abbott Government animal unfriendly. We’ve got Premier Barnett over in  Western Australia killing sharks in their own environment, why are we killing animals  in their own environments? Why can’t you spend the money educating the Western  Australian public, the risks of going into the sea where God placed these animals and  what’s your opinion Kelly?

O’DWYER:  Well look it’s obviously a matter for the WA State Government but I’m  quite happy to give you my personal opinion.

ELLIOTT:  Well it may not be though because I mean a great white shark is under  federal law a protected species.

O’DWYER:  Well I’m happy to give you my view which is, I’m a great animal lover  personally, I spend some of my holidays sort of travelling overseas to see different  animals of the world, but I do think we need to be a bit sensible about this, and  where we get advice that it isn’t safe for people who also use the ocean and let’s  face it people do, people surf and that’s a great thing, that’s part of the wonderful  traditions and the Australian way of life, if it is unsafe for them because the numbers  are in such sort of significance that it’s going to cause safety issues then I don’t  have a problem with it being reviewed from time to time.

ELLIOTT:  Richard very quickly do we shoot sharks or not?

MARLES:  Well I think we follow the science is the real answer to this question.

ELLIOTT:  I don’t think it’s being driven by science I think it’s an over the top  reaction to someone getting killed.

MARLES: Well I suppose what I think is that over the top reactions need to be, you  know, moderated, and it is important to follow the science and actually I agree with  what Kelly said, if the science is that there is a shark or sharks , I’m not a shark  expert, but if they’re causing danger to particular beaches I think it’s fair enough,  but fundamentally Trisha makes a fair point, this is their environment and I think it’s  important that there is an ability for them to be protected within it.

ELLIOTT:  Plenty of sharks up in Canberra, no is proposing yet to shoot any of  them -



MARLES: Not yet.



O’DWYER:  Not yet, it’ll come.

MARLES: We feel endangered sometimes.

ELLIOTT:  We’ll leave it there, Kelly O’Dwyer good to talk with you.

O’DWYER:  Great to talk with you.

ELLIOTT:  Richard Marles, same to you.

MARLES: Thanks Tom.

ENDS

