

ANDREW LEIGH MP  SHADOW ASSISTANT TREASURER  SHADOW MINISTER FOR COMPETITION  MEMBER FOR FRASER





E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  BREAKING POLITICS - FAIRFAX MEDIA   MONDAY, 24 MARCH 2014

SUBJECT/ S: Manus Island detention centre riot inquiries and Regional  Resettlement Program; Labor minority government in South Australia;  Paul How es’ career; Australia becoming a Republic.

CHRIS HAMMER: The Papua New Guinean Government is looking to stymie a  human rights into conditions at the Manus Island detention centre. This follows a  tour of the centre last Friday by journalists led by the head of the inquiry. The  Immigration Minister, Scott Morrison, has defended the decision, saying it is a  matter for the PNG Government. Well joining me to discuss this and other issues  is Andrew Laming, Liberal Member for Bowman in Queensland and Andrew  Leigh, the Labor Member for Fraser in the ACT, also Shadow Assistant Treasurer.

Andrew Leigh, to you first, Scott Morrison is right isn't he, this is purely a matter  for the PNG Government?

ANDREW LEIGH, SHADOW ASSISTANT TREASURER: It's important that  the Australian Government works constructively with the PNG Government and  part of the refugee resettlement agreement was always that resettlement would  occur as speedily as possible. What I'm concerned about is Minister Morrison's  slowness to engage with Papua New Guinea; the fact that we know that he only  spoke face to face with his PNG counterpart less than a month ago and the  Government hasn't put resettlement at the top of its agenda. The events in the  detention centre with the tragic death of an asylum seeker have led Labor to call  for an independent inquiry and for a senate inquiry, both of which are now  underway and it's really incumbent on the Government to begin that  resettlement process as quickly as possible.

HAMMER: Andrew Laming, surely an investigation into the events of Manus  Island are required?

ANDREW LAMING: There will definitely be investigations there occurring but I  also respect Papua New Guinea's right to determine the kind of investigation that  it holds. I've said before that Australia, by virtue of setting up this arrangement  owes some sort of informal interest and responsibility here, even though we  acknowledge it's completely within the borders and completely run by PNG itself.  That is a rule of support that they seek but what they do within their own  geography, their jurisdictional boundaries and their constitution is completely up  to PNG.

HAMMER: Okay. Now, part of the agreement is resettling people who are found  to be genuine refugees. Now that seems to be falling to bits to an extent, with  PNG saying they won't take all those refugees and now there's a scramble on to  find other Pacific countries to take refugees. So, Andrew Leigh, to you first. This  was Labor's policy to begin with. It's starting to unravel isn't it?

LEIGH: It's vital that the Government focuses on making this work because we  need that resettlement to occur for that resettlement agreement to stay in place  and that resettlement agreement is the main factor in reducing the number of  boat arrivals and reducing the number of drownings at sea. That was always why  Labor put this into place, to stop people drowning at sea. If the Abbott  Government doesn't work more effectively with the PNG Government then I've  got concerns about the ongoing viability of the resettlement agreement. I'm also  worried about the conditions inside the detention centre; the overcrowding, the  riots we've seen recently. I don't feel as though the Abbott Government has  given it sufficient attention. They've done very well with sloganeering in  immigration but this is about the hard work of public policy to make this  effective.

HAMMER: Andrew Laming, isn't this evidence that the Government in general,  Scott Morrison in particular, hasn't run the relationships with the PNG  Government that well so it's saying, hang on, we're only going to resettle some  of these people?

LAMING: You can see that the urgent crowding out the important when Kevin  Rudd rushed to get that signature on paper, Julia Gillard in fact to set up the  camp on Manus. The hardest decisions are always about where to resettle or  repatriate -

HAMMER: Hang on, you can't blame Labor for what's happening now?

LAMING: Oh, you certainly can blame them for a lack of agreement on where  successfully identified refugees are placed. It's always the hardest decision to  make. There is some history of regional players getting together to solve this  problems and you can see that it was probably by Labor, left as the great  unanswered question.

HAMMER: If they can't be resettled in PNG, where should they be resettled?  Where in the Pacific?

LAMING: Clearly as we know there haven't been any determinations at all yet  at Manus. I think that's a concern for all Australians. No one would wish long  term detention who need to be processed. But when they are resettled PNG will  have a key role, we know, because they're actually the domestic nation doing  the processing but numbers haven't been decided. They'll be hard discussions  between regional neighbours to find solutions. I'm optimistic that in the past,  there are good hearted countries in the region and we'll be calling on them again  I suspect.

HAMMER: If we can move onto the South Australian election. Now there'll be a  Labor Government for another four years. Andrew Leigh, is this a poison chalice  given that Labor's primary vote was so low, something like 30.8 per cent? It's in  minority government. Isn't it a poisoned chalice?

LEIGH: I congratulate Jay Weatherill on his win. When Labor has the  opportunity to form government in a stable manner we should do so and this  appears a stable government going into the future. I've been a little disappointed  to see the sort of petulance from people like Christopher Pyne who I think ought  to be playing a more statesperson-like role rather than just engaging in all of the  sledging of the now successful Weatherill Government.

HAMMER: But very difficult for Labor to claim a mandate there surely?

LEIGH: Forming government is about getting a majority of seats on the floor of  parliament. Labor has successfully done that. What we need now is the for the  Federal Government to step out of being just a bunch of Coalition barrackers to  being the national government for all Australians, willing to work with states and  territories regardless of the political complexion of their governments.

HAMMER: Andrew Laming, I saw you nodding your head there. Do you agree  with that?

LAMING: Oh, they've won it fair and square. Let's be honest. They've won the  most seats on the floor of the parliament. They've done a deal with an  independent. My point is it will be a very sad four years. There will be no J-curve  with Jay Weatherill. It will be all downhill. This a government that got one more

term that it deserved and it has a history. This has been a truculent government  as far has Indigenous affairs goes. APY Lands should be their number one focus  and hasn't been and to be promising more to regional Australia is a little too late.

HAMMER: Does the Liberal Party there in South Australia need a good hard look  at itself? I mean by rights, there will be a lot of people in the Liberal Party saying  we should have been a shoe-in here.

LAMING: Steven Marshall is a top candidate for a future premier but in reality  they lose too many seats by small margins in the cities and win regional seats by  huge margins and this isn't good enough in a democracy to win government, and  that's the reality.

HAMMER: So, not a problem with political leadership but with political party  machine?

LAMING: No, it's just a geographic distribution issue. You've got one massive  city of Adelaide and very little else as major centres go. That means we can look  like we have more voters voting Coalition when in reality we can't pull those  seats. It's a big challenge for South Australia and for the Coalition ahead.

HAMMER: On another subject gentlemen, Paul Howes is reportedly about to  announce his resignation from the union movement. Andrew Leigh, is this a big  loss to the wider Labor movement?

LEIGH: It's pretty extraordinary to see a 32-year-old hanging up his boots as a  senior figure. It speaks to how young Paul was when he got involved in the  union. And he's been very successful, not just for the AWU but also in being a  spokesperson for the broader union movement. I think his National Press Club  speech earlier this year was important calling for consensus: whether it's Andrew  and me, or business and the union leaders, we all need to be putting national  interest ahead of sectional interest.

HAMMER: Does it suggest he's lost his way or believes that Labor has lost its  way, the union movement has lost its way?

LEIGH: I think he's just looking for a new challenge. He's spent quite a while  now at the helm of the AWU and what a great position to be in. When I was  Paul’s age I was just finishing university.

HAMMER: Andrew Laming?

LAMING: What perfect timing. If timing is everything in politics and public life,  it's the perfect time to be walking away from the unions. Paul Howes can see

that. We'll see more of him but not in this capacity as defending the past of  Australia's union movement.

HAMMER: Why is it the perfect time to walk away?

LAMING: Well now, we're starting to reveal the reality, we're seeing in Victoria  the CFMEU's actions making it almost impossible for Boral to lay any concrete in  the entire state due to blacklisting. This is not the time to be defending  Australia's union past. Well done Paul Howes, great timing. It's a great time to  be leaving.

HAMMER: Now, another subject, let me take you back to last Thursday, the  Government was under pressure heading into question time over the resignation  of Arthur Sinodinos as Assistant Treasurer. The Prime Minister stood up and  announced that there was new and incredible evidence regarding the  disappearance of the Malaysian plane MH370. Was that appropriate statement  that the Prime Minister gave to the House to speculate if you like about this  debris in the Southern Ocean, the use of the Prime Ministerial office if you like  [to] make a formal statement to parliament? Was that appropriate, Andrew  Laming?

LAMING: Completely appropriate for the reasons that major nations are  collaborating together and now Australia has firmly made it clear that they are a  part of the search process. I would tend to agree with you that if nothing had  been found from that incident but the emergence of Chinese satellite images  showing wreckage or at least spots in the same locations suggests that a timely  and early announcement rather than an isolated one that has let relatives down.  I can't see any reason for suggestion that it was premature of inappropriate.

HAMMER: But, what would have happened if the Chinese satellite evidence,  didn't emerge two or three days later? Would you be saying something different?

LAMING: We have now been proven that it is the most credible of evidence that  is being pursued and that further enforces the Prime Ministers decision being a  correct one.

HAMMER: Andrew Leigh, what is your view about the Prime Ministerial  statement last Thursday?

LEIGH: I was a little surprised at the time, but I think it's a matter for the Prime  Minister to respond to.

HAMMER: Okay, another issue. There is a report in today's Australian  newspaper that Employment Minister Eric Abetz, or people from his office have

asked bureaucrats, if you like, to massage projections of job creation figures.  Andrew Leigh, are you concerned by this?

LEIGH: It's a brave public servant who stands up to a government that's cutting  back the public service jobs in such a way and credit to the public servants who  were willing to give frank and fearless advice to their minister. Minister Abetz has  no right to be asking public servants to do forecasts in a way that suits his  political desires. Australians deserve the most accurate forecasts, not the  forecasts that best fit Liberal Party policies. The Liberal Party is of course  concerned that it is not going to make its target of a million jobs over five years.  It's now that 100,000 short. They have gotten into this kerfuffle because of what  they did in the employment forecasting in the budget update last year which  then has had the effect of making budget numbers look worse, but now also  make it look as if they are not going to make their million job target.

HAMMER: Andrew Laming, this is no way to run a government is it?

LAMING: Well, I really, really love having a government which has a million jobs  figure and a target. I mean this is what Australians care about, is just a single  focus attention creating more jobs. When it comes to communicating with our  public service, everyone knows that they won't be pushed around. Everyone  knows that calls from advisors and ministerial officers are always tough and  many times can be portrayed as being 'massaged' when they are not. My view is  that it is about the jobs and not about the forecasts. Let's see how we go in the  next few years.

HAMMER: Well isn't that the point though, that Australian community is not  concerned with targets or forecasts. It's concerned about achievements and if  cooking the books, if you like, is going to come back and bite you?

LAMING: Well, there'll be real jobs created. You can't cook books around job  creation, that's got to be the focus. I accept that there has been some high  profile examples of job losses in Australia. But remember every year that we  create 650,000 jobs and lose half a million. There will be significant fluctuation.  We have got a few years yet and I am looking forward to seeing those jobs  numbers improve.

HAMMER: And you are confident of that one million job creation figure?

LAMING: I am very confident of achieving it and if you fall short by five percent  I still think it is a fantastic achievement. So setting an ambitious goal is really  important for a new government. I'm really glad they have.

HAMMING: Andrew Leigh, you know your way around economics and economic  projections, is the a million job creation target a credible one?

LEIGH: Well, we managed it through the Global Financial Crisis, so this is not a  high bar for the government to set for itself. A million jobs without a global  financial crisis ought to be a walk in the park, if Labor could do it with a Global  Financial Crisis. But at the moment they're tracking below projections. They're a  hundred thousand jobs short of where they need to be in order to get to a  million jobs. Like Andrew, I really hope they get there.

HAMMING: Okay, just finally, later today both of you gentlemen will be  speaking on a motion before the parliament on Australia becoming a republic.  Why that issue and why now? Andrew Laming, I will pass over to you first.

LAMING: Well I was hoping Andrew would kick this one off because it is his  motion.

HAMMER: Oh, okay, sorry. Yes, absolutely.

LEIGH: Very happy to. It has been nearly 15 years now since we had the  republican referendum and at the time we were told that if that referendum  went down that another model for a republic would come back up. But the 'don't  know, vote no' forces have ensured that we haven't had a chance to debate that  republic. Now I was delighted when Will and Kate welcomed their new baby into  the world. But today about 600 Australians will welcome their own new babies  into the world. I actually think that those 600 babies are better deserving to be  the Australian head of state than the child of Will and Kate.

HAMMER: Andrew Laming?

LAMING: Well, I don't rate this as a top 10 issue for Australia, I concede that.  But I also think that there are times where you have to cross the political divide,  be able to debate and discuss what potentially Australia will potentially look like  ten or twenty years down the track. I am a strong supporter of the republic and  I think it was a good moment for me to support Andrew's motion to re-prosecute  some of those ideas, even though they may not be fashionable at the moment.  And finally, my sense is that Australia can still be a great nation with minor  changes to the constitution that will allow us to have an Australian head of state.

HAMMER: Do you detect any movement on this issue say within the Coalition  Government, because that's where the major opponents to a republic reside?

LAMING: No, I see a real focus on delivering on election commitments, so  unfortunately not. But it's never a bad time to discuss the issue like a republic  versus a monarchy. That's going to happen today.

HAMMER: Okay, gentlemen, many topics covered this morning. Thank you for  your time.

LEIGH: And bipartisanship at the end.

HAMMER: Very good.

LEIGH: Thank you.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: TONI HASSAN 0426 207 726



