

THE HON RICHARD MARLES MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND  BORDER PROTECTION  MEMBER FOR CORIO



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW  ABC NEWSRADIO   THURSDAY 3 JULY 2014

SUBJECT/S: Scott Morrison’s refusal to update the Australian public on  reported asylum seeker vessels.

MARIUS BENSON: Richard Marles, there is no official word on what is  happening in the Indian Ocean and there is a lot unofficial confusion. Do you  have any independent information yourself to give you an idea of what’s  happening?

RICHARD MARLES, SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND  BORDER PROTECTION: No I don’t, and the lack of awareness that anyone has  in Australia about this because of the silence of the Government is a disgrace.  We simply need to hear from the Minister today about exactly what is going on  on the Indian Ocean, whether or not firstly all of those people who have been on  what appears to be two vessels are safe, and that they have been looked after in  that sense, but then secondly, what is the plan for them? The reports that we  see in the media today are deeply concerning if there is any truth to what we are  seeing about a handover to the Sri Lankan Navy then this Government is  throwing out the human rights handbook in order to protect a political  scoreboard, that would be a disgrace.

REPORTER: The Minister has said without giving any details that Australia is  acting in accordance with international obligations and law, do you think this  handover as reported but not officially confirmed or denied would be in  accordance with international law?



MARLES: Well certainly the reports that we are seeing in the papers today are  very concerning, and it is hard to see how they would be consistent with our  international obligations. But if the Minister or the Government is saying that we  will act in accordance with our international obligations, then he needs to be in  the media right now explaining how that is so. He needs to be making very clear  how the procedures that are being undertaken in relation to these people meet  our international obligations, because the reports that are emanating in the  media this morning are nothing other than deeply concerning.

REPORTER: The Minister has said that this action would be jeopardised by  revealing information, that the whole exercise on water is operational and  secrecy is necessary.

MARLES: Well that is ridiculous, and the whole question about operational  matters being used as a veil to prevent legitimate questions in the public interest  has always been a farce. What we saw with his press conference if you would  call it that on the weekend was a total farce. This is the Minister who doesn’t  mind going out there on a daily basis just to pat himself on the back when we  are talking about good news, but when there is news which is inconvenient to his  political scoreboard he has gone into hiding, and that is not good enough. And to  describe these matters as simply matters of ‘curiosity’ for the Australian public  treats every Australian with contempt. People aren’t ‘curious’ about the fate of, it  would appear, almost 200 people. And people aren’t just ‘curious’ about the  actions of their Government - they have a right to know. It is the people to  whom we ultimately owe the greatest obligation, and they have an absolute right  to know what is going on out there, and this Minister is treating everyone with  contempt in denying us the right to know.

REPORTER: In the absence of an official account there are unofficial accounts  and one says the asylum seekers on board an Australian Customs vessel have  had their refugee claim assessed by video link, and that they had been asked  simply four questions, and the questions are reportedly their name, their country  of origin, where they had come from and why they had left. Would that be in  accordance with international law if that were the case?

MARLES: I think if those reports are correct, then there are huge concerns  about the process which has been undertaken and very real questions about how  any of that could meet our international obligations and if, for example, if any of  those people answer a question in a way which would seem to require further  investigation, what availability is there for that to occur? Or is it the case that  there is in a sense a presumption that all the people are going to be handed over  one way or another? I mean, if those reports are correct, this would appear to  be a fig leaf in order to throw-out the human rights handbook, and the only

reason for doing that is to protect a political scoreboard. That would be very,  very concerning. But this is all the reason why we need to hear from the Minister  right now about exactly what is happening.

REPORTER: Richard Marles thank you very much.

MARLES: Thank you Marius.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: LIDIJA IVANOVSKI 0427 051 563

