

THE HON RICHARD MARLES MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND  BORDER PROTECTION  MEMBER FOR CORIO

E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW  INTERVIEW with MARK PARTON - TALKING CANBERRA 1206 2CC  WEDNESDAY, 15 OCTOBER 2014

SUBJECT/S: Tony Abbott’s comments on shirt-fronting President Putin;  High Court hearing on Tamil Asylum Seekers; Foreign Correspondent  program on Italy’s intake of Asylum Seekers

HOST, MARK PARTON: Richard Marles is the federal immigration shadow and  he’s on the line right now, he joins us on a regular basis, G’day Richard.

RICHARD MARLES, SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND  BORDER PROTECTION:  G’day Mark, how are you?

PARTON:  Not bad, I just wanted to start first up with the whole discussion on  Vladimir Putin and you know, discussion of shirt-fronts and everything else.  Where do you sit on how Tony Abbott’s expressed his want to have a robust  conversation with Vladimir Putin?

MARLES:  Look I wouldn’t have used the language that the Prime Minister used  but I certainly think there needs to be a robust conversation with Vladimir Putin.  I think this was always going to be a hard moment in a way, an awkward  moment. Look the G20 being in Australia is a fantastic thing, first time we’ve  hosted it, we’re going to have all the major world leaders in Brisbane later this  year, we’ve been preparing for it for a couple of years. But of course one of  those leaders is Vladimir Putin, and Russia behaved appallingly, obviously in the  lead up to MH-17 and in the aftermath, and I think that what you’ve seen over  the last few days is a reflection of the frustration that the Australian people feel

about the way Russia’s behaved. But it’s not so much the macho which is going  to matter here Mark, it is what is actually said to Vladimir Putin when Tony  Abbott meets him later in the year, and I would think that most Australians hope  he delivers a strong message.

PARTON:  Yeah I think so, let’s talk about what’s going on in the High Court,  the Australian Government’s decision to detain these 157 Tamil asylum seekers  at sea for nearly a month was illegal according to some lawyers, the validity of  the law to detain the group under the spotlight, what’s the Opposition’s position  on this?

MARLES:  Well there’s a whole lot of legalities which are going to be tested in  the Court and I won’t go through all of them, they need to be played out, but at  the time our view was very clearly that these people could have been taken to  Christmas Island or Cocos as soon as they were rescued at sea and then taken  to either Nauru or Manus. That was the system that had been set up and that’s  what should have occurred rather than people being left to languish on the  Indian Ocean for the better part of a month in order to basically protect an  artificial scoreboard which Scott Morrison had set up. And I think the point to  make here Mark is that the former Labor Government and this Government have  actually had success in bringing an end to the flow of asylum seeker vessels.  That is a good thing because we are not seeing people die at sea. But there is a  real streak of Scott Morrison being ham fisted in the way in which he deals with  this portfolio and today’s case is a reminder of that month back in July when he  allowed 157 people to just float around in the Indian Ocean for a month.

PARTON:  Going to be a lot of discussion today about that Foreign  Correspondent story on how the Italians are dealing with asylum seekers, did  you see it or not?

MARLES:  No I didn’t, but it is exactly right, what we’ve seen in the  Mediterranean this year is 3000 people lose their lives at sea. I do a lot of forums  around the country and often people say to me why do we have to have offshore  processing, why can’t we invest more in our Coastguard and our Navy like the  Italians do and rescue people and the point I make is that this is a innately  dangerous thing and in fact what we’ve seen play out in the Mediterranean this  year is a human tragedy which we are all too familiar. And I think what it says is  that the Refugee Convention is very important, it’s very important that countries  sign up to providing protection to people who flee persecution, but we also need  to establish some international norms now around how people are treated in  transit to make sure that we don’t see this unacceptable loss of life as people are  drowning literally in their thousands in transit.  You know we’ve all got an  obligation, and I think in Australia we’ve actually taken that up and we’ve done  something to make sure that people are not dying on our border and really the

humanitarian voices in this country have actually got to start seeing that is an  unambiguously good thing.

PARTON:  Thanks for your time this morning Richard.

MARLES:  Great to talk to you Mark.

ENDS

MEDIA ENQUIRIES:  LIDIJA IVANOVSKI  0427 051 563



