

THE HON RICHARD MARLES MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER  PROTECTION  MEMBER FOR CORIO



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW  INTERVIEW WITH MARK PARTON - TALKING CANBERRA 1206 2CC  WEDNESDAY, 17 SEPTEMBER 2014

SUBJECT/S: Australia’s humanitarian intake

JOURNALIST - MARK PARTON: We know we’ve got all sorts of drama in the Middle  East and Australia’s put its hand up and said hey we’re going to help America in trying  to get some sense in what’s going there and obviously there’s a lot of displaced people.  I know that although there is a bipartisan approach to this, Labor’s standing firmly  behind the Liberal Party and we’re all doing this together. One of the questions that’s  coming from the Opposition is look if there is such drama here, why wouldn’t we be  increasing our humanitarian intake of refugees, Richard Marles from the Opposition  joins us right now, G’day Richard.

RICHARD MARLES, SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER  PROTECTION: G’day Mark how are you?

PARTON: Excellent, seems to make sense that we’d do that.

MARLES: Well, we had the humanitarian intake at 20,000 when we were in  Government, that was cut to 13,750 by the Government, so that is 13,750 humanitarian  places each and every year applied across the globe. I suppose the point about this  number is that it is the single most important statement that we make as a country about  our generosity when it comes to the question of 7 million people globally who are  displaced and that number, or let me rephrase that, the 7 million that are seeking  permanent asylum, actually the UNHCR tells us there are 51 million people who are  displaced right now, but the point I was going to make right now, is that this is the  highest number of displaced people in the world since the Second World War and

obviously what’s going on in the Middle East is part of that, so if there was ever an  argument to increase the humanitarian intake it’s now, and we think that it is an  important statement as to who we are as a country. That we are prepared to go about  our business here in a generous way and I really was interested in your introduction and  the story of Maurice and his wife coming into Australia, I was kind of interested in what  you think about Maurice’s assessment of the Australian character, but I suspect not only  are we known for stealing girlfriends, I wasn’t quite sure of that, although that’s an  interesting call then for you to bring your wife to Australia if that is your assessment of  what we are like, but I suspect in the midst of that Maurice might have also thought that  we’re a generous people and that’s why this is important.

PARTON: It is important, I still believe, and I know you don’t necessarily agree with me  on this, but I still believe that the Abbott Government has some wriggle room on this,  that they’ll use, and I think one of the reasons they’ll use it is because you and me and a  number of others will embarrass them into doing it.

MARLES: Let’s see how that plays out, I don’t share that confidence, and for this  reason, the Government have said that they will put in place 4400 places for those who  are specifically displaced from Iraq and Syria, and that’s a good thing to be talking about  that number, but they are saying that will come from the 13,750, not additional places,  but from within the existing humanitarian intake as they have set that number, so this is  not extra that we’re doing and I guess our view would be, firstly the number is too low, it  should be at 20,000, but if the Government -

PARTON: At least.

MARLES: Well at least, but if the Government is talking in those terms, and I don’t see  any indication on their part that they’re about to raise the 13,750 figure -

PARTON: Because this has got nothing to do with any arguments with illegals getting  on boats and getting here, if anything, the Government’s success in stopping those  boats allows them more wriggle room here, because they don’t have to worry about the  numbers being hijacked from the other end. Talk us through how, because I don’t fully  understand how we do it, let’s work on this figure that we’ve got at the moment of  13,000 or 14,000, how do we physically find those people, what are the nuts and bolts  of getting those people, where do they come from?

MARLES: Good question, so first this, obviously completely within the discretion of the  Australian Government as to where it takes those people from, as I said earlier there  are 7 million people who are seeking permanent asylum in the world today who would  be genuine refugees, so there is a huge need out there, and there are not many  countries who offer humanitarian places in the way that we do, in fact at 20,000, we had  the second largest program in the world in absolute terms behind the US and easily the  largest per capita. Typically what we would do as a country and I think that this has  happened under both Governments, is go to the UNHCR and say to them you are the  global expert about where there is the greatest and most urgent need in the world,

where do you think we should deploy these places. They would give advice about that,  and often I think they would in a sense leverage Australia’s commitment to take people  to encourage Governments within the region that you’re talking about, to set up refugee  camps, knowing that a certain number will be taken through those camps, and that’s an  important point as well, and then there are a whole lot of agencies on the ground, the  IOM - the International Organisation for Migration and others who actually do the  assessments and the processing and then organise the transport. But it’s on the basis  of that advice for example that we now have a Somalian community, a Sudanese  community in Australia, why we have a Korean community, from Burma, Rohingyas, a  lot of that is about advice that we’ve received over the years from the UNHCR about  those being in areas of significant need, now it is advice, it’s not that they’re telling us  what to do, but it makes sense to go to them to get a sense of how to best deploy, what  we can offer, for the greatest effect.

PARTON: Alright thanks for chatting about it this morning, Richard we’ll see if we can  keep the pressure up.

MARLES: And are you still following the footy, a miserable game isn’t it?

PARTON: It is, well I think it’s a little bit more miserable for you than for me, because  you know I would have thought the Cats would still be in it now.

MARLES: Silly, silly miserable game, never been that interested in it.

PARTON: I’m really pleased that Brent Harvey is free to play on the weekend.

MARLES: I am too if he hadn’t it would have been very sad.

PARTON: Look I still think Sydney will probably win the flag, but I’ll be over the moon if  somehow the Kangaroos can make it to a grand final.

MARLES: Anyone but Hawthorn.

PARTON: Well you see my edict is always anyone but the Dockers so I was cheering  for Port Adelaide like nobody’s business.  Good on you mate thanks for coming in this  morning.

MARLES: See you Mark.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: LIDIJA IVANOVSKI  0427 051 563

