Home Â» Media Releases Â» Lantern parade a tribute to Queensland’s new arrivals

Lantern parade a tribute to Queensland’s new  arrivals

6 June 2014

The Parliamentary Secretary to the Minister for Social Services, Senator Concetta FierravantiÂ­

Wells, says Brisbane’s Luminous Lantern Parade is an ideal opportunity to welcome

Queensland’s new residents.

Formerly known as the ‘Refugee Lantern Parade’, this is the first year it has been known as the

‘Luminous Lantern Parade’ with a wider focus on welcoming all new arrivals to the Sunshine

State.

Senator FierravantiÂ­Wells, who has special responsibility for Settlement Services and  Multicultural Affairs, said it was a real pleasure to attend the event.

“The parade used a magnificent display of colours, lanterns, music and dancing to celebrate

the many positive contributions of migrants and refugees as members of Queensland society,”

Senator FierravantiÂ­Wells said.

“I am pleased that this event was so well received by the community.

“Since October 1945, more than 7.5 million people have migrated to Australia—over 800 000

of these people arrived under the Humanitarian Programme.

“Migrants and refugees make positive contributions every day to the social, cultural and

economic fabric of our society.

“The parade is another great example of the hospitality of Queenslanders and this is a

wonderful celebration of the state’s diversity.

Media Releases

Search

HOME MEDIA RELEASES SPEECHES TRANSCRIPTS BIOGRAPHY CONTACT

Listen

Page 1 of 2 Lantern parade a tribute to Queensland’s new arrivals | Senator the Hon ...

8/07/2014 http://concettafierravantiwells.dss.gov.au/media-releases/53

“Australia has always prided itself on welcoming new citizens and the Luminous Lantern

Parade is another example of our rich cultural diversity.”

Â© Commonwealth of Australia 2014 Accessibility Privacy statement

Page 2 of 2 Lantern parade a tribute to Queensland’s new arrivals | Senator the Hon ...

8/07/2014 http://concettafierravantiwells.dss.gov.au/media-releases/53

