The Hon. Scott Morrison MP  Minister for Immigration and Border Protection



Asylum seeker claims, Operation Sovereign Borders, Senate inquiry

Friday, 31 January 2014

Interview with Chris Smith, 2GB The Chris Smith Afternoon Show

Chris Smith: A big day in terms of border protection and immigration, we've got the  Immigration Minister Scott Morrison turning up to a Senate committee today where  he will be grilled about his very secret approach to preventing leaky boats coming  into Australian territorial waters. And won't that be fun, as he answers questions from  a committee mainly made up of members who are from the Labor party and the  Greens. So that will be worth the price of admission. Meantime we have finally found  the truth about those asylum seekers that the ABC claimed had been abused by the  Navy. The Australian newspaper conducted interviews with four Somali asylum  seekers at the centre of the allegations yesterday. One of them conceded that the  injuries occurred during a scuffle to prevent the asylum seekers from destroying the  fishing boat. Another man that claimed he too was part of this abuse has now  admitted that he had no knowledge of it because he wasn't even on that boat.  Meanwhile today new details have emerged about asylum seeker claims that  Australian sailors mistreated them during a boat interception operation earlier this  month. This is a completely different interception. A Somali asylum seeker has been  given top billing by the ABC this morning, he said there were angry protests from  those when they were told that they would be turned around and sent to Indonesia.  He alleges that during the on-board argument he suffered burns when he came into  contact with a hot engine, excuse me, after an Australian sailor sprayed him in the  eyes. So they are saying capsicum spray was used and of course capsicum spray  can be used when you are trying to calm down an angry mob on a leaky boat. But  again you have got this business about how they have suffered and sustained  injuries by having to touch hot engine parts. I thought we'd grab the Immigration  Minister Scott Morrison for a short time this morning and he is on the line right now.  Minister good morning.

Minister Morrison: Good morning Chris.

Chris Smith: Where do we start, we will deal with the committee in just a second.  Finally we are hearing at least through the Australian newspaper that the original  claims broadcast by the ABC about how those earlier asylum seekers were  somehow abused by the Navy, there is now some evidence that corroborates the  story that the Army, sorry the Navy gave and you gave that it was all bunkum.

Minister Morrison: Well that's the case but more importantly, Chris, January now is  the first month since 2008 that there have been no boats. I mean, now I think, that is  where we should start. That is the result of the work of the people that are part of  border protection command part of Operation Sovereign Borders doing difficult jobs  for us out there to protect our borders and the sorts of allegations that have been

made against them were obviously ridiculous and they were absurd and they were  offensive and they were sledging our Navy and I've had a very strong view about all  of this. What we read today in the Australian is, these people are still changing their  story. I mean, and who knows what, you know, what their next story will be.

Chris Smith: Well it never made sense as to why Australian sailors would be that  cruel, to force someone what at the point of a gun to hold onto hot engine parts, what  so they can allow them to go back to Indonesia and tell their story.

Minister Morrison: I mean, it is absolutely ludicrous, absolutely ludicrous and it is  offensive because the people those charges and allegations were being made  against are the same people who for the last five years have been risking their own  lives to rescue people just like this, when they have got on leaky boats and got  themselves into trouble.

Chris Smith: Now, are you able to ascertain, could be, because you guys flick  around between stations, are you able to ascertain whether the ABC is reporting on  what the Australian is reporting?

Minister Morrison: I wouldn't be able to tell you at the moment, Chris. But what I do  know is this, and that is I know that our Navy and Customs and Border Protection  personnel act in accordance with the very strict rules and guidelines for the use of  force in any of these situations, like our police do and like others do, when they are  put in difficult situations they are given powers, they are given equipment. Now they  know how to use it, they are trained how to use it and any allegation that people  have misused this use of force or misused any of the equipment they are provided  with is absolutely baseless without substantiation just like the ridiculous claims we  had to put up with last week which were broadcast.

Chris Smith: Ok, Is it possible though that what the ABC and others are trying to  show here is that the more secret you keep the details of who is coming in and how  they are turned back and what happens on board these leaky boats, the more  secrecy involved the more we don't know the truth?

Minister Morrison: Well that is a cop out. I think frankly, I mean, there is no way the  government is going to give the people smugglers a play book on the tactical  measures taken by our border protection commanders who defend our borders. I  mean what do they want us to do give them the pin number as well?

Chris Smith: But the history of Australian Government's has been a very  transparent approach to information given to the media. You know that.

Minister Morrison: Well not when it comes to sensitive operational matters and that  was the same policy applied by the Howard Government when policies similar to  these were employed back at that time. I mean, these are detailed sensitive  operations that take place in accordance with the training that is provided in the clear  orders that are given from the commanders and the best thing I can do to help them  continue to do that job every day is to follow the procedures that we have been  advised to follow. And that is to keep this information in a very sensitive way.

Chris Smith: Ok, we have got new details emerging, well via the ABC, it is funny  how we have correspondence from just about every major media outlet in Indonesia  and it is only the ABC that are good enough to put some of these allegations to air.  But anyway, new details emerging about asylum seeker claims that Australian  sailors mistreated them during another boat interception operation earlier this month.  We are hearing about capsicum spray being used and also the fact that they came  into contact with hot engine parts. Again, it sounds rather similar.

Minister Morrison: Well again, any suggestion that use of force or any personnel  defensive equipment that our people have has been used inappropriately and not in  accordance with their training or guidelines is baseless, is unsubstantiated, and the  Government rejects it.

Chris Smith: So did they use capsicum spray?

Minister Morrison: Well again, I don't go into any of the specifics of what might  happen out there.

Chris Smith: Is it possible they could of? Do they have capsicum spray?

Minister Morrison: Well that's on the website. That's part of the standard issue of  equipment and that has been the case for a very long time.

Chris Smith: So they may have needed to use it to keep these people from getting  out of control?

Minister Morrison: Well without speculating on a specific case, what I am saying is,  is that the suggestion that there has been any inappropriate use of any equipment  that they have to defend themselves and to take control of any situations is  absolutely baseless and unsubstantiated.

Chris Smith: So this is about holding hot engine parts, is this just the latest excuse,  the template being distributed by the people smugglers do you think?

Minister Morrison: Oh well, people have strong motives who have been denied  what the people smugglers promised them to make up all sorts of stories. I mean, I  am going to back the assurances provided by Navy and Customs and Border  Protection against the self-serving claims of others who are clearly not happy about  the fact they didn't get what they wanted which was illegal entry to Australia.

Chris Smith: Ok, back to secrecy or the lack of information handed to the media  about asylum seeker arrivals. You will be before the committee today which is  dominated by Labor and the Greens, this could be worth the price of admission?

Minister Morrison: Oh look, we will see how it goes. I am happy to stand by  Lieutenant General Campbell, the chief of the Defence Force and the head of  Customs and Border Protection. These are the, these are the men who are leading  our efforts out there to ensure that people don't get to Australia illegally by boat.  Labor and the Greens oppose our policy, they've always opposed our policies and  they still oppose them despite the glaring fact that this policy is working. Now how we

manage information in this operation is a critical part of its success and we know that  to be true. So I am not going to compromise the success of this operation that has  delivered zero boats since the 19th of December. 43 days by engaging the sort of  requests that are made of us to try and compromise a policy that is clearly working.

Chris Smith: Have you thought about how many lives have been saved as well?

Minister Morrison: Oh, who could say.

Chris Smith: Well Kevin Rudd said there were what 2500 lives lost over a period of  five years, I think it was, and I don't know where he was getting that from but if that's  the case and you start crunching the numbers hundreds of lives have been saved.

Minister Morrison: Of course this is possible and there was over 1100 that we know  of specifically that did perish during that period of time when Labor had lost control of  our borders. Remember over 50 000 people turned up on over 800 boats over that  period of time. And how many others lost their lives - who knows? But our policies  are working, we are going to keep implementing our policies because they are  working and the Labor and the Greens can team up again like they have, as much  as they like, and they continue to oppose our policies as they do but we will continue  to implement them because we know they are working.

Chris Smith: That could be good sport today. I wish you the best of luck with it and  thank you for your time this morning.

Minister Morrison: Thank you Chris.



See: Index of Speeches

URL:http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/sm/2014/sm211407.htm   Last update: Monday, 03 February 2014 at 09:17 AEST



