Scott Morrison MP

Minister for Immigration and Border Protection

Migrant communities, four Australians believed to have joined ISIL,  Senator Hanson-Young visit to Cambodia, G20, free trade agreement  with China

Monday, 17 November 2014

Interview with Ray Hadley, 2GB Ray Hadley Programme

Ray Hadley: Minister good morning.

Minister Morrison: Good morning Ray and I also echo what you said about the Sikh  community not just in Sydney but I have also visited similar temples down in  Melbourne. It is the same pattern, it is the same way of doing things and good on  you for going out there.

Hadley: Fantastic day and I reckon if I went there four or five days a week I would  weigh twelve or fourteen kilos more than I currently do because like I have said  before when I go and visit my friends from the Australian Lebanese community, the  Maronites, you can't go until you have had a belly full of food and they want to keep  loading you up, the same with the Sikh community.

Minister Morrison: Yes, that is my experience with both of them but this is the  broad experience of migrant communities more generally and I think it is just great  that people get the opportunity to hear that and we are a much stronger nation  because of these migrant communities.

Hadley: Ok, the Daily Telegraph has more details today on what we spoke about on  Saturday. There was a text sent to the mother of the four; 'we made it to Syria, we  will see you in paradise'. She thought they were going on a holiday somewhere in  Asia, Thailand we think, and she was so disbelieving of the text that she still went to  the airport to pick them up.

Minister Morrison: It is a sad story from the family's point of view and I feel for the  family but the real truth about these four young men, and one teenager as part of this  is, is that once they cross that line and they go to fight with the death cult they  become Australia's enemies and they become the world's enemies and they will  have to face the consequences of their actions. It is a terrible thing and it is  frustrating that if we had more information in this case then perhaps we may have  been able to prevent their onward movement as we have been able to do in other  cases but in this case no. That is why I appeal to those in the community and if you  are listening and if you are aware of something like this or you are concerned about  members of your own family call 1800 123 400.

Hadley: Now is there any indication, this may be instructive, can we trace back as to  where these four were radicalised because if mum and dad didn't know anything  about it, authorities knew nothing about it, someone has got hold of them.

Minister Morrison: Well that is really the job now of the AFP and our other agencies  to now go and go through that process. That is what they are about and to work with  obviously family and friends and others to understand how this came to pass  because we don't want other young Australians caught up and indoctrinated into this  death cult.

Hadley: We have had confirmation as I came on air from the Americans that this  young man Peter Kassig has been executed by Islamic state. A former soldier, who  went back to Syria to provide medical aid to people, gave food, even Al Qaeda made  an approach to Islamic state to say please spare him, he has been helping us but  they still killed him.

Minister Morrison: Well as they would because they are the most low of the low.  They are the most despicable human beings crawling around the planet in Daesh  and that is why we are over there doing what we are doing and that is why we are  here doing what we need to do to ensure that this insidious evil does not affect our  own communities and is put to a stop over there.

Hadley: An Australian Muslim convert we are told in the Tele today who edited a  book advocating, advocating female genital mutilation has now disowned the book  urging people not to buy it. She has had some sort of awakening thank god but  others of course haven't had the same awakening. We have got people in court at  the moment over similar charges.

Minister Morrison: I'm pleased to hear the first part of that story. There was actually  quite a large conference on the weekend which was organised by the Lebanese  Muslim Association and what they were focussing on was how they can get youth on  the right track. Now I know that is something that most of our communities try to  work on. In their case it is a matter of keeping them away from these mad idiots but  for the rest of us we want to keep young people on the right track and help them to  make good decisions in life as well. I was pleased to see that they had that focus on  the weekend about how they can reach and engage their own youth because 50 per  cent of the Islamic population in Australia is aged 24 and under. So it is  predominantly a very young population and they listen to their elders and their  Sheiks and Imams as much as other Australians listen to their Priests and Ministers  and parents. So it is important that we do what we can to engage those youth.

Hadley: Speaking of idiots, Greens Senator Sarah Hanson-Young is in Cambodia.

Minister Morrison: Yes, I hear she is on a fact finding mission. Facts and Sarah  Hanson-Young aren't two things that readily spring to mind.

Hadley: It is a contradiction in terms, fact - Sarah Hanson-Young.

Minister Morrison: Here is a fact for Sarah Hanson-Young, 302 boats before we  introduced turn backs, one after. There is a fact for you Sarah.

Hadley: How many people died, how many people perished?

Minister Morrison: Hundreds - almost 1200 over the term of the previous  government and since we introduced turn backs not one loss of life at sea. Now  there is a fact Sarah, you might want to reflect on that.

Hadley: Who is paying the freight for the trip to Cambodia? Us?

Minister Morrison: I don't know. Parliamentarians have some rights to go and travel  and Sarah came under previous terms of Parliament so I don't know if she is using  that allowance or funding it privately. I don't know.

Hadley: So she is there to see about the deal to resettle refugees in Cambodia?

Minister Morrison: Yes she has turned up at the wrong time. The on the ground  arrangements are not in place at the moment and it is still going to be some time  before they get in place. So she will go over there, she will whinge and complain like  she always does and people will ignore her as they should.

Hadley: Now we have had the G20 over the weekend and there have been many  positives to come out of it including the fact, it appears the Prime Minister may have  been blindsided by President Obama, but it would have been a big call having had to  confront that on climate change and hold firm and say well we are talking about  economic mattes here and economic opportunity.

Minister Morrison: That's right.

Hadley: It appears the President, who doesn't really have a mandate for what he is  talking about given he doesn't control everything in the United States of America, he  is a sort of lame duck President these days with recent events.

Minister Morrison: Well the President does have his own challenges now the  Republicans control both chambers of Congress. But putting that to one side I  thought our Prime Minister Tony Abbott did a sterling job. He didn't take a backward  step in any of this. He stood up strongly for what Australia's national interests were,  whether on climate change - where we are going to meet our Kyoto target. The US  Government didn't end up signing Kyoto and I understand they are going to meet  their target as well. But that is what it is about. People can talk all they like. We are  going to hit our target. We have just got a $2.5 billion emissions reduction fund  through the Parliament which is actually reducing Australia's emissions, not just  buying foreign carbon credits from overseas carbon traders. We are actually  reducing our own emissions and that is something the Labor Party voted against. So  they don't want us to help reduce our own emissions but they somehow want us to  go off and pay others to reduce theirs in other places around the world.

Hadley: In simple terms how big a deal is this trade agreement with China in relation  to where we perhaps thought we were headed, it even says in the Fairfax press that  industry representatives told Fairfax they were shocked of the breadth and depth of  the Chinese concessions.

Minister Morrison: Well I think this is a very ambitious deal and I am very proud of  the work Andrew Robb has done particularly when you combine it with the Korean  and Japanese trade deals. These are things that just sat on the backburner under

the previous government and Andrew Robb has been able to bring three together in  the space of just over a year. Now I have no doubt there will be plenty of people who  have issues with the deal but the thing is this takes us forward. These deals always  take us forward. There is a balancing of the various interests and the various trade-offs you do. That is what a trade is but this deal will take us forward and give us  economic opportunity particularly in our region with the biggest and growing  economy that there is around other than the United States.

Hadley: For people to grasp it winemakers who sell more than $200 million worth of  goods to China each year despite tariffs of up to 30% will see the tariff eliminated  over a four year period to 2019. Tariffs on horticulture products - seafood and other  goods - accounting for 93 per cent of Australian exports by value will be reduced to  zero by 2019 and shock tariffs recently imposed on Australian coal will be removed  over a two year period.

Minister Morrison: Look these are all gains as you say and they are hard won but  you don't get them if you don't turn up. Andrew Robb has certainly turned up and has  argued the case strongly. Obviously in that process there are some things that also  have to be granted in that but you don't get anything for nothing. This is a  government that is just getting on with getting these deals done because we know  they provide opportunity for us. That is where the jobs come from - from growing  trade.

Hadley: As always thanks for your time, talk to you next week.

Minister Morrison: Thanks a lot Ray.



