Scott Morrison MP

Minister for Immigration and Border Protection

Cambodia, Refugee Convention

Interview with Chris Uhlmann, ABC AM Programme

Chris Uhlmann: I spoke to the Immigration Minister before he left for Cambodia.  Scott Morrison, what's the nature of this deal with Cambodia?

Minister Morrison: This is about a regional solution. This is about providing genuine  resettlement in a third country which is Cambodia, a signatory to the Refugee  Convention. It enables us to fulfil on the policy which says no-one will be resettled in  Australia. It applies to those who are currently having processing on Nauru. Over  200 people have been identified as refugees now and it provides the opportunity for  them to voluntarily decide to be resettled in Cambodia.

Uhlmann: How many people can you send and when?

Minister Morrison: There are no caps on this and this will just be an ongoing  arrangement. First of all we need to build the capability and we're not rushing into  this, we never have. This has never been that type of an arrangement. It is about  ensuring we get it right, that we get the right measures in place, the right systems in  place, we need to train people up in Cambodia. It's about building their capability, not  just to take those from Nauru but to more broadly play a role on regional  resettlement.

Uhlmann: So would you send people from Papua New Guinea as well?

Minister Morrison: There are no plans for that at present, but obviously as the  relationship grows and the capability builds then there's the opportunity to raise  further matters.

Uhlmann: How soon will it begin?

Minister Morrison: It should begin later in the year but we still have some more  work to do on the implementation arrangements. Signing the MOU (Memorandum of  Understanding) is a critical step in this process but now we'll have the opportunity to  work directly with settlement service providers, potentially engage with the IOM  (International Organization for Migration) and others to actually get the program up  and running. So we're still looking out towards the end of the year and perhaps early  next year.

Uhlmann: What have you given to Cambodia to get them on board with this?

Minister Morrison: The most important thing we're giving them is our expertise.  Cambodia wants to be a country that can resettle refugees properly and they're  seeking our advice and expertise on how we can do that. But in addition to that, and

it's not driven by this I should stress, the Australian Government will be providing  over four years $40 million to support various overseas development aid projects.  That's on top of the $79 million or thereabouts we currently provide in aid to  Cambodia. Now this is on rice milling projects, on land mine clearance projects and  things of that nature, and electoral reform issues. So these are good projects.  They're projects that are very worthy.

Uhlmann: Cambodia is one of the most corrupt countries in Asia. How can you be  sure that this money will go to the projects that you identify?

Minister Morrison: For the same way that we are today and how we constantly get  providing development aid assistance to Cambodia now. I mean the same  measures, the same things that we do to ensure the integrity of that aid which has  been done over many years by many governments, the same checks and balances  will be in place for this.

Uhlmann: Who will pay to support the refugees?

Minister Morrison: The costs of the resettlement package for each will be met by  the Australian Government. Those costs will be better known once we go through  the next phase which is working with settlement service providers, but also beyond  that when we get a better understanding of what the take-up might be. Because  remember, this is a voluntary arrangement. No-one is forcing anyone to go anywhere  and if people choose to do that then we'll be able to better plan for those costs going  forward.

Uhlmann: Have you identified people who might be willing to go at this stage?

Minister Morrison: Well, at this stage we're just signing an MOU. We will now work  through the implementation arrangements and get that happening and we'll be doing  that at the same time as engaging with people on Nauru.

Uhlmann: So all up in what you're offering Cambodia and the costs of this program,  how much will it be?

Minister Morrison: Well, at this stage we have clear costs on the ODA (overseas  development assistance) payments and that's $40 million over four years. At this  stage I think the broader costs which will be taken up within the broader resettlement  costs we're meeting on Nauru and PNG and other places, so those costs are yet to  be fully determined.

Uhlmann: Does it bother you at all that you're sending these refugees, people  identified as refugees, to one of the poorest and most corrupt countries in Asia?

Minister Morrison: Well, I don't necessarily agree with that absolute assessment  because in the seven years to 2011 the percentage of people in poverty in  Cambodia has fallen from over 50 per cent to around 20 per cent. I mean this is a  country that is trying to get on its feet; this is a country that is making great progress.  Its population has doubled from its very dark times many years ago. So if the rest of  the world is going to constantly keep them in the cellar, not give them a go at trying

to do something positive like this which we're going to do with our expertise? We say  we should, we say we should give them a go.

Uhlmann: Cambodians can't find jobs there so how do you imagine refugees who  don't speak Khmer will go?

Minister Morrison: Well, language training is part of the resettlement package that  we'll be undertaking and I think that's important. But as many have said to me about  those who have come on boats that they're quite innovative and entrepreneurial and  I think there would be opportunities for people with those sorts of skills and  enthusiasms.

Uhlmann: Do you believe that you'll be able to clear both Manus Island and Nauru  over time?

Minister Morrison: Eventually yes because just as it occurred under the Howard  government, I mean we have only had one boat as you know turn up this year, those  157 people went to Nauru. It's been over 50 days since that venture. So as long as  the boats keep not coming and that is certainly what we're doing through the  measures we announced in the Parliament, then yes, we can achieve that outcome  but it'll take time.

Uhlmann: Can I take you to the legislation that you tabled yesterday? You are  removing all reference to the Refugee Convention of 1951 from the Migration Act.  Are you attempting to get around your international obligations?

Minister Morrison: Absolutely not. We're enshrining those obligations in our Act.  We are specifically putting in the words of what it means to be a refugee, what  protection means, what fear of persecution means and we are basically taking what  is in the Refugee Convention and putting it in our own law…

Uhlmann: And sew it in so the courts can't interpret it?

Minister Morrison: …so the Australian law determines what our obligations are and  not someone sitting out of Australia commenting and interpreting international  conventions. This is about quarantining and ensuring the sovereignty of Australia  determining its obligations.

Uhlmann: You've lost a couple of cases in the High Court. Is this an attempt to deal  the High Court out of this process?

Minister Morrison: No, what this is about is Australian law defining our obligations  and that's what it does. It doesn't diminish them; it enshrines them in our law and  puts us in charge of what our obligations are, not those who would seek to arbitrarily  add to it.

Uhlmann: And are you turning the children of refugees into stateless people?

Minister Morrison: No, they will be considered together with their parents as a  family unit and we will honour all of our obligations under the Statelessness  Conventions and other relevant treaties.

Uhlmann: Scott Morrison, thank you.

Minister Morrison: Thanks a lot, Chris.



