

THE HON RICHARD MARLES MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION  MEMBER FOR CORIO



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  PRESS CONFERENCE, PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA

THURSDAY, 25 SEPTEMBER 2014

SUBJECT/S:  Scott Morrison’s deal with Clive Palmer

RICHARD MARLES, SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER  PROTECTION: This morning we have heard a comparatively short speech from the  Minister in relation to a very large piece of legislation. Labor will be going through the  detail of this in a calm and a methodical way and you will hear more from us in the  coming days about the detail of the legislation.

But some preliminary thoughts about what has been proposed today are these, Scott  Morrison has indicated a desire to get people out into the community as quickly as  possible, Scott Morrison has consigned 30,000 people to a state of limbo for an entire  year. If he was so interested, he shouldn't be doing it now, but on day one of this  Government and he could have. By processing people and for those who are found to  be genuine refugees offering them permanent protection, a pathway to citizenship, so  that these people can be off the Government tab as quickly as possible and contributing  to our society with all the rights and obligations of an Australian citizen.

Labor opposes Temporary Protection Visas, we oppose them because they put people  in a permanent state of limbo. To have a situation where you are being assessed, a  costly assessment, each and every three years in a rolling way puts people in a  permanent state of limbo. And make no mistake - for the vast majority of people that we  are talking about here, if they are found to be genuine refugees, they will be living their  lives in Australia but under a Temporary Protection Visa they will be doing it as  marginalised residents. That is why Temporary Protection Visas do not work. It's why  Temporary Protection Visa’s were abandoned by John Howard, and they don't work as  a deterrent. Labor took Australia off the table on the 19th of July last year, from that  moment, Temporary Protection Visas, as a deterrent, came completely redundant

because no-one seeking to come to this country in the future will be afforded a visa here  in Australia and so it can be neither a deterrent nor incentive.

We need to act in relation to the 30,000 who are here in a way think which is simply fair  for those people, but in our own national interest and Temporary Protection Visas do not  do that. So for us, the fundamental principle is a pathway to citizenship and we will be  judging this legislation against that principle. In relation to Temporary Protection Visas,  obviously it does not provide that pathway. In relation to the Temporary Safe Haven  Enterprise Visas, from the Minister's press conference today, it would appear that a  pathway to citizenship is being provided. Now, if that is the case of itself it is a good  thing, but this represents a humiliating back down on the part of this Minister at the  behest of Clive Palmer. We do acknowledge the needs of regional Australia and we will  be having a good look at this legislation in terms of how it can contribute to that.

The legislation also deals with Australia's refugee assessment process. The principle  here is that we need as a country to have a tight, a fair and an efficient assessment  process which is consistent with our international obligations, we will be having a good  look at this legislation to see how it meets that principle.

Finally the legislation deals with aspects of turn backs, this is a complex legal area. We  will be seeking independent expert legal advice about what this legislation means in  relation to this and we are seeking a briefing from the Government about exactly what  they are trying to do with this legislation in this area. Finally, in the coming days both  myself and Bill Shorten will be meeting representative s of Australia’s refugee  settlement sector to further discuss this issue. Are there any questions?

REPORTER: Has Clive Palmer been played?

MARLES: We will have a good look at the detail of this legislation. But let's be clear  about Scott Morrison - Scott Morrison seeks to present himself as the tough man of  Australia's borders, but what we are seeing in this Minister is a man who absolutely  knows how to backflip. Now, Labor took Australia off the table on 19 July last year and  in the last month we have seen Scott Morrison put Australia back on the table for many  people who arrived in Australia after that date.  At the behest of Clive Palmer it would  appear that Scott Morrison has opened up a pathway to citizenship for those who are in  Australia, just two weeks after he made it plain that there would be no permanency for  any person who came to this country by boat. This is a Minister who is in the process of  humiliating back downs, day after day and who absolutely knows how to backflip, it  would appear that Clive Palmer has worked out how to make him do it.

REPORTER: What do you make of the plan to render babies born to asylum seeker  parents in Australia stateless?

MARLES: Look, we will have a good look at the legal implications of this legislation.  You will appreciate that we have just been given this in the last hour or so. But that is an

issue which raises a whole series of questions and we want to have a good look at that.  So that we can appropriately determine Labor's position in relation to it.

REPORTER: Just on that, that would clearly be a change in the legislation that would  have very strong retrospective effect. Does Labor support retrospective changes to  legislation?

MARLES: As a matter of principle, we've never supported retrospectivity in legislation  as a matter of principle. It is obviously something that one seeks to avoid in a legislative  way, but we're going to have a good look at the detail of this to see how it impacts in  relation to that question.

REPORTER: Just on the issues of the turn backs itself, the changes to the Maritime  Powers Act quite expressly would restrict the rights of natural just, they would also  expressly allow transfers and interceptions to occur at sea and then to allow people to  be sent to a third country. Would you support those kind of changes and if they are, you  are then supporting the Government's own turn back policy?

MARLES: Again, this is a complex legal area, it's why as I have said we will be seeking  independent expert legal advice about all the questions that you have just put there and  they are very good questions in terms of what this legislation seeks to do. But we will  also will be seeking a briefing from the Government about exactly what it is that they are  trying to achieve with this legislation in relation to turn backs.

REPORTER: Just to illustrate a very clear example of that, if for instance the same  events were to occur with the Ocean protector that we saw in July this year, would you  facilitate them being turned back either to Sri Lanka or perhaps the sent to Nauru or  Manus?

MARLES: Well, perhaps the answer that - we will get legal advice in relation to exactly  what this legislation seeks to do about turn backs. But our issue in terms of turn backs  are these, firstly, turn backs have been occurring under a veil of secrecy, so it is very  difficult to have an understanding of exactly what is happens on the high seas. We have  always maintained a concern in relation to turn backs about safety at sea and we have  not heard answers from the Government in respect of that. We have always maintained  a concern in relation to turn backs about the effect that it has, particularly on our  relationship with Indonesia, it's just plain commonsense that if we are going to have a  lasting resolution to this issue, that we need to be working hand in glove with our  nearest neighbour, a place from which the vast majority of boats have come, so that we  don't have an answer which is just a resolution over last month and this but in relation to  this year and next - and over the next decade. They are our concerns in relation to turn  backs, I have also made it clear that we have an open mind in relation to any policy  which saves lives at sea and we retain that open minds.

REPORTER: Have you had any discussions with cross benches on permanent  residency?



MARLES: We have had some discussions with cross benches. We have not had a  discussion with Clive Palmer, we have sought to do that but that's not been able to be  achieved. But we have made our position very clear that we are opposed to Temporary  Protection Visas because they put people in a state of permanent limbo and what needs  to be the fundamental proposition, not only in terms of having a compassionate attitude  to those who are already here but in terms of our own national interest and for that  matter our own national budget, so that we have people in the community as quickly as  possible contributing in a totally and full way just as every Australian citizen would.  Thank you.



ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: LIDIJA IVANOVSKI 0425 071 563

