

THE HON TANYA PLIBERSEK MP  DEPUTY LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND  INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT

MEMBER FOR SYDNEY





E&OE TRANSCRIPT   DOORSTOP INTERVIEW  SYDNEY  SATURDAY, 22 NOVEMBER 2014

Subject/s: ABC cuts, Ebola.

TANYA PLIBERSEK, DEPUTY OPPOSITION LEADER: We’re here in Town Hall  Square where in the next hour or so we’ll see a crowd gather to show its support for  our national broadcaster, the ABC. The ABC and SBS provide a valuable service to  Australians and they have for many years. Just as we’ve grown as a nation, so we’ve  seen the ABC grow, from its early days with just a few programs and the unusual  spectacle of Australian stories told in an Australian voice for the first time on our TV  screens and on our radio bulletins, to now a very sophisticated media organisation  that can compare well with the best in the world. Before the election Tony Abbott  said as clear as day, no cuts to the ABC, no cuts to SBS. He didn’t say it once, he  said it many times and Australians are shocked and horrified to think that this is  another broken promise from the Abbott Government. Before the election Tony  Abbott said “No cuts to health, no cuts to education, no change to the GST, no  change to pensions, and no cuts to the ABC or SBS”, now every one of those  promises has been broken. There is no promise that he’s made left to be broken.  Australians want to defend the ABC and SBS because they value the ABC and SBS.  Particularly at times of crisis when there are bushfires, when there are floods, when  there are natural disasters they turn to the ABC for the information that keeps them  safe. And when they’re overseas, if they wish for information from Australia, they  tune in wherever they can to stories from home. Australians want to hear Australian  stories told in Australian voices and they want a television industry here in Australia  that tells those stories with Australian actors and Australian story lines. Stories like  Redfern Now, and back in the day Sweet and Sour, so many programs that have  reflected the way Australia has changed over the years. Any questions?

JOURNALIST: Talking of these cuts, the Government explains them away as not  cuts but as efficiency dividends, do you buy that?

PLIBERSEK: Well I think everybody knows a lie when they’re being told a lie.  Before the election Tony Abbott said “no cuts to the ABC” and now we’ve seen, if  you include the Australian network and the cuts in the previous budget, more than  half a billion dollars cut from the ABC and SBS, now I don’t know how anyone can  think they can get away with cutting half a billion dollars and then saying nothing  to see here, no cuts here. A lie is a lie is a lie.

JOURNALIST: Do you think we’re going to see an impact on content?

PLIBERSEK: Well of course we’ll see an impact on content, I mean isn’t it  extraordinary that you’ve got Christopher Pyne launching a petition in Adelaide  because he knows that programming will be cut and he knows that jobs will go in  Adelaide. And isn’t it extraordinary that you’ve got National Party members saying  don’t touch programming in the bush. I mean these are the people who have  supported these cuts and then they want their own patch of turf protected. If you  cut half a billion dollars from the ABC and SBS, you can’t protect broadcasting, you  can’t protect programming, you can’t protect Australian content. We will see all of  these things negatively affected, jobs will go, 400 to 500 jobs are predicted to go,  you can’t keep making fine quality TV and radio when you’re cutting hundreds of  staff and half a billion dollars.

JOURNALIST: Do you think a rally like this will make any difference, isn’t it too late  now?

PLIBERSEK: Well no, I think rallies like this are absolutely vital because the fact  that Christopher Pyne and National Party members are out there saying to the  Government ‘don’t cut my patch, hands off my ABC’ shows that they know  Australians care for the ABC and care for SBS. In fact, the very fact that Tony Abbott  made this promise before the election shows that he knows Australians want the  ABC and SBS protected. The fact that he made the promise that he broke shows  that he knows that people care. So I think rallies like this are absolutely vital and I  think people should be contacting their Liberal Party and National Party MPs and  Senators and saying hands off my ABC.

JOURNALIST: How seriously should we take the comments from the United Nations  today about discrimination against refugees that have Ebola?

PLIBERSEK: Well isn’t it extraordinary to see our Foreign Minister at a Security  Council meeting lecturing the world on Ebola when Australia has been so slow to  act, dragged kicking and screaming to doing anything. It is an extraordinary scenario  to have Australia lecturing countries that have done so much more than we have in  terms of providing medical assistance and humanitarian support, and extraordinary  to have Australia lecturing the world about discriminating against countries where  Ebola is prevalent when the Foreign Minister and the Immigration Minister can’t even  get their story straight about whether we’ve got visa bans or we don’t.



JOURNALIST: Do you think there has been a contradiction there from what the  Minister said in terms of those visa applications from people coming from Ebola  affected countries?

PLIBERSEK: Well Scott Morrison and Julie Bishop have said two completely  different things. I don’t know whether this is part of their continuing turf war or  whether they just don’t know - the left hand doesn’t know what the right hand is  doing. But they’ve made two completely contradictory comments about whether we  are or aren’t processing visas from Ebola affected countries.

JOURNALIST: Doesn’t the Government have a responsibility though to take  precautions like this to protect their citizens?

PLIBERSEK: The first and most important responsibility of any government is to  protect its citizens. What we’ve said all along is the best way to protect Australians is  to fight Ebola in West Africa, at the source of where the virus is spreading. We know  now that close to five and a half thousand people have died from Ebola. We’ve been  told by the World Health Organisation, the Centres for Disease Control, the United  Nations, the Security Council in the past, our own AMA, our own Public Health  Association, the International Crisis Group, that the best way to fight Ebola is at the  source, in the countries where most of the infections are occurring, and the best  thing that Australia can do is help the international effort to contain the spread of  the virus. We’ve got Julie Bishop saying that at the Security Council, but not doing it  here at home. I think this is an example where deeds matter more than words and  our deeds so far have been inadequate.

ENDS

