Minister for Immigration and Border Protection

Scott Morrison

Nauru, burqa

Friday, 03 October 2014

Press conference, Canberra

Minister Morrison: Serious allegations have been made regarding sexual  misconduct and abuse at Nauru and such allegations should never be taken lightly,  should never be made lightly. On receipt of those allegations and in addition to  seeking further information, those matters were referred to my department for  assessment and advice on what further action should be taken.

In addition to that and in parallel, I have been provided with reports indicating that  staff of service providers at the Nauru centre have been allegedly engaged in a  broader campaign with external advocates to seek to cast doubt on the  Government's border protection policies more generally and that also cast some  doubt on the integrity of previous allegations.

I'm drawing no conclusions about any of these matters but it is very important that  we get these matters resolved. The matters that have been brought to my attention  are concerning, certainly the allegations of sexual misconduct are abhorrent and I  would be horrified to think that things of that nature have taken place. I'm also very  disturbed at the suggestion in the reports that have been provided to me that there  has been misuse, allegedly, and compromising of official reports and records for the  purposes of these things being sought out as part of further information campaigns.

The orchestration of protest activity and the facilitation of that protest activity on  Nauru, including the tactical use of children in those protests to frustrate the ability of  those who work at the centre to deal effectively and safely with those issues, their  coaching and encouragement of self-harm for people to be evacuated off the island  and fabrication of allegations as part of a campaign to seek to undermine operations  and support for the offshore processing policy of the government.

We need to get to the bottom of these things both about the serious allegations that  have been made about sexual misconduct, as well about the reports we're receiving  about those who are employed by contractors that are paid for by Australian  taxpayers about whether they're conducting themselves also professionally.

If people want to be political activists, that's their choice, but they don't get to do it on  the taxpayer's dollar and working in a sensitive place like Nauru.

Allegations of the abuse and misconduct are serious and they need to be addressed  and action taken wherever necessary and that will be the Government's response  working together with the Government of Nauru.

Equally, the Government must have confidence that service providers act with  professionalism in accordance with their contractual obligations. They are employed

to do a job not to be political activists. Making false claims and worse allegedly  coaching self-harm and using children in protests is also completely unacceptable,  whatever their political views or whatever their agendas.

Today I announce that the acting secretary of the Department of Immigration and  Border Protection has commissioned Mr Phillip Moss to conduct an independent  investigation into all of these matters. Mr Moss is formerly, as you'd know, the  Integrity Commissioner and former head of Australian Commission for Law  Enforcement Integrity.

He has served the Australian Government's law enforcement and integrity  communities with distinction since July 2007 when he was appointed Integrity  Commissioner. Mr Moss will be asked to assess the accuracy of the allegations and  determine exactly what the facts are in all of these cases. Ensure that those facts are  available to any authorities for any action that will take place as a result and provide  the department with recommendations to strengthen relevant arrangements relating  to the provision of services at the centre and the conduct of service providers and  staff at Nauru.

The review will look closely at the actions of all entities contracted by the Australian  Government to provide services at the centre, allegations of criminal conduct are  committed under Nauruan law will by referred to relevant Nauruan authorities to  investigate and prosecute as appropriate. In addition, I can confirm a series of  matters in this report regarding possible breaches of the Crimes Act relating to use of  official information have been referred to the Australian Federal Police.

I can also advise that my department has had to invoke provisions under the service  provider contract to require the removal of 10 staff from Save the Children Australia  from Nauru.

I should stress these removals do not relate to any suspected misconduct regarding  sexual abuse or misconduct.

Yesterday I spoke to my Nauruan counterpart, the Minister for Justice, David  Adeang, on this matter and he's indicated his strong support for this review.  Consistent with the memorandum of understanding between Australia and Nauru,  the security provider and the management of the centre including the care and  welfare of persons residing in the centre remains the responsibility of the sovereign  Government of Nauru and the Australian Government provides support to the  Nauruan Government in this role.

That is why it is important that Mr Moss will work closely with Nauruan authorities on  this review and share his findings in their entirety with them together with any other  information that he may (inaudible) in the review that would assist the Nauruan  Government in any of their responsibilities. Mr Moss has been asked to deliver an  interim report in the next 7 weeks with a final report by the end of the year. Happy to  take questions.

Journalist: Minister Morrison, when were the Save the Children staff removed from  Nauru and do think there will be changes to these sorts of contracts you have for  service providers?

Minister Morrison: Firstly, the request was made by my department for those 10  persons to be removed yesterday. In relation to any ongoing matters regarding  contractual arrangements, I state again, I'm not drawing any conclusions at this  stage. A whole range of allegations have been put up here and I think that's  important we have someone like Mr Moss go through all of that, review all of the  records that are there, look into the allegations that are made and there are various  other reports that have been put together and give the Government a clear picture  about what the situation is here and the Government will, in the course of that  process, make any further decisions they have to make an contractual  arrangements.

Journalist: Is there a suspicion that at least some of the allegations of child abuse  may have been fabricated? Is that part of the investigation or are they two separate  investigations?

Minister Morrison: It is because Mr Moss will be looking at all of these things, both  the allegations of sexual abuse and misconduct and to what extent such allegations  may have been compromised in their making as part of a broader campaign. That is  what Mr Moss is being asked to look at. Are those allegations true? If they are,  there's obviously a course of action that needs to be taken and I would think most  importantly referral to Nauruan authorities for potential criminal behaviour. Equally if  these are found to be part of a fabricated campaign then that's very serious as well.

Journalist: If there are findings, is it just Nauruan law you're looking at or potential  breaks of agreements done under Australian law?

Minister Morrison: All of these things are open for Mr Moss to look at and as I said  there have already been matters referred to the Federal Police regarding the Crimes  Act and use of information.

Journalist: Is Save the Children the only service provider that is under a cloud in  terms of these allegations that abuse claims have been fabricated and self-harm is  been coached with asylum seekers?

Minister Morrison: I'm not aware of any allegations against any other service  provider in that respect but I stress again, that those individuals who have been  asked to be removed from Nauru, there is no suggestion that they've been engaged  in any form of sexual misconduct, abuse or inappropriate behaviour. They are  related to the other matters I've referred to.

Journalist: Is it possible to say how long those people have been at Nauru?

Minister Morrison: I don't have that information in front of me. Some people have  already left who are also subject to some of these reports. Others that allegedly have  been involved in some of the other incidents, they have also left but the substance of  those allegations and their veracity is a matter that Mr Moss will be able to  interrogate.

Journalist: How did the allegations come to light and what does this say about the  Government's future relationship with NGOs?

Minister Morrison: I missed the first part of the question.

Journalist: How did the allegations about the tactical use for example of children  first come to light to you and what does this say about the Government's future  relationship with NGOs and specifically Save the Children?

Minister Morrison: Again, I'll leave it for Mr Moss to inform what has actually taken  place before I arrive at any judgments on any of these things but the information that  we receive about the running of that centre comes from a variety of sources.  Obviously we're heavily engaged in the running of those places and we have access  to a large amount of information and when these reports are provided to me there is  a very strict process for how they're compiled and they have done that in accordance  with that process so I think what those reports simply say to me is that this is  something that needs to be further examined and I need to be in a position to know  what we're looking at here. I'm troubled by those reports as I was troubled by the  issues that were raised by Senators here and others and I would be appalled to think  if that behaviour was occurring in Nauru as I know Justice Minister David Adeang  would equally be appalled. I think it's important that people may have difference of  views about the Government's border protection policies and what concerns me is  that I think the public don't want to be played for mugs with allegations being used as  some sort of political tactic in all of this. Issues of sexual misconduct have to be  taken very seriously and it's incumbent on those making allegations as well as those  looking at these allegations to do so in good faith and with a view of protecting the  innocent.

Journalist: Your relationship with NGOs and specifically Save the Children, is this  undermined?

Minister Morrison: That's a separate issue and it is not whether someone's an NGO  or not, this is about we have a contract with a service provider and the issue is are  they engaging in the performance of their duties consistent with that contract. It  wouldn't matter for it was a commercial operator, NGO or anyone else. The question  is they're paid to do a particular job not to engage in personal agendas.

Journalist: What's the role of the Nauruan police with these instances? Are they  involved in talking -

Minister Morrison: This is a matter that will be reviewed by Mr Moss and he will  share any information he is able to obtain with Nauruan authorities, particularly  where it may involve any breach of Nauruan law. The Nauruan police are the ones  who are responsible for investigating and bringing forward any possible arrest and  then their justice authority is pursuing any prosecution so that's where the Nauruan  authorities step in. It's not unlike the situation we recently went through in Papua  New Guinea where we had Mr Cornall conduct a review and that information was  shared with Papua New Guinean authorities and as you know two people have been  charged there. The justice and policing issue for breaches of Nauruan law are  obviously dealt with by Nauruan's. To the extent that there are breaches of  Australian law, particularly in relation to section 70 of the Crimes Act and use of  information well that's a matter for the AFP but Mr Moss will sit in the middle of this  process and share his information with all relevant authorities.

Journalist: Has there been any arrests yet by the Nauruan police over any  instances that may have happened in the last year?

Minister Morrison: Not to my knowledge. In relation to the matters that have been  raised in the course of the past week, no, there have been no arrests to my  knowledge on those matters.

Journalist: This is yet another inquiry into offshore detention centres since you've  been the Minister, which is only just over a year, doesn't it show that these detention  centres are untenable?

Minister Morrison: No, it doesn't, Latika, at all. I think that's a ridiculous suggestion.  What this shows is the Government will always deal with these matters decisively  and thoroughly with a commitment to finding out what the reality of the situation is.  I'm not going to put up with misconduct in centres whether they're onshore or  working with the Nauruan or Papua New Guinean Governments. I'm not going to put  up with it there either. This is a responsible way to deal with issues that arise in  these centres. Issues arise in many areas of public policy every day. It's incumbent  on the Government to deal with those matters responsibly and that's what we're  doing.

Journalist: Minister, the 10 people who have been removed from the island, what  role did they have at the detention centre?

Minister Morrison: I'm not going to go into that today. They've been asked to be  removed and there's an inquiry that will take place and I'll wait for the outcomes of  that. I don't want to get in the situation of providing further details about those  individuals. There are privacy issues there and I'll leave that rest there.

Journalist: Minister, has anyone volunteered to go to Cambodia yet?

Minister Morrison: We are not even at the stage where such invitations are being  issued. There's still lot of work to do on the ground which I indicated when I was in  Cambodia. There will be - the program in Cambodia will start off small and will grow  over time. This has always been the nature of this arrangement. I'm pleased that we  are able to conclude that arrangement. We're putting the work in on the ground with  potential service providers and working with them to get the arrangements in place  which would enable people to hopefully be able to start going there late this year,  early next year. We're not rushing this. This arrangement is about providing  permanent resettlement as part of a new model which we think ads to the global  resettlement task in a genuinely regional way.

Journalist: What did you make of the decision by the presiding officers yesterday to  have people wearing facial coverings sit in the chamber in the enclosed galleries  where the schoolchildren usually sit?

Minister Morrison: Lyndal, the Government has really serious issues to deal with  today and frankly that's not one of them.

Journalist: You've worked hard, though, with Muslim leaders. Jamal Rifi is one of  those. Did you have any contact with him overnight? This is an extraordinary shock  to many of the Islamic groups out there.

Minister Morrison: Jamal and I are good mates. We're going to the Grand Final on  Sunday together and I'll have to be a Bulldog for a day. Apologies to my Sharks  colleagues for that one day, I'm pleased to go with my mate Jamal. I'll also be at  Lakemba tomorrow for some important religious activities that are happening there  tomorrow. Look, engagement with this community in particular is not something  that's just begun, it's always been there. Members of parliament from all sides of this  place have deep and engaged relationships with that community and I think what we  need to continue to focus on is the positive elements of this and what unites us and  not get distracted by things that frankly are just distractions.

Journalist: Is that what the burqa ban debate has been?

Minister Morrison: I'll leave my comments at that.

Journalist: Just back to Nauru, earlier this week there were a series of allegations  about sexual exploitation that weren't just concerning children, women were claiming  that guards were making them strip in order to get access to the shower - are you  suggesting that those claims have been fabricated too?

Minister Morrison: I said at the outset of the press conference that there was a  series of allegations that had been made they include those allegations. They're the  ones that have been brought to my attention over the course of the last week or so.  I'm not drawing any conclusions on this, only to say that I have (a) a set of  allegations of sexual misconduct, and (b) a set of reports which indicate with a high  degree of probability that there has been a campaign that involves the making of  allegations in order to seek to undermine public confidence in the government's  offshore processing policy. Now it's important that we understand what the reality is  of this. If there is any substance to any of those allegations, I can assure you that the  government of Nauru and the government of Australia will act decisively.

But equally, if people who are engaged to work in these centres have been engaged  in making false allegations, fabricating information in official reports, using children  tactically in protest, encouraging self-harm, then I'm sure you'll agree that equally is  quite abhorrent.

Thanks for your time.



