

THE HON RICHARD MARLES MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND  BORDER PROTECTION  MEMBER FOR CORIO



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW  TALKING CANBERRA 1206 2CC  WEDNESDAY, 22 OCTOBER 2014

SUBJECT/ S:  Gough W hitlam; Local asylum seeker prayer sit-in

MARK PARTON: Richard Marles is the Opposition’s immigration spokesperson  and he’s on the line right now, Richard why was yesterday such a special day in  Federal Parliament?

RICHARD MARLES, SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND  BORDER PROTECTION: I think special is a good word Mark, it was sad, it was  nostalgic, in some respects it’s appropriate to think of it and enjoy a sense as  well for the life of Gough Whitlam but this was a man who really came about at a  point in Australia’s political life where I think our democracy was stale, at the end  of a twenty three year reign of conservative parties, and he represented  modernity and he brought a whole lot of elements to Australian life which were  about a progressive country, its place in the world, recognition of China, opening  up our universities, repairing the relationship between non-indigenous and  indigenous Australians, the list goes on, but he was the emblem of modernity  and he really I think was the start of modern Australia in the second half of the  twentieth century, and to mark that moment yesterday was very special.

PARTON: I think it’s also really interesting to see that even many on the hard  right are of the belief that Australia is actually today a better country because of  the time that Gough Whitlam spent in The Lodge.

MARLES: I think that’s right, and so many of the ideas that have their genesis  in the period of 72’ through 75’ now are part of the way in which we organise  our society and the way in which we govern Australia, the health system, the  NDIS was referred to a lot yesterday as having its origins in the Woodhouse  Report that was commissioned by the Whitlam Government, so I think that’s  right. You also got a real sense yesterday that Gough Whitlam was a person who  inspired, inspired people actually on both sides of politics be it for or against him,  but so many people articulated that their reason for being involved in politics  today began with their sense of Gough Whitlam and you know I think that also  reinforces this idea that in many ways modern Australia, the second half of the  20th century, an open economy, that Australia really had its roots I think in the  Whitlam Government and then what came after it both in terms of Conservative  and Labor governments, so incredibly significant moment.  I also wanted to point  out to you Mark that of course Gough being elected in 1972 was an important  moment, but his crowning achievement was in 1973 when he became the  number one ticket holder of the Geelong Football Club and there is a photo in  today’s Geelong Advertiser of him wearing a Geelong jumper standing next to  the then coach Polly Farmer and he is remembered very fondly in Geelong.

PARTON: Well speaking of things that go on in Geelong, you haven’t had any  more prayer sit-ins in your electorate office there have you Richard because that  was all a bit extraordinary.

MARLES: Well I’m amazed that that news has made it to our nation’s capital,  but yes I did have a prayer sit-in and indeed this group has been conducting sit-ins around the country at various offices of MPs, look it was all very civilised. We  made it clear to those who were sitting in that if they needed to use the toilet or  get them a coffee we were very happy to do all of that, at the end of the day I  think this group wanted to make sure that their point was made and so  eventually the police were called when it was time to go home but it was a pretty  civilised protest.

PARTON: These were religious extremists’ ladies and gentleman from the  Salvation Army.

MARLES: That’s your words not mine.

PARTON: From the Uniting Church, look it’s interesting what you say because  based on everything I’ve heard about this incident, yes your office was extremely  accommodating in saying okay if you want to come in and make your point  heard, but that it really gone down to at 7 o’clock at night everyone wants to go  home and you have to leave.

MARLES: Well you do and I think, you know, look this isn’t the tactic I’d employ  to make my point but this was the tactic that they were seeking to employ which  was ultimately have themselves arrested. But what you discover when you get to  the pointy end of that process is that there’s confrontation, you have to revoke  people’s authority to be in that room unless you’re going to move things on and  the police obviously have a lot of work to do in their town of Geelong as they do  around the country and I think that they were cranky that they had to come to  this particular incident, but that’s how it is, we live in a democracy and people  are entitled to make their point and that’s how they’ve made it.

PARTON: And I guess they’re disappointed with the Labor position on asylum  seeker policy as dare I say it in this time of great respect, I’m sure Gough would  be.

MARLES: I don’t know what Gough’s view would be on that. Look I think one  thing that Gough did was think clearly about the issues that presented  themselves to him and if were to think clearly about this issue, we do have this  simple fact, we have stopped seeing deaths at sea and offshore processing has  played a critical part of that and it would be an enormous mistake in my view an  enormous moral mistake to allow that flow of boats to sail again with the  complete certainty that we would all have, knowing now what we now know,  that that would lead to hundreds of people dying, there’s a morality that needs  to be born in mind in making sure that never happens again.

PARTON: Richard thanks for your time this morning.

MARLES: Great to talk to you Mark.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: LIDIJA IVANOVSKI  0427 051 563

