Scott Morrison MP

Minister for Immigration and Border Protection

Migration and Maritime Powers Legislation Amendment (Resolving the Asylum  Legacy Caseload) Bill 2014, counter-terrorism, defence

Thursday, 04 December 2014

Interview with Kieran Gilbert, Sky News AM Agenda

Kieran Gilbert: How are the numbers looking in the Senate?

Minister Morrison: That is for the Senate to proclaim how  they intend to vote. I am  not going to verbal any of them. We will work that  issue through the course of the  day. The bill that is up is to restore  Temporary Protection Visas, powers for turn  backs at sea which have been so  successful - enforcing those powers and thirdly  resolving the legacy caseload  of 30,000 people. Now they are the three things we  took to the last election  and received a thumping mandate for. Those measures are  before the Senate.

Gilbert: In terms of the moves yesterday to increase the  humanitarian intake to  almost 19,000 by 2018/19, do you see that as the  humanitarian dividend of a  draconian policy?

Minister Morrison: No I have always seen the issue of the  intake as being separate  to the issue of stopping the boats. We have had great  success on stopping the  boats and the issue here is once you have been able to  stop the boats and clear the  legacy caseload of the 30,000 cases you can then  start addressing the question of  your overall humanitarian intake but you have  got to be able to pay for it. What I  announced yesterday would cost over $100  million and I have been able to find the  savings in my Department and portfolio  that will fund that. So you can't just put it up  to 20,000 and not pay for it.  That is how we have the budget mess we have now. So  what I have been able to  offer is what I have been able to afford and that is how this  government  operates.

Gilbert: And what is your sense from what you are hearing  from the other side, from  the crossbench, are they inclined to do what they say  essentially because the PUP  Senators said they were going to back the TPVs?

Minister Morrison: Everything that has been raised with us  by the crossbenchers  has been addressed in the amendments we have put forward,  particularly the  arrangement we outlined and agreed with the Palmer United  Party earlier this year.  All of our amendments deal with those issues but I  will allow other Senators and  other parties to outline what their position is  on all of this. I don't think it is for me to  say that. We have had very  constructive discussions particularly even till late last  night to make sure  that we had resolved all of those issues but ultimately it is for the  Senate to  determine these matters and really we are talking about an increase in

the  intake, work rights for those on bridging visas, getting 1500 people out of   detention including 460 children who under the Labor policy are to all go to  Nauru.

Gilbert: And the policy as you say you took to the  election, this is not one of those  areas where people saying you are breaking a  promise…

Minister Morrison: This is keeping a promise, this is doing  what we said we would  do.

Gilbert: If you say for example like with the higher  education reforms they hit the  fence in the Senate and that was a bit of a  surprise to many but this wasn't and isn't,  if you can't get this through it is  a messy finish to the year isn't it?

Minister Morrison: Well we will just continue to press on  with implementing our  commitments in this area which is what I have done in the  last year. The Senate  knocked me back twice on temporary protection visas with  Labor and the Greens  but I was still able to be in a position where I have not  provided a permanent visa to  anyone who has come on a people smugglers' boat.  So I think people know I will get  there. I think one of the reasons that  particularly Senator Xenophon has been so  supportive is he knows this is the  better way to do it of the alternatives that are  before the government to be  consistent with our policies.

Gilbert: I want to ask you a question about the whole  policy situation and you have  been vilified by many refugee advocates and  others, with this increase to the  humanitarian intake, you personally as a  father and a human being, do you get a  sense of satisfaction when you are able  to do that by the tough policy that has been  slammed from pillar to post by  refugee advocates and the left on the political  spectrum?

Minister Morrison: I have always been very committed to  what I have been doing  here not just this year but over the last five years. I  have advocated for a set of  policies that have stopped the deaths at sea, that  have ensured we have increased  the humanitarian programme for the Special  Humanitarian Programme from 500 to  5000 places, there are $2.5 billion in  budget savings and now if we are in a position  to clear the legacy caseload of  30,000 people Labor just left behind - 4000 of whom  they didn't even start  processing and that enables me to get to a position to raise the  intake and pay  for it; well that is something I think is worth voting for and that is why  I  believe so many crossbench Senators already have indicated their support.

Gilbert: You have visited the home of the Elbaf family in  Sydney. Four of their sons  essentially tricked their father to take them to the  airport. They flew to Thailand and  then went to Syria. Can you talk us through  the meeting that you had with that family  urging them obviously to make an  appeal for their sons to come home.

Minister Morrison: Well this could be any street by the way  - this is a typical  suburban Sydney street. When I walked in there the dad who  used to be a taxi  driver was watching the cricket. We talked through the issue.  They were obviously  devastated and what it showed to me was this was not some  sort of hyper  radicalised family, they hate ISIL and the death cult as much as  every other  Australian and they have just had four sons lost to that death  cult. They can barely

get through a couple of sentences without that reality  keep smacking them in the  face. So my appeal to them was to work with us to  help to ensure other parents can  know when their sons may be similarly being  indoctrinated and then we can act. The  sad case for this family is we found out  too late to prevent it. I know of many other  cases where we have prevented it  and we have ensured that those families are not  suffering as they are. The  point that these families are hyper radicalised and that  these young blokes  were always that way, in this case that wasn't the case.

Gilbert: Is that a shock to the agencies involve, that  these young men were  radicalised so quickly?

Minister Morrison: I wouldn't say a shock because our  agencies are very aware of  just how insidious these organisations are who prey  on young men like this. What it  demonstrates is that is what they will do. It  is not just those running around waving  black flags and carrying on like  absolute idiots, it is young men who can become  susceptible to this in that  community and we need to help them to ward it off. We  need to work with the  parents, the brothers, the sisters, the cousins, the aunties and  everyone. This  is something that Jamal Rifi and I have been working on for some  time. 1800 123  400 - if you think your kids are being indoctrinated by this death cult  call  us.

Gilbert: Ok let's move on I just want to finish on a couple  of other issues not related  to your portfolio but the Defence Minister his  office has seen two staff members sent  this morning. They had to hand in their  passes, hand back their phones and told to  leave, they couldn't even clear  their desks, after a couple of leaks regarding travel  expenses for the Defence  Minister. That office is just a shambles at the moment.

Minister Morrison: I think David Johnston is doing his job  as Defence Minister in  supporting with what we are doing in Iraq but that is  where his focus should be and  these other matters I will leave to the Defence  Minister to deal with and others who  are directly responsible for this sort of  thing…

Gilbert: Someone is trying to damage him though, leaking  the amount of money he  spent on some dinners.

Minister Morrison: All of this commentary I can only leave  to you and others  because I have no direct knowledge of any of these matters.  What I do know is this,  as sharing a seat on the National Security Committee  with David Johnston the  Minister, we are focused on what our troops are doing  and our airmen and women  are doing over in Iraq and that is where his focus has  been in that planning and  preparations and support and you know what, that is  where I think those troops and  airmen and women would like his focus to be and  I am sure that's where their  families would like that focus to be.

Gilbert: Well it hasn't been so much recently because a  couple of gaffes and so on.  There is a lot of talk about a possible reshuffle  in coming months.

Minister Morrison: Those decisions aren't made by the  Minister for Immigration  and Border Protection Kieran. I think it is fairly  pointless and you wouldn't expect me

to engage in that sort of speculation. I  will leave that to the professional speculators  to engage in all that sort of  stuff.

Gilbert: But your name always comes up when it comes to Defence  and a possible  replacement.

Minister Morrison: That really has nothing to do with me.  What I am focused on is  what we were discussing before. That is we said we  would stop the boats and I think  the results there are plain for everyone to  see. Now I am trying to resolve the legacy  caseload of 30,000 people. That is  the job I am doing, I get great satisfaction from  getting the results I said I  would get.

Gilbert:  Lastly and  finally the front page of the Australian Financial Review today  apparently Julie  Bishop, quote unquote, according to a Ministerial source went  bananas at the  Prime Minister after a suggestion in the Herald Sun that Andrew  Robb was going  to chaperone her to the UN climate talks in Peru.

Minister Morrison: No disrespect to the Australian  Financial Review but I haven't  read that this morning and it just sounds like a  whole lot of other nonsense that  usually gets carried on with and speculation  in the last week of Parliament. What is  actually happening today in Parliament  is not any of that nonsense. There is a very  serious bill before the Senate  today. It is a bill that we took to the last election. It is a  bill where there  have been six months of very solid discussions and I think very  positive  discussions. Labor and the Greens are not part of the solution on border   protection but the Coalition is.

Gilbert: Does it frustrate you though as a Minister who  most people say you know  you have been effective and got your area done but you  are being undermined by  mess elsewhere.

Minister Morrison: Kieran you are not Oprah and I am not on Oprah's couch so  they are not issues that I think are even worthy of discussion.

Gilbert: Ok I am certainly not Oprah. Thank you Minister I appreciate your time.



