

THE HON BILL SHORTEN MP  LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  MEMBER FOR MARIBYRNONG



E&OE TRANSCRIPT   DOORSTOP INTERVIEW  THURSDAY, 6 FEBURARY 2014  CARINDALE

SUBJECT/S: Griffith by-election; Trade Unions; Industrial relations; SPC,  Ford, Schapelle Corby

BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: It's great to be at Carindale  Shopping Centre with Labor's quality candidate for the Griffith by-election Terri  Butler. This is my sixth day of campaigning over the by-election and it’s clear to  me that on Saturday voters have got a stark choice. Do they vote for Terri Butler  who will stand up for the local community, who will not simply be a yes person to  Tony Abbott and Campbell Newman, or will they vote for a candidate who will  end up having to support tough cuts in the health system and not stand up for  their local community? It’s also really important in this by-election, as families feel  cost-of-living pressures, that they do actually participate and turn out. Australia’s  a great country and regardless of one's politics, we should never take our right to  vote for granted. So I strongly encourage every elector in the Griffith by-election  to make your voice count, even regardless of you vote for, but I would like you to  vote for Terri Butler because she’s a strong local candidate whose in touch with  the needs of ordinary Australians. She’ll stand up against health cuts. She won't  simply be a rubber stamp for Tony Abbott or Campbell Newman. Perhaps we will  get Terri to say a few words and we're happy to take questions.

TERRI BUTLER, LABOR CANDIDATE FOR GRIFFITH: Thanks everyone. It's  been so fantastic meeting and speaking with so many Griffith locals over the  course of this by-election campaign. I've had literally thousands of conversations  with people in the Griffith area since the by-election was called and I can tell you  they are concerned about the health care cuts of the Newman Government and  they're very concerned about what other cuts we might have to expect from the  Commission of Audit that’s now conveniently not going to be revealing its cuts

until after this by-election. People would like some clarity,  people would also like  someone who will genuinely stand up for them as a representative, not someone  who will defend Campbell Newman's health care cuts, not someone who will  repeat Tony Abbott's lines, but someone will genuinely speak out about the  issues that matter. I’ll never be a rubber stamp for Tony Abbott or for Campbell  Newman, I’ll also always be a strong voice. I've got a positive plan for our future  and I ask people for your support on Saturday. Thanks very much.

JOURNALIST: [Inaudible]

BUTLER: Look, people - we know that this is a by-election. By-elections  traditionally do have less of a turnout than general people elections, but I've got  to say people are pretty engaged. There’s a lot of mood out there for people vote  to send a real voice to Canberra. They don't want to see yet another Liberal  National Party politician, so I think that people are really engaged and have been  quite interested that opportunity to send that message to Canberra.

JOURNALIST: [Inaudible]

SHORTEN: What's important in modern workplace relations is the search for  cooperation, the creation of high value, well remunerated, profitable workplaces. I  have got no doubt that Tony Abbott's view of workplace relations is blame the  worker. We have seen the disgraceful performance over recent days when  you've got Coalition MPs bullying food preserving workers at SPC, blaming them  for the Government not providing vital one-off assistance which would mean that  Australia, which should be the food bowl to Asia, keeps value-adding jobs in  Australia. I have spent my adult life trying to create win-win outcomes for  employers and employees. Australia works best when we work together. So why  on earth Tony Abbott, you know, he’s given up on car production workers, he’s  given up on food processing workers. You know, there’s not a group of workers  whose jobs Tony Abbott will fight for, and when we talk about modern industrial  relations, Australia’s got two roads. We can go the low road; cut conditions, cut  penalty rates, cut job security, or we can go the high road and we actually value-add, we have high-skilled jobs where we make things that the rest of the world  wants to buy.

JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten, your response to Ford expected to announce job  losses?

SHORTEN: Listen I, like many Australians, have heard the dreadful news leaking  out there may be further and more sudden job cuts at Ford. I just say to Tony  Abbott: When will you start fighting for people’s jobs rather than the jobs of LNP  politicians? Manufacturing is a proposition which we can do in Australia. It seems  to me that the Abbott Government has thrown up its arms and given up on  fighting for Aussie jobs. I know that we can't keep every job here, you know, I live  in the real world, but what I don't accept is the Government of Australia saying

we’re not even going to try fighting for Australian jobs and Australian  manufacturing. Australians are the smartest people, we can compete with the  rest of the world, we just need to have governments who are fighting for Aussie  jobs, not just giving up and walking away.

JOURNALIST: Do you agree with the views of Mr Howes though in regards to  the compact and regards to wage levels in Australia?

SHORTEN: I've been a consensus representative of working people and  employers for my whole adult life. I understand that we should be working  together. I think not in a month of Sundays is Tony Abbott capable of sitting down

with unions and employers and working out a win-win outcome. Tony Abbott has  never negotiated a wage rise or a productivity agreement for any business in  Australia, and so I don't think a leopard changes his spots. In terms of how  Australians are paid, most Australians earn ordinary wages and they earn every  cent they get. Cost of living is a real issue. The idea as families in Griffith are  trying to make ends meet, that somehow they're getting paid too much to me is  swallowing the Liberal line, and I think that Australians need to be supported and  respected for paying their taxes, for going for to work, earning their incomes, for  working co-operatively. That's the future. It's cooperation and the high road, not

penalty rate-cutting, Australian jobs selling out policies of the Abbott  Government.

JOURNALIST: You say that most Australians do get paid the [inaudible] wage,  are you then saying that Paul Howes is right that some sectors have had  unsustainable wage growth?

SHORTEN: No, what I believe is -

JOURNALIST: So just to clarify, sorry, no sector at all has had unsustainable  wage growth over the last five years including the mining sector which has had a  25 per cent jump, the public sector as a whole 17 per cent jump, is that in your  view [inaudible]?

SHORTEN: I do not subscribe to the theory that most Australians are overpaid.  Let me just assure families -

JOURNALIST: No I'm not asking you about most Australians, Mr Shorten, I'm  asking about these particular sectors.

SHORTEN: So you're asking about a couple of thousand offshore oil workers?  Who are you asking about?

JOURNALIST: [Inaudible]

SHORTEN: Public sector workers?



JOURNALIST: Yeah, 17 per cent, stick on public sectors. 17 per cent wage  growth in five years. Is that sustainable?

SHORTEN: Public sector workers have not had a 17 per cent growth in five  years. What we see is cuts to the public sector under Tony Abbott. When we talk  about public sector workers, I have in my mind's eye nurses, fire fighters, police,  people in Centrelink looking after those who are down on their luck. This country  needs to stop being divided by Tony Abbott, you know, only in the course of this  by-election we've had Abbott Government Minister Andrews come out and say  that pensioners welfare’s unsustainable. You know, what's that? That's our  grandparents, that's people on disabilities, that's sole mums. We’ve had the  Abbott Government come out and say that food preserving workers, working in  cannery lines are earning $50,000 a year, keeping Australia's toehold in value-adding in the food industry are overpaid, but the game here in Australia is to work  together. A consensus should be the order of the day. When the Abbott  Government keeps dividing Australia into goodies and baddies, that is not the  future. This Tony Abbott chap is Marty McFly, it’s Back to the Future, back to the  1980s, you know, where the good guys are some people who vote Liberal at the  top end of town, and the bad people are unions who disagree with him, the  science experts who disagree with him, the economists, the teachers, the public  servants. Australia does not have three years to waste on Tony Abbott's divide-and-conquer approach -

JOURNALIST: [Inaudible]

SHORTEN: Labor believes, well I'm talking about the Prime Minister of Australia.  This by-election is between Liberal and Labor. People want to know what Labor  stands for? We stand for bringing people together. We stand for the high road,  we stand for high skills, well remunerated jobs where people can pay the bills.  Tony Abbott says the answer to Australia's future is cut health care, cut our  schools. No country ever dumbed its way to greatness. The Liberal ideas  cupboard is bare. They ran in the last election on the basis they weren't Labor.  They have no idea about what to do with Australia and now they're just trying to  set up false arguments, they want to blame the unions, they want to blame the  cannery workers, they want to blame the car workers. You know, Ford workers  are wondering about whether or not they have a job tonight . What cold comfort  do they get from Tony Abbott who says that they’re overpaid? This country  cannot waste time on a sterile policy of blaming people, rather how do you give  kids the best start in life. Where are the apprenticeships, where are the jobs  coming from, that’s the important issues in 2014

JOURNALIST: [Inaudible]

SHORTEN: I tell you what, if you want to look at rug-pulling this week, Sharman  Stone. She is a member of the political party that form the Government. She has

belled the cat on the dishonesty of Joe Hockey and Tony Abbott. You know,  Tony Abbott and Joe Hockey launched an all-out assault. It is remarkable that  when you’ve got people battling for their jobs, when you’ve got farmers on the  land battling to get people to buy their fruit, they get attacked by their own  government? That is the rug-pulling issue of this week.

JOURNALIST: Have you spoken to Paul Howes since his speech and do you  work with him?

SHORTEN: Of course, and no, I haven't.

JOURNALIST: Do you agree with the argument that he made that the industrial  relations debate has become hyper-adversarial, a blood sport, if so, what are you  going to do about it?

SHORTEN: The best answer if you want to remove the hyper adversarial nature  of workplace relations, first of all, under Labor, strikes were down, real wages  growth was up, productivity was up. If you want a creative cooperative  workplace, you have a Labor Government. I do not think that anyone in their  wildest dreams thinks that Tony Abbott - he wants to have a Royal Commission  into unions, he doesn't want to work with people. I make it very clear right now I  would meet with Tony Abbott and I’d sit down and talk about co-operative  workplace relations, but what he’s go to stop doing is attacking ordinary people  on ordinary wages and conditions, undermining their job security, undermining  their penalty rates. This country works best when we work together. That's why  we need Terri Butler in Griffith because she gets that she won't be a rubber  stamp to Tony Abbott's extreme agenda of school cuts, health cuts. She will  stand up, she’s not a rubber stamp.

JOURNALIST: Terri, last night you said you were proud of the way Labor’s  handled the asylum seeker issue over the last few years. That works well in the  West End, but will it work in the outer suburbs of the electorate?

BUTLER: Last night I said I was proud of Labor's record on immigration, that  we’re an immigrant nation and that I for would always support immigration for  what its delivered to our nation.

JOURNALIST: It appears that some [inaudible] are willing to [inaudible] to what  Paul Howes said yesterday. Sam Dastyari yesterday said that perhaps on wages  he would consider where by penalty rates would be cut if the minimum wage was  lifted, is that something that you would be willing to entertain?

SHORTEN: First of all, we have an independent umpire in Australia who  establishes our wages and conditions. Secondly, when we have this debate  about penalty rates, quite often the people who advocate for penalty rates being  cut, never advocate for lifting the minimum wage. So what happens is we see a

debate about penalty rates which is skewed towards cutting low-paid workers  pay and conditions. People say we're too hard on Tony Abbott. I've never seen  Tony Abbott ever back an improvement of workers' conditions and pay. Never,  ever. Never seen him issue one press release in his whole parliamentary career  saying an increase in the minimum wage, you know, he’s never advocated or put  that position.



So the problem in Australia is this: If we want to have a productive workplace,  you do it by cooperation. I've got a track record of a thousand agreements. I’ve  lifted the wages of people, but in return seen companies lift their productivity. If  we want to get away from the adversarial mindset of the Abbott Government, the  best thing you can do is vote Labor in the Griffith by-election on Saturday.

JOURNALIST: [Inaudible]

SHORTEN: I haven't heard that. We’re open to constructive suggestions how we  assist our farmers. Drought’s a dreadful thing and it’s a real issue in parts of  Australia, but as we’re talking about farmers, how about Mr Abbott assist the  thousands of fruit growers in the Goldburn Valley by not doing them over. You  know, we’ve got this crazy debate where Joe Hockey and Tony Abbott boast  about not giving $25 million to a company on a one-off basis. I tell you what, the  Australian taxpayer will be paying more in Centrelink payments, more in the  relocation costs, there’s more economic harm caused by the Abbott Government  neglect of the fruit canning industry in the Goldburn Valley. You know, the  problem with Tony Abbott is they know the price of everything and the value of  nothing.

JOURNALIST: Should Schapelle Corby get a profit from telling her story?

SHORTEN: Listen, I think that Schapelle Corby - I would like to see her come  back to Australia. I don't know all the ins and outs of what she has done and  hasn't done, but what I do know is that she has spent a long time in an  Indonesian jail. Again, without taking sides about the merits of her case, I would  like to see that woman back in Australia as soon as possible and that's what  matters to me.

JOURNALIST: Do you think she should profit from her story?

SHORTEN: I think before we start getting into a debate about whether or not she  should profit about story, she’s been locked up in an Indonesian jail for a very  long time. If people think that’s somehow some clever strategy for her to get, you  know, a windfall gain now, I don't think anyone else would be about repeating  that. So I'm not about to start kicking her, I think the issue is, whatever has  happened in the merits of her case, I’d like to see her come home.

JOURNALIST: [Inaudible]



SHORTEN: There’s been thousands of jobs lost in the media, I don't think you  shouldn't get a pay rise. I think the issue of manufacturing isn't to do with wage  growth. I think the issue to do with manufacturing has been the high dollar. I think  the issue to do manufacturing is that we need new investment and productive  capacity. We can have a manufacturing sector in Australia. The whole of  northern Europe have first world wages and they make things. Our challenge is,  it’s not the wages, we’ve got to get to get away from this mindset that somehow  workers are the reason why we don't have manufacturing in Australia. We've had  a high dollar. What we now need is a skilled workforce. If we give away our jobs,  in Qantas, or in Holden or in Ford or in SPC or a dozen other industries, we will  end up paying 10 times as much for what they're making when they come back  to Australia.

JOURNALIST: Tony Abbott manufacturing said the key to increasing  manufacturing is through cheap energy, so, remove the carbon tax.

SHORTEN: Energy’s part of the mix, there’s no doubt about it, but when we talk  about SPC, you know, the issue is $25 million. Why is it that Tony Abbott can  give money to a chocolate factory in Hobart, but not a fruit factory in Shepparton.  The Liberal Party have never seen an issue to do with people that they don't turn  into politics.

Thanks, everyone. Have a lovely day.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: LEADERS OFFICE MEDIA UNIT 02 6277 4053



