

THE HON RICHARD MARLES MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND  BORDER PROTECTION  MEMBER FOR CORIO



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP INTERVIEW  CANBERRA  TUESDAY, 11 FEBRUARY 2014

SUBJECT/S: Toyota; Tony Abbott abandoning Australian jobs;  Temporary Protection Visas; Boats.

RICHARD MARLES: I am sad and angry about what has occurred yesterday  with the decision of Toyota to cease the making of cars in Australia by 2017.  Yesterday’s decision by Toyota represents the death of the Australian car  industry. I represent a car town, Geelong, which has had Ford in it since the  1920s, which has a number of car component companies MHG Glass being an  example which make windscreens for Toyota vehicles. The car industry has been  central to the economy of Geelong for most of the twentieth century, right  through to now. That we find ourselves in a circumstance today under the  Abbott Government’s watch, that we live in a country that will no longer make  cars is a deeply saddening thing for me, and for the community of Geelong.

We need to be totally clear, the highest tech manufacturing we do in this country  today is making automotive vehicles, with the announcement yesterday by  Toyota we are a dumber country - that is the significance of what occurred with  Toyota’s statement. Let’s also be clear about one fact - this occurred under the  Abbott Government’s watch. Having a car industry in a nation is a clear and  conscious decision of that nation’s government, if you look at all the countries  around the world which manufacture cars, they are all done with a deep  involvement by Government and, in fact if you look at the subsidy that existed  within Australia towards the making of cars it was comparatively light compared  to what you see in other countries around the world that make vehicles. But, the

reasons countries do that, is because it is at the heart of being an advanced,  modern economy.

It is at the heart of having modern technology within your economy. The Abbott  Government let all of that go. It was a conscious decision, a conscious decision  of Tony Abbott not to have a car industry in this country. When Joe Hockey  goaded Holden last year to leave this country, with the result and decision that  occurred, he signed the death warrant at that moment for Toyota. And in doing  that, he signed the death warrant for a whole lot of car component companies all  around Australia, many of which are in my electorate of Geelong. Workers at  those companies have every right to feel enormously angry with their federal  government - with their Prime Minister. He has let them down, he has made it  clear when there is an Australian job on the line he won’t answer a phone call,  he won’t go in to bat for it - he will participate in a political stunt. That is the  Prime Minister that we have in this country today.

Yesterday was an enormously sad day for this country, it was an enormously  significant moment in the economic history of Australia, it was a very sad  moment in our history. We now need to do everything we can to try and rebuild  manufacturing in this country. You need to know that Labor is utterly committed  to doing that, but I have enormous fears and enormous concerns about the  commitment of this Government going forward towards saving other  manufacturing firms in this country. And, I’ll make one final point, we sit here  today, those of us in my community in Geelong with Alcoa about to make a very  significant decision about its future and I want to know what Tony Abbott is  going to do for those workers because there are one thousand people at the  Point Henry smelter who are waiting to see whether they have a government  that is prepared to stand up for their jobs.

JOURNALIST: Toyota didn’t blame the Government, so why are you?

MARLES: Having a car industry in a country is a very, very clear decision of a  government, the idea that a government can simply say that cars are welcome to  be made here, if a car company wants to come here they can do it, but they are  doing it on their own is utterly and patently ridiculous. That is a proposition that  doesn’t stand up in any country in the world. Making cars is a public private  partnership and in this case the government partner has essentially put up their  hand and said ‘we’re not interested in doing it anymore’ that is what happened  last year, and the consequence of that is what happened yesterday.

JOURNALIST: Why wasn’t Labor able to save Ford in your electorate? What is  the difference?

MARLES: There is a huge difference, Labor was not out there seeking to try and  goad Ford offshore.

JOURNALIST: Ford still left.

MARLES: If I can answer the question, manufacturing is a difficult industry,  keeping cars going is a difficult thing to do, no one is pretending that it isn’t, but  when Ford was looking at its future what they had in the Labor Government is a  partner that was there to try and do everything it conceivably could to keep Ford  going, and that is actually the case with Mitsubishi. What we did not do was  goad Ford to leave, we did not do that. What you saw from Joe Hockey last year  was qualitatively different to any action that you saw when Labor was in power,  and I have absolutely no doubt that if Labor were in power today we would not  be seeing events play out as they have last year and yesterday in relation to the  end of the car industry. This was a conscious decision of the conservative Abbott  Government, a conscious decision of Labor is that we want to have  manufacturing in Australia, we want to have a car industry in Australia.

JOURNALIST: Isn’t it time to acknowledge there are some forms of  manufacturing that just aren’t viable in Australia?

MARLES: Well, I don’t acknowledge that manufacturing is not viable in  Australia, that is the first point. Manufacturing can have a great future in  Australia, but governments need to make a decision about whether they want to  have manufacturing. If you are going to have a fundamentalist, economic view  point such as is being put forward by this Government, then you will see the  single biggest haemorrhage of manufacturing in Australia’s history and  unfortunately that is what we are witnessing.

It is a conscious decision of government, I cannot stress this point enough, it is a  conscious decision of government whether they want to have a car industry and  indeed whether they want to have manufacturing and this Government is making  the decision it doesn’t want to have that, and as a result we are losing  technology and we are losing tens and tens of thousands of jobs.

JOURNALIST: What would you like to see the Prime Minister put on the table?

MARLES: That is a good question, I think it is very important that when the  Prime Minister meets with the Premier of Victoria today, that there is a

comprehensive transition package that is put in place by the Federal  Government. And, when I say that, it must include not just the impacts of those  people directly affected by Toyota, but all those people who are employed by car  component companies that supply to Toyota, because that is the impact of the  decision Toyota has made, that is the impact the conscious decision the Abbott  Government has made. It is not just about Toyota, although obviously it is about  Toyota but it is also about a myriad of car component companies which employ  hundreds of people in my community in Geelong which also need to be  considered when a transition package is put in place.

JOURNALIST: What do you make of the Abbott Government’s decision to move  asylum seekers in the community on to temporary humanitarian concern visas on  the proviso that they don’t get permanent protection?

MARLES: I have seen the reports of the step that apparently the Government is  making in relation to this, and I have also seen reports there may be potentially  a question of disallowing the regulation that underpins that in the Senate. We  will be considering our position in relation to that, we will be talking to all parties  in the Senate about how to proceed, but I will make this point, last year the  Senate made a very clear decision about temporary protection visas (TPVs), the  visa which is now being dusted off by Minister Morrison hasn’t been used for a  very long period of time, it was conceived for a specific purpose and it is now  being used specifically to in-effect get around the decision that Australia’s Senate  made. That is of deep concern to me, and in the conversations that we do have  with various parties in the Senate in the coming days, that fact will certainly way  heavily in my mind.

JOURNALIST: Is it a TPV in another name?

MARLES: I think the answer to that question is that this is unquestionably an  attempt by Minister Morrison to get around the decision made by the Senate last  year in relation to TPVs.

JOURNALIST: Is a broader stimulus package required for Victoria, is that what  you would support?

MARLES: It is, in the sense that the transition packages that are put in place  and one hopes that a transition package will be put in place, what we saw from  the Abbott Government in relation to the decision that was made by Holden was  woefully inadequate. Whatever is put in place as a result of the decision which

has now been made by Toyota needs to comprehend the entire supply chain  supplying Toyota.

Car component companies such as those that exist within my electorate have to  be comprehended by any package that is put in place.

JOURNALIST: We have heard 2016/17 by Ford and now Toyota but we saw in  January that Ford made 300 people redundant because of poor sales, do you  fear that these companies will bring that leave date forward?

MARLES: Again a good question, I fear in relation to Ford their ability to  continue through to 2016 and can I say that there are hundreds of people that  continue to work at Ford today and what an important shock absorber, if I can  put it that way, in relation to the decision that Ford made was that people  believed they had employment up to 2016, as you rightly said Ford made an  announcement last week which saw 300 people across Broadmeadows and  Geelong made redundant from the middle of this year. It has to raise a question  about the capacity of Ford to continue through to 2016 and I note that Ford has  made no guarantee they will do that. Ford and all the car companies say they  will attempt to match production with demand and if that demand falls well then  it does throw into question the dates that have been put forward. Now, in saying  that I absolutely believe that Ford want to continue to be here until 2016 and I  am sure the same is the case for Toyota, it is important for the question that you  have asked that we actually do need to keep supporting these companies  through until that time because there is a lot of peoples employment that is  dependent on that time and it is an important part of transitioning the economy  in places like Geelong beyond the decision a company like Ford has made.

JOURNALIST: Do you concede that the Government can’t actually do anything  to make sure that demand is still there, making sure Australians still buy those  cars?

MARLES: No, I actually don’t concede that, I think there are a range of  mechanisms that can be put in place to support these companies in direct and  indirect ways, but I also think what is most important is that government  continues to have a dialogue with these car companies and I am appalled, utterly  appalled by the idea that yesterday the Prime Minister was unable to take the  very phone call from Toyota because he was too busy announcing his political  stunt.

JOURNALIST: Defence chiefs are reportedly looking into the draft into how the  Australian Navy came to trespass into Indonesian waters, how much of that  should be made public?

MARLES: That needs to be made public, I’ve seen reports today as well that  Customs as well as Navy have completed their inquiry into the incursion of  Australian vessels into Indonesian territorial waters and I understand the results  are now on the Minister’s desk. It is really important that those reports are made  public to the Australian people and the culture of secrecy that has surrounded  the way in which this Government has gone about its asylum seeker policy is  brought to an end.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: LIDIJA IVANOVSKI 0427 051 563

