

THE HON RICHARD MARLES MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND  BORDER PROTECTION  MEMBER FOR CORIO



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  INTERVIEW WITH JULIE DOYLE - CAPITAL HILL  FRIDAY, 26 SEPTEMBER 2014

SUBJECT/S:  Scott Morrison’s hypocrisy on Cambodia deal

JOURNALIST - JULIE DOYLE: I’m joined from Melbourne by the Opposition’s  Immigration spokesman Richard Marles, Richard Marles thanks for coming in,  now the Government says that is part of a regional solution to people smuggling,  isn’t it important to involve other countries in the region?

RICHARD MARLES, SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND  BORDER PROTECTION: I think it’s very important to involve other countries in  the region, but what you need is a Government which has some expertise and  has some ability to manage those relationships with the countries in the region  and what we’re seeing right now is a Government which has utterly failed in  managing its relationships with those countries where we have offshore  processing arrangements. We’ve absolutely seen that with Papua New Guinea,  months after the Minister was sworn in as the Minister it was not until he ended  up having a conversation of substance with his counterpart in PNG about the  critical question of re-settlement , we’re still more than a year down the track  and no person has been re-settled yet in PNG.  We saw the Minister go off to  India armed with cricket bats coming back talking about a landmark deal with  that country and it was dead before the ink was even dry.

DOYLE: Are you saying then Richard Marles you don’t think that this agreement  will actually come through, that people will be re-settled in Cambodia?



MARLES: Well I’ve just listened to the extract you’ve played of the Minster  talking on radio this morning and what’s clear is that they’re going off to  Cambodia today without any sense of what the costs are of this agreement and  it seems apparent that there hasn’t even been conversations with the  International Organisation for Migration and other settlement agencies about  how the settlement is actually going to occur in Cambodia.  It has to me all the  hallmarks of a quick fix deal which is being done on the run and that’s our  concern about the way in which this Government has been handling its  relationships in the region when it comes to managing offshore processing.

DOYLE: Do you think refugees will be mistreated in Cambodia?

MARLES: Well I think we need to see the detail of the agreement that is  provided to us by this Minister so that we can have a sense of assurance about  that question and indeed a whole lot of other questions associated with having  an arrangement of this kind with Cambodia.  It concerns me that to date all the  information which has flowed in relation to this proposed agreement has come  from Cambodia itself, indeed this very trip was announced in effect to the  Australian people by the Cambodian Government through the Cambodian media,  and I’m not sure if it was left up to Scott Morrison whether we would even know  that he was going there on Grand Final weekend to sign this agreement.

DOYLE: Now Cambodia is a signatory to the UN Convention on Refugees is that  good enough does that give you some comfort there?

MARLES: It matters, it absolutely matters that they are a convention country,  but I think it’s also important to have a look at other aspects of the human rights  record and on that basis to be confident that there will be appropriate treatment  of those persons who are going to Cambodia and appropriate measures will be in  place to see that they are   re-settled.   Now we’re open minded about whether the Government can  demonstrate that to the Australian people but it would be actually nice to hear  from our own Government about what their plans are and how they intend to  deal with what are very legitimate questions.

DOYLE: Well we heard the Minister say this morning that Governments need to  give countries like Cambodia a chance that the country has changed, I mean do  you just continue to write Cambodia off?

MARLES: We’ve never written Cambodia off, indeed any view of the way in  which Labor in Government and Opposition has worked with Cambodia over the  years makes it clear that we’ve had a deep engagement with that country.  Now  that doesn’t mean that there aren’t issues facing Cambodia today and it’s

important as an international community that they are highlighted, what I think  matters though in the context of what is being proposed now is that we have a  clear explanation from the Government about how they intend to deal with the  questions which are being raised about the human rights circumstances within  Cambodia.  But Julie I’d make one other point here, if it is OK for this  Government to do an agreement with Cambodia the huge question is, what on  earth was wrong with doing an agreement with Malaysia three years ago -

DOYLE: Well Richard Marles Malaysia’s not a signatory to the UN Refugee  Convention and you just said that matters.

MARLES: It does matter but I also made the point that it’s not the whole story  and if you want to try to have a comparison of the human rights record of  Cambodia against the human rights record of Malaysia I mean I would say that it  is impossible, impossible to go down the path of doing an agreement with  Cambodia but refuse to have anything to do with Malaysia. I mean it’s impossible  to reconcile those two positions other than through hypocrisy and I think there is  an enormous hypocrisy in the steps that were taken by the Coalition three years  ago in failing to work with the then Government in bringing about the Malaysian  Arrangement and frankly we could have dealt with this issue three years ago had  they worked with us back then and hundreds of people have lost their lives  since.

DOYLE: Richard Marles we’ll have to leave it there thank you very much for your  time.

MARLES: Thank you Julie.

ENDS

