

THE HON RICHARD MARLES MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER  PROTECTION

MEMBER FOR CORIO





E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW   ABC NEWSRADIO WITH MARIUS BENSON  FRIDAY, 21 MARCH 2014

SUBJECT/ S: Tony Abbott in PNG; asylum seekers; Manus Island.



MARIUS  BENSON: Well  as  we  mentioned  the  Prime  Minister  is  in  Papua  New   Guinea today for talks with his counterpart, Peter O'Neill, talks that are planned to  concentrate on economic issues but the talks are expected to deal with the Manus  Island  detention  centre  as  well.  Labor  established  the  Manus  Island  centre  and   backed its continued operation while at the same time accusing the Government of  failing to run it properly.  For a Labor view on the Papua New Guinea talks I’m joined  by the Shadow Immigration Minister, Richard Marles. Richard Marles, good morning.



RICHARD MARLES, SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER  PROTECTION: Good morning Marius, how are you?



BENSON: I’m well. The Prime Minister says he will be talking to Peter O'Neill about  Manus and what can be done to swiftly get people out of the camp and resettled but

a lot of people expressed doubts that any resettlement will take place. Do you think  resettlement is a genuine prospect?



MARLES: Well I think resettlement is absolutely the issue and I think what is really  clear is that the Australian Government has dropped the ball when it comes to  resettlement, I mean we have really seen no serious attention provided by the  Australian Government to this issue since they came to power until the crisis that  occurred at Manus Island a month ago and that’s really not good enough and the  arrangement provided that Australia would be providing the support and assistance  associated with resettlement in Papua New Guinea and so what we now need to see  is a much more hands on approach. We need to understand what commitments the  Australian Government is going to make to Papua New Guinea to make sure that  resettlement happens.  It’s not rocket science to say that if there is no processing  going on at the facility there is obviously going to be tension.



BENSON: And the tension, in fact the spark for the riot last month at Manus Island  was apparently an unofficial word that the asylum seekers weren’t going to be  resettled. That there was nothing in train to see them resettled and many people  have said it is unrealistic to expect people to settle in to Papua New Guinea from  such vastly different cultures but you think it’s a genuine prospect?



MARLES: I do think it’s a genuine prospect and I think if it was done right and  there is the appropriate assistance provided by the Australian Government and that  was our commitment at the time that the arrangement was made, then it can be  done.  I think people need to understand that cities like Port Moresby and Lai, a  large city, have lots of different communities within them, there’s a mosque in Port  Moresby for example, and so I do think it is possible that resettlement can occur but  there needs to be understanding about where exactly that’s going to happen that’s  obviously Papua New Guinea’s call but where ever they intend to resettle and how -  we need to be supporting them but that’s precisely the discussion that should have  been happening with the Papua New Guinea Government from the moment that  Tony Abbott and Scott Morrison were sworn into office. In fact what we have seen  happen is that they have not seriously had that conversation until a couple of weeks  ago and I think that’s the issue.



BENSON: What should the Prime Minister be saying to Peter O’Neill, the Papua New  Guinea Prime Minister, in talks today on Manus, particularly the violence at Manus,  should he be critical of the way Papua New Guinea authorities handled the issue?



MARLES: There are inquiries in place and those inquiries firstly need to be  [inaudible], I hope they will be and we need to see the outcome of them before we  start being critical of any particular individuals and I think I may have said it to you  before, I am a little concerned about how Papua New Guinea and Manus Islanders in  particular are being characterised in this whole discussion.  I think one thing that is  absolutely essential is that the outcome of the inquiries which take place are made  entirely public to the Australian people. We have already seen our Government  operate on the basis of secrecy when it comes to asylum seeker policy. That simply  cannot occur anymore and it must not occur in relation to what is discovered  through this inquiry process about what’s happened on the Manus Island facility.



BENSON: Richard Marles, thank you very much. Richard Marles is the Shadow  Immigration Minister.



MARLES: Thank you very much Marius.



ENDS



