

THE HON RICHARD MARLES MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND  BORDER PROTECTION  MEMBER FOR CORIO



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  INTERVIEW   ABC 24 WITH JOE O’BRIEN  TUESDAY, 18 FEBRUARY 2014

SUBJECT/ S: Manus Island.

JOE  O’BRIEN:  Returning  to  our  top  story  now,  there’s  been  a  dramatic   escalation in tensions on Manus Island with one asylum seeker confirmed dead  and another 77 people injured. For more on this I’m joined by the Opposition’s  Immigration Spokesman Richard Marles from Geelong in Victoria. Richard Marles  good afternoon. What does this tragic incident indicate about the Government’s  approach to asylum seekers right now?

RICHARD MARLES, SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND  BORDER PROTECTION: We’re deeply concerned about the serious incident  which occurred overnight, there’s still information coming to light, but this is the  most serious event that we’ve seen, the second in two days, the third since Tony  Abbott came to power. It’s becoming apparent that Manus Island is melting  down on Minister Morrison’s watch. This is of enormous concern, what we now  need to see is a full inquiry into what has occurred at Manus Island.

O’BRIEN: So what form would that full inquiry take?

MARLES: Well we’d need to know exactly what has occurred here and it’s really  important that we understand what steps the Government is going to take to  resolve this situation. I can’t stress enough how important the Manus Island  Detention Facility is to Australia’s strategy for dealing with boats coming from  Indonesia it is the single piece of public policy which has made the biggest  difference in seeing an end of boats from coming from Indonesia. So if there is a  concern at Manus Island, that needs to be a concern of every Australian, we  need to understand what steps the Government’s going to take to resolve this

situation and in order to do that we need to have a full inquiry so we understand  exactly what has occurred and what is occurring at the Manus Island Detention  Facility.

O’BRIEN: Should the facility continue to be part of Australia’s asylum seeker  policy approach?

MARLES: The facility is utterly critical to Australia’s asylum seeker policy  approach, as I say, it is the cornerstone of the strategy that our country has in  place to see boats stop coming from Indonesia. From the time that the regional

re-settlement arrangement was entered into with Papua New Guinea on the 19th  of July last year, we saw a 90 per cent decrease in the flow of boats by the time  of the election. It is the thing which is making the difference, which is why it’s so  concerning that we now see on this Minister’s watch a situation where the proper  orderly running of the detention facility appears to be breaking down. We need  to know exactly what’s going on there, we need to have a full inquiry and we  need to know what the Government is going to do to rectify this situation and  stop this happening again.

O’BRIEN: Asylum seeker groups would argue that this is evidence of the terribly  desperate situation these people are in because of the approach that the  Government is taking and the approach that your Government took as well.

MARLES: Let’s be clear, from a humanitarian point of view, it is so important  that we stop boats coming from Indonesia because people were dying in that  voyage it was one of the most dangerous voyages in pursuit of refuge anywhere  in the world. Manus Island is playing a really important role in stopping people  getting on those boats in the first place. It has an enormous role to play and it’s  very important that it continues that’s why the Labor Government established it  and that’s why we put in place the regional re-settlement arrangement. But  Manus Island was able to be run properly under the Howard Government, it was  running under the Gillard and Rudd Governments, it is melting down under this  Minister’s watch, we need to know what is going on here and we need a full  inquiry to understand that.

O’BRIEN: What about the point that a human rights group make that you’ve got  to take into account the mental state of the people there and the uncertainty  about their future?



MARLES: Of course all of those matters need to be taken into account, it may  be that the proper processing of people, the re-settlement of people in PNG are  all issues which need to be examined properly but whatever is the cause we  need to understand why this detention facility is melting down under this  Minister’s watch, that’s why we need a full inquiry, it needs to look at every

aspect of the detention facility so that we get it right because it is the  cornerstone of Australia’s strategy to stopping the boats coming. It’s why it’s so  important and it’s why we need to know and the Australian people need to know  what’s going on.

O’BRIEN: So are you satisfied with the way people are being handled there and  informed of their, what’s likely to happen to them, the health conditions for them  there because there have been concerns about that raised by several different  groups and they’re saying that this is at the root cause of leading to situations  like this developing.



MARLES: Well I think we need to understand whether that’s the case and sure  I’ve seen the amnesty report or had the briefing on the amnesty report in  relation to the Manus Facility and you couldn’t help not be concerned about the  issues that were raised in that report. But this is why we need a proper inquiry  into what is happening at Manus Island, why there are these events occurring to  make sure that these events don’t occur again and to make sure that the Manus  Island Detention Facility can continue to play the role that it has up until now of

being the cornerstone of Australia’s strategy in stopping the boats.

O’BRIEN: Some people would argue that you could avoid this situation  developing by processing these people in Australia and properly assessing their  refugee status and accepting them in Australia if they are refugees.

MARLES: I think that the critical piece of public policy which has had the biggest  impact on stopping boats coming to Australia has been to take Australia off the  table, that’s what the regional re-settlement arrangement did. And when you  look at the graph of the number of boats and the number of asylum seekers who  have come to Australia, it starts to decline on the 19th of July when the regional  re-settlement arrangement was put in place and Australia was taken off the  table. Now if we go down the path that you just described that would put  Australian back on the table, and hat would see more boats and more deaths at  sea as a result. From a compassionate point of view, from a human rights point  of view, it is so important that we stop the boats coming, Manus Island has a  critical role to play in that, and that’s why we need to understand what is going  on at Manus Island, and why is it melting down under this Minister’s watch?

O’BRIEN: Shadow Immigration Minister Richard Marles thanks very much for  talking to us there from Geelong.

MARLES: Thank you.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: SOPHIE ANDREW 0401 443 524

