Foreign Minister Julie Bishop

ABC Insiders: 28/09/2014

Foreign Minister Julie Bishop joins Insiders to discuss actions against  terrorism in Australia, and the fight against Islamic State militants in  Iraq and Syria.

BARRIE CASSIDY, PRESENTER: Our studio guest is the Foreign Minister, Julie  Bishop. And while she joins us, let's have a look at the game on the sidelines of  yesterday's AFL Grand Final: Julie Bishop versus Bill Shorten at the North  Melbourne breakfast.

JULIE BISHOP, FOREIGN AFFAIRS MINISTER: The Cabinet has been spending  time working out who would represent us here today. The Prime Minister refers to it  as the ARL. Malcolm keeps talking about the URL. So, we decided to choose between  the women. Oh.

Actually, it's great to see Bill here today. I don't know what he's about to say, but I'll  support whatever it is he says.

BILL SHORTEN, OPPOSITION LEADER: It is lovely to see Julie Bishop here. I think  we could all agree that she's been best on ground for the Government this year. It  does make you wonder, of course, how much improved the Abbott cabinet would be  if they had two women in the team.

BARRIE CASSIDY: Minister, good morning. Welcome.

JULIE BISHOP: Good morning, Barrie.

BARRIE CASSIDY: He's got a point, hasn't he? There's some speculation, though,  that there may be a reshuffle, perhaps that issue might be addressed.

JULIE BISHOP: I don't believe that the Prime Minister has a reshuffle in place. He's  very happy with the performance of the team. We were just having a bit of fun. Bill  and I were having a dig at each other yesterday at the breakfast. But I believe that the  Abbott Government team is performing well and I don't believe that there's a  reshuffle anywhere near the future, so.

BARRIE CASSIDY: Alright, let's go onto the immediate and very important issues of  the Government, potentially, or Australia joining air strikes over Iraq. When do you  think a decision will be taken on that?

JULIE BISHOP: The Prime Minister has just returned from the United States. I've  been in contact with him this morning. I expect that there will be a National Security  Committee meeting this week, and at that committee, of course, we hear from our  experts, the chief of the Defence Force, our intelligence agencies, the Federal Police,  there'll be a general discussion about what we've both learned - the Prime Minister  and I - from our time in New York during the UN General Assembly Leaders' Week,

and depending upon the decision of the National Security Committee, then it would  go to cabinet for a discussion, presumably during the course of this week.

BARRIE CASSIDY: Given that these planes have been in position in the Middle East  for a while now, what has the holdup been about?

JULIE BISHOP: Well there's been a mission in Syria. The US have been focusing on  air strikes in Syria and they've been joined by a number of Arab states and I think  that's a very positive sign, that the Saudi Arabians, the Emirates, Jordan, Qataris and  Bahrain have all been part of the air strikes, the operations in Syria.

In relation to Iraq, we need to have in place a legal framework. Senator Johnston, our  Defence Minister David Johnston has been in Baghdad over the weekend and he has  met with the new Iraqi government. They have some challenges. They are yet to  appoint a defence minister, they are yet to appoint an interiors minister. So we want  to ensure that we can get the legal framework in place as well, so it's a matter of going  through that process, but it's very important ...

BARRIE CASSIDY: So that could still take some time, couldn't it?

JULIE BISHOP: Well, I think it'd be a question of days. That's why David Johnston  was in Baghdad, to meet with the new Iraqi government, to assure them that we were  expecting them to be an inclusive government, that they had a role to play in  ensuring that they were representative of the various factions and tribes and groups  within Iraq, because of course that was one of the problems for the previous  government.

And also to talk about the details of what would be required to support the Iraqi  Defence Force, because we would be going in at the invitation of and with the  consent of the Iraqi Government to support their defence forces to be able to defend  their citizens and fight back against ISIL.

BARRIE CASSIDY: Yes, and that is a very important distinction, and does that then  rule out Australia getting involved in any air strikes over Syria where that is not the  situation?

JULIE BISHOP: It is a different situation in Syria. The US is going in under Article 51  in relation to a collective self-defence of Iraq. It's a different legal framework.  Australia has been asked to support the Iraqi government. That's what we've been  requested to do and so that's our mission.

BARRIE CASSIDY: If Australia, though, is requested to support the air strikes over  Syria, Tony Abbott has left open the possibility of that happening.

JULIE BISHOP: Well, our request so far has been focused on Iraq. That's what we've  been asked to do. Should there be a request in relation to Syria, well we would  consider it. We'd also consider the legal framework that the US is relying upon in  order to go into Syria, but we would make our own judgment about that.

BARRIE CASSIDY: Yes, but the way that the US rationalises it, they say parts of Syria  are ungoverned. Is that the view that you take?

JULIE BISHOP: Yes, I do, that it is ungoverned space in eastern Syria.

BARRIE CASSIDY: And that being the case, then, you wouldn't necessarily look for  any approval from the Syrian government?

JULIE BISHOP: Well, we wouldn't be working with the Syrian government anyway.  We don't recognise that as a legitimate regime. But we also know that there are  different questions that arise.

The US has taken its legal advice, which says that under Article 51 and the collective  self-defence right, that they can move into Syria. What we can also do is starve ISIL  and its ilk of fighters and funds and weapons and resources from Iraq and externally  and this was the tenor of the debate in the UN over the last week.

About 40 countries took part in a discussion that John Kerry had convened Friday  week ago and different countries put forward ways that they would be able to support  the effort to combat, destroy, degrade ISIL and it's not all military action.

There's a lot of political work that needs to be done, diplomatic, humanitarian and  also to stop the financing of these terrorist organisations, stop them getting foreign  fighters and that's a role Australia has to play. Indeed, 80 countries around the world  now claim that they have foreign fighters leaving - citizens leaving their countries to  fight in the Middle East. So there's a lot that countries can do beyond just military air  strikes.

BARRIE CASSIDY: Now if you were to get involved, though, in some way in Syria,  you would lose the Labor Party's support. They've made it perfectly clear that that's a  step too far. How important would that be in terms of this remaining a bipartisan  approach?

JULIE BISHOP: It's very important that it be bipartisan and we are very appreciative  of the Labor Party's support in not only getting through new terrorist laws, but also  the support for any mission in Iraq. But let's take it step at a time.

We've been requested by the US and the Iraqi Government to support efforts in Iraq.  That's what we've been considering, that's what we've pre-deployed aeroplanes and  our Special Forces for that mission. And we are comfortable that it requires a legal  framework from the Iraqi government, an invitation and consent from the Iraqi  government.

Now Syria is another step. Different considerations would apply. It'd have to be a  completely different discussion within the National Security Committee, within  Cabinet and presumably with the Opposition.

BARRIE CASSIDY: Now president Barack Obama said during the week - he seemed  to elevate climate change ahead of terrorism as the issue that most threatened the

planet and he said that more lives are at risk in terms of changes to climate change  than terrorism. That's clearly not a position that Australia supports, given that Tony  Abbott chose not to go to the climate change talks.

JULIE BISHOP: Well I'm the minister responsible for international climate change  negotiations and given that Parliament was sitting and the Prime Minister was  making a very important speech on national security in the Parliament, we felt that  the best allocation of ministerial time was for me to be at the climate change summit,  where I have responsibility within the Government for international ...

BARRIE CASSIDY: But leaders went along. There were about 120 of them.

JULIE BISHOP: Not every country was represented by their leader. Foreign  ministers were from New Zealand, from Canada, from a number of other countries.  And most leaders were arriving for the president Obama meeting on the Wednesday  for foreign fighters and given that the Prime Minister was making a national security  statement in the Parliament, we thought it was an appropriate allocation of  ministerial responsibility.

BARRIE CASSIDY: Would you dispute, though, the way that president Obama  framed it, that climate change is a bigger threat to the world than terrorism?

JULIE BISHOP: Well I think it's all relative. Climate change is a challenge and all  countries recognise that. There were many countries represented at the climate  change summit. But likewise, an immediate threat of terrorism is affecting not only  the Middle East, but all of us. All countries around the world are at risk of terrorist  attacks. Given that 80 countries say they have foreign fighters who are going to the  Middle East, presumably radicalised, will be experienced, hardened terrorists and  then coming back home to their home countries. That presents a risk to the globe  regionally as well as our country.

BARRIE CASSIDY: The Immigration Minister, Scott Morrison, has just signed an  agreement with Cambodia to take refugees from Nauru. Australia, as recently as  January, in a submission to the UN in Geneva, told Cambodia that we don't like their  approach to demonstrators, that people are locked up without trial. There are health  issues there. It's a poor country, as everybody knows. How is this an appropriate way  to go?

JULIE BISHOP: This is a regional solution under the Bali process. Cambodia is a  signatory to the Refugee Convention. Cambodia is a part of the Bali process and the  Bali process recognises that countries in the region will be part of the resettlement  issue. And Cambodia has asked to be part of the refugee resettlement issue in our  region.

It's voluntary. If people want to go to Cambodia, Cambodia's saying that they will  provide a home, and what's most important, they will provide freedom from  persecution. Under the Refugee Convention, refugees are guaranteed freedom from

persecution. They're not guaranteed a place in a developed country or a First World  economy. They are guaranteed ...

BARRIE CASSIDY: No, they're not, but there's a clear preference on the part of the  UN that that's where they go, they go to developed or developing countries and not to  poor countries.

JULIE BISHOP: Cambodia is a developing country and Cambodia has significant  aspirations to be a developed country. I was there in February. I met with their  ministry, their officials and they're very keen to be part of the Bali process, to play  their role in it and they are aspirational and I don't think it's for you or me to tell  Cambodia that they can't offer themselves as a location for refugees.

BARRIE CASSIDY: Is it for the UN to make that judgment, though, and they've  already said it's outside of international norms?

JULIE BISHOP: It's a voluntary arrangement and if ...

BARRIE CASSIDY: But voluntary - what choice have they got: Nauru or Cambodia?

JULIE BISHOP: Well, that's the choice that they have.

BARRIE CASSIDY: It's not much of a choice.

JULIE BISHOP: The point that the Australian Government has made is that we will  not receive people who have come via the people smuggling trade. And Australia is  one of the most generous refugee resettlement locations on the planet.

In fact, the US, Canada and Australia make up 90 per cent of all refugee  resettlements around the globe. And if other countries are able to bear some of that  burden, if Cambodia or other countries are prepared to say we'll take refugees, well  then it will make it easier for the US, Canada and Australia to continue to take our  share.

BARRIE CASSIDY: Is it embarrassing though that in the end they're taking two or  three initially, maybe four or five a bit longer term?

JULIE BISHOP: It's a start.

BARRIE CASSIDY: It's a very small start.

JULIE BISHOP: Well, it's an opportunity for a country like Cambodia to be part of a  regional solution. I don't know what you think a regional solution means, Barrie, but  to me it means that countries in the region are part of ...

BARRIE CASSIDY: Maybe 40 or 50 people might be a reasonable regional solution.

JULIE BISHOP: Well it's voluntary. I'm assuming that people will want to test it out.  And Cambodia is very keen to get people into their country that can help them grow  their economy. They want to be a developed country. They are aspiring to be a

developed country and I think Australia should do what we can to support them in  that. And we have a generous aid program with Cambodia that's focused on  economic development, it's focused on sustainable economic growth.

And, over time, countries have changed their economic profile and they look at other  South-East Asian countries - Singapore, Indonesia, Malaysia - and say, "Well, we  want to be like that," and I think Australia should give Cambodia every opportunity  to put aside its dark past and to embrace a much more prosperous stable and secure  future.

BARRIE CASSIDY: The Australia Network is about to close down. We have an  audience in about 40 countries in the region. They'll be seeing Insiders this morning  for the last time. Have you got a message for them?

JULIE BISHOP: The ABC could continue with the Australia Network. The point that  the Government makes is that we didn't believe that the Australia Network was  meeting the contractual obligations it had with the Department of Foreign Affairs  and Trade. And then of course there was the issue of the corrupted tender process  under the previous government which cast a pall over the commercial tender that  was meant to be in place. And I believe that we can be much more creative within the  Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade about our public diplomacy and promoting  Australia aboard.

BARRIE CASSIDY: But how could the ABC continue to provide the service? The  contract was not only about the money, it was about access.

JULIE BISHOP: Well, the contract was in fact with the Department of Foreign  Affairs and Trade, it was to promote Australia abroad as part of our public diplomacy  effort and I believe that we'll be able to do that in a much more creative way and  that's where I'm focusing my efforts.

BARRIE CASSIDY: Yes, but my point was that without that contract, you say that the  ABC could have kept the network running. How could it?

JULIE BISHOP: Well it's up to the ABC to determine how it wants to prioritise the  taxpayer money that it gets now. But I don't believe that it was meeting its  contractual obligations to the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade in promoting  Australia abroad through the Australia Network. So I'm looking at other alternatives  where I think we can do it in a much more creative and positive way.

BARRIE CASSIDY: And just finally on the G20, and it does seem now that the  member countries will be inviting Russia and Vladimir Putin to attend. Given  everything that you've said, though, you say that maybe it's a good thing that he come  here and he can face international condemnation?

JULIE BISHOP: Well, it's not up to Australia to rescind an invitation to a member  country. Russia is a member of the G20, and so, the invitation is automatic. It's not  up to Australia to rescind it. And I've taken soundings and a number of countries are

concerned that if we start disinviting members because of their behaviour, then it  would threaten the primacy of the G20 as a premier economic forum.

BARRIE CASSIDY: Yes, sure, but my point is now that he's coming though, you can  hardly say - you can hardly encourage international condemnation. Surely Australia  will have to be a courteous host.

JULIE BISHOP: Well Australia of course is a courteous host, but there are the  opportunities for the world leaders, particularly at the leaders' retreat, to inform  president Putin directly what they think of his illegal annexation of Crimea and his  breach of Ukraine sovereignty and his ham-fisted attempts to derail the independent  investigation into the shooting down of Malaysian Airlines MH17.

I'm sure that world leaders will relish the opportunity to inform president Putin what  they think of Russia's behaviour in the last six months or more.

BARRIE CASSIDY: And Australians, who are naturally mightily offended and upset  by what occurred, what would you say to them? That they should show restraint in  terms of protests?

JULIE BISHOP: Well, we don't restrain protests in this country, as long as they're  not violent, as long as it's a peaceful expression of a point of view, then Australians  are free to do that.

BARRIE CASSIDY: Thanks for your time this morning. Appreciate it.

JULIE BISHOP: My pleasure.



