

THE HON BILL SHORTEN MP  LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  MEMBER FOR MARIBYRNONG



E&OE TRANSCRIPT   RADIO INTERVIEW  3AW WITH NICK MCCALLUM, DARREN JAMES AND JOHN HOWSON  SUNDAY, 25 MAY 2014

SUBJECT / S: Tony Abbott’s Budget of Broken Promises; Asylum seekers;  Cuts to education and university fee increases; Families in public life.

HOST: Last week we spoke to Prime Minister Tony Abbott on the federal Budget,  here’s some of what happened:

TONY ABBOTT [AUDIO]: You cannot spend what you haven’t got, and you can’t  borrow what you can’t repay. And if a Government spends money today, it’s either  got to be paid for by today’s taxes or tomorrow’s taxes.

HOST: Joining us now the federal Opposition Leader Bill Shorten. Mr Shorten, good  morning. Do you agree with that statement?

BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: I think this whole federal  Budget by Tony Abbott has shown that this is a Government who is willing to break  its promises and tell lies before the election.



HOST: No, that’s not the point. The point is, he said you’ve got to pay it even today  or put if off til tomorrow. So it’s not about broken promises, it’s about how do we  pay the debt. What would you do to pay the debt?

SHORTEN: Let’s just deal with each of those points you just made. If you ask me  do I agree with Tony Abbott, that you’ve got to pay debts, yes I do. I don’t think  you need to be Prime Minister of Australia to work that out. But if you’re asking me  if I support the Budget, which is going to see our pensioners slugged, going to see  Medicare with new taxes, going to see petrol go up for a cooked up Budget crisis  which I think is exaggerated by this Government, that’s what I really think. I think  this Government has gone too hard, I think it shows - I think Australia in the last  fortnight has had a good look at Tony Abbott’s Budget and they don’t like it.



HOST: Mr Shorten, the deficit tax, obviously I think is a broken promise. But there is  every indication - and I believe Penny Wong also indicated this morning - that you  will support it in the Senate. Why?

SHORTEN: First of all, it is a broken promise, absolutely. I think about 3 per cent of  Australia earn more than $180,000, they’re going to have to pay more income tax. I  mean thought it was the Liberal Government who said they were for lower taxes and  Labor wasn’t, and this clearly shows that old myth is just a fairytale. But when you  quite rightly say well, ‘what’s Labor going to do on it,’ there’s so much to oppose in  this Budget, and going back to something which one of your panellists said earlier,  ‘what would you do?’  We don’t support the deficit levy or new income taxes on

people who go to work, but with our scarce political capital, our priority is to stand  up for lower and middle income earners.

HOST: At what point, and I mean I mentioned this is a difficult one for you guys, at  what point do you block individual bits of the Budget, before you end up blocking  supply? Which of course for the Labor party is a horrendous thought. Do you have to  be careful?



SHORTEN: There are different bits of legislation and you’re quite right with your  question to highlight the fact that there is plenty of detail and different laws which  will come into the parliament. Some of the changes which Tony Abbott wants to

introduce into his Budget won’t require a passage of law, it will get there. Others,  the Greens have said they’ll support. Again, I think that’s pretty ironic - remember  Tony Abbott used to carry on a fair bit about Labor voting with the Greens? It’ll be  Liberal voting with the Greens to give every motorist a new petrol tax. There are  some which we won’t support but we’re not going to die in a ditch over, and there  will be other measures we oppose. In terms of the actual supply bill, what Labor has  had a traditional conventional objection to is when the Government of the day needs  money to pay its pensions, its public servants, you wouldn’t block them. So yeah  sure it’s a moving feast, but some of the principles that we would adopt - I think  though what has been interesting is that so many Liberals have either been missing  in action on the Budget. I mean, where’s Malcolm Turnbull, he hasn’t exactly worked  up a sweat selling his former rival’s Budget. And there are others quietly  backgrounding journalists saying they think it’s gone too far. So I’m not sure how  much of this Budget we’ve heard about a fortnight ago will even get presented to  the parliament. I mean, Christopher Pyne and Peter Dutton, the Health Minister,  have said that they’re prepared to negotiate, so -

HOST: Will you negotiate with them? Are you prepared to negotiate on things like  interest rates on HECS, say for instance, which Mr Pyne has indicated that he would  negotiate?

SHORTEN: We’re prepared if the Liberal Government is going to agree with us. We  don’t think that they should increase the interest rate on loans to students. I think  sometimes in Australia we take our good fortune for granted, and one of the things  of our good fortune is that children, no matter what their background, have an  opportunity to better themselves in life. And what will happen with the increase of

university fees and the cutting of university funding - and there’ll be lots of parents  listening to this show today living from modest means. I mean they’re not living in  Toorak, but they’re reasonably well off or they live in the bush and they’ll be saying  ‘well, will we be able to afford to send our kids to university?’  This is where this  terrible poverty of vision in the Abbott Government’s Budget has gone - we’re  creating two Australias. I have to say that surely there is a smarter way to run this  country than creating an underclass. I mean, this idea that we’re not going to pay  the unemployed anything for six months, this will lead people to begging and worse.

HOST: Just to point that out, that’s just for the youth, it’s just for people under 30,  it’s not universal, it’s the youth.

SHORTEN: I know it is for people under 30, but I’m not sure - if you’re 26, the bills  aren’t any cheaper, the food, the can of baked beans doesn’t get a discount because  you’re under 30.



HOST: Well the question will be for many people - an Opposition should oppose,  that’s fair enough - but what would you do if you were in Government to get rid of  the debt?

SHORTEN: Well, first of all, we would drop this paid parental leave scheme which is  going to cost $22 billion over the next four years. Really, is there a case to be made  to pay millionaires an extra $50,000?



HOST: No.

SHORTEN: So there’s $22 billion. The government wants to remove the means  testing of private health insurance. And we want to encourage - we get that people  should be encouraged to have private health insurance. But if you’re earning a  quarter of a million or a million dollars, you probably don’t need a taxpayer funded  subsidy to help you buy your health insurance. So that’s probably worth another $3  billion. But then again, I have to say, we can find some sensible savings, my  proposition though is Tony Abbott and Joe Hockey, they’re the Prime Minister and  the Treasurer of Australia, we’re not going to be as ruthlessly negative as they were  in Opposition. But this is not a good vision underpinning this Budget. When all is said  and done, we didn’t ask Tony Abbott before the last election to say that there’d be  no cuts to health and education, we didn’t ask him to say there’d be no cuts to the  pension, we didn’t ask him to say a range of the promises - no increases in taxes. I  remember he used to give Julia Gillard a tremendously hard time for breaking an  election promise. Tony Abbott has broken more promises than plates at a Greek  wedding.



HOST: Ok, give us two measures in the Budget you will try to block in the Senate  the Labor party will try to block in the Senate?

SHORTEN: We’re not interested in a GP tax -

HOST: Yep, so that’s the $7 co-payment, you mean?

SHORTEN: Yes. And the new tax on petrol, we don’t see that that’s the right thing  to do.

HOST: Ok so those two you will oppose in the Senate, and that of course means  they have to go to the crossbenchers to try and get through.

SHORTEN: Yes. And again, for listeners who say ‘oh my goodness, it’s two sides of  politics banging on, why can’t they just get on’ we understand that there’s a sensible  task to be done with the Budget, but we don’t believe that the fair go in Australia  and the safety net should be undermined. We don’t believe that broken promises  and lies before the election should be allowed to translate to a permanent  underclass in Australia like they have in other countries.

HOST: Considering the fact - I mean you’re the new Opposition, good luck to you,  you know, let’s have a clean slate. What happened before you become Opposition  Leader is done. In retrospect, do you regret the sort of spending that went on under  the previous Labor Government? I mean there was some horrendous wastes of  money that went on. I mean the fact that we canvassed Africa and god knows  where to get a seat on the Security Council, a temporary seat. The fact that we gave  money to the Caribbean, millions and millions of dollars for them to fight climate  change. I mean there was a lot of money given away with great abandon, do you  regret all that spending?

SHORTEN: I think it’s fair to say that the pink batts program, which is probably the  highest profile one, where there was a lot of spending to help the economy and the  insulation in people’s roofs, that was rolled out far too quickly, and we’ve seen the  terrible and tragic consequences. Anyone who says that they’ve done everything  right after their time in Government is a fool. But having said that, I also must  submit to you that Australia had a triple A credit rating at the end of Labor’s time,  which it didn’t have when they came into power. There were nearly a million jobs  created, about a million jobs created during the global financial crisis in Australia,  where 30 million jobs were shed in other parts of the developed world. There’s  always a job to be done and people can always do better, but I have to say when it  comes to this Government and what they said and did before the election to what  they are doing now, I am appalled that the best they can do is hit low and middle  income earners and family payments, to uni fees and to Medicare and to petrol and  to the pension.



HOST: One question. The boats have stopped, so I believe that there should be  amnesty to everybody who is in detention at the moment. Give them amnesty, clear  the decks and say that’s it, we’ve given you amnesty to suitable people to come and  live in Australia, fair enough, and we’ve cleaned the decks. What would you do when  you become Prime - if you  become Prime Minister - what would you do to keep the  boats stopped?

SHORTEN: I think regional resettlement, started by Labor, has worked. It does  discourage people coming through the people smugglers. We don’t want people  drowning at sea and being exploited - their desire to have a better life - being  exploited by people putting them on unsafe boats. So regional resettlement is a big

part of Labor’s strategy for boats. And we are watching what the Government does  very carefully, in terms of what they’re getting done and what they’re telling people.

HOST: And Mr Shorten, I’ve got to ask you about the front page of the Herald Sun  today. What was your reaction when you read Tim Mathieson’s attack on Margie  Abbott?

SHORTEN: I thought it was way out of line. Tim Mathieson got a hard time when  he was Julia Gillard’s partner, but I don’t think that Margie Abbott is a legitimate  target. So no I don’t agree with what Tim said, I felt for the Abbotts on that one.



HOST: It’s not fair to attack Frances Abbott either, I think keep families out of it,  keep families out of it.

SHORTEN: I’m in public life so I have that view. I practice that view, yeah and I get  that Tim got a hard time, and he did, but what I also believe is that - if you’re  dealing with Tony Abbott, there’s plenty to disagree with if you’re thinking about  politics, I don’t think Margie or his daughters fall into that category at all, they  shouldn’t be in the political firing line.



HOST: And neither should your family.

SHORTEN: And nor - that’s right. I didn’t like it when it happened to Tim, and I  don’t like it now.

HOST: I reckon the last time we spoke to you, or one of the last times we spoke to  you, you were at the start of a fun run. Are you still running? Is there enough time  to -



SHORTEN: Yeah, I got a little bit of bronchitis, but yeah I have a done a few, but  I’m not going to set any land speed records.

HOST: No but at least you’re out there having a crack.

SHORTEN: Yeah it’s really good. But I’m going off to see Little League soccer now,  out in Gladstone Park, it’s a sunny day in Melbourne. It’s a good normal Sunday.  Then I go to Canberra.



HOST: And you have an abnormal week. Hey good to talk to you, thanks for making  yourself available this morning.

SHORTEN: Lovely, take care, thank you.

ENDS

