Foreign Affairs Minister Julie Bishop

ABC Insiders

Australians choosing to travel to the Middle East to join groups such as  ISIS.

Transcript (E&OE)

22 June 2014

FRAN KELLY, PRESENTER: Coming up our program guest, the Foreign Minister,  Julie Bishop.

While she joins us, here's the Prime Minister delivering a blunt warning to young  Australians who've taken up arms in Syria and Iraq.

TONY ABBOTT, PRIME MINISTER: The last thing the Australian people want is to  see murderous, potential terrorists coming to this county. There are up to 100 people  who have left Australia apparently to join these various jihadist groups in Syria and  now in Iraq.

Be in no doubt that some individuals from this country are now participating in acts  of barbarity in Iraq. These people should have no place in our country and we will do  our best to keep them out. And if they can't be kept out they will be taken into  detention, because we are not going to allow people who are an obvious threat to our  safety and security to roam loose in Australia.

FRAN KELLY: Julie Bishop, welcome to Insiders.

JULIE BISHOP, FOREIGN MINISTER: Good morning.

FRAN KELLY: Minister, do we know how many Australians are active participants in  these wars and how do we know that?

JULIE BISHOP: Well, Fran, I think this is one of the most disturbing developments  in our domestic security situation for quite some time.

We are aware that there are a number of Australians who are heading to both Syria  and Iraq to join up with these jihadists, particularly the ISIS (Islamic State of Iraq  and Syria) or ISIL (Islamic State of Iraq and Levant) group, defined by its savagery  and brutality. And we estimate that there are about 150, and we gain this information  from the cooperation of intelligence agencies around the world.

In April, I travelled to Lebanon and Jordan and met with not only the leadership but  also the heads of the intelligence agencies there and discussed levels of cooperation,  because a number of Australians are travelling through Lebanon to reach Syria, and  now we're concerned that they're moving from Syria into Iraq.

Other countries are likewise deeply concerned about this, and I've been having  discussions for quite some time with counterpart foreign ministers in Malaysia,  South-East Asia, Europe, the United States. And it's a global issue, but we are  particularly concerned with the reports of Australians who are heading off not only to  train but to take leadership roles in radicalising others. And of course the fear is that  they will come back to Australia with these newfound abilities and talents in  terrorism.

FRAN KELLY: Minister, given the concerns, and as you say, you've been in  discussions for quite some time on this, we know this week, because images were  posted on Facebook, at least two Australians were, it seems, involved in the murder  of Iraqi civilians in this latest fighting in Iraq.

One of the men, Khaled Sharrouf, has been convicted and jailed here in Australia on  terrorism. He left the country last year for Syria on his brother's passport. How did  that happen? Why wasn't he being monitored and does that suggest security is too  lax?

JULIE BISHOP: We have adopted a whole of government approach to this issue. And  as we did with Operation Sovereign Borders in relation to stopping the people  smuggling trade, we have adopted a whole of government approach where our  relevant agencies and ministers and departments are involved in coming up with  solutions, analysing the issue, reviewing situations, including the circumstances  where Mr Sharrouf left Australia on his brother's passport. If he has…

FRAN KELLY: How did that happen though? How was a convicted terrorist, jailed  terrorist, allowed to get out of the country even if it was under his brother's name?

JULIE BISHOP: It won't be helpful for me to go into specific security arrangements  and intelligence matters. Suffice to say we can confirm he left Australia on his  brother's passport.

I have cancelled a number of passports when it's been reported to me that  Australians are seeking to leave or in fact are seeking to come back from fighting in,  particularly, Syria. But as I said, we are receiving reports that they are also in Iraq  where ISIS is fighting the Iraqi security forces, and so we are doing what we can  across government.

It is a topic that is engaging the Australian Government at every level. Our National  Security Committee is discussing this matter and we are working out ways to ensure  that Australians are safe from what I find to be a deeply disturbing development in  our domestic security.

But there are many dimensions to the conflict in Syria and Iraq. There is a  humanitarian crisis that is unfolding, and Australia is playing its part in supporting  agencies that are providing humanitarian support for those displaced people as a  result of the conflict. There's the sectarian nature of this conflict between the Sunnis

and the Shias, and then of course there's the emergence of this particularly barbaric  form of terrorism in this ISIS group, so barbaric that even al-Qaeda is distancing  itself from its activities.

FRAN KELLY: I'll come to some of those other elements, but to stick with this notion  of the Australian jihadists, you've said you've cancelled a number of passports. How  many passports have you cancelled so far, and is that the policy now to revoke  passports?

JULIE BISHOP: A number of passports have been cancelled. I won't go into the  details but it's quite a few, and this has been the practice of previous governments.  The previous Labor government also cancelled passports when the intelligence was  presented to indicate that this person was a threat to our security. And I will continue  to monitor the advice of our intelligence agencies, but I do act and do cancel  passports when I receive such advice. And we are considering…

FRAN KELLY: And Minister, how do we know who poses a threat? How do we prove  that?

JULIE BISHOP: We have our intelligence agencies both in Australia and overseas  cooperating with other intelligence agencies, and these people's activities are being  monitored and assessed all the time. So we are ever vigilant to ensure that  Australians are kept safe from those people who are seeking to take up with terrorist  organisations and join these jihadist movements overseas.

Now, it's deeply disturbing, and that's why the Australian Government is taking this  very seriously and is adopting a whole of government approach so that all relevant  ministers, agencies and departments are involved in seeking to solve this problem.

FRAN KELLY: Minister, Australia is sending a small force to Baghdad; how many  soldiers are going or are there and what will they be doing?

JULIE BISHOP: It's a small element of our SAS (Special Air Service) and they are  there purely for the purpose of ensuring that our diplomatic staff at the embassy in  Baghdad can leave if that becomes necessary.

Now we have in place arrangements with the United States, who have a much bigger  presence in Iraq. We already have an arrangement that they will assist should we  need to evacuate, but we thought it prudent to have our own SAS specialist element  there to assist if need be.

I spoke to our ambassador, Lyndall Sachs, last night. I've spoken to her from time to  time to ensure that our staff are safe. She says the situation in Baghdad is tense but  calm. There was a very big demonstration yesterday in the streets but that seemed to  go off peacefully, and she assures me that our staff in Baghdad are safe and secure.

There are contingency plans in place should they need to evacuate, but we thought it  best to have some Australian soldiers there to assist as well. They're there with the  consent of the Iraqi government, of course.

FRAN KELLY: Can you confirm a report this morning suggesting that the Australian  embassy staff are currently shredding documents in case our embassy and those  documents might fall into the hands of ISIL fighters?

JULIE BISHOP: Our embassy is making contingency plans should we have to  evacuate them. But at this stage there is no discussion about that beyond putting in  place those contingency plans.

The ambassador assures me that we have a core element there. They are still doing  diplomatic work, including consular work, although that is limited because, as the  Australian Government has said on numerous occasions, Australians should not  travel to Iraq and if they are in Iraq they should be making plans to leave. If they are  staying, because they're a long-term resident or a dual national or working with a  company, then they must ensure that their personal safety is taken care of.

FRAN KELLY: Is there any chance Minister…

JULIE BISHOP: Because we have a small staff there, there's only a limit to any  consular work we'd be able to provide to any Australians.

The Baghdad airport is still operating, commercial flights are still operating. So we  urge any Australians that don't need to be there to come home.

FRAN KELLY: Is there a chance that Australia could agree to any greater military  involvement in Iraq?

JULIE BISHOP: I don't envisage that situation. Certainly the Iraqi government has  not requested support, has not requested Australia to provide any military support.  The United States has not requested us to do so.

What we are doing is providing humanitarian support in the form of money. We've  provided $5 million to the UNHCR (United Nations Commissioner for Refugees) and  the World Food Program for immediate basic supplies - hygiene kits, water, food,  shelter - for the 500,000 people it's estimated are leaving cities in north-west Iraq.  And this adds to those who have come in from Syria and also those who are displaced  by the previous conflict earlier this year. And it is a dire humanitarian situation in  Iraq.

FRAN KELLY: Minister, it's widely regarded that the solution here is ultimately a  political one, but it's also reported that US officials have told senior Iraqi officials  that the prime minister, Nouri al-Maliki, must leave office before America gets more  involved.

Is that your understanding and do you believe that the Iraqi prime minister, Nouri  al-Maliki, is not the leader Iraq needs now and he should step down? Is he under  pressure to do that?

JULIE BISHOP: I understand that the United States have made it quite plain that  they want to see much greater inclusivity in the Iraqi government. The trouble stems  for the fact that the Sunni leadership, the moderate Sunni leadership, feel excluded  from the Shia-dominated government. And there are calls, not just from the US, but  from across the world, and I join with those calls, for a much more inclusive  government that takes into account the concerns of the Sunnis, the moderate Sunnis,  who are currently feeling excluded.

There must be a government of national unity, and I know prime minister Maliki  called for that during the week.

Of course actions speak louder than words, so we are encouraging the government to  include the Sunni leadership so that together they can repel this particularly  repugnant form of jihadist group, ISIS. I do point out that ISIS…

FRAN KELLY: Let me just ask you deliberately. Do you think there is any chance of  the moderate Sunnis agreeing to be part of anything with al-Maliki in place, and, as  UN secretary general Ban Ki-moon has warned, any further involvement could be  counter-productive as they get involved with al-Maliki there - that the West will be  seen as part of the enemy?

JULIE BISHOP: Well, that's not the case at present. My ambassador assured us that  there is no anti-Western sentiment currently in Iraq, apart from obviously the  jihadists who are against everybody.

But the thinking at present is that the Iraqi government, it is a sovereign  government, must become more inclusive. Other countries are supporting the Iraqi  government's efforts to be more inclusive.

There must be a political solution because this sectarian divide between the Sunni  and Shia groups can spill out across the Middle East, and that would be catastrophic.

So the world is urging the Iraqi government to be more inclusive to find a political  solution because a military solution would be devastating.

FRAN KELLY: Minister, on another issue, the Australian Government has been in an  argument about changing the description of East Jerusalem from occupied to  disputed. Can I clarify this - is it your policy that the term 'occupied territories'  shouldn't be used at all, even referring to West Bank and Gaza?

JULIE BISHOP: No, this debate was about East Jerusalem, and it was a very  mischievous attempt by the Greens to try to turn this into a much greater issue than  it was.

I have repeatedly and consistently said there is no change in government policy. We  remain committed to the two-state solution. And I've said consistently that we  remain committed to UN Security Council resolution 242, which deals with the  events of 1967. But we refer to that..

FRAN KELLY: So just to clarify Minister because…

JULIE BISHOP: Can you just allow me…

FRAN KELLY: … because you've said this a number of times, though…

JULIE BISHOP: Can I just finish? We refer to the geographic location as East  Jerusalem as previous governments have done. The previous government referred it  to as East Jerusalem, former foreign ministers call it East Jerusalem; we call it East  Jerusalem. The Greens call it occupied East Jerusalem and the Australian  Government does not.

But we have not changed our policy. I made that position quite clear to the group of  ambassadors and representatives from Arab and Islamic countries that I met with on  Thursday. We've not changed our policy.

FRAN KELLY: So when Australia's ambassador to Israel, David Sharma, said a week  or so ago, "I think we call the West Bank the West Bank as a geographical entity  without adding any adjectives whether occupied or disputed, we'll just call it what it  is." Is that your policy?

JULIE BISHOP: Our policy is to commit to a two-state solution, and we call East  Jerusalem East Jerusalem. We are committed to the UN Security Council resolution  242 that came into being after 1967 and other UN Security Council resolutions, and  our position has not changed.

FRAN KELLY: Minister, just finally on another issue, the Australian journalist Peter  Greste, who was locked up in Cairo in December, will find out tomorrow, the court  will make a deliberation on whether he is released or whether he is convicted.

I understand you've been speaking to the new Egyptian foreign minister. Any news,  any indication on that front? Any good news for the Grestes?

JULIE BISHOP: Well, I spoke to the new Egyptian foreign minister, foreign minister  Shoukry, overnight. He has just been appointed because of the presidential elections,  and I re-emphasised our concerns about Peter Greste and the fact that he's been in  detention since last year. I pointed out that he's the only foreign journalist in these  circumstances, and I made the representations again that we wanted him home as  soon as possible.

The foreign minister took onboard what I had to say. This is a message that we have  given at every level we can find in the Egyptian government, whether it be the  current or the interim government previously. Our Prime Minister rang the interim

president, and I know he's seeking to make contact with the new president, president  el-Sisi.

So we are making representations at every level in the Egyptian government with a  view to ensuring that Peter Greste is home as soon as possible.

FRAN KELLY: Julie Bishop, thank you very much for joining us on Insiders.

JULIE BISHOP: It's been my pleasure.



