The Hon. Scott Morrison MP  Minister for Immigration and Border Protection





Breach of privacy, Manus Island incident, Bali  drug charges, Operation Sovereign Borders  Wednesday, 19 February 2014

Interview with Ben Fordham, 2GB Sydney Live with Ben  Fordham

Ben Fordham: Scott Morrison the Immigration Minister joins us in the studio right  now. Minister good afternoon.

Minister Morrison: G'day Ben.

Ben Fordham: How was the traffic.

Minister Morrison: It was shocking out there and so it's pretty wet and I am sure  there are plenty of people trying to wind their way through it.

Ben Fordham: You made it in the end, that's the main thing. A lot of things to talk to  you about this afternoon I don't know where to start to be honest because there is so  much going on but let me kick off if we can this embarrassing security breach, how  did this happen.

Minister Morrison: Well it was inadvertent, it is unacceptable and I have certainly  conveyed that view and this is something the government obviously has to take  responsibility for and as Minister it is my responsibility to fix it and when these  happen, things happen I think that's exactly what you've got to do.

Ben Fordham: How did it happen.

Minister Morrison: Well it was inadvertently there was a link provided to another file  off the website so it wasn't up there readily assessable with a big 'click me for secret  information'. That's not what occurred. What occurred was there was a document  which had a summary of detention statistics which is something we do every month  and there was a link which required other add-ins to enable and access that  information. Now that has all been taken down. That information can no longer be  accessed and KPMG have been engaged to get to the bottom of the issue and we  should have an interim report on that next week. We've also asked the media outlet  which actually accessed this..

Ben Fordham: That's the Guardian.

Minister Morrison: The Guardian, we will be asking them, I should say, to provide  us with advice of who they may have passed this information on to.

Ben Fordham: So you haven't asked them to do that yet.

Minister Morrison: We are in the process of doing that now. That's a legal process  we are going through.

Ben Fordham: Are you concerned that they are going to be sharing the information  with the ABC.

Minister Morrison: Well all we want to do is get the information back, Ben. I think  that is the important thing. This is very private information it shouldn't be out there in  the public domain. I don't want it out there in the public domain I'd like it returned to  us those that have it and particularly the Guardian who I understand has it and I'd  like an assurance that it hasn't been passed on to anyone else.

Ben Fordham: You mentioned today in a statement that you released well it was  suggested that there might be disciplinary action against the person who released it,  is that right.

Minister Morrison: Well that's a matter for the Department Secretary but these are  all the actions that I would expect them to be undertaking. I mean it is just  unacceptable but as Minister I have to take responsibility for these things.

Ben Fordham: Are you embarrassed.

Minister Morrison: Of course I am. This should not have happened and the reasons  for it need to be fully understood and it should never happen again but I am not  going to blame contractors, I am not going to blame the weather, I am not going to  blame as the previous government did everybody other than themselves. They used  to blame me when I was opposition for their mistakes. But it is my responsibility to fix  it and that is what I am going to do.

Ben Fordham: Can we now go through the Manus Island situation. One man, we  believe a 24 year old Iranian Kurdish asylum seeker is dead. Two people have been  flown to an Australian hospital one is being treated for a gunshot wound, the other  for a cracked skull. Another man believed to be in a serious condition at Port  Moresby hospital after having his throat slit. More than 70 others are injured. Off the  back of what you have just said about your responsibility as Immigration Minister  how much responsibility do you claim for this.

Minister Morrison: Well some of the information you have just gone through, Ben, I  can't confirm because some of it is speculation at present I mean I have no reports of  a person's throat being slit at all and that is something that is being put around by  refugee advocates today. That hasn't been put around in any official report or  confirmation by me. What we have been doing at Manus Island is putting in place an  expanded capacity and increased security presence. There have been constant  sweeps through this facility to ensure that what happened last night was not far  worse. I mean what happened the other night was serious, it was a major incident.

That incident was responded to and that centre is operating today. I can't say the  same thing, Ben, for what happened after the Nauru centre burnt down. If you want  to talk about a meltdown of a centre, that was a meltdown it literally melted down.

Ben Fordham: Alright, let's leave Nauru for now and let's go through Manus Island.  Can we go through this step by step for a moment.

Minister Morrison: Sure.

Ben Fordham: So Sunday night, is it right that these asylum seekers were told they  would not be settled in Australia.

Minister Morrison: Well that has always been the position. The suggestion that was  put out in the media was that they were told that they wouldn't be settled in Papua  New Guinea and that they may be assisted to be settled somewhere else. Now that  was never true and they were told what the standing policy was and that is that they  would be settled in Papua New Guinea.

Ben Fordham: Ok, we are piecing a lot of this together based on what you said in  your briefing yesterday and a mix of other things, other reports are out there and as  you'd understand, as you'd appreciate when there is a lack of detail or information  people do have to fill in a few gaps.

Minister Morrison: Well to be fair I have given two very fulsome press conferences  on this. I gave a press conference on the other incident that occurred on the Sunday  and Monday and I have provided all the information that has come to hand to me.  Now if others want to provide speculative reports and noise and chatter well I'd  encourage people to ignore that and stay focussed on the official reports that I have  provided.

Ben Fordham: They are focussing on you right now because those are reports that  you gave to the media and I agree yesterday lengthy press conference but not  everyone listening to this program was able to hear all of that so why don't you just  explain what happened on Sunday night on Manus Island. Let's go to Sunday night.

Minister Morrison: Well on Sunday night there was an incident that involved people  on both sides of the fence and there some protests.

Ben Fordham: When you say people on both sides of the fence are you talking  about people inside the detention centre.

Minister Morrison: Yeah there were people inside the detention centre and there  were people on the other side of the fence. That was the Sunday night incident.

Ben Fordham: and what happened.

Minister Morrison: Following that incident we had a breach where people got back  inside and while that was a serious incident it was managed and there were no  serious injuries on that night.

Ben Fordham: You are skipping ahead a little bit on me. I just want to find out so  that people can visualise what is going on. I understand there is a detention centre  there and people are being held in there. What happened on that Sunday night.

Minister Morrison: Well on Sunday night there was some exchange between  people on the outside of the centre and those on the inside.

Ben Fordham: And when you say exchange were they verbal exchanges or..

Minister Morrison: Well all of these things, there had been some rolling protests  inside a lot of chanting a lot of noise those sorts of things and there was an  exchange between people on both sides of the fence. That was Sunday night.  Sunday night was not the serious incident Sunday night was the modest incident.

Ben Fordham: But there were eight people arrested weren't there on Sunday night.

Minister Morrison: There were, they were.

Ben Fordham: And 19 people at the medical clinic.

Minister Morrison: Correct, but these injuries were nothing like what we saw on the  following night. On the following night was a very serious incident and obviously  involving the tragic death of one individual and that will be subject to the proper  investigation in Papua New Guinea.

Ben Fordham: The external part of the detention centre is guarded is it not.

Minister Morrison: Yes.

Ben Fordham: By whom.

Minister Morrison: The other side of the fence and particularly well beyond that  fence is the domain of the Papua New Guinea authorities. So their police force which  is both a regional and those from the national police force.

Ben Fordham: Is there a riot squad of sorts that is involved outside.

Minister Morrison: Yes.

Ben Fordham: So do we know why there were these exchanges verbal and maybe  otherwise going on between outside and inside when there is a riot squad outside.

Minister Morrison: In addition we have perimeter security which is provided by our  local service contractors G4S and they were the ones involved in mostly in that event  that took place on the Sunday night. On the Monday night when there was a much  more significant breach. On the Sunday night there was around 35-37, I think Ben,  people there and who were able to get past the centre and they were taken back up  to the centre. On the Monday night it was far more significant and as you said 77  people had to be treated for injuries. One person was deceased.

Ben Fordham: Why was this person shot.

Minister Morrison: Well that wasn't the person who is deceased that was the  person that was shot in the buttocks.

Ben Fordham: I am going to go to that first. Why was this person shot.

Minister Morrison: Well we don't that information yet Ben and nobody does.

Ben Fordham: Do we know who fired the shot

Minister Morrison: No, we don't.

Ben Fordham: We don't know whether it was PNG police or…

Minister Morrison: We don't know that, no.

Ben Fordham: Could it have been someone else other than PNG police.

Minister Morrison: Well Ben I don't speculate, I just tell you what I know and what I  know is that at the moment is we don't know how that person was shot and by who  and in what circumstances.

Ben Fordham: Let's go to the death of the person who suffered head injuries. Is that  right passed away with head injuries.

Minister Morrison: That's right.

Ben Fordham: What happened then.

Minister Morrison: Well also we don't know Ben. This was a fairly significant  incident in the middle of the night, there was a lot of activity, a lot of motion. Where  that event even took place, that incident took place I can't confirm for you at the  moment.

Ben Fordham: You don't know whether it is inside the detention centre.

Minister Morrison: No we don't know and that's what I said yesterday at the press  conference.

Ben Fordham: And you haven't learnt any more information in the last 24 hours.

Minister Morrison: No we don't know Ben and that is why there will be a proper  investigation conducted by the PNG authorities into the specific incident of the  person who is deceased.

Ben Fordham: You'd be keen to find out from the PNG authorities and government  to say hey listen and I don't mean to be paraphrasing and guessing what is going on  inside your head but if I was the Minister I'd be wanting to know did it happen inside  the detention centre that we are responsible for or outside.

Minister Morrison: Well these are important facts to know Ben but I think…

Ben Fordham: No one has given you an answer to that.

Minister Morrison: No because Ben this was an incident that took place less, well  within the last 36 hours, last 48 hours and it is not uncommon when you have an  incident of this nature and this scale for the details not to be able to be established  for some time so it is important that we be patient, that we get the facts right and that  we don't lead to conclusions and we don't entertain and give oxygen to what frankly  at the moment are some fairly hyperventilated claims being put around by refugee  advocates who frankly have one objective here Ben and that is to have Manus Island  shut and that is not going to happen.

Ben Fordham: It's a pretty volatile situation going on there isn't it you must be  concerned about the future of the facility.

Minister Morrison: That is why I sent General Campbell up there, he will be there  tomorrow. He will be taking an assessment of things there and he is authorised to  take actions up there that he thinks are appropriate and he will report back to me.  But I want to stress again Ben. This was a very serious incident but at the end of the  day the response and the security we put in place meant that the next morning the  centre was up and running. The centre is operating, its operations have not been  the, have not been shut down and I think that is great tribute to the people who were  involved in responding to the very serious incident.

Ben Fordham: Ok, there has been a high level review underway, onto another  matter now, into whether or not the Royal Australian Navy breached Indonesian  sovereignty several times I know that, I think it was yourself or certainly the  government the Australian government..

Minister Morrison: General Campbell and I.

Ben Fordham: Yeah, were worried that this happened on six occasions or  something like that. You have now got some news on that I understand.

Minister Morrison: That's right the review, the report has been released this  afternoon by the Chief Executive of Customs and the chief of the Defence Force.  And it confirms that there were six occasions where Indonesia's territorial waters  were breached. It is very clear that the government's policies and operational  instructions that the operations they were involved in had to be done where it was  safe to do so and they were not to incur on Indonesian sovereign territory within the  12 nautical mile zone of their archipelagic baseline. So instructions were very clear, it  finds that those instructions were provided and that the incursions were inadvertent.  There were some..

Ben Fordham: It was an accident.

Minister Morrison: It was an accident and that is being briefed to the Indonesian  government over the last few days.

Ben Fordham: Have you apologised.

Minister Morrison: I already had. I did that several weeks ago when those  incursions took place as did the government formally and the foreign minister and  others.

Ben Fordham: So the formal apology happened weeks ago but there is not extra  apology or extra dialogue. You just update them on your view.

Minister Morrison: We undertook to update them on the review and reasons for  how this occurred and we have done that in some detail with the government of  Indonesia. The opposition was briefed on that this afternoon and that is why that  report is now only being released today. It was to happen yesterday but  understandably Mr Marles was engaged in matters in his own electorate yesterday  regarding Alcoa so we were happy to do that.

Ben Fordham: What is your take on review into all of this, I mean accidents do  happen is that the way that you..

Minister Morrison: Well that is what has happened and it is highly regrettable. It is  not something anyone would like to have seen happen but it has happened and the  important thing is that the measures as the report finds have been put in place to  ensure that it doesn't happen again.

Ben Fordham: Have you committed to your Indonesian counterpart that it won't  happen again.

Minister Morrison: Yes. That is what the government has done to the government  of Indonesia and that has been passed on formally through our ambassador.

Ben Fordham: Have you heard the news about this woman from Sydney's east that  has been arrested in Bali on drugs charges.

Minister Morrison: I have only just heard that report Ben but that doesn't relate to  my responsibilities as the Immigration Minister.

Ben Fordham: Ok, you would be concerned about that wouldn't you about another  case of an Australian resident being caught up in drugs charges in Bali.

Minister Morrison: Well of course, sadly there are many Australians offshore  overseas who find themselves in these situations and as a local member of  parliament on occasions I have had to get involved in trying to assist people in those  situations as our Department of Foreign Affairs does on a regular basis and do a  very I think excellent job in trying to support people in those situations.

Ben Fordham: I interviewed your opposite number Richard Marles about an hour or  so ago and he was claiming credit for the boats stopping. He was explaining how it  was the policy put in place by Labor the PNG solution and the fact that after the PNG  solution was in to play and leading into the election there was a 90 per cent  reduction of some sort.

Minister Morrison: I am afraid the Labor party is delusional on this issue. We know  that the reason there has not been a successful people smuggling venture get to  Australia in the last now nine weeks is due to this government's policies, particularly  those we are implementing at sea. Their policies, the previous government, never  had the resolve, will or interest in implementing. The issue on Manus Island I think  highlights the reason why you would have such a breadth of polices we have  implemented. They have talked about Manus Island being the cornerstone well with  the previous Government it was their only stone. It was their only stone that they  were dragged kicking and screaming to implement and when they did frankly they  did it in half measures. It was under funded, it was under capacity.

We have doubled the capacity at Manus Island since it was established, we put  hundreds more security officers since we took office, and we put in place force  assessment reviews immediately. One of the first things that General Campbell and I  did we were concerned about the security status of the facility and I think that was  borne out by the events of the last few days. Now the events are regrettable but at  the same time in a difficult situation where the centre was tested the centre is  standing unlike what happened on Nauru or Christmas Island or Villawood.

Ben Fordham: You have got a lot of people, thousands of people who are being  delivered news that they don't want to hear and we presume that is what has  happened in Manus Island as well I mean..

Minister Morrison: People don't want to be there, Ben that is no great secret. They  hate it.

Ben Fordham: Why are they here is it worthwhile reminding people why they are  here.

Minister Morrison: Well they have illegally arrived in Australia and they are subject  to a policy which said you will be processed offshore and they didn't get what the  people smugglers promised them and we are denying the people smugglers the  fulfilment of their promise.

Ben Fordham: Do you believe that boats have stopped now for good.

Minister Morrison: I am not claiming that at all. What I can claim is that for the last  nine weeks not one venture has successfully got here and over that same period  around 1500 people turned up last monsoon season over the same period. So we  are having good success Ben, it is due to the strong suite of policies. You don't do  this with one measure as the previous government is now claiming. That just shows I  think how clueless they are on what it takes to stop the boats. Had they not, had they  been re-elected and had they not then implemented all the measures that we now  have Manus would have fallen over months ago. It would have been overwhelmed in  terms of capacity. It would not be able to fulfil the policy objectives that they said it  would and equally the big claims about resettlement in Papua New Guinea well we  are having to do that. It was a blank page about how they were going to do that,  they'd agreed nothing in detail we are having to do that job.

Ben Fordham: Just lastly you have been criticised in some quarters for not sharing  enough information and always falling back on operational reasons as a reason for  not giving a lot of that detail. I have said on air many times that I thought it was a  master stroke in not providing those daily or 48 hourly updates every single time a  boat arrived because you took control of the situation but will we reach a point six  months, twelve months down the track where you can share with the Australian  people information about our borders like how many boats were turned around.

Minister Morrison: I think we may Ben and that is a decision for down the track. Our  focus now is on making sure that the operation works and does the job of stopping  the boats.

Ben Fordham: But we are not going to have to wait 30 years for cabinet documents  to be released are we.

Minister Morrison: Look I would strongly doubt that but that is something that  General Campbell would consider once we are at a much more advanced stage of  this operation but we can't be complacent about it. We can't get ahead of ourselves.  We certainly haven't. We will have a full independent inquiry into what happened up  at Manus, Ben; I know the opposition has been claiming something different of that.  We are conducting exactly the same review and the same process that applied in  Nauru when it burned down, Christmas Island when it burned down, when Villawood  when it burned down under the previous government.

Ben Fordham: When someone dies in a detention facility run by the Australian  government does the Australian immigration minister send condolences to the family  of the person who died.

Minister Morrison: Well I did that yesterday in my statement and we are in the  process of trying to advise the family and other relatives where we can of this  person's passing so it was very disappointing that refugee advocates chose to go  and put the nationality and release the name of the person. I thought that was very  unfortunate and very irresponsible but that is what I have become used to from a  concerted campaign by refugee advocates that try and shut down this government's  policies. My message to them is very simple, it won't happen.

Ben Fordham: We'll talk to you soon, Scott Morrison thank you.

Minister Morrison: Thanks Ben.

Ben Fordham: Immigration Minister Scott Morrison on Sydney Live.



See: Index of Speeches

URL:http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/sm/2014/sm211927.htm   Last update: Thursday, 20 February 2014 at 10:39 AEST



