

MICHELLE ROWLAND MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR CITIZENSHIP AND  MULTICULTURALISM  SHADOW ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR

COMMUNICATIONS  MEMBER FOR GREENWAY





E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  THE PROJECT  MONDAY, 24 FEBRUARY 2014

SUBJECT/S: Manus Island.

CHARLIE PICKERING: Michelle Rowland is the Assistant Shadow Minister for  Immigration. Michelle, isn't he just implementing your policy?

MICHELLE ROWLAND, SHADOW MINISTER FOR CITIZENSHIP AND  MULTICULTURALISM: I think we need to remember that a terrible tragedy  occurred here, at least one person has died and there have been injuries. I would  like to firstly go to the fact that this was a policy that was initiated by Labor on the  basis that we would see a drop, a dramatic drop in the number of drownings at sea.  And we have seen that. That was a direct result of that.

STEVE PRICE: It sounds like you're trying to dodge the question. Charlie is right -  you reopened Manus, you negotiated the deal with New Guinea, you put the  company in charge and we have a man dead. You can't have it both ways. Labor put  Manus back on the program. That is where this man has died. If anything it's Labor's  fault?

ROWLAND: And Scott Morrison is the responsible minister today. This is the person  who is no longer in opposition and who talked tough when he was in opposition and  is now the responsible minister. Even in Question Time today he could not have the  buck stop with him. The key questions of what did you know, when did you know it,  failed to be answered by this minister.

PICKERING: Over the weekend we saw thousands attend vigils looking for a more  compassionate approach to asylum seekers. Is part of the problem is that both  major parties have opted to pander to those who want cruelty over compassion?

ROWLAND: I think there are a couple of things. I know a number of people who  went to the vigils, people who I'm close to and people who feel strongly about this  issue. I can appreciate the strong feelings that they have about this situation. At the  same time I think we need to recognise that the Australian people were sick and  tired of seeing people dying at sea. It was a completely intolerable circumstance.  That is why the arrangements were put in place under Labor and we saw an almost  immediate drop in the number of people arriving by boat.

PRICE: You're not seriously claiming Labor stopped the boats, are you?

ROWLAND: Look at the figures yourself.

PRICE: I have looked at the figures.

ROWLAND: There was an immediate drop, an almost immediate drop in the  number of boat arrivals as a result of the July 2013 policy being put in place. That's  a fact.

PICKERING: I put it to both of you - is that just a reminder and perhaps a  suggestion and a wake-up call for all of us that this whole situation is more  complicated than saying, "stop the boats". Let's say you've stopped the boats, you  stop the boats and now people are dying in camps. So I say to all of you, you can  win an election on a slogan, but you haven't solved the problem. I think all sides of  politics need to say how do we solve the problem?

ROWLAND: I can fully appreciate why people are sick and tired of this being  treated like a political football. One thing that we have under Australia's control is  the treatment of people in these detention centres. That is something that we need  to get right. We can't have this sort of intolerable situation occurring where people  are dying, and where we don't have full information from the government about  what is happening.

PICKERING: Thank you for your time.

ROWLAND: My pleasure.

ENDS



