

TRANSCRIPT OF RADIO INTERVIEW ABC891 ADELAIDE  Date:  19 February 2014  HOST: Every Wednesday, we like to talk national affairs with two very powerful men.  They’re heavy hitters. They’re from South Australia, but they’re heavy hitters on the federal  scene. They are, of course, Christopher Pyne, Federal MP for Sturt and Education Minister  and Leader of the House. Good morning, Christopher Pyne.

CHRISTOPHER PYNE: Good morning, David.

HOST: And Mark Butler, Labor MP for Port Adelaide and Opposition Environment and  Climate Change spokesman. Good morning, Mark Butler.

MARK BUTLER: Good morning, everyone.

HOST: It’s nice to have you both in the studio.

PYNE: It’s nice to be here.

HOST: Now, Chris Pyne, how do you counter the view that following the Alcoa decision, that  you’re a part of a government that is prepared to sit on its hands while industry after industry  goes to the wall - Alcoa, GMH, Toyota, SPC?

PYNE: Well, Labor gave Alcoa $40 million two years ago and Alcoa are announcing that  they’re closing this week. So the Labor Party gave $40 million of taxpayers’ money to Alcoa  effectively to keep them open for two years. Now people I think would question whether that  was an useful expense of taxpayers money. The best thing that we could do in government,  and for the Labor Party the best thing they could do, is support the measures we have  introduced that would help grow the economy again, to reduce energy prices by abolishing  the carbon tax, by bringing back the Australian Building and Construction Commission by  abolishing the mining tax -

HOST: Lower wages and conditions?

PYNE: By passing $20 billion worth of savings, $5 billion of which are Labor’s own savings.  So, Labor is standing in the way of the government’s program to fix the economy and then

blaming the government when there are job losses. Now they can’t have their cake and eat it  too.

HOST: Mark Butler?

BUTLER: Well, I don’t think we blamed the government for the job losses at Alcoa. I don’t  think you’ll see anyone on the record yesterday doing that. We have said that the  government has some blame for the death of the car industry and I think that’s a different  situation. Alcoa is suffering a global, not slump but collapse, in aluminium prices and two  years ago when we put forward a package for a couple of years to see whether Alcoa could  get through this period we were hoping - and I think all of us in Australia were hoping - that  aluminium prices would recover. They collapsed by about 40 per cent in the last five years.  But it’s clear that there’s so much over-capacity and so much oversupply coming out of  China that that’s not going to be the case. But what I think we’re getting very frustrated  about, and the Australian people are getting frustrated about, is this palaver about the ‘the  mining tax caused the death of the car industry’ according to Joe Hockey in Parliament last  week. It’s very clear from Alcoa that the carbon price had absolutely nothing to do with the  closure of Alcoa announced yesterday. Yet we see, Joe Hockey, Ian McFarlane, a whole  range of other Cabinet Ministers trying to connect the two. We just want a serious jobs plan,  a very serious jobs plan from this government and we’re not getting that.

HOST: Can you put this in some sort of context for us? We had the global financial crisis  and now something else is going on with all of these industries which are closing down. Is  that on the same scale as the global financial crisis was for this country? Can you put it into  some sort of context, Mark Butler?

BUTLER: Well, I think there’s a structural shift happening -

HOST: Is that structural change as significant as the global financial crisis was in terms of  jobs and people having a wage packet?

BUTLER: Well, I think it will be. Unemployment has already reached a level it hasn’t been at  for 10 years. We were very fortunate in Australia because of cooperation by business, by  unions, by government to get through the GFC, which was a time-limited period where the  banking system had to get itself back into shape. This is more of a structural shift we’re  facing, one that’s been exacerbated by -

HOST: So, this is the bullet we dodged?

BUTLER: No, this is one that’s not connected to the banking crisis that came out of the  GFC. This is one connected to an oversupply of aluminium in the country, in the car industry  - a very competitive car industry that does require government support - and a very high  dollar that doesn’t seem to be coming down.

HOST: Christopher Pyne, perhaps it’s deeper, more significant than the global financial  crisis was?

PYNE: In Labor’s last budget they forecast that unemployment would rise and  unemployment is rising. There are a number of important economic factors that are playing  into this. There’s the high Australian dollar, which has been high for a long time. It is the cost  of doing business in Australia. And one of the reasons that the government wants to reduce

regulation and red tape, bring back the ABC, introduce a registered organisations  commission, abolish the mining tax and the carbon tax, review the renewable energy target,  is to reduce costs in the economy, reduce the cost of business, and make Australia a place  where people are open for business again.

HOST: Someone died on Manus Island. Mark Butler, the Labor Party have got nowhere to  go in this one have they, in terms of being outraged over that particular detention centre  because it was set up by Julia Gilllard, it was expanded and reinforced by Kevin Rudd, so  this is your policy and the consequences of it.

BUTLER: Well, you’re right. The PNG arrangement was particularly in its current form of  arrangement was struck by Kevin Rudd in his short time as Prime Minister before the  election and it has been the decisive factor in the drastic reduction in the number of boat  arrivals over the last several months. All of the evidence says that. But what it did require -

HOST: Oh, you stopped the boats?

BUTLER: Have a look at the data. It’s quite clear that the numbers started reducing  drastically before the election. After the PNG arrangement -

PYNE: Keep a straight face, Mark.

BUTLER: Not as Christopher would have it, that the day Tony Abbott took the keys to the  Lodge -

PYNE: Don’t start smiling, Mark.

BUTLER: What it has always required is very serious ongoing attention by the Australian  Government to ensure that arrangements in Manus Island and in Nauru for that matter -

HOST: So, you created the environment, you created the powder keg, whatever you want to  call it -

BUTLER: We don’t walk away from the fact that the arrangement was struck under Labor,  but it was always struck with a responsibility on the Australian Government’s part, which is  now Christopher’s government, to ensure that things run smoothly, and a particular  responsibility to ensure a high level of transparency and that’s what this current Minister,  Scott Morrison, seems utterly incapable of.

HOST: Christopher Pyne?

PYNE: Well, I have to hand it to Mark Butler for audacity. He takes out the gold medal if that  was a Sochi sport -

BUTLER: That’s rich? coming from you, Christopher.

PYNE: Well exactly, I’m in a good position to judge and I judge you as the gold medal  winner. In 2008, Labor abolished the Howard Government’s policy to protect our borders.  From that time until 2013, over 50,000 unauthorised arrivals came, there having been a  trickle in the previous seven years. We’ve been elected and we’ve introduced the policies to  turn back the boats where it’s safe to do so, offshore processing, and an attempt to introduce  temporary protection visas, which Labor continues to block. And the boats have stopped. We

haven’t had an unauthorised arrival in eight weeks. So I think the public know who’s  responsible for stopping the boats. What happened on Manus Island is very upsetting. It’s  quite tragic. I notice Mark Butler didn’t show any great compassion for what has occurred  there. There’s an investigation - in fact, he wanted to take credit for it - there’s an  investigation, the Department of Immigration -

HOST: [inaudible]

PYNE: Well, he was. He was trying to take credit for Manus Island without making any  comment about -

HOST: Well, you’re both taking credit for Manus Island.

PYNE: Well, I’m taking credit for stopping the boats. The point is that there’s an investigation  by the PNG -

HOST: You don’t like Manus Island?

PYNE: - by the PNG police, there’s an investigation by -

HOST: The Manus Island solution -

PYNE: There’s an investigation by the Department of Immigration into what happened on  Manus Island, but the fact remains that if people weren’t trying to come to Australia in an  unauthorised way, they would not be on Manus Island and they would not be on Nauru. And  when the Howard Government lost in 2007, there were three people in detention in Australia.  There was nobody on Nauru. There was nobody on Manus Island.

HOST: Is there a suggestion within the government that the problems on Manus Island are  being whipped up by friends of the people smugglers and that is that if there are riots, the  only way to try and crack the system now is to burn the joint down?

PYNE: I don’t know the answer to that question.

HOST: Do you suspect that? Is there any talk going on? We know you have long policy  debates now in Coalition Cabinet meetings.

PYNE: Which is a good thing.

HOST: Yeah. Has anyone suggested that?

PYNE: Uh no, not that I’m aware of.

HOST: Mark Butler?

BUTLER: Look, I haven’t heard that suggestion. I’ve heard a number of suggestions going  around over the last 24 hours, and I think that’s why it’s important that there be a  comprehensive and transparent investigation into what’s happened at Manus, which as  Christopher said has been a terrible, terrible event with the loss of life and very serious  injury.

HOST: But is the thinking, the cruel, terrible arithmetic of this situation that as sad as it is for  one man to die, that is still preferable to a whole boatload of people drowning?

PYNE: Well, we want to stop the boats -

HOST: Because of the humanitarian crisis?

PYNE: There is two reasons why I think it’s very important we stop the boats. Number one,  we don’t want tragedies at sea that we saw, unfortunately, on an all too regular basis under  Labor. Secondly, the government has to have a policy that means that those people who  apply to come to Australia as refugees from overseas are not put back in the queue by those  who come here in an unauthorised way. We have ot have a policy that is robust and fair to  everyone.

HOST: Chris Pyne, just coming back to jobs. We know you think Alexander Downer’s going  to do a good job as High Commissioner of London, but do you think Mike Rann is qualified to  do a good job as the Ambassador to Italy?

PYNE: I don’t think there’s been any announcements about these -

HOST: Now, you’re the one who’s smiling.

PYNE: That’s because I’m smiling at you because I haven’t seen you for so long. It’s nice to  see you.

HOST: Yeah. Beware the smiling politician.

PYNE: This is mere speculation.

HOST: [laughs]

PYNE: When the announcements are appropriate to be made, they’ll be made.

HOST: That’s code for Alexander Downer is going to London and Mike Rann is going to  Italy.

PYNE: Look, I don’t make those announcements. The Foreign Minister does.

HOST: So you’re totally unaware of it?

PYNE: They haven’t been discussed with me.

BUTLER: I think Christopher is smiling because he’s finally going to see the back of his  factional nemesis Nick Minchin. He will be able to exert his vice-like grip even further on the  South Australian Liberal Party.

PYNE: They’re all very valued colleagues and friends.

BUTLER: [laughs]

HOST: Now, you’re both smiling.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: SAMANTHA REGIONE 0412 642 387



