

THE HON AMANDA RISHWORTH MP  SHADOW PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY FOR HEALTH  FEDERAL MEMBER FOR KINGSTON



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  ONLINE INTERVIEW  BREAKING POLITICS   FRIDAY, 23 MAY 2014

SUBJECT / S: Tony Abbott’s Budget of Broken Promises; Tony  Shepherd; Polls; GP Tax; Immigration.

CHRIS HAMMER: Well joining us now is South Australian Labor MP Amanda  Rishworth. Good morning.

AMANDA RISHWORTH, SHADOW PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY FOR  HEALTH: Good morning.

HAMMER: Now the architect of the Commission of Audit Report on the budget  Tony Shepherd, has had a go at sectional interests such as educational interests,  saying stop complaining, we’re trying to share the burden equally. Tony Abbott  has said the Government is striving to be fair. Is this a fair budget?

RISHWORTH: Well it’s not a fair budget. And I think when I’m out and about in  the community people are telling me that they believe that they were lied to  before the election and that they are being attacked now by the Abbott  Government. In terms of what Tony Shepherd had to say, he represents vested  interests as well. He is a spokesman for the Business Council of Australia and I  can imagine that if for example the Government chose to the company tax rate,  he’d be having something to say about that. So, this burden is falling  predominantly on ordinary Australians, when it comes to costing more to see the  GP, when they’ve had family payments cut, when those single mothers have had  big cuts to their income and their Newstart. I think that there is a lot of pain  been felt by ordinary Australians and the Labor Party has made it clear we’ll stick

up for them. When it comes to education, the work done by David Gonski was  incredibly thorough and it wasn’t just about insuring that individual children get a  great education; that was something really important. But it was also about  lifting the education of our whole country, so that we can perform better in a  globalised world. So I fail to understand why the Government is cutting this  when they promised before the election they wouldn’t. But for Tony Shepherd to  suggest he doesn’t have vested interests, well, he does, just as many other  people out there do.

HAMMER: Now I believe that the Labor Party’s most encouraged by the opinion  polling this week. Both the party polling and the polling in newspapers like the  Fairfax papers. I understand that Caucus has had a phone hook-up. What’s the  mood in the Party? Do you believe this could be a one term Government?

RISHWORTH: Well look, I’m not really actually focused on the polling. I’m  focused on standing up for my electors and standing up to the principles that I  believe in and that the Labor Party believes in. And I’ve been out and about at  train stations over the last week. I’ve had street corner meetings last weekend  and people are very upset. They believe that they’ve been deceived, they believe  that this budget isn’t fair and they believe that there is no understanding from  this Government about what ordinary people will go through. And I think that  nothing is clearer than the confusion around the $7 co-payment that we’ve seen.  The sort of suggestion that you can just give up a packet of cigarettes or a  couple of middies of beer and then you’ll be able to go and pay to see a doctor.  When I’m out there talking to people, they’re pretty shocked by that and those  comments. And they are really saying to me that people in the Liberal Party don’t  understand what it’s like to live on an ordinary wage.

HAMMER: Okay, you’ve been out at railway stations, as you say, you’ve been  having street corner meetings. That sounds like an election campaign. You  wouldn’t do that every week. Has basically Labor geared itself up and said ‘okay,  let’s go into campaign mode, we can make the most out of this’?

RISHWORTH: Well look, I have to say that I’m out and about all the time. I get  out and about to my train stations on a pretty regular basis. And I talk to people.  I have a program of street corner meetings and I think that most people, most  MP’s are regularly out and about with their constituents. What I’ve been -

HAMMER: But you’d be completely mad not to put an extra effort in at the  moment. Surely that’s part of Labor’s plan.

RISHWORTH: Well look, I am currently seeking my elector’s views about what  they think about the Medicare co-payment and about the costs, which is really a  Medicare Tax. And I am getting overwhelming feedback from people saying that

they were deceived, that Tony Abbott lied to them before the election and  they’re feeling very upset about it. And so I’ll be out and about talking to my  electors and making sure that I represent their views in the Parliament. But there  is a lot of concern. Another regular comment that’s made to me is, with all of the  budget speculation and all of this discussion: where is the Government’s plan for  jobs? There’s no plans for jobs in this budget and so people are feeling very  disappointed, very deceived and really frustrated with a Government that seems  they don’t understand what it is to live on an ordinary wage.

HAMMER: Okay. Now we’ve seen these protests emerging on University  campuses this week, are they going too far? Do you think the students are doing  their own cause service, roughing up Liberal politicians etcetera?

RISHWORTH: Look I think any form of physical violence is completely  unacceptable and I think that it is doing a disservice to what is a very legitimate  concern. The legitimate concern about the cuts to education and the potential  increase in fees to higher education, is of particular concern. So I can understand  that concerns and the upset that these students have. However, it is  inappropriate to have any form of physical violence. I think it should be deplored.  And I think really to get the message across, physical violence is never, ever  appropriate.

HAMMER: Okay, Amanda Rishworth, on another subject; that of asylum  seekers. The Government appears to be flagging changes to the legislation  covering asylum seekers who are already in Australia and the process they go  through to achieve refugee status. It’s reported that the ultimate aim of these  changes is to reduce the success rate for Australian refugee claims. Is it too easy  to become a refugee in Australia?

RISHWORTH: Well look, there’s been a very clear process to become a refugee  in Australia and that process is clear and transparent. In terms of the article, and  I can only go on the article that was published, there’s seems to be some moves  about speeding up claims and certainly I think that the principle of ensuring that  claims are settled as quickly as possible so there’s certainty for those involved, is  very important. And certainly in principle, I would support ensuring that claims  are more quickly processed. However, they need to be done in a fair and  transparent manner and I think that there is very little detail in the article about  how that might be achieved. So, I think I would, and I think the Labor Party  would like to see the detail of what’s proposed. But obviously anything has to be  done in a fair and transparent way.

HAMMER: Because the suggestion here, increasingly is that people are being  accepted as refugees who don’t deserve that.

RISHWORTH: Well look, obviously there’s been a very clear process and when  you talk to people that have achieved refugee status, I’ve talked to a number of  people who have certainly been fleeing persecution and quite awful  circumstances. I couldn’t speak, I haven’t done a proper analysis of the whole  system. But certainly any process that’s in place needs to ensure that we are  properly going through, and it’s transparent, it’s fair, and that it actually does  occur as quickly as possible to give people certainty.

HAMMER: Alright, Amanda Rishworth in Adelaide. Thank you so much for  joining us.

RISHWORTH: Thank you.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: REBEKAH HUPPATZ 0422 687 199



