The Hon. Scott Morrison MP  Minister for Immigration and Border Protection



Asylum seeker allegations, Operation Sovereign  Borders, children in immigration detention,  Australians fighting in Syria  Monday, 03 February 2014

Interview with Ray Hadley, 2GB The Ray Hadley Morning Show

Ray Hadley: Joining us in the studio the Immigration Minister Scott Morrison.  Minister G'day.

Minister Morrison: G'day Ray.

Ray Hadley: Nice to talk to you again. I picked up the front page of the Australian  newspaper today, Mark Scott is a decent bloke and I have had a little bit to do with  him not recently but when he was at Fairfax. The managing director of the ABC Mark  Scott has hit back at accusations his journalists have failed to practice of editorial  rigour in the way of the recent asylum seeker claims and maintains he has strong  support for the ABC despite a deteriorating relationship between the broadcaster and  the Government. But what I am disappointed about and I don't think you should ever  apologise to Government, it is not the role of a broadcaster to apologise to  government despite the fact that I had to to Wayne Swan over another issue at  another time. But it seems to me that he is refusing to apologise to the Navy.

Minister Morrison: Yes, that's the bit that surprises me Ray. I mean people make  mistakes and I think clearly on suggesting that the Indonesian police statements  which merely just repeated the asylum seekers' claims in any way backed up those  outrageous slurs against our Navy - I mean why the ABC wants to stand behind that  report and not apologise to the Navy I just find a bit surprising. People make  mistakes, they should just simply apologise to the Navy for that. It is not about  apologising to the government I think that completely misrepresents the situation.  This is about a slur against the Navy, a report that said it backed up claims of these  sorts of outrageous torture allegations and that is simply not the case as their stories  have changed I don't know how many times since then and they should just  apologise and move on.

Ray Hadley: You were sitting there opposite Sarah Hanson-Young on Friday when  she made these claims, we played previously, take one more listen:

Senator Hanson-Young: …High seas being, being publicised. Now yet we have a  television show publicising techniques that you are using for border security at

airports. We have another television show of course about the coast guards. There  does seem to be a little bit of a double standard here.

Australian Customs and Border Protection Service CEO Michael Pezzullo:  Sorry Senator the TV show about the coast guards, sorry is that the fictional Sea  Patrol program? I don't know which one you are talking about.

Ray Hadley: How did everyone stop themselves from bursting out laughing? Now  we have ascertained we think she meant Sea Patrol on the Nine Network but she  could well have been talking about another program that does deal with coast guard  which is produced out of New Zealand. Nothing to do with the Australian  Government.

Minister Morrison: I think Senator Hanson-Young does struggle a little bit between  fact and fiction particularly when it comes to these issues and if the facts don't suit  her argument then fiction will do and I think what we saw on Friday was I think Labor  and the Greens teaming up once again to attack the Government for border  protection policies that are working and Senator Carr got all terribly worked up.

Ray Hadley: What was he on about? He was talking about you didn't read  documents relating to your portfolio, what's that about?

Minister Morrison: If he showed as much interest in their border failures when he  was a cabinet minister when over 800 boats turned up as he does in my reading  habits then maybe the story of their government might have been different. I mean  this was a pedantic point that he was pursuing but the bottom line is this - Labor and  the Greens have teamed up to attack the government for stopping the boats and  they continue to do it. They never seem to learn from their mistakes and in  opposition they seem to have not shifted an inch.

Ray Hadley: It just seems to be that they can't cope with the embarrassment. I mean  and it has been done because, I have said it all along and there are different  methods by which you can do it as we saw through the Howard Government back in  2001-2002, but the bottom line is if you don't have the resolve you will never achieve  it. Now previous Prime Minister's both Gillard and Rudd didn't have the resolve.  None of their ministers in charge of your portfolio had the resolve they just didn't  want to do it.

Minister Morrison: It was the missing link in the whole thing and when policies were  implemented, dragged kicking and screaming to implement them, they were never  going to have the impact and what we have been able to demonstrate is not only do  we have the resolve but our Navy and Customs and Border Protection personnel,  our immigration staff, our federal police, everyone who works in Operation Sovereign  Borders has the professionalism and the wherewithal, and the integrity to get the job  done. I think they are the real heroes of this exercise so far, Ray. We have still got  many rounds to go but they are the ones implementing the policy. They are doing it  well and we appreciate their efforts.

Ray Hadley: Now doesn't mean they won't come again but no boats for six weeks at  the moment. That's the first time that has happened in January what, for six years?

Minister Morrison: That's right, I mean we've had two persons transferred in the  last couple of days for medical reasons but no boat has got here.

Ray Hadley: No boat, and there is no truth in the suggestion that given her  performance on Friday Senator Hanson-Young is looking to transfer people from  Christmas Island not to Manus Island or Nauru but rather to Gilligan's Island.

Minister Morrison: Not to my knowledge Ray. Not to my knowledge.

Ray Hadley: You know when you watch Law and Order too Senator, that's not true  either. And they put that right at the start of the show.

Minister Morrison: That's true. Look what I think a lot either in the media or in the  Labor Party or the Greens, they want to treat Operation Sovereign Borders as some  sort of reality television show for some sort of voyeuristic interest. Now that is not  what we are running here. We are not running Operation Sovereign Borders for the  entertainment of Labor and the Greens and some media outlets. We are running it to  stop the boats and that is what we are focussed on and if people don't like the  transmission at the moment well we are sorry about that but it is not going to change  our resolve to continue with a way of handling information which General Campbell  gave evidence before the Senate last Friday that the way we handle information is  helping us stop the boats.

Ray Hadley: One of my listeners Wendy said ‘the Minister is being very diplomatic,  Miss Hanson-Young is a complete nit-wit.' Well that may be your view and I'm sure  the Minister can't express that sort of view but judging by the email traffic it is shared  by many, many people. We spoke recently on another matter, dual citizenship  between Syria and Australia. There is another story today about the type of people  going to fight there for both sides of the conflict. Are we any closer to a decision on  what we do with these 120 Australian men actively engaged in the conflict in Syria?

Minister Morrison: Look, we are making a lot of progress on this Ray. There is not  much I can say publicly on this at the moment. The Attorney General has been,  George Brandis, has been shoulder to the wheel on this now for some months ever  since we came into Government and we are going to keep working away on that and  when we have got something to announce Ray, then certainly we will.

Ray Hadley: Ok, just back on Friday they have been posturing to force you to  release details, and you said on this program as late as last year and when I  returned this year, that that wouldn't be happening so where does it go to from  Friday's amateurish performance by Sarah Hanson-Young, what happens next? Is  that it?

Minister Morrison: Well they will consider it further. I understand a reporter told me  as I left that they could so resolve to send me to jail if they wanted to if I don't  produce the documents. I don't think anything will get to those sorts of absurd levels  but look it's up to the Senate to do what they want. I mean it was the first time in 22  years a member of the House of Representatives had appeared before a Senate  committee and the reason I did that Ray was a) I was going to front up and b) I  wasn't going to allow Labor and the Greens to attack General Campbell and General

Hurley and Mike Pezzullo the CEO of Customs for an afternoon of sport for their own  entertainment. I stand behind those guys every step of the way.

Ray Hadley: It has never gone that far but in the past your counterparts from the  then Labor Government also refused to disclose documents relating to other matters.

Minister Morrison: Absolutely, on numerous and numerous occasions. I mean  Wayne Swan I remember on one particular issue decided that he would relent and  provide the information weekly, weekly - provide a statement weekly on things and  that was as far as he'd go. So look the hypocrisy of Labor on this issue is  breathtaking but what is even more concerning is that their amnesia about 800 boats  and 50 000 people turning up and over 1100 people dying is breathtaking.

Ray Hadley: Well the battle is not won yet.

Minister Morrison: No it is not.

Ray Hadley: We have stopped the boats for six weeks, we hope that extends to  twelve weeks and then eighteen weeks and hopefully we can get to the stage where  we got under the Howard Government in one year it went from 5500 odd people to  no boats, no people.

Minister Morrison: That's right and we will know in hindsight when this is achieved  and you just never take the pressure off and you never compromise your operation  and you deal with things as they come up and I noticed Ray that we are now going to  face another enquiry from the Human Rights Commissioner into children in  detention. I mean, we will cooperate with that inquiry but I think what is worth noting  about this is that there were over 1000 children in held detention when we came to  office, that is slightly less than what we inherit at the moment, but the reason there  are children in detention is because over 50 000 people turned up on illegal boats on  Labor's watch. So we are dealing with Labor's chaotic mess here and by all means  have an inquiry into children in held detention but understand the reason they are in  there is because the Labor Party's border failures were so dramatic. There were no  children in held detention when the Coalition lost office in 2007. There were over  1000 when Labor lost office.

Ray Hadley: Just in relation to this inquiry by the Human Rights Commission, at the  end of the inquiry what action can they take against anyone?

Minister Morrison: Well look they will make a series of recommendations which the  government can consider and they will make recommendations in relation to the  various international conventions how they see that applying and that's their view  and that has to be treated with respect and considered.

Ray Hadley: But not acted upon?

Minister Morrison: Well that's a matter for the government, always. The last time  that the Human Rights Commission decided to do an inquiry into children in  detention it was when the Howard Government was in office and now they are doing  one now the Abbott Government is in office…

Ray Hadley: Just stop there. So when we went from no children in detention when  they took office, the Labor Party, and then 1000 in detention when they lost office to  your government coming in, there has been no Human Rights Commission inquiry in  the intervening period…

Minister Morrison: No.

Ray Hadley: For all those children? Isn't that a coincidence, a strange coincidence  that over that period of time, that six year period we have no inquiry, immediately  they lose power, there's an inquiry?

Minister Morrison: Well that's for the Commission to explain but they engaged with  the Department over that period of time. There is some suggestion I understand that  my department hasn't been engaging with the Commission. I don't accept that. We  continue to engage with them. I met with the Human Rights Commissioner not that  long ago and we discussed a whole range of issues and I am happy to keep meeting  with them. We've all got to do our job. She has a job to do, I have got a job to do,  you've got a job to do, and we'll all keep doing our jobs and my job is to stop the  boats and that's what is happening.

Ray Hadley: Ok, thanks very much for your time.

Minister Morrison: Thanks a lot Ray.



See: Index of Speeches

URL:http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/sm/2014/sm211431.htm   Last update: Monday, 03 February 2014 at 14:24 AEST



