

THE HON RICHARD MARLES MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND  BORDER PROTECTION  MEMBER FOR CORIO

E&OE TRANSCRIPT  INTERVIEW with MARK PARTON - TALKING CANBERRA 1206 2CC  WEDNESDAY 13 AUGUST 2014

SUBJECT/S: National security, Scott Morrison’s secret deal with  Cambodia

JOURNALIST - MARK PARTON: G’day Richard.

RICHARD MARLES, SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND  BORDER PROTECTION: Good morning Mark. How are you?

PARTON: Excellent, major concerns about Cambodia but not big enough  concerns for us to stop going down the path of sending 1000 asylum seekers  there?

MARLES: Well the first question Mark that we need to have answered from the  Government is what are they actually doing? They have gone about their  business with asylum seekers behind a curtain of secrecy and we still really know  much more about this from the Cambodian Government than we do from our  own. It’s only in the last few days that we’ve had some sense of confirmation  from the Government that they’re even talking to Cambodia, so I think the first  question that we need to have answered is exactly what are they planning to do?

PARTON: And of course you know they won’t answer, you can ring Scott  Morrison’s office today and you can say can we get a confirmation that it’s  Wednesday and they won’t comment as that’s an operational matter.

MARLES: And that’s one of the real problems here, this is a Minister who hides  behind the veil of secrecy so he does not have to answer legitimate questions

which are in the public interest, but he’s happy to lift that veil of secrecy on the  good days. I mean he’ll go and beat his chest when it suits him but when we’ve  got difficult news, hard questions to answer, really important questions to  answer, this is a Minister who goes missing and it’s not good enough. And I think  a lot of the points you raised in your introduction there are good points to make.  What safeguards are there going to be in terms of the issues that are persisting  in Cambodia today and also if we’re really serious about going to Cambodia, then  what could possibly be the problem with an arrangement with Malaysia three  years ago?

PARTON: And I think we know what the problem was, it was your idea.

MARLES: Well it was our idea and it had the real prospect of resolving this very  issue three years ago, and you look at all the misery that has occurred since then  and I think this whole issue now brings out the hypocrisy in the actions of the  Coalition three years ago in relation to Malaysia.

PARTON: And look, at the other side of that is the fact that whether you agree  or disagree with the way that Morrison’s gone about his business, the flow of  asylum seekers has virtually stopped.

MARLES: Well the point to be made there Mark, is this all could have happened  much earlier had the Coalition in opposition been willing to work with the  Government at that point in time and I think one of the points that needs to be  made now is the Government enjoy an opposition which is completely committed  to seeing the end to the flow of asylum seeker vessels which has been  supportive of offshore processing and which has fundamentally been willing to  work with the Government on the thrust of its agenda to bring an end to the  flow of boats, that’s a very different set of circumstances than what we enjoyed  when we were in Government.

PARTON: Sarah Hanson-Young has tweeted this morning basically saying that,  now hang on a second I’ll read it again for you, she says “no time for excuses,  the Abbott Government needs to offer genuine humanitarian assistance by giving  protection to Iraqi refugees, an emergency increase to the Australian  humanitarian intake to help offer safety to Iraqi refugees and moratorium on  returning those already here.” Your thoughts?

MARLES: I think what we’re seeing in Iraq, it is a real human tragedy, the  actions of ISIS, I think are concerning the whole world, and what we’ve seen on  Mount Sinjar is just absolutely appalling. Firstly in relation to the American action  there, we need to see the detail of what the Government’s planning, but we are  basically supportive of the Australian Government in its support of the efforts of  the United States to deal with this issue. I think in terms of the question of what

we do in relation to providing asylum, all of that needs to be considered, but the  real issue right now is making sure that we do everything we can as an  international community to bring to an end the humanitarian situation that is  existing in Iraq.

PARTON: But I guess in answer to the specific question Sarah Hanson-Young’s  talking about, an emergency increase to Australian humanitarian intake to help  offer safety to Iraqi refugees, what are your thoughts on that?

MARLES: We need to be talking with the global community about what sought  of assistance is needed in terms of that, what meaningful role Australia could  play, and how we could participate in that, and I think that’s the real answer to  that question.

PARTON: It doesn’t seem like an answer at all though Richard.

MARLES: It’s easy to come out with a set of words that Sarah Hanson-Young  has now, but what I want to understand is what would the international  community be asking of Australia in relation to this and how we could  meaningfully contribute. And I think when we have answered those questions,  we can then work out what we can do, and obviously Australia should be  disposed to helping in what is an absolute tragedy.

PARTON: Isn’t it. Interesting and fascinating to watch the goings on between  Australia and the US at the moment, the relationship we have with the US is  strong and getting stronger and I think most Australians are extremely  supportive of that.

MARLES: Absolutely, and it is our most critical, bilateral relationship in the world  today. It’s a very strong relationship. I was in the US a couple of weeks ago and  you just realise the extent to which our economies are linked, the extent to  which our security is linked and AUSMIN which is what we’ve seen play out over  the last few days, which is a bilateral meeting of Defence and Foreign Ministers,  is really in a principle means by which the relationship is maintained on a year to  year basis, and there’s a lot that we are doing together, and it is a very  fundamental relationship for Australia.

PARTON: I think it’s a pretty good time for us to have a strong relationship with  the US because the next ten years is going to be pretty interesting, we caught  up with Peter Leahy yesterday, the former head of the Australian Army, and I’m  sure you’ve been aware of some of the things that he’s been saying about the  potential for a 100 year war against radical Islam.

MARLES: Yes and I think we need to be careful about what language we use  but having said that, the images that we have seen on twitter in the last week  have been appalling, they are as appalling set of images that I can think I can  think of, and when you look at the sorts of experiences the world’s had over the  last 20 years, that’s a big statement but really thinking about it, particularly the  image of the young boy, is just absolutely astonishing, and I’m struggling to  come to terms with the idea that these people who have grown up in Australia  watching the same TV shows that we watch, experiencing the same culture that  we do, and yet they have taken this appalling path, and it is an issue that the  people streaming to Iraq and participating in the activities of ISIS is a global  concern and we as a global community and particularly through our alliance with  the US, absolutely need to be standing firm in relation to this and again bringing  that back to home in terms of the measures that the Government have  proposed, we want to see the detail of that, but our disposition is very much to  be supporting the Government in relation to a national security issue of this kind.

PARTON: Richard thanks for your time this morning.

MARLES: It’s a pleasure Mark.



ENDS

MEDIA ENQUIRIES: LIDIJA IVANOVSKI 0427 051 563

