

THE HON TANYA PLIBERSEK MP  DEPUTY LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND  INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT

MEMBER FOR SYDNEY





E&OE TRANSCRIPT   TELEVISION INTERVIEW  IN THE HOUSE, THE TODAY SHOW, CHANNEL 9  FRIDAY, 11 JULY 2014

SUBJECT/S: Carbon, Asylum Seekers

KARL STEFANOVIC: Big Clive Palmer, the wrecking ball that he is and joining  us to discuss all things and Clive and carbon, Malcolm Turnbull and Tanya  Plibersek. Nice for you to be with us this morning and in your hoodies, Tanya this  morning, which is a good cause.

TANYA PLIBERSEK: In our hoodies. Yeah, absolutely, raising money for the  Australian Indigenous Mentoring Experience, a terrific organisation that helps  indigenous kids finish school, finish uni.

STEFANOVIC: Alright, Malcolm, what happened with Clive, my friend?

TURNBULL: Well, there was a combination of confusion and a procedural issue,  some amendments that the Palmer group wanted - had to be initiated in the  House. But look, it is very disappointing. You know, the Palmer Senators all went  to the election promising to repeal the carbon tax, but you know more  importantly, Karl, the Labor Party went to the election promising to abolish the  carbon tax. Now, we are all fascinated by Clive's gyrations and comparisons with  Miley Cyrus and so forth, but the fact is that the carbon tax could have been  repealed if Labor had voted for its repeal. Labor is voting to keep a tax that they  said they would abolish.



PLIBERSEK: Well, here’s the point, though, Malcolm. Tony Abbott is out there  saying that if you get rid of the carbon tax, families will save money and then he  is refusing to guarantee that with legislation. You are trying to it make it sound  very complicated here, it is very technical. It is not technical. We are saying if  this really is going to save people money, why can't you guarantee it? Virgin,  Qantas, Woolworths they’ve all said they are not going to pass on any savings.  We have said all along that yes, we will vote for the repeal of the carbon tax but  you actually have to do something to protect the environment to reduce air  pollution. We say an Emissions Trading Scheme, that is what you used to say  when you were Liberal Party Leader too, on both these things, on passing on the  costs and doing something real about air pollution. You are failing.

STEFANOVIC: The reality is, Malcolm, that if you had just done what he said,  and you know it is a stuff up as well, he wants big penalties for gas and  electricity companies that don't pass on those price reductions, pretty simple,  why wasn't it done?

TURNBULL: Well, I think the- as I understand it, the issue in the Senate  became the nature of the amendments that Palmer wanted, were because they  were money bills needed to be initiated in the House of Representatives, and  hence we’ll have some amendments next week.

PLIBERSEK: It is just a shambles, Malcolm.

TURNBULL: Look- But- Hang on, Tanya. Everyone's focused on Clive and I think  that suits him to have everyone focused on him, but you guys could make it  happen. The Labor Party could vote to support the repeal of the carbon tax and  it could vote to support the mandate -

PLIBERSEK: Sure. And if you introduce an Emissions Trading Scheme to  replace it, we will. You need to do something real about air pollution, Malcolm.  Everybody agrees. Environmentalists, economists, the rest of the world is  moving, Australia is the only country going around backwards.

TURNBULL: Well look, we’ve- no one has been around debating this issue more  than me and I have for many years.

PLIBERSEK: That's right. That's right.

TURNBULL: But I’ll just say this to you, the one thing that is quite clear is that  the Coalition got a very clear mandate at the election to repeal the carbon tax, to  repeal the Emissions Trading Scheme and to introduce a new program, direct

action and Labor should support that, they should support the will of the people  as expressed last September.

PLIBERSEK: Well, the will of the people chose this Senate too.

STEFANOVIC: Ultimately though, look it does have the appearance of being  chaotic and if it looks like it’s chaotic and smells like it, it probably is. This was in  the lead up to the last election. This was how the Coalition was describing the  government of the time.

[Video footage] ABBOTT: What an absolutely shambolic mess that this  Government has become. This is a chaotic Government. It seems to be fighting  starting with everyone.

[Video footage] PYNE: This Government is starting to resemble a scene from  Downfall.

[Video footage] ABBOTT: This is a government in chaos with the Prime  Minister no longer in charge. This is the team to provide strong and stable  government.

STEFANOVIC: Malcolm, if you don't sort out the Senate you’ve got massive  issues.

TURNBULL: Well, it is obviously better to have a majority- well, better to be  able to get your legislation passed in the Senate than not. But I just say, Karl,  that there is a big difference between today and last year. The Labor Party's  whole survival as a government depended on the support of independents in the  House of Representatives. They were being dictated to by those independents.  Yes, we don't have a majority on the floor of the Senate in our own right but you  know very few governments ever have. So, there is a fair bit of colour and  movement at the moment but the situation in the Senate is pretty much situation  normal in Australian political history.

PLIBERSEK: I don't think anyone would call the situation normal.

TURNBULL: What was remarkable under Gillard was she didn’t have a majority  in the House.

STEFANOVIC: Well, effectively Clive's doing your job better than you are at the  moment. For the Opposition - he’s a great hand for you guys at the moment,  isn’t he?

PLIBERSEK: Well, he is a very colourful political performer and he is certainly at  the very least protected the Australian Renewable Energy Agency, the Clean  Energy Finance Corporation. He said that he will help us defend the renewable  energy target, all that is really important. We need to have more renewable  energy in Australia.

STEFANOVIC: Just quickly Malcolm, I just want to ask you about asylum  seekers. The Australian carries a story this morning with claims, very serious  claims that these asylum seekers are being by coached and encouraged to self-harm by refugee advocates who then use the incidents as political capital. Are  you aware- are you able to comment on that story at all?

TURNBULL: No, I'm not. I am aware obviously of the claims but I really - I  don't want to comment on something that I've got- that I don't have first-hand  knowledge of.

STEFANOVIC: I understand, well, if that was the case?

PLIBERSEK: Well, I mean I don't know any details other than what I have seen  in the paper this morning. I think it is a terrible concern if people are self-harming.

STEFANOVIC: Indeed. Just finally, on a much lighter note, can we all take time  at the end of the working week, the political week, to take in this wonderful  photo of the Prime Minister with his Japanese counterpart. If we just have a look  at that photo. There he is. What a way to end the week. Malcolm, is that  something you would be into?

TURNBULL: Well, he is promoting a great Aussie product, RM Williams boots.

STEFANOVIC: Indeed.

TURNBULL: And it will be a kangaroo hide led escalation of the relationship  between Australia and Japan and RM Williams boots.

STEFANOVIC: And sake. You're alright with that, Tanya, aren't you? It’s like  George Negus style.

PLIBERSEK: I'm not sure I can add anything [laughing].

STEFANOVIC: Thank you guys for coming in today, we appreciate it. (RAP  MUSIC PLAYS) Malcolm, we’ve got a bit of ghetto music if you want to put your  hoodies on, it’s for a good cause, just whack that hoodie on top. Malcolm, come  on, come on Tanya. She is doing it.



PLIBERSEK: I'm game.

STEFANOVIC: There you go. Just let it go, just like this.

TURNBULL: Tanya looks like a - you look like one of the - an elf with that.

PLIBERSEK: Little Red Riding Hood.

TURNBULL: You do and you’ve even got the matching shoes which is fantastic.  Show Tanya’s matching shoes.

STEFANOVIC: Just do it, Malcolm.

PLIBERSEK: I put a lot of thought into it.

STEFANOVIC: Come on just a little hand gesture or something, let it go  Malcolm.

TURNBULL: No, no, I’ll be right.

STEFANOVIC: You’re too uptight.

TURNBULL: Yeah that’s right.

PLIBERSEK: He’s not really. Just on TV.

STEFANOVIC: No, no, he’s very cool. Thank you, nice to see you, Tanya.  Thanks, Malcolm.

TURNBULL: Thanks, guys.

STEFANOVIC: It’s a great cause, too.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: DAN DORAN 0427 464 350

