

GAI BRODTMANN MP

SHADOW PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY FOR  DEFENCE  MEMBER FOR CANBERRA



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW  2CC INTERVIEW WITH MARK PARTON    THURSDAY, 13 NOVEMBER 2014



SUBJECT/S: Lambie/PUP, Renewable Energy Target, Children in  detention; War correspondents memorial.

MARK PARTON: Well look, I wanted to talk first up guys if I could, about the  amazing Jacqui Lambie. I don’t know if the two of you have laid eyes on the  interview last night on the 7.30 report. You’ve seen it Gai - have you had a look  Zed?

ZED SESELJA, LIBERAL SENATOR FOR THE ACT: No I haven’t  unfortunately; I was at an event that went pretty late last night so I missed it.

PARTON: Some of the things that Jacqui Lambie said, she pretty much indicated  that she was a stand-alone, lone wolf, you know, I going to do my own thing.  And you just wonder how a political party can function in this fashion, Gai?

GAI BRODTMANN, FEDERAL MEMBER FOR CANBERRA: It was interesting  seeing her interview last night, but it really is an internal matter for the Palmer  United Party. And what I’m concerned about Mark is not what’s happening in the  internals of PUP, but what’s happening to this town under the Abbott  Government.

PARTON: So that’s a great dodge from Gai. Zed you can dodge by saying you  didn’t see it?

SESELJA: Well look no I’m not going to dodge it. A couple of things - I’ve said  publicly before and I’ll say it again - I don’t think Jacqui Lambie is a positive  influence in Australian politics. I haven’t seen anything from her so far that  indicates that she’s bringing much to the table. But can I say another thing in  response to what Gai has said. The reasons these things are important, what  happens in PUP, is because Labor votes against everything, along with the  Greens, so they empower PUP. And they make them very powerful -

PARTON: This is another thing that’s Labor’s fault?

SESELJA: Well when Labor and the Greens vote against 99 percent of legislation  that comes through the Senate, that does make PUP very powerful and therefore  everything that Jacqui Lambie says becomes far more important. If we had a far  more constructive Labor party, who was actually looking to learn from their  election loss, then PUP would actually be nowhere near as influential because  like things on the Renewable Energy Target that we’ve seen this week, we could  negotiate with the Labor party, rather than the crossbenchers.

PARTON: Gai, you’ve put power in the hands of the Palmer United Party…

BRODTMANN: I just want to pick up on Zed’s point on the RET. The fact is that  this has been bipartisan over many, many years. There’s been a bipartisan  approach on the RET and what we’ve seen this week is that the government is  not really committed to a genuine way forward. And that’s putting thousands of  jobs at risk, and it’s also putting a great deal of uncertainty out there for  business.

SESELJA: We’re committed to a real 20 percent and that’s the problem. We’re  actually seeing that that’s going to be around 27 percent. 20 percent is what we  committed to, 20 percent is what we remain committed to, and I’m not really  clear why the Labor party walked away from this because in the end we will have  to negotiate with the crossbenchers. I think it would have been better if there  had been a deal between the Labor party and the Coalition because that would  give the long term certainty that we need. But unfortunately that’s not going to  be the case.

PARTON: If you want to come clean this morning Gai you can, in terms of what  role you played in getting those protestors to sit in Zed’s office all day. Come on,  come on, did you crowd source these people?

BRODTMANN: I mean these protests have been happening for a while around  the country. I understand there have been 13 similar peaceful protests around  the country, and I had nothing to do with it.

PARTON: Zed, I heard you on this radio station late that afternoon and I  thought you spoke really well about the fact that hey, this is Australia, and one  of the beautiful things about this place is that you do have the right to do exactly  what these people did?

SESELJA: That’s right, and in the end they were entitled to protest, that was  fine. They weren’t entitled unfortunately to indefinitely occupy the office, and  that was where it sort of came to a head.

PARTON: So how ugly did it get in the end?

SESELJA: Oh look, I don’t think it got ugly at all. I think these protestors  wanted to make a point, I think that some of them particularly wanted to get  arrested to make their point. And look that’s fair enough. I disagree with some of  their conclusions. I disagree with the, I guess, policies that they advocate,  because the reality is, since we’ve come to government not only have we  stopped the boats, but we’re seeing less and less children in detention. Which is  certainly something that I want to see, but that’s what’s been happening under  our government - we aren’t seeing people drown anymore, we’re not seeing the  people smugglers in charge anymore. And we are seeing what is known as the  ‘legacy case load’ - those who came under the previous government now dealt  with. The sooner we can deal with that the better for everyone, but you can only  do that properly when you get control of the borders - as we have.

PARTON: It’s interesting having a discussion about asylum seekers with a Labor  and Liberal representative on the line. It’s not really all that exciting. If we had  someone from the Greens here, they’d be really adding to this debate. I note  that there are 13 million people, is that the figure that they’re talking about,  displaced out of this war in the Middle East, and you wonder where they’re all  going to go?

BRODTMANN: It’s a real challenge actually because you’ve got people going  into Jordan. I saw the Jordanian ambassador at a function just recently, and she  was talking about the millions that have arrived in Jorden. Turkey has got many,  many refugees as well. So they are spilling out into the region, and it’s a  challenge for the world.

PARTON: It is a big challenge. I think we’re still going to be talking about this,  and talking about it ferociously when we get to the next poll… I wonder when  the Labor position is going to change.



BRODTMANN: In terms of what? We’re quite clear on this Mark. Our view is  that we want to stop people from getting on boats. We want to stop people from  making that dangerous journey by sea. The regional solution was voted against  by the Coalition, as well as the Greens.

SESELJA: Mark, we had the extraordinary thing recently where Richard Marles  acknowledged that turn backs were working, and Bill Shorten couldn’t bring  himself to say that is does. So, we already see that there will be a policy shift in  terms of what’s been successful, and that would be tragic. This goes well beyond  politics. The last time this policy was changed, it was disastrous and we saw  thousands of people drowning. So let’s not forget that, that policy changes in this  area actually have a real impact on human beings. In the case of the former  government it led to thousands upon thousands of people getting on that  dangerous journey, and for some people unfortunately never making it.  So I  hope the Labor party won’t try and roll this back at any time, but unfortunately  we’re still getting mixed messages in opposition.

PARTON: Alright, let’s talk further about this war correspondents memorial. War  correspondents, who have risked their lives so that audiences back home knew  the realities of the conflict, are going to be honoured with the construction of a  new memorial at the Australian War Memorial here in Canberra. This is  wonderful, Gai?

BRODTMANN: It is wonderful news. I got wind of this when I was at a US  alliance event earlier this year, and it is wonderful news. And what’s even more  wonderful is, as you know C.E.W Bean has had a very strong connection with  Canberra. He wrote a lot of his chronicles out at the Tuggeranong Homestead,  and so I really applaud this initiative. War correspondents play an important part  in telling our war history, in chronicling our history and our story. And so I think  it’s a great initiative.

SESELJA: Look it is, I’m really pleased the government has committed to this. It  is another way of telling out history, because we obviously first and foremost  honour our war dead at the War Memorial. 102,000 people who have died in the  service of our nation at war, but obviously the war correspondents were often  putting their lives on the line. And what they did was not only chronicle the  history, but allowed the Australian people to know what was going on, which is  critically important. So I think it’s long overdue.

PARTON: It’s dangerous, dangerous work, and we’ve certainly seen quite a  number of near tragedies and absolute tragedies involving journalists in the last  12 months -

SESELJA: Well that’s right, we’re seeing them locked up, we’ve seen them  executed, we’ve seen some absolutely terrible things happening so it’s still a  very, very dangerous thing to be a correspondent in war zones.

PARTON: Zed, thanks for coming on this morning.

SESELJA: It’s my pleasure. Thanks Mark, thanks Gai.

PARTON: Thanks Gai Brodtmann.

BRODTMANN: Thanks Mark, thanks Zed.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: CLAIRE WHEATON 0422 370 036

