

THE HON BILL SHORTEN  LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  MEMBER FOR MARIBYRNONG

E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  ABC INSIDERS  SUNDAY, 9 NOVEMBER 2014

SUBJECT/S: China Free Trade Agreement; G20; Taxation; Defence pay cut;  Asylum seeker policy; Rebuilding Labor; Ebola.

BARRIE CASSIDY, HOST: Bill Shorten, welcome.

BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Good morning, Barrie.

CASSIDY: We will pick up on those labour issues in a moment, but just on the deal  itself - this is something that has been negotiated now for about a decade or so and  it looks as if Tony Abbott is about to seal the deal.

SHORTEN: I saw Andrew Robb's comments and where he says he doesn't want this  deal to be attacked for being a scare campaign. What I’d just say to Andrew Robb is  tell the Australians the truth. What is in the deal? What we have seen this week with  the Free Trade Agreement - and Labor goes with the principle of free trade, that is  why we supported the Korean deal and the Japan deal - is what’s in it, what's the  good news and the bad news? This week the Government has been leaking out  selectively good news. I just want to see all the detail, and the Government should  tell Australians what’s really the case.

CASSIDY: It does seem that the last piece of the puzzle was access for Australian  farmers, and in return of course there has to be increased investment opportunities  for the Chinese here in Australia.

SHORTEN: I think there's a number of issues which we will carefully study in the  detail of the agreement. First of all, does China - will China lift tariffs on our mineral  imports, especially in aluminium and iron ore? What will they do about sugar? The  live export beef deal looks promising, that part of it. I am also going to be curious,  will Andrew Robb get a deal which is equal to or superior to the deal that New  Zealand has? There’s a lot of detail. Labor has been constructive on trade  agreements. What frustrates me is the Abbott Government’s so addicted to politics

that they treat Australians as silly by selectively leaking out bits and pieces and  holding back information and then softening up the people to see - for whatever  nasties they may have in it.

CASSIDY: But you know with these sorts of things it’s give and take. And you’re  now throwing in demands that perhaps the Chinese rejected, but in the end they've  been able to strike a deal that Labor couldn't.

SHORTEN: We haven't seen what the deal is first of all, Barrie, so to that extent  we're having a hypothetical discussion. In terms of the matters which I raise, it's not  just a demand to say that sugar should get access to Chinese markets, it is not just  a demand to say that China should lift the tax as it's put on our iron ore going into  China. Everyone knows iron ore prices are very low and now we have got extra  taxes to pay on it. I think that a trade agreement is good if it works for your national  interests. A trade agreement is bad if it doesn't. We're interested in the creation of  jobs and trade, but not necessarily just signing up to anything like a blank cheque.

CASSIDY: On that issue of Chinese workers now, and what Andrew Robb did say  there, he gave a guarantee there would be no cheap Chinese labour, that Chinese  would be paid at Australian rates.

SHORTEN: Again, it’s all in the detail. When it comes to trade, Labor believes in  having open borders, we believe in international trade. We also want to make sure  that it creates jobs, it doesn't just take Australian jobs. I know the Government is  sensitive about unemployment. I have been travelling through regional Queensland  in the last week and before then through northern Tasmania. Unemployment is a  real problem. We have got discouraged job seekers dropping out altogether, we’ve  got high levels of youth unemployment. The Government promised a million new  jobs. They’ve got no chance of achieving that target. So Labor will stand up for  making sure that we deal with opportunities for unemployed Australians as well as  promoting trade.

CASSIDY: But you are not saying as part of this that the Chinese can't bring their  own workers out under some circumstances?

SHORTEN: We just haven't seen that detail. And frankly, if there is a big  development in Australia I would rather see Australians get the opportunity to be  employed first. And that is not a case we shouldn't have guest workers, Australia has  always had guest workers. But Labor understands the real misery which occurs  when people are unemployed. You and I both know there are many older  Australians who’ve just given up looking for work because the job market is not  what it should be be. So when this Government says ‘look, we’ve managed to have a  meeting in another capital and conclude a trade agreement’, for Labor the detail  always matters.

CASSIDY: On the G20 summit now, and there does appear to be early signs that  Tony Abbott and the G20 partners will reach some sort of agreement on global  growth by 2 per cent. That would be quite an achievement on Tony Abbott's part,  wouldn't it?

SHORTEN: What will be the achievement is if we get global growth by 2 per cent  more than is expected. I want the G20 to be a success. This is not a matter of  politics. It was Wayne Swan, Julia Gillard who helped lead the negotiations to get  the G20 here. Tony Abbott and Joe Hockey get to bring in hopefully some of the  opportunities which arise from having the world's leaders in Australia. What I also  know though is that we need leadership at the G20. For me, what I will be  interested in - and what millions of ordinary Australians will be interested in -  arising from the G20 - is are we advocating for inclusive growth or austerity? Are we  arguing for policies which increase jobs or don't? And will we deal with the issue of  climate change? The Government doesn't want to talk about the elephant in the  room. The rest of the world is moving to take real action on sustainable policies to  tackle climate change and we know the Australian Government has slammed  Australia into reverse gear and is taking us backwards.

CASSIDY: On the issue of the crackdown on tax avoidance, now given the  revelations from Luxembourg during the week, do you expect any sort of global tax  agreement to emerge from the meeting?

SHORTEN: I think many nations in the world have ignored the problem for a long  period of time. But now we see the aftermath of the Global Financial Crisis and  falling government revenues. Governments are feeling the pressure from ordinary  people to say,  ‘hey, why is it we the people pay our taxes, yet if you’re a  multinational corporation you can shift your profits and go hunting for the best tax  jurisdictions in the world?’ It is wrong in Australia that a high street newsagency can  pay more tax than Google or Glencore in Australia. But the problem for the  Government is they discover that they need to do something about taxation, but  they always have a plan to increase taxes on the poor.

CASSIDY: But Joe Hockey has been saying the same things that you're saying now.

SHORTEN: But the difference is Joe Hockey's actions don't match up to his words.  One, he proposed to put on a tax on going to the doctor. Two, he is proposing to  make it more expensive to get a higher education in Australia. Three, he has cut  back the Australian Tax Office efforts to collect taxation from multinationals. So this  is a bloke who loves to say one thing but when it comes to actually doing what he  says you get a different prescription altogether. You and I know that they would  rather increase the GST by blackmailing the states and cutting their funding, than  they would chase multinationals for taxation earned in Australia.

CASSIDY: Vladimir Putin, now there will be a meeting apparently, with him,  between Tony Abbott and Vladimir Putin in Beijing and that will clear the decks. And  you would think that would be the sensible way to go about it, rather than have  some sort of diplomatic incident in Brisbane?

SHORTEN: I’d sympathise with Tony Abbott's initial position about Putin. For me -

CASSIDY: What, with the shirtfront?

SHORTEN: No, not the shirtfront. His initial position. Tony Abbott went too far  when he said that, and everyone knew it, and in some ways that weakened our

legitimate outrage. The Russians support the separatists in the Ukraine. Separatists  fired the missile which killed people. I don't believe that the Russians don't know  what's happening. Or in other words, if they opened up the books and they told us  what's really going on, we could get closure for a whole lot of people who are  caught up in something well beyond their control with devastating consequences. I  met with some of the families on Thursday in Brisbane, and one of them made a  remarkable point. I don't know how someone who has lost your parents could be so  - not even forgiving, just mature or move beyond the grief. They said perhaps what  Australia should do is be encouraging there to be peace in Eastern Ukraine. So I am  hoping that Tony Abbott uses this opportunity with the Russians to get to the  bottom of what's happened. I agreed with what David Marr said before though,  Putin is not going to tell us the truth but Tony Abbott has to at least ask. Also I think  that we need to show leadership and be supporting European efforts for peace in  Eastern Ukraine. That at least might make some sense of senseless barbarity.

CASSIDY: Let's move on to the Defence Force pay rises now. And you’ve already  been critical of this, the restricting it to 1.5 per cent. But the Government, through  no fault of its own, has a $40 billion deficit.

SHORTEN: The Government can't lie straight in bed on Defence Force pay. They  have been shameful on this.

CASSIDY: But how can you deny the deficit figure and therefore how can you claim  that they're in a better position to meet wage rises with indexation?

SHORTEN: This is a Government who says that running the government is too hard  for them to do. There was money allocated in the Budget to afford a pay rise of  greater than 1.5 per cent. I know the Government don't like talking about their  unfair Budget, but the money was allocated to provide an increase in wages. The  truth of the matter is this, on Defence Force pay: One, the Government loves to put  the flag around themselves, this Government are flag patriots. They love to be  photographed with people in uniform. Yet they have put up a pay offer to the  independent tribunal which means that effectively every soldier, sailor, and airman in  Australia is going to take a real pay cut because of this Government. And what  makes this Government particularly shameful on Defence Force pay is because  they're going to say this: because we're giving our uniformed people 1.5 per cent,  they're using them to justify no pay rises for the rest of the public service. So they  are using the military to force through a right wing wages policy. It is not even  keeping up with inflation. If you look at wage increases across Australia, they're  already down, but this Government is driving them further and they’re using the  military. They talk about Team Australia, the Government, yet they won't even pay  the team players, the Defence Force, properly.

CASSIDY: Ok, but then if they do allow the military - they get 2.3 per cent  according to inflation, that flows through to the public service and then right across  the workforce. Can the country really afford wages to keep up with inflation?

SHORTEN: Maybe if Tony Abbott dropped his paid parental leave scheme they  could. Maybe if they didn't cut back efforts to chase multinational taxation they  could. This is a Government who are long on lecturing and short on consistency.

There's no leadership on what they've done here. Any mug can cut the wages of  people. It takes a really clever person to grow the Australian economy, to create the  set of circumstances where things go forward and you don't have to ask your men  and women in uniform and their families to help subsidise the running of Australia.

CASSIDY: A week ago now, when Richard Marles raised this prospect of Labor in  certain circumstances turning back the boats he was slapped down very quickly.  Why did you do that?

SHORTEN: Labor hasn't changed its policy and we needed to make that perfectly  clear. Richard has been doing a great job in his portfolio and of course the success  in terms of discouraging people smugglers, Labor submits and I believe, is driven by  regional processing which was put in place by Labor.

CASSIDY: Graham Richardson, who is a former Senator and Minister said Labor's  policy resulted in too many trying and too many dying. Where is he wrong?

SHORTEN: That is why we need to discourage the people smugglers, and regional  processing discouraged it. That's what Labor's policy has been put in place to do,  and the Liberals have kept it. I mean -

CASSIDY: And you don't accept that the turn back the boats policy has been a  factor at all?

SHORTEN: I don't see that the evidence is at all clear yet, Barrie. First of all we  don't know the details of the incursions into Indonesian waters. We don't know the  regime under which these have been done safely. What I do accept though, is that  when it comes to discouraging people smugglers and creating greater safety at sea,  that what we need to do is keep - Labor needs to keep the path of regional  processing.

CASSIDY: In the last couple of days, a couple of people - former leader Bill Hayden  and now last night Anthony Albanese - have both called for a need for Labor to  reduce the influence of factions. Have you got any plans to do something about  that?

SHORTEN: Well, I welcome the calls of both of those people and I am really  pleased they have done that. It reinforces what I said back in April, that Labor needs  to be a membership-based party, not a faction-based party. And what we’ve got to  start doing is reaching out to candidates from all walks of life. I regard in the next  12 months ensuring that we’ve got the widest range of candidates promoting the  best range of policies as being fundamental to Labor connecting with the Australian  people. So I do believe that the changes which are coming in will assist that. But no  political party can ever stand still. Labor needs to be as modern and as outward  looking and as democratic as the nation which we aspire to run.

CASSIDY: Do you have real plans to do something about it?

SHORTEN: Yes.

CASSIDY: What would they be?

SHORTEN: First of all we proposed that it shouldn't be compulsory to belong to a  union to join the Labor Party. This is not an issue which -

CASSIDY: You’ve already announced that -

SHORTEN: Of course -

CASSIDY: But my question is have you got anything up the your sleeve?

SHORTEN: I do believe we need to encourage more rank-and-file participation in  our preselections, and I  do believe that we need to have an element of direct  election to our nation conferences. What I also know, though, is when we look at  the Labor Party, the challenge is to get the best possible candidates and have the  best possible policy processes. We have already started the work of developing our  policies for the next election. Public forums, involving our party membership in a  way that's never happened before. I want to encourage Australians that if they've  got views about the direction of this country, the Labor Party's interested in what  you have to say and we want more people to get involved in the Labor Party and  join us.

CASSIDY: Just finally on Ebola in Africa, are you pleased now the Government is  finally making a contribution on the ground?

SHORTEN: Yes I am, but it is belated. I think it is shameful that we have followed  the rest of the world. It's been a lack of leadership. Labor has supported on a  bipartisan basis international efforts by the Government to do trade agreements with  Japan or take the intervention that we have in northern Iraq. But on other matters  this Government has shown a shameful lack of leadership. They won't talk about  climate change. They have got a very narrow definition of security, they look at  military security -

CASSIDY: They were being cautious. And you can understand why -

SHORTEN: Security -

CASSIDY: - they don't want Ebola in Australia

SHORTEN: You and I both know, as many Australians do, that security and  protecting Australians comes in many forms. It is not just our men and women on  the frontline, it’s not just trade agreements. It’s climate security and it’s and health  security. To deal with a contagion like Ebola you are far better off dealing with it at  source. It defies belief that when we all know that what West Africa needs is trained  health professionals that this Government has dragged its feet about allowing health  professional volunteers to be able to go to West Africa. This Government needs to  show leadership, not just on some issues, but if we're trying to be international  citizens, the rest of the world has worked out you tackle Ebola at its source. Why  has it taken this Government so long to do what the rest of the world and many  Australians have already worked out needs to be done?



CASSIDY: Thanks for your time this morning.

SHORTEN: Great, thank you.

ENDS

