

THE HON RICHARD MARLES MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER  PROTECTION  MEMBER FOR CORIO

E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP INTERVIEW

MELBOURNE  SATURDAY 29 MARCH 2014

SUBJECT/S:  Border protection and Operation Sovereign Borders.

RICHARD  MARLES,  SHADOW  MINISTER  FOR  IMMIGATION  AND  BORDER   PROTECTION: Well  thank  you  for  coming  this  afternoon.  Let  me  start  by  saying   that  saving  lives  at  sea  is  unequivocally  good  and  of  course  there  is  bipartisan   support to all the policies we can to see the reduction in the loss of life at sea.

It  is  too  early  to  proclaim  victory,  this  is  not  a  footy  match  - this  is  not  about   scoreboards and banners and slogans, this is about serious public policy addressing  a  very  complicated  issue.  The  most  important  step  that  Australia  has  taken  in   reducing the loss of life at sea is the Regional Resettlement Arrangement that was  entered into with Papua New Guinea by Labor last year. It is the agreement, it is the  policy  which  has  taken  Australia  off  the  table.  Now  I  am  very  worried  that  this   Government  has  dropped  the  ball  when  it  comes  to  managing  the  Regional   Resettlement Arrangement with PNG, it shouldn’t have taken Manus Island melting  down before we saw Minister Morrison scurrying off to Port Moresby.

We saw the Prime Minister go to Port Moresby as well, and the outcomes of those  meetings are also deeply concerning, for the first time we hear talk of people maybe  being needed to be repatriated in Australia. Now if that is true, that is a watering  down of the Regional Resettlement Arrangement - that is actually putting Australia  back  on  the  table  and  we  can’t  afford  that.  It’s  not  surprising  to  me  that  we  see   announced  today  Mr  Morrison  making  another  desperate  dash  to  Port  Moresby.   None of this is good enough. This is an agreement which needs to be nurtured and  managed with constant attention and most critically, Australia needs to be providing  the necessary support to see PNG engage in the resettlement process.

Are there any questions?

REPORTER: Richard you said that Labor has played a key role in what’s happened  recently with the lack of boats but there wasn’t 100 days under Labor when a boat  didn’t come, does it seem as though the Government’s policy is working?

MARLES: Well let me say the chest beating that we have seen from the  Government today will stick in the craw of many people, if the Coalition was serious  about saving lives at sea, you would have seen a very different attitude displayed by  the Coalition toward the Malaysian Arrangement which was proposed by Labor back  in 2011. It would have made a difference, the milestone which is being heralded  today would have occurred years earlier. Now that of course, wouldn’t have suited  the politics of the Coalition, it would have saved many, many lives.

REPORTER:  How plausible is the 100 day figure the Government is trumpeting?

MARLES:  Well, we don’t know exactly what is happening on the high seas, I think  every Australian is concerned about the secrecy which is surrounding the  Government’s policy when it comes to asylum seekers. We can only take the  Government at its word about those people who have come to Australia but let me  re-iterate what I said at the outset, saving lives at sea is unequivocally good, you  won’t see any meanness on part of Labor when it comes to that, this is something  that we wanted to see as well which is why we put in place the arrangement that we  did with PNG, we simply needed to see an end to that very significant loss of life at  sea that we did, and if that is occurring that is unequivocally good, I think it is too  early to proclaim victory, but we will be doing everything we can to support policies  which bring that about.

REPORTER:  Does Scott Morrison deserve a promotion?

MARLES:  I note that Scott Morrison was asked the question today about his future  in the portfolio, let me make this point - it is way too early to proclaim victory. If we  are seeing a reduction in the loss of life at sea, as I say that is a good thing, we  should remember though, that we have just gone through the monsoon which  historically is the period of lowest traffic in terms of vessels coming from Indonesia. I  would make this point if Minister Morrison is serious about this area of policy he  needs to commit to seeing out this full term in this portfolio. He actually needs to  commit to that because this is not a job which is going to be done overnight and it is  not just about seeing an end to the loss of life at sea today, it is about seeing that  over the course of years. So I think if Minister Morrison is serious about that he will  commit to serving this full term in this portfolio.

REPORTER:  The Government has talked about entering into a third phase in this  operation that will focus on the people that are actually in detention, what do you  think that will include?

MARLES:  Well, if we are considering those people who are already in Australia,  those people who arrived in Australia before the 19th of July last year, which is the

day on which the arrangement with PNG was put in place, if you like the day in  which Australia was taken off the table, if you are talking about that cohort who  came earlier we need to be dealing with those people in a dignified, humane way,  which is consistent with our national interest.

Now, what we have seen from this Government is really an attempt to be mean for  the sake of it in relation to a group of people who don’t have any bearing now on  whether or not a deterrent is put in place to stop people coming in the future by  vessels from Indonesia or Sri Lanka, so I am concerned about the way in which the  Government is going about this. I heard again Scott Morrison talking about  Temporary Protection Visas, and there is an inconsistency within his position. If  there is a proclamation of victory today well then it is very clear that TPVs have no  bearing whatsoever as a deterrent to stop people coming by vessel from Australia,  but TPVs do put in place a whole lot of instability, they prevent people from being  able to move on with their lives, they are costly to our own system and so if we are  moving to some new phase where there is a focus on those people, which should  have been there beforehand, well we have got to do that in a way which is in the  national interest and which is sensible.

REPORTER:  If Labor is voted back in, what will the landscape look like then? Will  you have such a figure like the 100 days?

MARLES:  The critical piece of policy which changed the game here was the  arrangement which Labor put in place, 90 per cent of the flow of boats had stopped  by the time the election occurred, so it is fine for the Prime Minister and Minister  Morrison to stand in front of big banners on this issue, but actually putting in place  serious policy is what needs to be done here and the critical step that was taken to  see a reduction in the loss of life at sea was a step that was taken by Labor. Thank  you.

ENDS

