

MICHELLE ROWLAND MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR CITIZENSHIP AND  MULTICULTURALISM  SHADOW ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR

COMMUNICATIONS  MEMBER FOR GREENWAY





E&OE TRANSCRIPT  FAIRFAX ‘BREAKING POLITICS’  WEDNESDAY, 11 JUNE 2014

SUBJECT / S: Abbott cuts to advocacy groups; Australia Post; Paid  Parental Leave; Abbott’s visit to the US

CHRIS HAMMER: We’re joined now by Michelle Rowland, Labor Member for  Greenway in Sydney’s west. She’s also the Shadow Minister for Multiculturalism  and for Citizenship. Michelle, good morning.

MICHELLE ROWLAND, SHADOW MINISTER FOR CITIZENSHIP AND  MULTICULTURALISM: Good morning, Chris.

HAMMER: Now the Australian Council of Social Services is expressing concern  that the government is defunding advocacy groups. Is that a concern you share?

ROWLAND: I can appreciate their concern, Chris, because ACOSS is one  example of an organisation that has provided advocacy services but also very  strong advice for government to take up as it sees fit. And I think they’re a very  well respected organisation. Its concerns seem to be on a couple of fronts:  firstly, comments from Minister Morrison that advocacy groups shouldn’t receive  taxpayer funding, and we saw what he did with the Refugee Council, defunding  that after the Budget. But also in terms of its work with welfare organisations  and the fact that it appears they’ve been told by the Minister for Social Services  previously that no gag orders would be put in place. So on a couple of fronts this

seems quite concerning, and I think it points to what might be a bad trend in not  giving a voice to these community representative groups.

HAMMER: But surely it’s up to the Government. If it’s finding advice from such  groups is not useful, as it develops policy, surely it’s better off in these tight  budgetary times to put its money elsewhere?

ROWLAND: When we seek to have voices, Chris, on issues that affect a diverse  range of people, it is important to ensure that it’s not only one sector that’s  being heard. Not just business, not just advice that the government wants to

hear. And that’s the sort of role that ACOSS and many other groups have  performed in the past. Not only for Coalition governments, but also Labor  governments. So I think irrespective of a government’s political culture, it’s  important to get a range of views and ACOSS is one example of a group that’s  provided very full and frank and impartial views in this area.

HAMMER: But the Government is undertaking reviews of policy issues. Now, it  may not include all the groups that may want to be included but it is doing the  work. A case in point is the McClure Welfare Review, although once again ACOSS  is expressing concern that they don’t think the process there is a full and proper  one.

ROWLAND: Even on that point Chris, I note again the comments in Fairfax  today that this review doesn’t even appear to be taking submissions. Now if that  is the case, that would be very concerning. The way we commonly understand  reviews is that they involve some sort of consultation on some sort of position  paper. And if that is not taking place it is very hard to characterise this as a real  review.

HAMMER: Now, moving on. One area where the government is facing problems  is with Australia Post. The head of Australia Post is warning that the business  model for its letters business is, if it’s not broken it’s in the process of breaking.  What should be done to help Australia Post?

ROWLAND: Australia Post, I think, has done a great job in innovation. It’s done  an excellent job in capitalising on e-commerce and it started that out quite early.  It’s also done, I think, an exemplary job with its parcel business. It’s got quite a  few services. You can see for example the pick-up and drop points at places  other than actual post offices. So in that sense it recognised the need to  innovate, but I think in the process of this review it needs to be kept in mind that  we can’t have geographic areas being discriminated against.

HAMMER: Now Australia Post is saying that its shop fronts are doing well, its  parcel delivery service is doing extremely well. The problem is the letters

business. What would you think if Australia Post proposed going to the New  Zealand model which is delivering letters perhaps not every day but every  second day, three times a week. Is that viable?

ROWLAND: I think this would need to be subject to community consultation  and I would be concerned that such changes, because they would be quite  dramatic changes, I would be concerned if they were pushed through without  consultation with workers and the business and with the community. So I think  with any reform that is being looked at by Australia Post needs to be evidence-based and needs to be based on wide consultation.

HAMMER: But is it such a change they moving to three days a week delivery,  not same day delivery etcetera? It’s kind of inevitable.

ROWLAND: Look, I think that we recognise that the letter service has changed  dramatically. If they are going to be changed I think the public would expect to  at least be consulted on this rather than it be pushed through without  consultation.

HAMMER: If we can move on to paid parental leave. Some National Party MPs  including the Senator John ‘Wacka’ Williams, who proposed a different model to  that being put forward to Tony Abbott and the model that Senator Williams  proposed is 26 weeks leave, at minimal wage, superannuation included. It’s very  similar to Labor’s own model of 18 weeks leave. Would Labor be interested,  would you be interested in supporting this compromise model being put forward  by the National Party?

ROWLAND: The starting point I think, Chris, is to recognise that we have a paid  parental leave scheme already that is working, and is working well. And the fact  that John Williams and others are now proposing alternative schemes  demonstrates that this so-called signature policy of Tony Abbott isn’t even  supported by his own government. Now, I’ve seen compromise positions being  proposed. What I would say to that is, if that was such a good idea, then why  wasn’t this proposed by the Government when they were in Opposition and the  PPL scheme came into place? I think that this is a policy that doesn’t appear to  have very many friends and it’s losing them as each day goes by.

HAMMER: It must be very tempting though for Labor to support such a scheme  if you could unite with the National Party MPs and split the government?

ROWLAND: Well we know at heart they’re agrarian socialists, Chris, that’s what  the Nationals essentially are. But I think again it comes down to the point that  we have a PPL scheme in place. It’s been working very well for a couple of years.  If these changes are proposed to it I don’t see any evidence-based policy making

in what Senator Williams is proposing. This appears to be a reaction by the  Nationals to Tony Abbott’s own scheme. I don’t think that that’s a sustainable  way of proposing policy. I think that we already have a sustainable and  affordable scheme in place at the moment.

HAMMER: Okay. Just finally; Tony Abbott is in the United States. Should he be  trying to meet with Hillary Clinton?

ROWLAND: My understanding, Chris, is that normally when there’s a looming  election in the United States - and Australia being a deep and long friend of the  US - leaders when they are in the United States would seek to meet with front  runners from both the Republicans and the Democrats, irrespective of the  political hue of the Prime Minister of the day. So if it is the case that the Prime  Minister is meeting with Republican front runners it would probably be useful for  him to meet with Hillary Clinton. Certainly, she’s a front runner for the  Democrats.

HAMMER: Okay. Michelle Rowland, thank you for your time today.

ROWLAND: My pleasure, Chris.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: NICK TRAINOR 0407 078 138

