

DAVID FEENEY MP

SHADOW ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR DEFENCE  SHADOW MINISTER FOR VETERANS’ AFFAIRS  SHADOW MINISTER FOR THE CENTENARY OF ANZAC  SHADOW MINISTER FOR JUSTICE

MEMBER FOR BATMAN





E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  SKY NEWS AM AGENDA   THURSDAY, 11 SEPTEMBER 2014

SUBJECT/S: President Obama speech; National security, Tony Abbot’s  broken promise of submarines; Asylum seekers and TPVs.

KIERAN GILBERT: Thursday morning, the Shadow Justice Minister and  Shadow Assistant Minister for Defence, David Feeney, and Liberal Senator Zed  Seselja. David Feeney first to you, to what you heard there from Dominic  Waghorn and ahead of the President’s speech, this is pivotal in the United  States, but then I guess as well this is going to be the lead up the preview to  what we expect will be an enhanced Australian contribution as well.

DAVID FEENEY, SHADOW ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR DEFENCE: Well I  suppose it is clear that Australia is already playing a role here in terms of the  work of the Royal Australian Air Force in delivering humanitarian assistance to  people in distress. To people in northern Iraq and also providing some armed  assistance to the Peshmerga. Australia together with the United Kingdom, Italy,  France and others have already engaged in that kind of important work. And  clearly the President today is going to outline the strategy for the United States  and the Coalition about how that goes forward. I guess one of the key things  that I draw some confidence from is the fact that he has worked very  assiduously to make sure that Muslim nations in the region, Turkey, Iraq itself, of  course, Saudi Arabia, Jordan and others are part of this strategy and are working

to deal with this threat from ISIS, which of course is a threat to the whole  region.

GILBERT: Indeed it is, and if we needed a reminder Zed Seselja of the  implications of this conflict around the world and in our own backyard as well,  we got it today in various reports, the most notable, the front page of The  Australianthat it reports that there are settled plans among a small group of  radicals, to engage in terrorist activity on Australian soil.

ZED SESELJA: Yeah look obviously those reports are very concerning. This is  not something obviously we can turn a blind eye to, because from time to time,  we see the threats right here in Australia and those reports confirm that.  Obviously we’ve got our AFP and our intelligence agencies, I think doing an  outstanding job, an outstanding job over many years to try and counter this, but  it only takes, it only takes one, one person with evil intent to slip through the  net, to cause great damage to cause potentially death and destruction. So it’s  important that we are ever vigilant and of course these reports bring that home  very, very starkly.

GILBERT: David Feeney, The West Australian reporting this morning that the  United States will want and seek support from Australia in the form of SAS  troops, Commando’s as well, that that is seen as our best contribution to such  any international mission. Do you have any reservations about our special forces  playing that role?

FEENEY: Well no, I suppose the position that we are in at the moment as the  opposition is that we have not been briefed by government about what its  intentions are in this particular area. Obviously we have talked to date only about  providing, air assistance, humanitarian assistance, the governments mooted  fighter planes, their doing close air support for the local forces. But we have not  yet been briefed about what the government’s intentions might be beyond that  scope, and I think the appropriate thing for us to do is to wait for such a briefing  and get a better sense of what the government’s intentions are. I do note  however that President Barack Obama and indeed all of those world leaders that  have commented on this operation so far have made plain that there is no need  for boots on the ground. So, I don’t imagine any one is considering a substantive  military contribution. The key thing here is to support those Muslim forces in the  region that are fighting ISIS and doing that very difficult military work  themselves.

GILBERT: When you look at the broader situation Zed Seselja, you can respond  to that if you like. But I guess it seems almost inevitable that the international  coalition would have to look to Syria, because this where the Islamic state group  strong hold is in Raqqa, which is in Syria, so to just hit Iraq would seem to be

only dealing with one very isolated part of this problem, which of course goes  across the border into Syria as well.

SESELJA: Well, I think you are right there Kieran that that will have to be  looked at, this is a fundamentally significant problem, that doesn’t just stop in  Iraq, and so those things need to be looked at. I did want to respond to the  previous question, I think firstly, when we talk about our special forces, we know  that they are up to the task of whatever might be asked to do, they are  absolutely the best in the world, but it’s important, also that we don’t necessarily  flag intentions here. It’s important that we’re not giving, and the government  shouldn’t be giving a running commentary about whether Special Forces may be  used, how they may be used. I think that may be inappropriate. All I would say  on that, is should they be asked, should they be given a role I am sure they will  do an outstanding job.

GILBERT: Let’s move on to the broader issue about defence capability; the  submarines of course, have generated a lot of attention this week. The fact that  there has been speculation Australia will look to Japan, to provide the next  generation and supply of 12 submarines. David Feeney, the opposition leader  has coped a bit of flack in a couple of the newspaper analysis over the last day  or so, for they say he over did it, in his speech in the ship yard in Adelaide.  Tapping into nationalism and even racism, is the accusation in The  Australian this morning, what’s your response to that.

FEENEY: Well I think it’s nonsense. And of course all Bill Shorten did is articulate  a long held, and strongly held view from the Labor Party that these submarines  should be built in Adelaide, because that’s the right solution for Australia. I would  also make the point, up until a few weeks ago that was the position of the  government as well. This is the Abbott government went to the last election,  holding precisely the same policy and its only in recent days that policy has been  betrayed. Our view hasn’t changed, that’s the recommendation of the Future  Submarine Project, and our view is that those submarines should be built in  Australia because that’s the best solution.

The Future Submarine Project reached the conclusion that an evolved Collins, or  a new design should be built in Australia. And really the real driver for this is that  Australia has some unique capability requirements which means there isn’t a  readily available submarine on the international market that we can purchase off  the shelf, and do the job that we need done. We have particular requirements  because of our geography, in terms of range and endurance, and that’s why we  built the Collins Class in the first place. That’s why today it stands as the most  lethal diesel electric submarine in the world, and why we think an evolved Collins  is the best solution. The idea that we can simply build that submarine overseas  means that we not only do we give up jobs, not only do we give up industry

capabilities, not only do we surrender the ambition of being the parent navy of  our own submarine design, but most crucially we might be purchasing a  submarine that can’t do the job we require of it. These are very important  questions, and the Government has yet to step up to the plate and explain its  reasoning for why it has abandoned its promise to build those submarines in  Australia.

GILBERT: Senator Seselja, wasn’t Bill Shorten’s, his speech, his comments,  were they in line, as David Feeney asserts this morning, as worth a long held  Labor Party position.

SESELJA: Well I don’t think it was a performance fitting of an opposition leader,  and certainly not of an alternate Prime Minister. It was more be-fitting of a  partisan union leader who wasn’t putting the national interest first. I mean what  we should be looking at in defence policy is the best defence of our nation. And  when we look at defence acquisitions and when we look at major projects, such  as submarines, we should be looking at what can best do the job of defending  our nation, and Labor stripped a lot of funding out of defence, we saw it drop to  its lowest level since 1938, under the Labor Party, and we’re seeking to fix that  mess, but the rhetoric from Bill Shorten was not be-fitting of an opposition leader  and I think does undermine our abilities going forward to get the absolute best  capabilities for our nation.

GILBERT: What specifically were you concerned about?

SESELJA: Well, I think that some of that commentary that you refer to was  correct, not only was he appealing to protectionism, but he was also appealing in  part to xenophobia, and I think it’s a well-known Labor Party figure, in Troy  Bramston, who had that to say in the papers today, referring almost, treating the  Japanese like they are our enemy, because we fought them in World War II.  Well that’s not the case, they are one of our allies, they should be treated with  the respect that one of our valued friends and allies deserves and Bill shorten  didn’t do that.

GILBERT: David Feeney.

FEENEY: Well I think that’s plainly ridiculous. This doesn’t go to our long held  strong and diplomatic trading relationship with Japan. This really goes to the  question, what kind of submarine does Australia need? What is the task of that  submarine? And how can we get the best value for money? And Labor’s long  held view, and indeed the conclusion of the Department of Defence, was that the  way we can best get value for money was having an evolved Collins design, a  submarine purposed built for our requirements here in Australia, and built by a

workforce that quite frankly has demonstrated again and again that it can  achieve world class quality and world class outcomes. We embarked in 1987 -

SESELJA: Well David, why the reference to the boats that have been sunk in  World War II? What was the purpose of that?

FEENEY: I think you are talking about an interjector from the crowd, who made  a remark about Japanese subs in Sydney Harbour. What we are really talking  about here Zed is not interjections from the crowd, we are talking about Bill  Shorten articulating a long held Labor view and, until recently, your view, and  that is that the best result for Australia is to have these submarines built in  Australia. That is the best result, not just for our industry, not just for our ship  building, but of course for our department of Defence, because then they get the  submarine they need, and we have the intellectual property in this country to  then sustain that submarine fleet.

SESELJA: David, I am not talking about an interjector from the crowd, I am  referring to Bill Shorten’s comments, just be clear on that.

FEENEY: Well then I think you need to comprehend exactly what he said. One  of the challenges we will have if we go down the route of betraying our  submarine industry and purchasing submarines from overseas is the long term  sustainment of those submarines. At the moment 95 per cent of spare parts and  maintenance tasks for those submarines can be done here in Australia, we have  an indigenous capability. If those submarines are purchased from overseas, how  do we maintain them? How do we sustain them?

GILBERT: Senator Seselja, just to wrap up before we go to a break, your  response to the specific point there from David Feeney. Not on the rhetoric, but  on the specifics of the parts and supply and that sort of thing into the future if  you have got a home grown fully built submarine from Adelaide?

SESELJA: Well I think obviously no decision has been taken, that is the first  thing to say. But what we have heard from senior ministers is that whatever  decisions are taken that that capacity will be there. That maintenance capacity  and a whole range of tasks will be undertaken in Adelaide.

FEENEY: But what if we have no ship building industry in this country?

SESELJA: And that is very important. But any decision shouldn’t be taken that  undermines our capacity.

GILBERT: A quick break, we will be back in just a minute stay with us.

*BREAK*

GILBERT: With me this morning, the Shadow Justice Minister, David Feeney  and the Liberal Senator Zed Seselja. My Feeney, on Scott Morrison’s speech  yesterday relation to asylum seekers those that arrived here between July 19,  last year and December 31 of last year his now looking at temporary protection  visas to move those people. Largely the population of the asylum seeker  population that is on Christmas Island move them into the Australian community  on TPVs. Given there are no other options really, would you welcome that at  least, as a move that would have these individuals in the community?

FEENEY: Well it is a curious move by the government but I guess when we look  to the ingredients that have meant the boats have been successfully stopped, we  look to things like the fact that visas on arrival in Malaysia, and visas on arrival in  Indonesia, were both successfully stopped on our watch as it happens. But also  one of the key ingredients was our arrangement with PNG, and one of the things  Richard Marles has tried to highlight in recent days is the fact that those  arrangements between Australia and PNG really have fallen into rack and ruin  under this Government. And so one of the key pillars to the success of this policy  in recent times, which is now in some trouble, and so bringing people to the  mainland on TPVs ultimately is a signal that those resettlement plans, and those  arrangements with PNG have really fallen into some disrepair under this  Government. We think that is an area that deserves particular attention, because  that was of course one of the most powerful deterrents in successfully stopping  the boats. And I don’t think the government can afford to let those  arrangements fall into the disrepair as they have apparently done.

GILBERT: Zed Seselja if Mr Morrison is looking at this as a backup option to  bring people here that were a part of that case load, as he has described it  between July and December, does that show that the capacity of the other  options, like Manus, like Nauru are overloaded, that he can’t access those.

SESELJA: No, well temporary protection visas are important, they are important  in a number of respects, but let’s look at this particular issue. Scott Morrison has  done the job when it comes to stopping the boats. What David has said is that  its somehow it’s not working under the new government. Nothing could be  further from the truth. There has been one boat in the last, in the first eight  months of this year. In the first eight months of last year I think there were over  200 boats. So something like 18,000 people under the Labor Party, so things  have significantly changed. And any critique that says it’s not working is frankly a  ridiculous one. What we now need to deal with, and what Scott Morrison is  dealing with, is to find solutions to what has been inherited by this government.  And one of the issues is the large number of people who arrived in Australia,  under the Labor Party, and under the policies of the Labor Party. So temporary

protection visa’s as has been floated by Scott Morrison should now be looked at  by all concerned, whether it’s the Labor Party seems to have dealt themselves  out of this, whether it’s The Greens, whether it’s the cross bench. This is a way  of getting people out of detention whilst maintaining the integrity of our system,  surely that is something that should be very, very carefully considered by our  voters.

GILBERT: Okay, Zed Seselja and David Feeney, thank you both. Gentleman we  are out of time, but appreciate your time this morning Thanks.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: DEE CAKIR 0434 407 116

