

THE HON RICHARD MARLES MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER  PROTECTION  MEMBER FOR CORIO

E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW   ABC RADIO NATIONAL  MONDAY, 24 FEBRUARY 2014

SUBJECT/S: Manus Island incident; Bishop.

RICHARD MARLES, SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER  PROTECTION:  But last week we saw the Minister like a bull in a china shop  blaming asylum seekers when clearly he did not know what was going on.  And we  didn’t hear the Minister talking on advice, we heard the Minister making emphatic  and personal statements about what occurred, where it occurred and of course all of  those statements turned out to be wrong.  And not only what happened on Manus  Island but we also need to know what’s happened inside the Minister’s office  because this is clearly a Minister who does not know what is going on on Manus  Island.

ALISON CARABINE:  The Government has announced an inquiry into what did go  on on Manus Island, the PNG authorities are also investigating, do you think Scott  Morrison will make himself available to that inquiry and indeed the chain of advice  that he received?

MARLES: Well Scott Morrison needs to make himself available to that inquiry, we  need to understand what is the chain of information from the Manus Island  detention facility to this Government’s Minister responsible for that facility.  This is a  facility which is at the cornerstone of Australia’s strategy in stopping the boats  coming from Indonesia to Christmas Island, and so it’s very important that we  understand the extent to which our Minister is actually in charge of this situation, so  it’s very important that he fronts that.  But I think prior to that, we need the Minister  to come clean with a timeline of what occurred last week, what he knew, when he  knew it and when he made that available to the Australian people.

CARABINE:  The Opposition has often complained that the Government is too  secretive about asylum issues but Scott Morrison gave two press conferences the  day after the violence, maybe this problem with the conflicting advice may not have  come up if he hadn’t spoken publicly, if he had waited until he had all the facts, so  you can’t have it both ways, which way do you want it?

MARLES:  It’s not that hard for the Minister to simply say what he knows when he  knows it.  If the information is not clear, if he’s not certain, it’s ok to say that.  If he  is talking about advice that he’s received, he can act on that basis, but let’s be clear,  last week the Minister like a bull in a china shop could not be quick enough in his  trying to blame asylum seekers within that detention facility.  That’s the issue here.   He overreached in relation to that, and yet on other occasions he hides the truth.

CARABINE:  If the asylum seeker Reza Barati died inside the perimeter as it now  appears, can the Government guarantee the safety of any asylum seeker that it has  a duty of care to protect?

MARLES:  Well I think that is a profound question, and a deeply important question  and a question which must be at the heart of the inquiry which looks at the events  which occurred because it is obviously essential that the Government can maintain  that guarantee, but the events of last week would suggest that they’re unable to.   There needs to be an assurance to the Australian people that people are being  treated with dignity and that they have their safety guaranteed, and frankly given  the events of last week we cannot be sure of that.

CARABINE:  And the spotlight now seems to be firmly on the G4S security staff,  the Minister says while he’s not drawing any conclusions, G4S will be a part of the  investigation and he said quite pointedly that G4S must act lawfully at all times.   How much does the Opposition have in G4S maintaining not just security, but also  the safety of asylum seekers on Manus?

MARLES: Well I think it’s right that G4S be the subject of the inquiry as well,  obviously all the contracted staff at the facility have a role to play, and the role that  they played during the really tragic events last week needs to be scrutinised as  indeed their role more generally so that we have a sense of the situation at Manus  Island and what led up to the events last week.

CARABINE:   It was the Labor Government that awarded the Manus contract to  G4S, under the contract terms G4S was required to hire a quota of PNG locals to  help out with security, there are unconfirmed reports out of Manus that these locals  employed by G4S savagely beat and slashed asylum seekers, could it be Richard  Marles that it was Labor that set in train these events which resulted in the death of  Reza Barati?

MARLES: Well we need to have an inquiry which looks at all the circumstances of  the detention facility in its entirety, I think it’s entirely appropriate that local people  be employed in and around the facility but clearly this is something which needs to  be examined in terms of what G4S did but that’s why we need a full inquiry.



CARABINE:   But would Labor accept responsibility for what happened if indeed the  locals were involved?

MARLES: Well the inquiry needs to happen, and we need to see what the outcome  of the inquiry is.  I make this point, this is a facility which was operated under the  Rudd and Gillard Government, the facility which under a different guise was run  under the Howard Government, it’s a facility which appears now to be melting down  under the Abbott Government and under Scott Morrison’s watch.  We need to know  what is this Government doing wrong and that is the principle thing that this inquiry  needs to find an answer to.

CARABINE:   You say that the buck stops with the Minister, the Minister has very  strong support of the Prime Minister who describes him as strong and decent, the  last thing the Australian people would want protecting our borders is a wimp.  What  do you make of the Prime Minister’s support for his Minister?

MARLES: I’m frankly appalled by the comments that the Prime Minister has made,  these are comments which are more suited to a school yard than a statesman.   We’ve watched the serious of serious events occur last week which involved the  death of a young man and the best our Prime Minister can do is use language which  is best suited to a school yard.  This is not a macho contest, in that sense when I  hear the Prime Minister, my initial reaction is he just needs to grow up, but this is a  Government which needs to take this issue much more seriously.

CARABINE:   Richard Marles just briefly, the Foreign Minister Julie Bishop has asked  Cambodia to take asylum seekers from Australia.  Is Cambodia an appropriate  country for settlement considering it is one of the poorest nations in Asia with a poor  human rights record?

MARLES:  Well right now we know more about this from the foreign media than  from  the Foreign Minister.  We’ve got to see exactly what is being proposed, the  Foreign Minister needs to explain that and the Opposition will have a good look at  whatever that proposition is but the first point here, is that we’ve got to hear from  our Foreign Minister exactly what was proposed to the Cambodian Government.

ENDS

