



THE HON CHRIS BOWEN MP  SHADOW TREASURER  MEMBER FOR MCMAHON





E&OE TRANSCRIPT   DOORSTOP INTERVIEW  PARLIAMENT HOUSE  THURSDAY, 20 MARCH 2014

SUBJECT/ S: Arthur Sinodinos; ICAC investigations; The Government’s  retrograde changes to FOFA reforms; Conditions on Manus Island;  Qantas Sale Act.

CHRIS BOWEN, SHADOW TREASURER: Good morning everybody.

Well we’ve seen Senator Sinodinos stand aside but now it’s time for the  Government to stand aside their outrageous changes to the Future of Financial  Advice reforms. This was the personal mission of Senator Sinodinos. It was being  botched in terms of its delivery by sneaking it through by regulation in an  attempt to avoid parliamentary scrutiny. It’s also a retrograde step. It leaves  Australian consumers exposed to rip offs to financial collapses, poor advice based  on commissions and removes the requirement effectively for financial planners to  work in the best interest of their client. Not something which this Government  should regard as revolutionary. And for Tony Abbott to say it’s a given that  financial planners will act in the best interest of their clients is just plain wrong.  He’s forgotten the lessons of history of Storm, of Trio and of Westpoint.

So Senator Sinodinos standing aside is an opportunity for the Government to  change their approach. Mathias Cormann the acting Assistant Treasurer should  put a halt to these changes - should say the Government won’t implement these  regulations and should agree to subject them to proper parliamentary scrutiny.  The Labor Party’s position is very clear if there are regulations imposed we will  move to disallow them. We will oppose the legislation. This will create because of  the Government’s botched handling, uncertainty and more red tape for the  sector ironically given the Government’s rhetoric. Even the financial planning  industry thinks the Government’s changes go too far. Even the financial planning

industry thinks there should not be commissions. The only people who think the  Government is handling this well are the Government.

Happy to take some questions.

JOURNALIST: From you experience [inaudible].

BOWEN: Well as a former Treasurer and former Assistant Treasurer I can tell  you that a Treasurer relies on their Assistant Treasurer in the Budget process  very closely. And the Assistant Treasurer is normally responsible for a lot of the

detailed work which goes into a budget. A lot of the finer detail of policy  changes. So this dysfunction which has been caused by the standing aside of  Senator Sinodinos will certainly not help budget preparation which I understand  is already behind the eight ball.

The Government’s already running late in their Expenditure Review Committee  process, so I’m advised so it’s certainly a blow. It just goes to show that this  dysfunction in the Government is having an impact.

JOURNALIST: Has Arthur Sinodinos broken any laws? Has he done anything  wrong and why did Labor use the Senate yesterday to pile political pressure  when he’s only be called as a witness to the ICAC?

BOWEN: Because there’s a long standing convention that when serious  allegations are aired in a tribunal like the Independent Commission Against  Corruption that a Minister would stand aside. Ministers in a position of Assistant  Treasurer are doing serious business, dealing with serious matters -

JOURNALIST: Well Carmen Lawrence didn’t stand aside in the ‘90s when she  was under pressure.

BOWEN: Well Carmen Lawrence eventually resigned. What we’re talking about  here is the situation, the long standing convention that when a serious allegation  is aired through a tribunal like the independent Commission Against Corruption  then Senator Sinodinos should have stood down. Now the Labor Party’s response  has been proportionate, measured and considered. We haven’t called for his  resignation we said the ICAC process should be allowed to take its course and of  course we’ll monitor that closely. So I would object your assertion that somehow  the response has not been proportionate to the seriousness of the allegations.

JOURNALIST: Mr Bowen are you concerned that the Prime Minister has already  said that he expects Arthur Sinodinos to return to the role of Assistant Treasurer.  Are you concerned that Arthur Sinodinos has responsibility for corporate law  matters and this isn’t the best look?



BOWEN: I thought the Prime Minister’s wording there was unfortunate. I  thought that was pre-empting the Independent Commission Against Corruption  process. Secondly that was one of the reasons why we did call for Arthur  Sinodinos to stand aside, that he was responsible for company laws, company  regulation and that just underlines the point, Laura, of why we took the  approach that we did.

JOURNALIST: Why on earth would Labor have needed to poll the night before  the last election, wasn’t it pretty clear what was going to happen to you?

BOWEN: Well, I think you’re referring to the story in The Australian which I read  today. I’m unaware of the finer details of that. My understanding is that local  officials believe they’re complying with Federal law. If there is a State law in play  as well, which local officials weren’t aware of I’m sure the Queensland branch of  the Labor Party will handle the matter appropriately.

JOURNALIST: But is Labor is in a position to moralise?

BOWEN: Well when are error is found the Labor Party will act accordingly, and if  there is a local official dealing with a matter and they’re not aware of a particular  State law then there are ways of dealing with it which is a matter for the parties  as to how it’s dealt with but would be dealt with appropriately.

JOURNALIST: Mr Bowen, there’s a PNG judge currently conducting an enquiry  into the disturbances on Manus Island, some of the evidence yesterday came out  that asylum seekers were being fed worm-infested bread, as a former  Immigration Minister, is that something that concerns you?



BOWEN: Well of course if that were to be the case that would be completely  unacceptable and its incumbent on the Government not just to wash their hands  of what’s happening on PNG. It is Australia’s responsibility to ensure that the

centre is run appropriately and that all necessary measures are put in place, and  this Minister seems to be particularly hands off when it comes to the running of  the Manus Island centre, which is not appropriate.

JOURNALIST: Unions have been receptive to possible changes to the Qantas  Sale Act as long as Australian jobs are guaranteed. Can Labor be persuaded to  support the Qantas Sales Act if there is such a guarantee?

BOWEN: Our position remains the same as it was when we spoke about this in  the past which is that a red line issue for us is 51-49 Australian ownership. On  matters underneath that we would be prepared to be constructive if the  Government were prepared to enter into constructive dialogue about those sorts

of matters. That remains our position and there are important protections in the  Qantas Sale Act which we would support maintaining. At the moment the  Government just appears to be offering a take it or leave it approach. We’ll  obviously, as the process works through the Senate we’ll look closely at the two  Senate committees and inquiries and we would obviously act in the national  interest when it comes before the Senate.

JOURNALIST: What did you think on Tuesday when you opened the paper and  it showed you behind in the polls compared to Joe Hockey? Does this mean your  message isn’t getting through?



BOWEN: Look, putting aside that we don’t comment on polls particularly. I  thought the fact that a new Treasurer who has not yet brought down a Budget  managed to get a reasonable poll result was particularly unsurprising and I was  not perturbed in the slightest Laura by that particular poll, in the slightest.

JOURNALIST: Russia doesn’t seem too deterred by the sanctions that have  been slapped on by Australia and the United States is it time to (inaudible)

BOWEN: Oh look, I’ll leave Tanya Plibersek to comment on the details of the  Russian and Ukrainian situation. We have indicated our support for sensible  measures that the Australian Government might choose to undertake, in  consultation and coordination with other like-minded governments.

JOURNALIST: There have been a number of reports of suicide attempts on  Manus recently, to what extent do you think the lack of concrete arrangements  for resettlements could be adding to their stress.

BOWEN: Well an important part of the Manus island arrangement is that Papua  New Guinea has agreed to resettlement. That was very much an important part  of the arrangement entered into between Australia and Papua New Guinea and  it’s important that that be properly implemented and of course it’s important that  the progress in implementing that be properly communicated to the people in  the facility so that any concerns they have are dealt with.

JOURNALIST: It was nine months ago though, there’s not visa arrangements,  work arrangements, welfare -

BOWEN: The Government should be updating both the people of Manus Island  and the Australian people about what progress has been made.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: JAMES CULLEN 0409 719 879

