

THE HON TANYA PLIBERSEK MP  DEPUTY LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND  INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT

MEMBER FOR SYDNEY





E&OE TRANSCRIPT   RADIO INTERVIEW  ABC RADIO NATIONAL WITH ALISON CARABINE  WEDNESDAY, 21 MAY 2014

SUBJECT / S: Student protests; The Abbott Government’s Budget of  broken promises Thailand; Cambodia.

ALISON CARABINE: Tanya Plibersek, good morning.

TANYA PLIBERSEK, DEPUTY LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Good  morning, Alison.

CARABINE: Tanya Plibersek, if we could first go to the student protests, the  Prime Minister has taken the AFP advice and cancelled his visit today to Deakin  University. Is it a pretty sad indictment that the Prime Minister’s safety can’t be  guaranteed visiting a university campus in his own country?

PLIBERSEK: Well, I think certainly the scenes we saw a couple of days ago of  Julie Bishop and Sophie Mirabella being jostled at protests are not acceptable. I  think student protests should be large but they should be peaceful. It’s very clear  that students have something to protest about but they have to do it in a way  that’s proper and respects our democratic positions. Christopher Pyne said as  late as November last year that he wasn’t going to increase university fees. This  move to deregulate university fees basically means poor kids won’t get to  university and they won’t get to do the courses that will lead them to a  successful career with a decent job. It’s a completely clear broken promise.

Christopher Pyne could not have been clearer when he said that he was not  going to increase university fees. So it’s not just that it’s a broken promise, but  the fact that this will take us to a two-tier American style university system  where the best courses at the best universities are completely unaffordable to  ordinary people.

CARABINE: And Labor will vote against these changes to higher education in  the Senate but it was just last year that the Labor Government was trying to cut  $2.3 billion worth of funding to the tertiary sector. Isn’t it a bit cute, maybe even  hypocritical, for Labor to now be lining up against these changes to higher ed?

PLIBERSEK: Higher education funding expanded massively under the Labor  Government, in part because we deregulated university places. We said to  universities, you can have as many students as you can cope with. But funding  increased, year on year, every year, very substantially. What we sought to do,  was take some of that very fast growth and put it into the Gonski school  education reforms because we know that the first years of a child’s schooling are  critical to their life long success in education. Now, the Gonski school education  funding reforms have gone too, so there’s a cut to university funding, a cut to  school education funding, a cut to TAFE, a cut to youth programs that connect  kids who have less school, back into schooling or into the workforce, and they’re  at every stage, there’s a cut to childcare as well. So, from the minute your  children leave the cradle to go out into the world, every stage of their education  has received a cut in this Budget.

CARABINE: But the cut to higher education won’t occur in the Senate because  you’re opposed to it, so too the Greens and we also understand, Clive Palmer.  Now, the Government has calculated that Labor is blocking $40 billion worth of  savings measures, the Treasurer says unless the Budget is passed pretty much  unchanged, every household could face higher interest rates, higher taxes down  the track. Did you take that into consideration before deciding to take what is a  fairly obstructionist stance in the Senate?

PLIBERSEK: It’s not about obstructing the Budget. This is about standing for to  the sort of Australia that we want to live in and that we believe Australians want  to live in. We don’t want an American style deregulated university system or  worse still, an American style deregulated health system where your credit card  counts more than your Medicare card. Australians were not told before the  election, in fact they were told the exact opposite, they were told that Tony  Abbott was the best friend of Medicare, no cuts to health, no cuts to education,  no change to pensions, no new taxes, every one of those promises broken -

CARABINE: But if, if Tony -

PLIBERSEK: No, no, I want to finish this saying this -

CARABINE: Sure.

PLIBERSEK: Because if Tony Abbott is serious about this Budget being a threat  to Australia’s Triple-A credit rating, why is he introducing a $20 billion Paid  Parental Leave Scheme? $5.5 billion a year -

CARABINE: Which is paid mainly by business.

PLIBERSEK: No, well it’s paid partly by business and partly by taxpayers. And  it’s paid partly by cuts to things like pensions, health, education, all of the cuts  that this Government is proposing. I’ll tell you something else, Ali, when we were  in -



CARABINE: Well, can I just put one thing to you, Tanya Plibersek?

PLIBERSEK: Sure.

CARABINE: You talk about the pre-election promises which have been broken  by the Government, Labor is making a big song and dance about that but as Joe  Hockey points out, Labor is opposing over $13 billion in savings that the Coalition  took to the election, such as the mining and carbon tax repeals, where is the  consistency from Labor in that?

PLIBERSEK: Well, because people voted Labor because we said we would  oppose those measures. And enough people voted Labor to give us the power -

CARABINE: But more people voted for the Coalition.

PLIBERSEK: Sure. And enough people voted for us to give us the power to  keep our promise to the Australian people which is not to allow open slather  when it comes to air pollution, that’s what getting rid of the Carbon Pricing  Scheme would do, open slather on air pollution. And enough people voted for us  to say that when mining companies are extracting minerals from the land that  belongs to all of us, if they are very highly profitable then some of that profit  should go back to the Australian people to pay for health and to pay for  education and to pay for pensions and to pay for the low income super  contribution that is also being taken away by this Government and to pay for the  school kids’ bonus. And Alison, when we were in Government, the Liberals  opposed the very sensible savings that we made in private health insurance. For  example, when I was Health Minister, they opposed the means testing of private  health insurance, something that they’ve in fact extended in this Budget. They  opposed the sensible pricing of older, generic medicines. They voted against

paying less for older medicines to put that money into new medicines. I don’t  think that they can be pointing the finger on the budget responsibility.

CARABINE: Okay. We’re going to have to move on. Tanya Plibersek, if we could  turn to the Foreign Affairs portfolio, I’m not sure if you’ve had a formal briefing  on the situation in Thailand, but with the army on the streets having declared  martial law, is there any sign of a political consensus in Bangkok?

PLIBERSEK: Well, Alison, I haven’t had a formal briefing from the Department  of Foreign Affairs but obviously I am very concerned about what’s happened with  the military now. I would hope very much that order is restored quickly but that  Thailand is able to draw on its constitution and its democratic values to allow the  Thai people to indeed choose their government and that peace and democracy  are restored quickly.

CARABINE: And on the negotiations for a refugee resettlement deal with  Cambodia, Labor is not ruling out supporting such an arrangement. As we know,  Cambodia is one of the poorest countries in the world with a poor human rights  record, why would Labor consider Cambodia to be a suitable place for refugees?

PLIBERSEK: Well, we haven’t seen the details of the proposal at all and I  certainly share the concerns that you’ve just mentioned. Cambodia is one of the  poorest countries in Asia, it’s a country that still has difficulty in feeding its own  people, malnutrition for children is still a problem there, the human rights record  as you point out, is questionable at the moment, protestors are being shot in the  street. So we are gravely concerned about some of the things that are  happening in Cambodia and I think really the question for the Government is  why they think Cambodia is a better place to send asylum seekers than Malaysia  where they, when they were in the Opposition, they blocked Labor’s proposal for  Malaysia which would’ve seen people living in the community, able to work, able  to send their kids to school, and able to get healthcare.

CARABINE: Yeah but does that mean you would be arguing within the Party  room for Labor to oppose any Cambodia resettlement deal?

PLIBERSEK: Well, I make my arguments in the party room, Alison, I don’t just  go on the radio before I do. All I’m saying is that Cambodia is a country that has  many problems of its own and we haven’t seen the proposal -

CARABINE: It sounds like you don’t want it to go ahead, you don’t want Labor  to support it.

PLIBERSEK: Well, we haven’t seen the proposal yet, Alison. I don’t know how  the Government’s going to guarantee the safety of the people that it sends  there. I’d be interested to hear that.

CARABINE: Tanya Plibersek, thanks so much for your time this morning.

PLIBERSEK: Thanks, Alison. See you.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: DAN DORAN 0427 464 350

