Minister for Immigration and Border Protection

Scott Morrison

Illegal boat arrival charged with criminal offence, PNG Regional and  Resettlement Arrangement, Armidale Class patrol boats

Monday, 24 March 2014

Interview with Ray Hadley, 2GB Ray Hadley Program

Hadley: [audio begins]…wanted in Victoria and we didn't know exactly what it was  about at the time. We since found out it was over the alleged abduction and sexual  assault of a nine year old boy. At two o'clock last Tuesday police from the NSW sex  crimes squad operating on excellent information they had obtained were contacted  by Victorian officers, they told them they were seeking a bloke in NSW. Now they did  some really good work, really good work because shortly before 11 o'clock that night  NSW detectives had already located the man, they pulled over a car on Parramatta  Road in Auburn and they nabbed him. The driver, a 21 year old man was arrested  and charged by virtue of an interstate arrest warrant. He was then refused bail and  extradited to Melbourne on Thursday where it is understood he faced court on  Friday. I now have more information on the matter suggesting the man involved is  actually an asylum seeker from Afghanistan. Immigration Minister Scott Morrison is  on the line. Minister can you confirm that? Good morning.

Minister Morrison: Well I can Ray and he is on remand in Victoria.

Hadley: In custody?

Minister Morrison: That's right.

Hadley: Now, it is a very serious assault and the details have been given to me, it  relates to a nine year old boy and it is a very serious sexual assault not that I am  underplaying other types of sexual assault but I am talking about the most heinous  way of dealing with a nine year old.

Minister Morrison: Well these are very serious charges and obviously they are  before the courts Ray so there is not much I can comment further on that and that  process will work its way through the courts. But you know what our policy is, I mean  I have cancelled 56 bridging visas to those who are illegal maritime arrivals who are  in the community who have been charged with various offences and our policy is if  that's what happens then you don't go out of detention. If this individual for whatever  reason happens to be released by the court to face it on another occasion then he  will go straight back into detention.

Hadley: I might mention that NSW Police did an outstanding job they nabbed him  within nine hours of being told they were looking for him and it wasn't just a random  vehicle check on Parramatta Road, they targeted him and got him in custody within  nine hours of being told by Victorian police they were looking for him.

Minister Morrison: Well it is an excellent job and I want to commend the NSW  Police Force and the Victorian Police Force for the way they conduct themselves  with all of these matters. We work very closely with police around the country. It was  something we made very clear before the election, we provide the details of where  people are and where they are released into the community so police are aware of  people's presence. Not just for matters like this but also to ensure their own  protection and in the community.

Hadley: Ok now. Captain Emad, we are hoping for an update but I believe because  of the sensitive legal processes in relation not so much to him but his family we are  still waiting to hear?

Minister Morrison: We are still waiting, I mean there is a lot happening but it  wouldn't be helpful for me to canvas what that is on the airwaves.

Hadley: Ok. PNG, Papua New Guinea they warn some of the 1300 boat people  currently housed on Manus Island may have to be sent back here or elsewhere. The  Australian reports the PNG government have received legal advice that some of the  detainees are not refugees. What is going to happen to them?

Minister Morrison: Well the processing is underway and the Prime Minister's visit  on the weekend I think assisted the things that we are already doing to get that  processing to a point of some decisions and I think we are getting very close to some  decisions there now and they have said that by about May they will be in a position  to start resettling people in Papua New Guinea. No one is coming back here to  Australia. The agreement with Papua New Guinea I think is very clear in their  undertakings to resettle people in Papua New Guinea and if there are any other  nations that are prepared to get involved with that then those opportunities will be  pursued. But the only place the people there, at the moment and I would think into  the future, are going to be if they are found to be refugees is in Papua New Guinea.  And if they are found not to be refugees well they will stay in detention or they will go  home.

Hadley: What is the legal standing of actually putting them on a plane and sending  them back from whence they came?

Minister Morrison: The same challenges that exist for the more than 30 000 people  that Labor left here on our own shores before they started offshore processing and  where you can get those travel documents and where you can get the other  countries to receive them back, then that is exactly what you do. If they voluntarily  decide to go back then that process becomes a lot quicker and that is why the option  if you are found not to be a refugee as well you can stay in detention and if you don't  cooperate with going back that is where you will be.

Hadley: The Australian has got a story this morning about the patrol boat fleet used  to intercept boat people. The Armidale Class patrol boats according to them are  riddled with defects. Have you got any information on whether we are putting a strain  on them by their use in our northern waters?

Minister Morrison: Well they are certainly not under the same strain they were  previously. When you have over 800 illegal maritime arrival vessels turn up that puts

an enormous strain on the fleet and that has been the overwhelming principle, in fact  I would say sole cause, for the reasons that the fleet have had the difficulties they  have and it really did stretch them beyond I think what the original intent was for that  sort of level of tempo of operations. What we have been able to do thanks to the  great work of all of those involved in the Navy as well as Customs and Border  Protection is we are maintaining a very strong fleet to the North but obviously these  vessels under that workload where they were running a taxi service for so many  years, flat strap 24/7 ferrying people to Christmas Island on behalf of people  smugglers, well that is not happening anymore and we have had 95 days today,  Ray, without a successful people smuggling venture to Australia. That is something  we are very pleased about and that is due entirely to the great work which is being  done by our Navy and Customs and Border Protection officers.

Hadley: As always thanks for your time, we'll chat next week.

Minister Morrison: Thanks Ray.

Hadley: Immigration Minister Scott Morrison on the line.



