

ED HUSIC MP

SHADOW PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY TO THE  SHADOW TREASURER  MEMBER FOR CHIFLEY



E&OE TRANSCRIPT   ONLINE INTERVIEW  BREAKING POLITICS - FAIRFAX MEDIA  WEDNESDAY, 4 JUNE 2014

SUBJECT / S: Asylum Seekers, Climate Change, University Fees.

CHRIS HAMMER: We are joined by Ed Husic the Labor Member for Chifley in  Sydney’s West, Good morning.

ED HUSIC, SHADOW PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY TO THE SHADOW  TREASURER: Good Morning Chris.

HAMMER: Now a Lowy poll out shows that 71 per cent of Australians support  the government’s “turn back the boats” policy, as the government points out the  boats are stopping, is it time for Labor to stop its opposition to the government  policies and become bi-partisan on this issue and move onto other issues?

HUSIC: The big sticking point with this is: on a regional problem which is people  smuggling, you need two parties to make this policy work and we have our  biggest, nearest neighbour in Indonesia saying that they do not like this policy.  We would be better served by concentrating our efforts with them on a policy  that could work from both sides of the fence, rather than forcing a policy down  their throats that they are not prepared to accept. So the reason we never really  pursued this is because we both had our own defence personnel signalling  concern about it, and our neighbours signalling concern about it. A more  productive effort was to find a regional solution to this problem and that is why  we were able to strike up agreements with Papua New Guinea in July last year.

We wanted to get a similar agreement before that with Malaysia before the  Coalition sided with the Greens to block that in the House that prevented us  getting a drop in those numbers earlier.

HAMMER: But if the boats are stopping, then opposition from Indonesia is also  likely to diminish?

HUSIC: I think the reason the boats are stopping is because we put in place a  comprehensive resettlement agreement with Papua New Guinea and once people  smugglers realised that they weren’t going to be successful in their end goal  which is getting people on Australian soil, their business started to dry up and  really the lion’s share of this work is because of these type of agreements. Again,  we could have made headway on this, but the Coalition played politics when in  opposition. They stopped us putting similar agreements in place and that was to  the detriment of everyone concerned.

HAMMER: Whatever the merits of two sides of the argument wouldn’t it be  smart politics though to neutralise this issue, because let’s face it; there are  plenty of other issues here to attack the government on?

HUSIC: Politics has bedevilled this issue. It has been torturous to try to get  agreement on this in the Australian Parliament and we had the Coalition play  politics when they were in opposition. What we are about is having an effective  solution in place to make sure that people don’t die on that trip to Australia. We  wanted to get that in place last time, the Coalition played politics with it and I  don’t think we should have politics involved in something as critical and sensitive  as this. So from our point of view - and Richard Marles presented the view of  Labor last week pretty effectively in his National Press Club address - where he  said we need a system in place which stops people smugglers preying off the  desperate situations of people who want to get to Australia by boat and from our  point of view this off-shore processing is the biggest plank in that platform.

HAMMER: Are you concerned by revelations that some convictions of asylum  seekers, these are people who have been found guilty of say violence or  disruption while in detention in Australia, that these convictions are unsafe  because the police haven’t done the proper identity parades?

HUSIC: The bottom line is, the law is the law is the law and we can’t cut corners  and the concern is if you do cut corners, not only does it fly in the face of the  law in this country and evidence will be found inadmissible, but it hampers our  ability to prosecute people smugglers. So it is of great concern that the cases  that have been revealed, particularly in the Fairfax Media today, that if people  smugglers are getting off the hook because we are not following proper process,  everyone loses as a result of that. The only winners are people smugglers.



HAMMER: But you can’t blame the government for that. It is really a procedural  matter by the Federal Police isn’t it?

HUSIC: The buck has got to stop somewhere and the government should be  making sure that these procedures and policies are followed and they have to  send the signal so it is followed right through the chain that we can’t afford to  have people smugglers let off the hook.

HAMMER: Okay, if we move on to climate change, should climate change be  discussed at the G20 meeting that Australia is hosting later this year?

HUSIC: We should take every opportunity we can to get cooperation on the  global problem and when you see the big players moving and taking the issue of  climate change and global warming seriously and when we’ve got for example in  the U.S. at the moment EPA regulations that aim within the energy sector to cut  emissions 30 per cent by 2030, they are making pretty big headway in trying to  get emissions down in the U.S. and China: pollution in China is a major issue.  The government is trying a number of things including implementing a number  of emissions trading systems and schemes within mainland China to try to find  ways to reduce emissions. Yet our government seems comprehensively flat-footed on this issue, pursuing a policy that not one economist would put their  hand up and say is a viable option in reducing emissions in terms of action and  we just can’t afford to dither. When you look at NASA saying that the last 20  years were the hottest on record and we’ve seen even in our own experience last  May record temperatures for the number of days above 20 degrees breaking all  records, I think it is a real concern that we don’t have a thorough plan in place to  make sure Australia plays its part in reducing emissions.

HAMMER: Now the government has said it won’t move ahead of the rest of the  world, but there is a big climate meeting in Paris next year. Should Australia be  going to that meeting prepared to increase its targets if those other big polluters  China, America are moving as well?

HUSIC: The Abbott government shouldn’t be prepared just for meetings on the  world stage; they should be prepared for future generations. You know we owe  it to future generations to reduce emissions. This isn’t just about numbers on a  piece of paper, this is about people’s quality of life in the years ahead and as I  have said on this debate previously, I couldn’t look those future generations in  the eye and say - when we had an opportunity to make meaningful reductions in  emissions by using energy smarter that we failed to take up that chance to do so  and so I don’t care what meeting it is, we owe it to Australians and we owe it as  part of the global community to do the right thing not only on the climate, but  also the right environmental and economic thing in using our reduces properly.



HAMMER: So should we be a leader on this, in other words, move ahead of the  rest of the world?

HUSIC: I think we have the world moving ahead as one and we are being left  behind. We’ve got the big players, I mean if you look at Europe, the U.S., at  China, they are all moving on this and they are taking meaningful action.  Yesterday Tony Abbott -

HAMMER: But the question is should we move ahead of them, not just keep  up?

HUSIC: Well I think that we all have a part to play. People can say we are  moving ahead compared to other countries, but the fact of the matter is  countries are taking this seriously and ours isn’t. I mean we had Tony Abbott in  parliament yesterday suggesting the U.S. moves were akin to Direct Action, well  that is just ridiculous. Direct Action doesn’t do what the U.S. does which is set  standards. There is nothing there. We are going from a system where we make  polluters pay to a system where we pay polluters under Direct Action. It is just  absurd and as I said we are deferring concrete action on reaching our target of 5  per cent by 2020 when others in the world are looking to reduce emissions, in  the U.S. case by 17 per cent by 2020.

HAMMER: Okay, moving on, research out today indicates that university  graduates are being unemployed it is something like 30 per cent are still  unemployed for up to four months. Starting salaries have dropped. In Western  Sydney, there is a campus from the University of Western Sydney in your  electorate. Are you concerned that that university and its graduates are being  unfairly treated compared to those of the sandstone universities?

HUSIC: Let’s look at UWS, for instance. Within the region, the students that go  to UWS, the stats show 50 per cent of them are a family’s first time entrant into  a university degree. That is, it is the first of family to actually take the step into  tertiary education. What I would hate to see, and I am a graduate of UWS and I  certainly fit that statistic, I would certainly be concerned on two fronts. One, that  young people in Western Sydney would be put off from going to university  because they are worried about the cost because fees start to skyrocket and the  second is, when I think of future generations, a lot of parents in the region are  also thinking about this and are concerned about this, that students are loaded  up with debt very early in their careers and aren’t able to get a foot in the  Sydney property market because they are too busy paying off a loan or a HECS  debt and that is of real concern. We need Australia to be a smarter country. We  need more people to pursue an education, whether it be vocational or tertiary.  We can’t afford to have people not taking up, building their minds as much as

possible and then dedicating that to the community and the broader economy.  So the signal this is sending is terrible and I think we are going to pay the price  for it longer term.

HAMMER: Are you concerned for instance at Sydney University, a wealthy and  prestigious university, the board there can say, “okay, the commonwealth’s cut  funds by 20 per cent, we will put our fees up by 20 per cent,” but at the  University of Western Sydney it is much more difficult and they say well, “maybe  we shouldn’t put fees up so much but we need to drop quality”. That’s your  concern?

HUSIC: Absolutely. It is because UWS knows that the people who walk through  its doors aren’t people that walk through their doors with bags of money, they  are coming from modest backgrounds and they are people with a lot of ambition  and hope for the future but don’t necessarily want to have that tied to their  capacity to pay. So UWS will know that they don’t have the room to move and I  would be concerned that UWS’ students and the young people of Western  Sydney get a lesser quality standard of education compared to the rest of the  city and that shouldn’t be the case. We should be valuing brains and not tying a  wallet and a capacity to pay to ensuring that people go on, develop and make a  better contribution to Australian society.

HAMMER: Okay, that is your conclusion but have people from UWS  communicated that to you?

HUSIC: No they haven’t at this stage but then again they don’t need to because  it is a concern, a starting point concern. The starting point concern will be that if  universities don’t get a proper level of funding they are forced to charge more.  UWS knows it can’t charge more and people are basically then confronted with a  lesser quality of education because if UWS has to cut corners and cut costs,  Western Sydney loses out and I just think that that is unacceptable.

HAMMER: Ed Husic, thanks for your time today.

HUSIC: Thanks Chris.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: LEADER’S OFFICE MEDIA UNIT 02 6277 4053



