

THE HON BRENDAN O’CONNOR MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR EMPLOYMENT AND WORKPLACE  RELATIONS  MEMBER FOR GORTON



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVSION INTERVIEW   ABC NEWS 24  THURSDAY, 10 JULY 2014

SUBJECT/S: Increased unemployment rate; Prime Minister’s comments on  asylum seekers’ self-harm.

ANDREW GREENE: Brendan O’Connor thank you for joining us.

BRENDAN O’CONNOR, SHADOW MINISTER FOR EMPLOYMENT AND  WORKPLACE RELATIONS: Happy to be here.

GREENE: The latest labour force figures show that the unemployment rate has now  crept up to six per cent. Are we seeing the last of Labor’s legacy reflected in these  statistics?

O’CONNOR: This is a direct result of the budget - the impact the budget’s had on  business and consumer confidence. We now have a seasonally adjusted  unemployment rate with a six in front of it. That is a real problem for Australians who are  looking for work, who need to work so that they can look after their families. And we  need to see a jobs plan from the Abbott Government.

To date all we’ve seen is the Government turn its back on workers and jobs. And that’s  why I’m so concerned about the increase in unemployment in Victoria and South  Australia, two states where the car industry and the ship building industry have been  neglected by this Government.

GREENE: Your party is vowing to block most of the budget measures. What could the  Government, with your support, do in terms of perhaps looking at more flexible working

arrangements as employers in both Victoria and South Australia have indicated they  want?

O’CONNOR: Well, I’m not sure who you’re referring to when you say other people want  different working arrangements. It’s up to the Government to propose -

GREENE: Certainly for youth unemployment people have suggested perhaps more  flexible working arrangements, a look at penalty rates, is that something that could  happen now?

O’CONNOR: Well that’s up to the Government. The Government has to make decisions  about what it does in relation to any changes to industrial relations. But let’s just focus  here on the jobs that have been disappearing. We’ve seen this Government goad a  company a company like Holden to leave our shores and they’ve left. We’ve seen  Toyota follow suit. The automotive parts industry is now under crisis. And of course  we’ve had Senator Johnston, the Defence Minister promise before the election to build  ships in this country and then renege on that promise. So Mr Abbott and Senator  Johnston have really impacted adversely upon the shipbuilding industry.

If you look at the unemployment figures in South Australia and Victoria these are the  two states which of course have the highest proportion of manufacturing. They’re the  problems that lay at the feet of the Government as a result of their response to the jobs  crisis in those sectors of our economy and yet there is no jobs plan in other sectors of  our economy.

And therefore the Government really needs to respond to those challenges. And of  course at the moment the Minister for Employment who should be explaining this  unemployment increase is in a position where he can’t even control the Senate or deal  with the Senate because the Government doesn’t know what it’s doing.

GREENE: Mr O’Connor, if we could turn briefly to your former portfolio responsibilities  in Home Affairs and the reports of attempts of self-harm, is this behaviour acceptable or  like the Prime Minister says is it a form of moral blackmail being put on the  Government?

O’CONNOR: Look, I think it’s very important when you’re dealing with people who may  be in an agitated state, or anxious about their circumstances that you do not use  intemperate language. And at the very least I think the Prime Minister in response to  concerns about possible self-harm that had occurred on Christmas Island should have  been more temperate and I think a bit more compassionate in his remarks -

GREENE: But they’re frustrated at policies that were put in by your side, does that  upset you as well?

O’CONNOR: I’m not sure exactly to which policy you are referring. I’m saying that of  course you need to make sure the policies’ determined by proper decision making and

evidence and certainly based upon the advice of agencies of government and others.  And it can’t be done on the run.

But when you are dealing with people who may be in a highly agitated state, or highly  anxious about their future, it is very important that you use temperate language and you  do not deliberately seek to vilify people who are in such a situation.

I think the Prime Minister was injudicious at best when he chose to use such offensive  language about people who may be in such a state.

GREENE: Brendan O’Connor we’ll have to leave it there. Thanks for your time.

O’CONNOR: Thanks very much, Andrew.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: GLEN ATWELL 0428 434 709

