



THE HON MICHELLE ROWLAND MP  ACTING SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION  AND BORDER PROTECTION  MEMBER FOR GREENWAY





E&OE TRANSCRIPT  INTERVIEW WITH MARIUS BENSON, ABC NEWSRADIO  WEDNESDAY 15 JANUARY 2014

SUBJECT/S: The Abbott Government’s border protection secrecy

MARIUS BENSON: Michelle Rowland, there’s been no briefings from Minister  Scott Morrison for a number of weeks and he has now said that weekly briefings  are a thing of the past, they will only be there on a “needs” basis, is that a  reasonable approach?

MICHELLE ROWLAND: It is absolutely not a reasonable approach. This  Government has moved on from being secret about their immigration policy to  simply shutting it down altogether and I think for the Government to determine  what is the “needs” basis, what the public “needs” to know, is absolutely  contemptuous.

Before the election, this was a government that was very happy to stand in front  of billboards, giant billboards, spouting their immigration policies. In my  electorate, they were very happy to put out reams of their policy position on this  matter, but all of a sudden it’s a needs to know basis. This is nothing more than  a government that wants to hide the truth and doesn’t want to come clean with  the Australian people.

BENSON: The bottom line, according to Scott Morrison, is “that our policy is to  not provide information that might be useful to people smugglers and our policy  is working, the boats have stopped for several weeks and have declined over a  longer period.”

ROWLAND: Well we know why it’s working, it’s because we had, under Labor,  when we were still in government, the implementation of the PNG arrangement.  And as we always said a regional solution, a long term agreement, is the way to  go. And we can see the results of Labor’s policy in action. And look, we are very  - Labor is very pleased the policy is working, but it is absolutely contemptuous of  this government to be going around saying “this is a needs to know basis and  we’ll decide what you need to know, get the rest of your information from the  Jakarta Post”.

BENSON: But the policy being implemented by the current government is not  exactly the Labor policy alone. According to reports, and these are unconfirmed,  the Government has also been towing boats back.

ROWLAND: Well, what you’ve said is precisely the point, Marius. They are  unconfirmed reports, and if the Government has been implementing something  different, whether or not it’s been working, and we have never supported a  policy, their entire policy package, we instigated the PNG arrangement, if they  think that their policies are working then they should tell the Australian people.  We shouldn’t have to be saying “unconfirmed reports” of “indicate that”, the  Australian people have a right to know.

BENSON: On another aspect of the same issue, the Minister Scott Morrison has  declined to provide any information on protests reported in asylum seeker  detention centres, are you critical of that, because he makes the point that the  former government equally refused to provide information on protests like that.

ROWLAND: Well look, when we were in government we provided information,  far more fulsome information than this government is providing, so I think it’s a  bit rich for Scott Morrison to now be turning around and saying “oh, we’re only  acting in accordance with what the previous government did”. Look, there’s very  clearly a distinctive track record that has emerged with this government in this  area of policy. And that is one of secrecy, and that is one which the Australian  people have been denied fulsome information to which they are entitled.

BENSON: But on the issue specifically of protests in detention centres, was the  former government, the Labor Government, equally secret?

ROWLAND: Oh look I don’t believe it was equally secret. I believe the  Australian people had much more access to information across the gamit, not  only in that area but across the gammit, of immigration policy and I think that it  would be a misnomer to say that they are simply following Labor’s position from  when we were in government.

BENSON: The issue of asylum seekers arriving by boat was considered to be a  very big one, particularly in electorates like your own in the west of Sydney.  What sort of feedback are you getting from people in your own electorate about  the reduction in numbers and the government policy?

ROWLAND: Look I think they formed a view very early on that this a  government that doesn’t want to talk, and I speak to people at my mobile offices  and so forth as I move around my own community, and people now, they’ve  really written this government off, the level of contempt for this government and  the whole issue of secrecy really is part of that. And I think the Australian  people, and people whom I represent, they did want to see this issue resolved.  And I can tell you that when it was implemented during Labor’s term, in about  July last year, we did see people make the comment that, “well, we’ll see how  this goes, we’ll see if it does end up reducing the number of boats arriving”, and  it did and to this day, people do realise that that was a policy of Labor.

BENSON: Michelle Rowland thanks very much.

ROWLAND: My pleasure.



________________________________________________

