

JASON CLARE MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR COMMUNICATIONS  MEMBER FOR BLAXLAND  E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  SKY NEWS AM AGENDA   THURSDAY, 3 JULY 2014  SUBJECT/S: National Security; Government secrecy on asylum seekers.

KIERAN GILBERT: We are joined now by the Shadow Communications  Minister, Jason Clare. Jason Clare as a former Home Affairs Minister I’m  interested in your views on the reports this morning that the national security  overhaul will include enabling or could include enabling police. This is the front  page of the Australian today, to enable police to conduct surveillance operations  and to collect evidence in warzones such as Syria and Iraq. What do you make of  that suggestion? I guess the question is how would that happen? How would the  police be able to do that other than to have boots on the ground?

JASON CLARE, SHADOW MINISTER FOR COMMUNICATIONS: Well Kieran  we haven’t seen the legislation yet. We’ll work constructively with the  government on this. I understand these are recommendations that came out of a  Joint Parliamentary Committee last year that was chaired by the Labor Party and  those recommendations were supported by Liberal Party members as well. There  is no doubt that we have a serious issue here. If you have Australians overseas  that are fighting in a foreign war that have been radicalised and pose a risk to  Australians if they return to Australia, then we need to make sure that our laws  are able to meet that risk. That’s no mean challenge but we are very keen to  work with the government on this to make sure we’ve got the laws we need to  protect Australian citizens.

GILBERT: Well, enormous challenges, technology I suppose things have  changed but Jason Clare what would the logistics be of that sort of thing? How  would the police go about collecting surveillance intelligence from warzones?

CLARE: Two points here, one we haven’t seen the legislation and second it may  not be the police, it may be other government agencies. So I would need to  reserve an answer to that question until I’ve seen the detail of the legislation.   More broadly Kieran, what I would say is this, to tackle a problem as difficult as  this where someone can be radicalised and make a decision to go off and fight in  a foreign war just by sitting in their bedroom and clicking on a mouse, looking at  a website we need to do more than just change legislation. We need to work  with community leaders, I think what the Attorney-General did yesterday,  working with religious leaders is the right thing to do. We also need the support  of parents to make sure they send the right message to young people, not to get  involved in things like this and also as a community invest in things like the  Countering Violent Extremism Program. We funded that in government, this  government has decided not to continue that program, I think that’s a mistake  and I’d encourage the government to continue investing in programs like that.

GILBERT: Just quickly we are under a minute left but I want to ask you about  the suggestion in Fairfax reports today that Australian officials are secretly  screening out asylum seekers via video link on two vessels north of Australian at  the moment. What’s your take on that?

CLARE: Well here’s the problem, one we don’t even know if there’s a boat out  there, we don’t know how many people are on the boat, we haven’t had it  confirmed where they are from or whether they are seeking asylum, whether the  vessel is in distress, whether Australian Navy personnel or Customs personnel  have picked them up.

There’s a simple approach here, the government should tell Australian’s what’s  going on. Give us the information. Don’t treat the Australian people like mugs  and that’s what this government is doing. That’s what they did before the  election on things like the doctor tax, or the cuts to the pension. There’s a  pattern of behavior here that we are now seeing in this area too, where they are  refusing to tell the Australian people what’s going on. My message would be  front up and tell Australians what is happening.

GILBERT: Jason Clare thank you, we are out of time.

CLARE: Thank you.

ENDS  MEDIA CONTACT: RYAN HAMILTON 0414 599 468

