Interview with Peter van Onselen and Paul Kelly, Australian  Agenda, Sky News

9 February 2014

Subjects: Griffith By-Election, Section 18C, Royal Commission into Union Corruption, Syrian Conflict, ABC

E&OE

VAN ONSELEN: Can I ask you of the top about the by-election. The LNP refused to concede defeat last night, and this morning I  think it is on radio, the Labor candidate has formally refused to claim victory. Does the LNP seriously think that it is a chance of  winning this seat off postal votes still coming in?

SENATOR BRANDIS: Well the position Peter is this - at the close of counting last night the Labor Party had a two-party preferred  vote of about 52.3 per cent which was a swing against it of not quite one per cent. There are more than 10,000 postal and pre-polled votes still to come in. We expect that that will tighten. So I think it is too early to declare victory or to concede defeat although  I would acknowledge that the most likely outcome from here is that the Labor Party will fall over the line.

Now the point that I would take to you and your viewers is that in a seat that, until a few months ago, was the safest Labor Party  seat in Queensland, to just fall over the line in a by-election, which usually sees swings on average of five or six per cent against  incumbent governments, is a very very poor result for the Labor Party and for Mr Shorten.

VAN ONSELEN: Those averages of swings against governments tend to be in the second-half of their term, not so soon after an  election. You've got a Prime Minister who pledged to serve out a term, he's gone early. That must have upset voters. You've got an  Opposition Leader who, quite frankly, is not the most popular person on the ground in someone like Kevin Rudd's old electorate,  let's be frank. This all adds up to a scenario when you consider the quality of your candidate, this has to be a disappointing result.  And if it doesn't reflect on Tony Abbott who was Tony Abbott's picture taken off the how-to-vote cards for the Liberal Party? The  Labor Party left Bill Shorten on theirs.

SENATOR BRANDIS: Well I'm not aware of Mr Abbott's picture being taken off any how-to-vote card. It's the first I've heard of that.

VAN ONSELEN: It was on a Bill Glasson how-to-vote card at the federal election but it wasn't on it yesterday.

SENATOR BRANDIS: It wasn't taken off at all then. How-to-vote cards are always printed for the circumstances of the time and the  fact is that Dr Glasson was a very well regarded community figure. Now, Peter, can I take issue with something you said a moment  ago. It's not right to say that big swings against governments in by-elections are more commonly a feature of the second-half of  terms. In fact the by-election that bears most immediate comparison is the Gippsland comparison in 2008. It was at about the same  time into the life of a recently elected government. The Griffith election was five-months after the election, the Gippsland by-election  I think was eight-months after the election. It was created because a former minister, or in this case a former prime minister,  resigned from the seat. In the Gippsland by-election there was a six per cent swing to the Opposition, to the Government I should  say. In the Gippsland by-election, I think, coming at the same point of the political cycle of the Griffith by-election is probably the  closest comparator of all and to compare what happened on that occasion, in fairly recent memory, with what occurred in Griffith  yesterday, when there was as Paul Kelly has said, a 1.7 per cent primary vote to the Government, and a swing to the Government  of a little over 0.7 per cent - of the current figures we think that will be greater when the postal and pre-polled votes are in - was an  historically very very poor result for the Labor Party.

VAN ONSELEN: But in fairness, Senator. In the Gippsland by-election, that was the one that came at the same time as you had the  Lyon and the Mayer by-elections as well. Labor didn't contest either of them and they only contested Gippsland because they ran  dead so they could force preferences against the conservative independent running against the conservative candidate for your  party.

SENATOR BRANDIS: Well that may be so, Peter, but regardless of what the Labor Party's matters may have been back in 2008,  the point I make to you is that it's not to right to say, as you said, that swings a magnitude against governments are a feature of the  second-half of parliamentary terms. For there to be a swing to the Government at this by-election, there are very few precedents. In  the last thirty-or-so-years I think there have been three...

VAN ONSELEN: Senator, I don't mean to jump in but there's been twelve since 1949 - Mcpherson, Lindsay, Richmond, Wills,  Freemantle, Macquarie, Bendigo twice , Grey, Capricornia, ACT, and Clare.

SENATOR BRANDIS: Well, I said in the last thirty years and there have been three. Antony Green's done a body of work on this  and has discovered that the average swing against governments at by-elections for the House of Representatives is 5.1 per cent.  So I think a reasonable result for Mr Shorten yesterday would have been a swing to his party of about that order, of about 5 per cent  and a Labor Party two-party preferred vote of around about 58 per cent. In fact he got a swing against him and there are very few  precedents of that. It's a poor result for the Labor Party. I think they will fall over the line, but heavens above, to just fall over the line  in your safest seat in Queensland against an incumbent government, which every way you slice it, is a poor result for Mr Shorten.

KELLY: Senator, just to wrap this up, can we end the games here - is it the truth that the Labor Party has won this by-election and  isn't it a bit silly to continue to deny that?

SENATOR BRANDIS: I said I think the most likely outcome will be that they will fall over the line Paul. But I think it is too soon to  call it when there are more than 10,000 votes out and when the votes that have been counted are very tight.

VAN ONSELEN: We're talking about a lot of history. I can't think of the last time that a two-party result with that many of the vote  counted at over 52-48 TPP hasn't been conceded on the night.

BRANDIS: Well maybe. But as I say, I think the most likely outcome is that the Labor Party will fall over the line. They should have  done a lot better than that and I think what that tells you is that the people of Griffith saw through Mr Shorten's scare campaign.

KELLY: If we can just change the subject now to the Human Rights Commission, which is part of your overall responsibilities. What  are your plans to improve the efficiency of this organisation and to consolidate some of the arrangements?

Page 1 of 4 9 February 2014 - Interview with Peter van Onselen and Paul Kelly, Au...

28/05/2014 http://www.attorneygeneral.gov.au/transcripts/Pages/2014/First%20Qua...

SENATOR BRANDIS: Well Paul, I've made it clear for a very long time now that I want to rebalance the human rights debate in  Australia and integral to doing that is to reform the Human Rights Commission. For far too long the Human Rights Commission has  in my view taken a narrow and selective view of human rights so that in effect it hasn't been operating as a human rights  commission, it's been operating as an anti-discrimination commission. Now there is a role, in my view, for an anti-discrimination  body of anti-discrimination law in Australia and there should be a Commonwealth agency to superintend it. But if we're to have a  Human Rights Commission it's got to respect all human rights. And the point I've made to Professor Triggs, the President of the  Commission, and she conceded by the way in Senate Estimates last year, that the Human Rights Commission was largely missing  in action during the debate, the very vigorous debate we've had in this country over the last couple of years about freedom of  speech and freedom of the press. That's why the Government decided to recommend to Her Excellency the appointment of Tim  Wilson as Human Rights Commissioner with a particular brief to look at the traditional rights and liberties such as freedom of  expression, freedom of association, and freedom of the press....

KELLY: Well where do we...

SENATOR BRANDIS: ...significant feature of the commission's work.

KELLY: Well where do we go...

SENATOR BRANDIS: Where we go from here is I will be introducing into the Parliament in the course of this year a package of  legislation which is being developed at the moment, in consultation, I should say, with the Human Rights Commission, which will  restructure the Commission. That will do two things in particular. First of all, it will ensure that the commissioners who operate within  the Commission cover the range of human rights, not just anti-discrimination issues. It will also affect some structural reforms that

Professor Triggs herself has been looking for. For example, we had in my view the disgraceful situation last year when one of the  commissioners decided to take it upon himself to pursue a vendetta against a major company and the President of the Commission  found herself powerless to rein him in. The President of the Commission should have powers in circumstances like that which are  absent from the legislation at the moment.

VAN ONSELEN: Are you concerned that if you give that power to someone who perhaps has a culturally different view of the role  of the Commission to yourself that they're going to end up just reigning in one commissioner? I'm thinking of Tim Wilson.

SENATOR BRANDIS: No Peter because the kind of powers I'm talking of are powers in relation to misconduct not powers in  relation to, as it were, to police opinion. In fact one of the provisions of the act that I want to repeal is this rather chilling provision  that requires the commissioners to act collegially, to use quote the language of the statute. Now I've never before seen such a  statutory mandate for group think as a requirement that the commissioners act collegially. What the commissioners ought to do is  act pluralistically, but they ought to respect that there is a variety of human rights, all of them are important and different people who  have different views about both the content of those human rights and the relative importance of those human rights. So I want the  Commission to embrace this spirit of pluralism and diversity of opinion which has been noticeably lacking from its affairs in the  recent past.

KELLY: Now Minister, you keep talking about what you want from the Commission and the cultural changes that you propose to  make for the Commission, but I put to you that none of this can be affected unless the Human Rights Commissioner, Professor  Triggs, actually agrees. So, have you put your proposals to her and does she agree with your reforms or not?

SENATOR BRANDIS: Well, first of all, Professor Triggs did agree with my decision to appoint a freedom commissioner when I  raised it with her in Senate Estimates when I was still in Opposition. She said that she would welcome...

KELLY: Haven't you spoken to her since then?

SENATOR BRANDIS: Yes, of course I have.

KELLY: Well does she support your reforms or not?

SENATOR BRANDIS: She supports the reform of the Commission to embrace a greater diversity of plurality of views about human  rights, and in relation to some of the structural reforms I've mentioned, some of them, she's in fact asked for. I've had many  conversations with Professor Triggs and I find her a very cooperative interlocutor.

VAN ONSELEN: Is she supportive of Tim Wilson being on the Commission? I mean he's Melbourne based. Is he going to be able  to operate out of Melbourne? How is his position going to work because the Commission as I understand it is based in Sydney?

SENATOR BRANDIS: I'm aware that there was a conversation about that. But these are internal management arrangements which  I'm sure can be sorted out. But Professor Triggs welcomed Mr Wilson's appointment, both publicly and privately. I know that you  know Tim Wilson, Peter. I think that he will be a very fine commissioner. His appointment was welcomed by a variety of people in  the political spectrum, from people on the right wing of politics all the way through to the Melbourne Age. So I think it was a pretty  well received appointment.

KELLY: Ok, just talking about Professor Triggs, she has announced this week that the Commission will conduct an investigation  into children in detention. What's your response to that?

SENATOR BRANDIS: Well I was surprised by the announcement. I did have a conversation with her after the announcement was  made. And the point I'd make to you, Paul, is this - this is the second inquiry that the Human Rights Commission has embarked on  into children in detention. The first inquiry was into the Howard Government, the second inquiry has now been announced on the  watch of the Abbott Government. It was the Howard Government that released the children from detention and solved the problem  of unlawful arrivals so that at the time the Howard Government went out of office there were no children in detention, not one. The  Abbott Government is on the way to solving the problem. It's been more than seven weeks now since there's been an unlawful boat  arrival. So I find it curious that the only government that didn't suffer a Human Rights Commission inquiry into its treatment of  children in detention was the government that created the problem of children in detention, namely the previous Labor Government.

KELLY: What did she say [inaudible]

SENATOR BRANDIS: I'm not going to go into the detail of a private conversation but...

KELLY: You're clearly very unhappy about this. I mean you've put a cogent argument.

SENATOR BRANDIS: I was surprised that the inquiry was announced when it was. It would have been, and this isn't Professor  Triggs's fault because she's only been in office for 18 months, during most of the time of the Labor Government her predecessor  was in office, but nevertheless I think it very strange that the government that created the problem of children in detention, that is  the previous Labor Government, was the only government that didn't have an inquiry. Let's cut to the chase here Paul, the way to

Page 2 of 4 9 February 2014 - Interview with Peter van Onselen and Paul Kelly, Au...

28/05/2014 http://www.attorneygeneral.gov.au/transcripts/Pages/2014/First%20Qua...

solve the problem of children in detention is to have no unlawful asylum seeker boats trying to reach Australia. You stop the boats,  you eliminate the problem which is what my colleague, Scott Morrison, and the entire government led by Scott Morrison is  committed to doing, so far with some success.

VAN ONSELEN: I wonder, Attorney-General, if we could take you to the royal commission speculation. It's in News Limited Sunday  papers today that there will be an announcement on this, a former High Court justice to lead the royal commission. Is this the best  way to go, is this speculation close to what we're likely to see happen and what are your thoughts on Bill Shorten's alternative to  this? He's suggesting a police taskforce.

SENATOR BRANDIS: A couple of points Peter. First of all you will remember that during the election campaign the Coalition did  promise judicial inquiry into trade union slush funds. The revelations that we've seen in recent months suggest a much more wide  spread and systemic and ingrained problem with the trade union movement than merely slush funds. Secondly, Mr Shorten's  response to what is written of in the papers this morning is a very lame response. Mr Shorten says, well, you know, a royal  commission can't prosecute people. Well of course it can't, but it can refer people for prosecution. You have judicial inquiries, or  royal commissions where there is a systematic and ingrained cultural pattern within an institution that needs to be exposed, so that  one is not dealing occasional cases.  But you'd expect Bill Shorten to say that because you'd expect Bill Shorten to protect trade  union bosses because Bill Shorten was a trade union boss and he is only the leader of the Labor Party today because he is the  nominee of the trade union bosses who imposed him over the wishes of the rank of file into the leadership of the Labor Party.

VAN ONSELEN: But the other benefit of a taskforce is the immediacy of it as opposed to a royal commission that can take a lot  longer. If there's corruption going on, wouldn't it be good to perhaps walk and chew gum at the same time on this to support a  taskforce as well as a royal commission?

SENATOR BRANDIS: Well these are not either or propositions Peter. No announcement has yet been made. I won't be making  any announcements today. But watch this space. I think there has been a growing public concern about corruption in the trade  union movement which has accelerated in the recent past and I think it would be, frankly, irresponsible of the government not to  respond to that growing public demand in a very thorough way marshalling all of the appropriate institutions to address the problem.

KELLY: I'd like to ask you, as a senior minister in the Abbott Government, are you concerned about the editorial performance of the  ABC as the national broadcaster, and are your concerns such that you would like to see some specific follow-up action taken?

SENATOR BRANDIS: Let me say in the first place Paul that of course this isn't my portfolio. This is my colleague's Malcom  Turnbull's portfolio. Nevertheless I think it's fair to say that there is a level of concern shared not just by the government but in the  community at large about the performance of the ABC. It's almost become a cliché that the ABC has a particular point of view when  it comes to public affairs in the coverage of current affairs which is a centre-left, Labor-Greens biased point of view. The fact that on  their flagship current affairs programs they populate their panels with people who by and large represent that point of view and have  one or, if you're lucky, two token conservatives or people who represent the liberal-democratic point of view. I think is itself  revealing. So I think there is a level of public concern about the performance of the ABC. I don't have any objection, myself, about  not saying that this is other than a personal view. I don't have any objection myself to the ABC having commentators who take a left

-wing point of view as long as that's balanced by commentators who take a right-wing point of view and all points of view in  between. And so it's the lack of a, once again, this issue of a diversity of opinion that I think is the principal concern here.

KELLY: I'd like to follow up. Do you think it's right to say that the ABC has lost the confidence of the Coalition side of politics?

SENATOR BRANDIS: No, that proposition expressed in those bauld terms would not adopt.

VAN ONSELEN: But a mild diversion that, that there is a level of concern now where something has to happen whatever that might  be?

SENATOR BRANDIS: Look Peter, when I want to know what's going on in politics I don't watch the ABC, I watch Sky News  because Sky News has become the principal public affairs broadcaster. Now, that's spectrum of criticism of the ABC reflects a  deeper debate in an era where there are dozens if not hundreds of television channels rather than the four television, or five  television channels there used to be only a few years ago, about the need for the way in which public broadcaster sets its agenda  when there is a multiplicity of other platforms that do what it used exclusively to do.

KELLY: If I can just follow up on the question Peter asked. I mean, does something have to happen? I mean you've indicated that  there's a lot of concern in the government. I mean a number of ministers have expressed concerns along the lines that you've  outlined this morning. So where do we go from here?

SENATOR BRANDIS: As I say Paul, these are not just concerns of the Government. These are concerns, I think, of the  community, the community pays for public broadcasters.

KELLY: Well that just reinforces the question. So where do we go from here?

SENATOR BRANDIS: I think Mr Turnbull, who as I said before is the portfolio minister, has announced a study of the efficiency of  the ABC and SBS, the two publicly funded broadcasters, and I think that study is a useful thing to do. No publicly taxpayer funded  government agency should be free of financial scrutiny and it will be interesting to see where that goes. But look, I know where you  want to lead me Paul but I really, having made the general observations I've made, do think out of courtesy to my colleague

Malcolm Turnbull, that I shouldn't allow myself to be drawn further.

VAN ONSELEN: Can I take you to the Racial Discrimination Act and talk to you about section 18. Ahead of the election the  Coalition had a very clear position on this. There's been some resistance from certain quarters since then. Where is it at? I'm  assuming you're still going to go ahead with the adjustments you want to make. What's the timetable on that, how is that looking?

SENATOR BRANDIS: Peter, over the summer and the latter part of last year after the election, I have engaged in a reasonably  thorough series of private consultations with various stakeholder groups. Those discussions have reached a point, pretty much  reached the point at which they have concluded and I will be taking some proposals to Cabinet quite soon.

The Government is determined to remove from the Racial Discrimination Act the provisions which famously saw the broadcaster  Andrew Bolt taken to court because he expressed an unpopular opinion. The infamous section, 18c, of the Racial Discrimination  Act makes it unlawful to say something which is offensive or insulting or humiliating or intimidating. Now in a free country I don't  think people have a right not to be offended, I don't think people have a right not to be insulted. That's really the nature of spirited  public debate. But on the other hand I also think that we need strong protections against the incitement of racial violence or racial  hatred which is why I'm not just looking at section 18c, but I'm also looking at the incitement provisions in the Commonwealth  Criminal Code.

Page 3 of 4 9 February 2014 - Interview with Peter van Onselen and Paul Kelly, Au...

28/05/2014 http://www.attorneygeneral.gov.au/transcripts/Pages/2014/First%20Qua...

VAN ONSELEN: That's what I wonder about, what you took to the election, whether there's any chance of it being watered down. I  understand what you say about section18c, but I wonder whether these consultations have given the new Government and yourself  pause for thought about just how far you go beyond that core element.

SENATOR BRANDIS: I wouldn't put it that way. What I would say to you Peter is that I am aware, and have always been aware,  that this is a matter of tremendous sensitivity and it's important to get it right. The current legislation, section 18c, is unbalanced  because it is too invasive of freedom of speech. And the current Criminal Code provisions are, in my view, inadequate because they  are limited to the incitement of violence alone. What we want in this country is the right laws that protect people from inappropriate  conduct while not outlawing freedom of speech and it's possible to do both if you write those laws in the appropriate way. But it's an  exercise the Government has approached, and I've approached, in a careful and methodical and an unideological way because I  think that's what the community expects of us.

KELLY: Given your portfolio responsibilities, how serious is the threat to national security from Australians going to fight in the civil  war in Syria and being trained in that operation, and what can the Government do about this?

SENATOR BRANDIS: Paul, it's a very important question and the answer is that the threat is serious. There is an alarmingly large  number of Australians who have gone to Syria to participate in the Syrian civil war. That is a crime against Australian law. It is also,  of course, extremely hazardous conduct for those people to engage in. And there is the problem of people who, perhaps in  befuddled simple minded idealistic way, think they're going to go overseas to be freedom fighters and then fall under the influence  of al-Qaeda or al-Nusra or other radical groups and are radicalised and also taught the tradecraft of terrorism and come back to

Australia. So this is a matter that the Government takes very seriously. There is a significant Australian exposure to this problem  and the national security agencies and the Australian Federal Police are very alert to it.

VAN ONSELEN: Scott Morrison raised the idea of us being able to make some more changes that put us in line with other  countries like the UK and Canada, I think it was, that give the government greater powers, I guess, to deal with removal from  passports for example for dual-passport holders who choose to go and fight somewhere like Syria. Is that something that the  Government is seriously looking at?

SENATOR BRANDIS: As you rightly say Peter, other governments including the British and Canadian governments have made  changes to their laws in that area. And it is something that the government is considering.

VAN ONSELEN: And is it something that we're likely to see soon? I mean, I guess, this is one of those issues where timeframe is  important.

SENATOR BRANDIS: Timeframe is important and, I mean, I'm not going to anticipate what the legislation agenda will be but it is  something that is obviously an acute issue. There is a current exposure to this problem in Australia as I just said, and it's something  we intend to move on without delay.

VAN ONSELEN: It's already gone through Cabinet so it's now a legislative matter...

SENATOR BRANDIS: I never talk about what happens in Cabinet Peter.

VAN ONSELEN: Alright, fair enough. Senator George Brandis, Attorney-General, we appreciate you joining us on Australian  Agenda.

SENATOR BRANDIS: Thank you Peter, thank you Paul.

[Ends]

Page 4 of 4 9 February 2014 - Interview with Peter van Onselen and Paul Kelly, Au...

28/05/2014 http://www.attorneygeneral.gov.au/transcripts/Pages/2014/First%20Qua...

