

THE HON RICHARD MARLES MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND  BORDER PROTECTION  MEMBER FOR CORIO



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  PRESS CONFERENCE  TUESDAY, 19 AUGUST 2014  MELBOURNE

SUBJECT/ S: Children in detention.

RICHARD MARLES, SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND  BORDER PROTECTION: Today’s announcement by the Minister is baffling,  from the man who brought you a media strategy dressed up as ‘on water  matters’ today we have more spin in pursuit of a cheap headline. Back in 2010,  Labor announced that it would do everything it could to get kids out of  detention, and as a result of that decision, hundreds of children were removed  from detention facilities into the community.  At the time Scott Morrison criticised  these efforts as being a waste of resources.  The truth is, that all governments  should be doing everything in their power to get kids out of detention.  So why  has it taken 12 months for Scott Morrison to show any compassion towards kids  in detention?  Now the Minister has said that he’s been working on this for  months, looking for new capacity and new resources, but there’s very little  detail.  Where is the new capacity?  What are the new resources?  And what is  the advice which says that this decision should only apply to kids who are under  10?  The truth is, that today’s announcement raises many more questions than it  answers.  Are there any questions?

JOURNALIST: The Minister’s policy includes new support arrangements and he  also says that he has had to improve facilities to allow children to be released,  are you being a bit disingenuous by suggesting it’s your old policy that is being  announced today?



MARLES: There’s nothing obvious at all today about what the Minister has  announced, there’s no detail, there’s lots of generalities, but we do not here any  specifics about what resources he’s bringing to bear, and what capacity he has  managed to find.  The truth is, it is not clear at all what the announcement is  today, it is a very strange announcement indeed and if there is an admission in  this that the Minister has taken 12 months to come to the realisation that he  should be getting kids out of detention well then that is a disgrace.

JOURNALIST: Is this an acknowledgment by the Government of the harms that  have been spoken about by health professionals of children in detention?

MARLES: Well it is interesting to me that we are only now hearing from the  Minister any words at all about the needs of kids in detention.  We of course  hear those words in the very week when the Minister is to appear before the  Human Rights Commission’s Inquiry into children in detention.  You’d need to  ask the Government the question of what acknowledgement there is, what  revelation they’ve had, about the needs for kids in detention, but it is an  absolute no-brainer that all governments should be doing everything in their  power to get kids out of detention.

JOURNALIST: Does Labor still support the ongoing detention for children in  offshore facilities?

MARLES: On the 19th of July last year, Labor made the difficult decision to take  Australia off the table to save lives at sea, and we have seen as a result of that  decision, many lives saved at sea.  So obviously those children and indeed adults  who have come after the 19th of July, who are now on Nauru, are in a different  situation.  But it’s very important that these are facilities that are being operated  at world’s best practice in terms of the services that are being provided to kids,  in terms of schooling, in terms of counselling, now I do have concerns about how  these facilities are being run, they need to be providing safe, dignified and  humane refuge for everyone who is in them.  This is a Government which has a  woeful track record when it comes to transparency around this area of policy, it’s  really incumbent on the Minister to come clean to the Australian people about  exactly what are the conditions which are applying to kids on Nauru.

JOURNALIST: Do you question the timing of the announcement, obviously the  Minister is going to face the Human Rights Commission later this week.

MARLES: I think it’s very interesting that in a week where the Minister is to  appear before the Human Rights Commission’s inquiry into children in detention,  we hear for the first time any concern from him about the plight of kids in

detention.  I note that this was a question which was asked of him this morning  in his press conference and I also note that he failed to answer that question.

JOURNALIST: Just on another matter, what do you make of internal  correspondence within the Immigration Department about returning asylum  seekers to Syria?

MARLES: Look I’m not aware of the specifics of that internal correspondence so  I’ll have to take that question on notice and get back to you.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT:  LIDIJA IVANOVSKI 0427 051 563

