





THE HON TANYA PLIBERSEK MP  ACTING LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND  INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT

MEMBER FOR SYDNEY





E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP INTERVIEW  FRIDAY, 25 JULY 2014  ULTIMO

SUBJECT/S: MH 17; Australian Federal Police deployment; Scott Morrison  back-flip.

TANYA PLIBERSEK, ACTING LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Well thanks for  coming out this evening. There’s no one better to search for Australians on this  crash site than Australian Federal Police and if necessary, Australian defence  personnel. Labor has supported from the beginning every effort to ensure that our  police have access to this 50 square kilometre crash site. We are determined to see  every Australian brought home and the sooner we have access to the site and the  broader that access, is the better. Labor has supported from the beginning the  sending of Australian Federal Police to Europe. We received a briefing yesterday  from the Prime Minister’s office and the Federal Police and this extra deployment  wasn’t mentioned but of course we support Australian Federal Police as the best  people to search in this site for remains and for any evidence of what exactly has  happened to MH17.

JOURNALIST: Does the Prime Minister have to spell out what the troops will be  doing and how many will be going?

PLIBERSEK: My understanding is so far the Australian defence personnel that have  been sent have for example been providing personal security to Angus Houston. This  is a very dangerous area of Ukraine, there are heavily armed rebels on the site. They  have been haphazard about allowing access to the site, its plain that not all of the  rebel groups are cohesive, that there are different units operating that don’t follow a  clear command structure. So, making sure that Angus Houston, that our police,

Federal Police who are on the site, making sure that any consular officials who are  on the site are safe. If that takes Australian defence personnel then of course we  support that.

JOURNALIST: I guess the question was, does the Prime Minister have to spell out  what they’ll be doing?

PLIBERSEK: Well look, so far the Prime Minister has said that there’s a small  number of defence personnel and they’re there for reasons of providing security. I  think that that’s a perfectly reasonable explanation. I think it’s important that  Australians are aware that Australian Federal Police and Australian defence  personnel in some instances, are there to support our efforts, our share of the  efforts, of recovering the remains of people who have lost their lives in this terrible  crash. I think it’s important that when they cleared that as part of the Dutch lead  investigation, Australia is very, very keen to have its own people on the ground. We  rate our people highly, we know that they are highly experienced. We know that  some of these police for example have had experience in working through the rubble  after the tsunami in Japan. They are highly experienced people and they can  contribute to this operation and so we support the fact that they’ve been sent there.  There are defence personnel providing security on the ground, that’s a good thing.

JOURNALIST: You’ve talked about the lawlessness in the region. Are you  concerned about the safety of Australians troops or police in the region? Do you  trust President Putin’s assurances that they will be safe?

PLIBERSEK: Well I am concerned about any Australians in the area, as I am  concerned about the Dutch personnel, who are leading this investigation, as I am  concerned about anyone who is working on this investigative and recovery effort. It  is clear that these rebels have the backing of Russia. We hope that the Russian  President is able to use his influence firstly to ensure access to the site, secondly to  ensure that access is safe, and thirdly to ensure that we can have a big enough  force on the ground to actually make an effort of collecting evidence across a very  large site, to undertake that very large and difficult task appropriately. President  Putin, I hope, is able to use his influence to ensure the safety of Australians. But I  wouldn’t want to take any risks with Australian Federal Police. I wouldn’t want to  take any risks with foreign affairs staff or consular staff who are on the ground. So it  is important to have backup there in case it’s needed.

JOURNALIST: Just on another topic, on the issue of asylum seekers. Has the High  Court challenge forced the Government [inaudible] deal with India, and bring 157 to  Australia?

PLIBERSEK: Well I think the announcement today shows that the last few weeks  have been all about Scott Morrison’s ego, and nothing about making sensible  decisions in the interests of Australia and certainly not in the interests of the people  on board this vessel, including the children who have been detained for several  weeks on this vessel. Labor said many weeks ago that as the vessel was close to

Christmas Island it made sense to process people on Christmas Island, it’s only been  Scott Morrison’s ego that’s prevented that.

JOURNALIST: What do you know about their legal rights once they do enter  Australia? There is some conjecture that they are going to be sent to Curtin in the  end. Obviously if they are sent to Curtin then that’s in the migration zone, so will  they have legal rights to fight for asylum?

PLIBERSEK: Look I’m afraid I can’t answer that question; we’ve only read what  you’ve read in the papers. We haven’t received any special information from Scott  Morrison or from the Government, so it’s up to him to answer those questions, if you  can get him to a press conference. Thanks.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACTS: DAN DORAN 0427 464 350

