

TANYA PLIBERSEK MP  ACTING LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION   SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND  INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT

MEMBER FOR SYDNEY















E&OE TRANSCRIPT   ABC NEWS BREAKFAST   FRIDAY, 31 JANUARY 2014  SYDNEY



Subjects: SPC Ardmona; Criticism of ABC; Navy and asylum seekers

MICHAEL ROWLAND: We are joined now by the acting Opposition Leader  Tanya Plibersek. She is in Sydney. Good morning to you.

TANYA PLIBERSEK, ACTING LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Morning.

ROWLAND: Now what do you make of the Prime Minister’s argument that this  Coca-Cola Amatil, SPC Ardmona's parent company, is a $9 billion corporate giant,  it makes $200 million in just in six months. It really should have the job of  restructuring this plant without any help from taxpayers.

PLIBERSEK: I think it's important to acknowledge that SPC Ardmona were  proposing to put $165 million of their own money into this restructure. What  they were asking for was a co investment from the Federal Government of $25  million, so they were certainly prepared to put their own money on the table.

The independent advice that the Government got and the previous Government  got, that we got when we were in Government, is that this was a value for  money co investment because of the jobs that it would keep in the region. We

are looking in the Greater Shepparton area of unemployment going from around  8.5 per cent, which is already quite high to over 12 per cent, if this closure goes  ahead. There are thousands of jobs obviously that are directly employed by SPC  Ardmona but it's also the knock-on effects for farmers and other businesses in  the area, pushing up unemployment quite substantially.

This is an area where it's not easy just to shift from one job to another and  Australian farmers have found that it's not easy just to shift from one market to  another either. So it's the jobs, it's the social dislocation that we’ll see and it’s the  loss of food manufacturing in Australia. We know that the middle class in Asia is  growing quickly. We’ve had a strong Australian dollar for a while but as our  dollar drops our food products become very much more attractive to that fast  growing middle class in our region. It's a terrible shame to lose that capacity for  food processing now, knowing that we’ve got a big market on our door step that  has I think a very bright future for Australia.

ROWLAND: Now, what do you make, though, of the Government's argument as  we all know the Budget is under so much strain, it’s not just SPC Ardmona, it  took the same hardline view with Holden, it's likely to not give any love to  Qantas who of course wants some government assistance as well. Really the  time for what many people see as “corporate welfare” has truly come to an end  in Australia.

PLIBERSEK: Well, corporate welfare is one name for it, Australian jobs is the  other way of looking at it. So far, there's not been an Australian job that this new  government hasn't been prepared to see shipped offshore. Tony Abbott came  into Government saying that it was all about jobs, that he was all about jobs, the  Government was all about jobs and what we’ve seen at every crucial decision  point is a government that’s willing to ship Australian jobs offshore.

ROWLAND: What do you make of the broader argument that’s been put my  many including a very angry local Liberal MP Sharman Stone that the wider issue  of how easy it is to have overseas fruit dumped on the local market? And if  you're concerned about that, how should that be addressed?

PLIBERSEK: Well I think people should buy Australian whenever they can.  You’ve got to realise one of the great challenges that we’ve been facing as a  nation is the strong Australian dollar. Now that's been a reflection of our strong  economy, compared with the rest of the world. But it has caused temporary  problems for our manufacturing industry, problems that we can sort out,  problems that this company is prepared to work to sort out, prepared to put their  own money on the table.

We’ve already seen the Australian dollar come off its very high peaks a little bit.  With help from Government to restructure to bring out new product lines, this

company has a future here. Holden said that they had a future in Australia.  Holden were goaded out of Australia. SPC Ardmona, their worker’s, the farmers  that supply them, have had the back of the Government turned to them. I think  the question here is does this Government have a plan for jobs because the  manufacturing jobs are being shipped offshore and the jobs in the new economy,  I don't know that the Government has any notion where they're coming from.

ROWLAND: Let's go to other big story in national politics - that is, the review  announced late yesterday by the Government into both the ABC and SBS. An  efficiency review they're calling it. Firstly, let's hear from the Communications  Minister Malcolm Turnbull.

[VOICE GRAB OF MALCOLM TURNBULL] It's an important part of my  responsibility as Communications Minister to ensure that all of the agencies I'm  responsible for including the ABC and SBS spend the taxpayers' money they're  allocated as efficiently as possible. And this is a good opportunity, I  foreshadowed this last year in fact, to have a good study of the cost  effectiveness, the efficiency of both businesses. So it is not about, you know,  questioning your editorial judgment or programming decisions or the content of  programs, it's about the cost of running these two very big businesses.

ROWLAND: Okay Tanya Plibersek What do you make of this?

PLIBERSEK: Commission of audit, efficiency audit, I mean they’re all cuts,  they're all code for cuts. This is an absolute betrayal of the promise that Tony  Abbott made before the election, that there would be no cuts to the ABC and no  cuts to SBS.

Once again, we see Tony Abbott saying one thing before the election and doing  something completely different after the election. Australians love the ABC. They  rely on the ABC at times of emergencies to get information about how to leave  their homes safely during a bushfire or a flood. We love the children's  programming, which means that our kids growing up speaking in an Australian  voice knowing about our stories and our culture and our history. And before the  election, Tony Abbott hid the fact that he had an agenda to go after the ABC.  Since the election, we’ve seen him refuse to do open press conferences, we’ve  seen him now going after the funding of the ABC with up to a quarter of a billion  dollars cut from the Australia Network and yesterday Kevin Andrews saying what  goes around comes around, as a clear statement that the Government's  retaliating against what they see as unfavorable coverage from the ABC.

ROWLAND: And finally Tanya Plibersek, I want to take you to a story we are  just getting in this morning from our Indonesia correspondent George Roberts.  He has spoken to another Somali asylum seeker on that boat that has been very  dominant in the news in the last couple of weeks or so. George Roberts tells us

this Somali asylum seeker alleges that during the on board argument with  members of the Australian Navy he suffered burns when he came into contact  with a hot engine after Australian an soldier, he alleges, sprayed him in the eyes.  What do you make of that story?

PLIBERSEK: Well it’s impossible to make anything of it from the distance and  the lack of information. I have every faith in the Australian Navy, but, as for the  Government’s criticism of the ABC reporting of this, I’d say it is not the ABC's job  censor such claims. I have every faith in our Navy but when claims like this are  made it's quite right to investigate them properly.

ROWLAND: Tanya Plibersek in Sydney, thank you very much for your time this  morning.

PLIBERSEK: Thank you.

ENDS



Media Contact: Dan Doran 0427 464 350

