Minister for Immigration and Border Protection

Scott Morrison

Tuesday, 25 March 2014

Interview with Chris Uhlmann, ABC AM Program

Chris Uhlmann: An investigation into Operation Sovereign Borders by the ABC's  730 programme renews questions about what happened on a boat turned back to  Indonesia in January. In detailed interviews, new witnesses describe how protests  broke out on board. They say asylum seekers attempted to sabotage the boats  engine and they allege Australian personnel later purposely inflicted burns on their  hands - the hands of three men - as punishment for ignoring a ban on entering the  engine room. The highly contentious claim has been strenuously denied by the  Federal Government and it's again stated that the claims are baseless. To discuss  them I'm joined this morning by Immigration and Border Protection Minister Scott  Morrison. Welcome.

Minister Morrison: Good morning Chris.

Chris Uhlmann: Have you conducted any kind of investigation into this?

Minister Morrison: Well, as I said two months ago, what happened after these  events is the Navy does their assessment of these events and the advice they  provided to me was that these things were baseless and all we saw last night was a  repetition of baseless claims, nothing more than that. The Government stands by all  its rejections of these insulting and offensive claims and I think that's where the  matter rests.

Chris Uhlmann: Why can they be called baseless, insulting, offensive when there  are now four people who are making these claims? One person who claims to be a  victim. Surely if a victim makes a claim of something like this it's worthy of  investigation?

Minister Morrison: Well no, I don't think it's for the Government to disprove the  negative, Chris. It's for those who have allegations to be actually prove the positive.  There is no basis for this and there is still no basis for this. If the ABC just wants to  keep repeating and recycling these claims, well they can, but the Government will  continue to strenuously deny them as the Customs and Border Protection service did  as recently as last Friday and the Navy has done repeatedly. I mean these men are  well trained - these men and women are well trained. They operate in accordance  with their guidelines and there's nothing based on the work that the Navy and  Customs and Border Protection services has done and assessed which would  indicate they have done anything other than that.

Chris Uhlmann: But you will admit that people who are well trained and who act in  accordance to guidelines or who have guidelines have breached guidelines in the  past. Were the guidelines on the use of force reviewed in this instance?

Minister Morrison: Well, when the assessment was done after these events, there  was found to be no breach.

Chris Uhlmann: Can you tell us what the assessment was?

Minister Morrison: I just told you - I just told you what the assessment was.

Chris Uhlmann: Were the people involved in this questioned about what went on  board?

Minister Morrison: Yes.

Chris Uhlmann: Were those claims tested against the allegations that were made  by the witnesses?

Minister Morrison: They were aware of those allegations.

Chris Uhlmann: But have you questioned the witnesses?

Minister Morrison: Well I'm the Minister; I don't go around conducting any inquiries.  The Navy…

Chris Uhlmann: When I say you, of course, I'm speaking in broad.

Minister Morrison: The Navy and the Customs and Border Protection service,  depending on who's involved in any process undertakes assessments about things  such as this and they've given me their assurance. I believe their assurance. I don't  believe what I saw last night. I simply don't believe it. I choose to believe the  assessment that has been given to me by the Navy. I know others are doubting  those assessments. They are free to do that. It's a free country, Chris. I believe the  Navy.

Chris Uhlmann: It is a free country and if people never broadcast claims about  victims being abused by people in power, very little would be done by the media.

Minister Morrison: Well the criticism that was made of the ABC some months ago  was not about broadcasting the claims, it was to give some suggestion they were  substantiated on the basis of a police inquiry which was found not to be true. Now,  when I get things wrong, Chris, I fess up and I say I got them wrong. I'm still waiting  for the ABC to fess up on that point.

Chris Uhlmann: Well I think the ABC now is trying to find more proof of the claims  that it made and there was an expression of regret a little earlier, but it would appear  from these claims that more people have emerged that are corroborating this  evidence and this evidence is yet to be tested by the Australian Government.

Minister Morrison: Well no that's not true and I don't find what was put forward last  night any more credible…

Chris Uhlmann: You can't credit one side of the claims…

Minister Morrison: I don't find what was said last night any more credible than what  was said two months ago in fact and nothing's moved on. I suggest the ABC should.

Chris Uhlmann: Was pepper spray used in this instant or capsicum spray or any  kind of spray? Can you tell us what went on that boat?

Minister Morrison: Well I can tell you that those sorts of things are available to  officers to use in the appropriate circumstances.

Chris Uhlmann: But what's happening in this instance is that we are interrogating  one side of the proposition. You are talking internally on the other. We have no  clarity at all on what went on, on that boat from your point of view? Nothing.

Minister Morrison: No, no, I don't think that's true at all, Chris. I think the  Government's given a very clear denunciation of these claims and anyone can rock  up and make claims, but they have to be able to substantiate them before they are  given the credibility of the sort of investigation that you're suggesting. Now that  hurdle has not been cleared in these cases, simply repeating claims in order to  justify earlier reports is a matter for the ABC. Those claims are rejected by the Navy,  the Customs and Border Protection service, the Government, myself as Minister. We  don't believe them. They're not true from our perspective and I believe they're not  borne out by the assessments we've undertaken.

Chris Uhlmann: One of the ways that we could test these claims is the video  footage that your people would've taken on board that boat. Will you release it?

Minister Morrison: Why do you have the view that there is such footage? When has  the Government ever suggested there is any footage?

Chris Uhlmann: Because there is routinely footage taken and we saw actually in the  footage last night that there were cameras in people's hands.

Minister Morrison: That doesn't mean that there were video cameras, Chris and the  procedure is to undertake video of search and rescue incidents and this was not one  of those.

Chris Uhlmann: Was there any video taken on board?

Minister Morrison: Well, I'm not going to confirm the specific instances when and  where it's not used...

Chris Uhlmann: So there might be...

Minister Morrison: What I'm saying, Chris, is you're alleging that there is video  footage and there's nothing to substantiate that at all.

Chris Uhlmann: I'm alleging because I'm working in the dark at the moment,  Minister, because no information is being provided by the Australian government.  The only thing I'm trying to ascertain is was there any video footage taken on board  this boat?

Minister Morrison: Chris, if there were video footage it would have been reviewed  as part of an exercise such as this. But while we're getting into an individual  operational matter, it's difficult for me to go on that given the policy of the joint  agency taskforce. But let me just say this, it is the policy to have video where there is  a search and rescue operation. This was not a search and rescue operation and the  assumption that there is video footage of this, given the incident would have taken  than place over many, many days, video footage would of have had to have been in  every section of the vessel in order to take footage of all the events that may or may  not have taken place. And to simply suggest that that all exists I think is fanciful.

Chris Uhlmann: I'm not suggesting it exists. All I'm trying to ascertain is...

Minister Morrison: Well, I'm suggesting that it's fanciful, Chris.

Chris Uhlmann: Do any picture or images exist that might be useful in looking at  this particular case?

Minister Morrison: Well what I'm saying is the Navy have made it crystal clear to  me in their own assessment that there is no base to these claims and that's where  the matter rests as far as I'm concerned, Chris.

Chris Uhlmann: Do you appreciate that as an outsider that looking in on this  particular case that when the Government offers no information at all beyond saying  that you've looked at it, it's all fine as far as you're concerned, that questions will  continue to arise?

Minister Morrison: People can choose to believe the claims they saw on 730 last  night from people who said they rushed officers, they sought to sabotage a vessel  that they sought to illegally enter Australia. Last week we heard the claims of people  invoked 9/11 and swore at officers and threatened to kill them. Now, if people want  to believe those stories, they can, I don't.

Chris Uhlmann: We're seeing a Royal Commission at the moment into abuse in the  Catholic Church, something that I'm quite familiar with having been part of it for a  very long time. For a long time the Catholic Church though as an authority said that  there was nothing that happened to these people that they were making it up. If we'd  never broadcast those claims, then those people would never have been served by  justice would they? Is it not the role of the media to take these things on sometimes?

Minister Morrison: I'm not questioning, Chris, the 730 report or any other  broadcaster publicising what they believe to be claims. The only issue I've taken with  the ABC over this is that they said at the time that they were substantiated by a  police investigation in Indonesia which was simply not true. The ABC have never  corrected that part of their report.

Chris Uhlmann: This part of the report does now offer more evidence than those  claims might do.

Minister Morrison: No, it just recycles old claims, Chris, that's all it does. It just  recycles old unsubstantiated claims by witnesses that I don't believe are credible.

Chris Uhlmann: Minister, just finally on this, so it's not now or is not going to be your  intention that you will have a thorough investigation, which includes questioning the  people that are making these claims?

Minister Morrison: This matter is closed.

Chris Uhlmann: Scott Morrison, we'll have to leave it there, thank you.

Minister Morrison: Thanks a lot, Chris.

Chris Uhlmann: Scott Morrison is the Minister for Immigration and Border  Protection.



