



THE HON BILL SHORTEN  LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  MEMBER FOR MARIBYRNONG



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP INTERVIEW  CANBERRA  THURSDAY, 4 DECEMBER 2014

SUBJECT/ S: Tony Abbott’s year of broken promises; Tony Abbott’s  unfair budget; Immigration; Abbott Government’s back dow n on PBS  co-payment; GP Tax; Passing of Lynne Kosky.

BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: This has been a year Tony  Abbott would rather forget; but this has been a year that Australians will  certainly remember. This has been a year of Tony Abbott’s broken promises. It  has been a year of disappointment, dysfunction and deceit. Today, Labor has  published a little book, a written record of Tony Abbott’s broken promises this  year. If I might just quote from the little book of lies: Tony Abbott promised in  Health - “let me say it again, no cuts to Health. No cuts to Health”. This is a  broken promise. With $57 billion promised in actual cuts in the Budget to Health.  Another chapter of the book of lies - Education. Tony Abbott promised no cuts to  education. The Abbott Government has cut $30 billion to education in their  Budget. There is another chapter; Higher Education. In the Liberal Party policy  document, euphemistically named ‘Real Solutions’, Tony Abbott promised "We  will ensure the continuation of current arrangements of university funding." As  we know, they cut university funding in the Budget and they still persist with that  even as late as yesterday. Perhaps a final broken promise amongst the many  broken promises is cost of living. Tony Abbott promised yet again in the ‘Real  Solutions’ book he would reduce the cost of living pressures and help families  with the cost of raising children. The Abbott Government cut $5 billion worth of  family payments in the Budget this year. I might just ask my colleague Jenny

Macklin to make some additional remarks about the Government's latest  proposals around pensions. Then we will be happy to take questions.

JENNY MACKLIN, SHADOW MINISTER FOR FAMILIES AND  PAYMENTS: Thanks very much, Bill. In the cruellest Christmas present any  government could deliver, this Government has put the pension cut into the  House of Representatives today. Tony Abbott is trying to force through the  pension cuts through the House of Representatives today so that pensioners will  face a cut to their pension as a result of the changes to pension indexation. Tony  Abbott promised before the last election there would be no changes to pensions.  He said there would be no cuts to pensions. Well, Tony Abbott has legislation in  the Parliament today that will see a cut to the pension. $80 a week, it will mean  to pensioners over the next 10 years. $80 a week or $23 billion taken out of the  pockets of pensioners, and that's according to the Parliamentary Budget Office.  Broken promises, lies that Tony Abbott has delivered to 3.7 million Australian  pensioners.

SHORTEN: Thanks, Jenny. One of the reasons we've got so many of my  colleagues here is that in all of the areas that they represent, Tony Abbott has  broken promises. Happy to take questions.

JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten, you've shown a lot of opposition this year. When will  we start seeing some policies released?

SHORTEN: Well, I think what this Opposition has done is we've taken our  positions based upon principle. When it's come to fighting terror for instance,  we’re all in this together and indeed the Prime Minister recognises that on  national security, the Opposition has worked for the Government very well. I  don't accept the frame of the question that we're automatically opposing  everything and the Prime Minister himself recognises that. In terms of opposition  of the Budget, it really was an unfair Budget and I think we reflect what the  great mass of the Australian people think, but even on the Budget, we've  supported north of $20 billion worth of their savings. And indeed, we've offered  to support other measures of the Government's. They should drop their paid  parental leave scheme, for instance, that is a friendless policy. And also, for  instance, when it comes to properly taxing multinational corporations we are  prepared to do that and work with them, but it's the Government who's gone  soft on them and indeed, when you look at Labor's record when we were in  government, from means testing of private health insurance, right through to  difficult decisions that were made by the last Labor administration, our record is  that we're up for some of the tough decisions but what we can never do is drive  this country backwards by shrinking the confidence in the High Street, by  tackling the vulnerable with a GP Tax, by creating $100,000 university degrees,  by increasing the pressures on cost of living. So Labor takes its position based

upon the long-term national interest of the nation, not just this Government's  rampant ideology of broken promises in an unfair Budget.

JOURNALIST: What is Labor's plan to address the blow-outs in health,  education and NDIS spending that was identified in the Commission of Audit?

SHORTEN: I'm glad you mention the Commission of Audit, because that was  the Government's Plan B which they tabled before they put in their Budget which  was Plan A. Also just on this Commission of Audit - I think Victorian Liberals will  be asking themselves: why was it that the Commission of Audit was hidden after  the Tasmanian, South Australian and West Australian elections, yet the Abbott  Government brought down their petrol tax - a clear broken promise in the first  week of the Victorian election. This Commission of Audit has I think had a  chequered history and is not much loved within some parts of the Liberal Party.  But going to, I think, the issue of substance - we don't accept the proposition  that our Medicare system is in danger of explosion. We don't believe the case  has been made out for the GP Tax. As you know as well as I do, Sid, if there  really was the Medicare crisis which the Government rhetorically say there is,  why would they be putting the GP Tax money that's raised into a medical  research fund rather than plugging it back into the health system now? And in  addition, if there was this was this crisis, why is the Government quietly shelved  its pharmaceutical benefits co-payment scheme today? Why has it disappeared  off the Senate papers today? I mean the Government can't have it both ways.  There's a crisis which they'll resolutely prosecute, or indeed there's just a bunch  of ill-thought out, unfair ideas which they don't know where they're going.

JOURNALIST: If the MYEFO comes back and pushes out the surplus beyond  the target year that the Government's set, would you be happy with that  occurring?

SHORTEN: First of all, I think Joe Hockey shouldn't be waiting till just before  Christmas to bring down his mini-budget. I will ask our shadow Treasurer  perhaps to supplement this answer. There's a couple of basic questions for this  Treasurer. Why on earth does he have to do a mini-budget if his initial budget  had been any good? Secondly if the crisis is so urgent, as they huff and they  puff, why are they waiting till nearly the death knock of Christmas before they do  it? Thirdly, the Treasurer's out there pleading on his knees for Australians to  spend money, so why is he taking cuts off families of up to $6,000? I mean I tell  you the real problem in Australia. If the Treasurer Joe Hockey was more  competent, then Australians would have more confidence. I might ask Chris to  supplement this.

CHRIS BOWEN, SHADOW TREASURER: Thanks, Bill. The Government of  course is at sixes and sevens when it comes to the Budget surplus. Just about 60

days ago, the Prime Minister promised to return the Budget to balance on a  timetable. Yesterday, and the day before, Mathias Cormann has been running  away from that commitment. Just 60 days, they can't keep a central narrative  when it comes to the Budget. Now, we hear a lot about the Budget deficit and  what Tony Abbott calls the debt and deficit disaster. But of course, Joe Hockey is  the master of disaster when it comes to the Budget deficit. He's the one  overseeing blow-outs in the Budget deficit. As Bill said, what we need to see is  the mini-budget introduced and released as soon as possible as a matter of  urgency so the Australian people can see the true state of the books, and Joe  Hockey should produce a realistic set of books, not ones which are based on the  premise that they will somehow magically get through the Parliament. Measures  which have been comprehensively rejected by the Parliament and the people.  Now, if Tony Abbott and Mathias Cormann and Joe Hockey can't get a consistent  line on when the Budget will return to balance or surplus, then we'll need to see  the mini-budget before commenting further about what that means for the state  of the books going forward.

JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten, in relation to the cost of living, the Treasurer says  our cost of living - our standard of living is at risk if we don't get this Budget  through and he's called for the Opposition, the Greens and the independents to  be sensible and work through them. Is our standard of living at risk and are you  going to be sensible?

SHORTEN: Joe Hockey and Tony Abbott are the risk to the future of this  country. Joe Hockey, it is not the job of average ordinary Australian families to  fix your Budget. It's your job to fix your Budget. I mean, if you want to  talk about the greatest threat to standard of living it's unemployment. If you  don't have a job a lot of other things aren't working for you. Unemployment  under this Government has increased. It was at 5.7 per cent when at the time  of the last election. It was at 5.9 per cent at the Budget and now it's 6.2 per  cent. Even worse than that, since the Budget, 42,000 jobs, gone. Full-time job  growth in this country has practically stalled since the Budget.  Youth unemployment was 12.7 per cent at the time of the last election. Now it's  up to 14 per cent. Youth unemployment is at its highest level in 13 years, in  fact, since Tony Abbott was the Minister for Employment. This mob at  the moment, this Government, they're more interested in their own jobs, it  would seem than anyone else's jobs and standard of living. I mean, we've  got the situation where Julie Bishop wants the Prime Minister's job, Andrew  Robb's job is to watch Julie Bishop, Joe Hockey doesn't even want his own job.  David Johnston can't do his job and Scott Morrison, well, he wants to do  everyone's job.

JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten, could I please ask you about asylum seekers? I  notice that Mr Marles is not out here with you. Can you explain why Labor's

been relatively quiet on voicing its asylum seeker policies and can I get your  reaction please to the announcement that the Palmer United Party will support  the TPV bill that’s currently before the Senate?

SHORTEN: Just about, first of all, who's out here. When the word went out,  fairly, in the last few minutes did anyone want to join us for this press  conference about Tony Abbott's lies, our colleagues have been coming here to  do this and so I think if we went another 15 minutes we'd even have more here.  I that is in stark contrast to the Government, where let's face it they're not all  working in tandem, in sync in the Government, are they? In terms of your more  substantive point about being fairly quiet - we don't believe that TPVs are  the appropriate solution. We don't believe that. And we certainly don't think it  was particularly ethical of the Government to say that the only way children or  families might leave detention is if they voted for a particular bit of  government legislation which we think has some pretty dire consequences in  terms of the functioning of the Immigration Act. So we've got our position, we've  stuck to it and if Scott Morrison's done a deal with Clive Palmer, I mean I think  they announced that last month. Well, that shouldn't really come as a surprise to  anyone, should it?

JOURNALIST: But Mr Shorten, Clive Palmer seems to be saying that  Scott Morrison's now agreeing with him, we don't know whether that's true or  not, but the TPVs might lead to other visas and then a pathway eventually  for these people to stay in Australia. Isn't politics being the art of the possible  the only option there to get these people off Christmas Island, the children and  others, and bring them to the mainland, why wouldn't you agree with that?

SHORTEN: Well, when I see Clive Palmer and Scott Morrison give diametrically  different views about what the same legislation is I'm probably in the same boat  you are, it's not quite clear. Clive Palmer believes that the TPV system that  he's negotiated will lead to a path to permanent citizenship. Scott Morrison is not  saying that. So I think that, you know, there's a big question to answer there. In  some ways whilst Clive Palmer and Scott Morrison may be in the same bed  they've got different dreams. And this is the issue in terms of what they're  promising. It's they’re diametrically opposed. Labor has expressed on  record repeatedly our concerns about TPVs. It leaves people in limbo.

JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten, Labor's got a press release out today on the PBS,  the PBS increases not going ahead. Now, why is it not acceptable to increase  PBS prices in 2014 when in the 1990 Budget, Paul Keating said that the system  needed to be sustained and he increased them by I think more than 30 per cent?

SHORTEN: Sid, are you raising the 1990 Budget?

JOURNALIST: I had hair back then.

SHORTEN: Okay, okay, I was still at uni then. In all seriousness, though, I think  the issue which you do draw attention to, and I can feel Catherine  King emanating her desire to supplement this answer, so I would like to grant  that wish in moment, but in terms of this issue, let me turn it around and put  back a question to Tony Abbott. His argument there’s about, if a co-payment in  one aren't they all the same and why can’t you vote for a co-payment in  another? Let me say to Tony Abbott, in the light of you retreating and acceding  to Labor's wishes not to have an increase in the co-payment on the PBS, why  don’t you just actually retreat properly, do the job once, take the barnacles off  this rotten Budget, and drop the co-payment on the GP Tax? I mean, you know  Tony, you've got your foot on the sticky paper. You're ready to give up on this  silly co-payment increase in the pharmacy. Just do the whole lot, rip the band aid  off, do not, do not have a GP Tax on the sick and the vulnerable but I might ask  Catherine to help supplement that.

CATHERINE KING, SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH: Thanks, thanks very  much for that, Bill and of course the Government has been forced to withdraw its  PBS Bill or not debate it in the Senate and it's only been forced to because Labor  has said this is an unfair policy and of course it is an unfair policy in the context  of all they are doing in health. A government that lied before the election  about what it intended to do when it came to health. No cuts to health - it has  cut $57 billion out of our public hospital system, introduced an increased cost for  medicines for every Australian, particularly for those Australians who are  most vulnerable. And of course, its GP Tax. What we now know, what we now  know is that every time, every time this Government increased the PBS co-payment, there were patients who stopped taking medicines. So in the context of  a Budget that said no cuts to health before the election, in the context of a  Budget that absolutely smashes health care, it is important that people  understand what the rise in the increase to the cost medicine would do. It would  mean vulnerable patients would stop taking their medications, and I'm pleased  to see the Government has dropped the legislation but of course only for now. It  should also drop its GP Tax.

SHORTEN: Perhaps one last question.

JOURNALIST: Can we get a statement on the passing of Lynne Kosky?

SHORTEN: Thank you for raising that. The Victorian Labor Party and Victoria  has lost a distinguished former member of Parliament, Lynne Kosky. Like some  of my colleagues here from Victoria, I had the privilege of actually working with  her directly alongside here in the late 1980s, early 1990s. Lynne was a  remarkable minister in a range of portfolios. She fought a very tough battle with

her illness. She came back a number of times. She was a real fighter. She's left  us far too young. My thoughts are with Jim and her children. She’s left her mark  in local government, in State Government, in the not for profit sector. Lynne  Kosky will be missed. She was a distinguished Australian.

LABOR MEMBERS: Hear, hear.

SHORTEN: Thanks everyone.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: LEADER’S OFFICE MEDIA UNIT 02 6277 4053

