

THE HON BILL SHORTEN MP  LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  MEMBER FOR MARIBYRNONG

KATE ELLIS

SHADOW MINISTER FOR EDUCATION  MEMBER FOR ADELAIDE

ANDREW LEIGH MP  SHADOW ASSISTANT TREASURER  SHADOW MINISTER FOR COMPETITION   MEMBER FOR FRASER

E & OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP INTERVIEW  CANBERRA  WEDNESDAY, 4 JUNE 2014

SUBJECT/S: Cuts to education; Budget; Australia’s relationship with  Indonesia.

ANDREW LEIGH, SHADOW ASSISTANT TREASURER: Good morning  everybody. My name’s Andrew Leigh, the Federal Member for Fraser. And it’s a  real pleasure to welcome Bill Shorten and Kate Ellis to Ainslie School.

Founded in 1927, Ainslie School is the oldest continually operating public primary  school in the ACT. We’ve had the opportunity thanks to Kate Chapman and her  team to see the healthy eating canteen, to see some of the innovative learning  spaces that are being assisted by good investment in public education. We’re  right next to the Building the Education Revolution building, an investment of the  former Labor Government, in recognition that if you’re going to get a great  education you need to invest appropriately in schools.



I’ll hand over now to the Labor Leader Bill Shorten to say a few words.

BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Good morning everyone,  great to be here at Ainslie Primary school with local member Andrew Leigh, and  also our shadow spokesperson for education Kate Ellis.

Tony Abbott's going overseas today. We wish him well but we do also say to  Tony Abbott as he does his grand tour overseas over the next 11 days, that this  rotten Budget is still here festering when you come back. We say to Tony Abbott  as he is sitting in the big rooms overseas, just remember there are ordinary  Australians sitting in their lounge rooms trying to grapple with this rotten Budget  of broken promises built upon Tony Abbott's lies before the last election. This  Budget is still here for Tony Abbott to deal with when he comes back. The  problems of this Budget are still here. The unfair cuts especially in education, but  not just education are still here when Tony Abbott gets back from his overseas  trip.

In addition, the extent of problems and the extent of denial by Tony Abbott is  underlined by his most remarkable statement yesterday in Parliament. When  Tony Abbott was questioned about his view of the $80 billion of cuts, $80,000  million worth of cuts to schools and hospitals, shoulders Tony Abbott shrugged  his shoulders and said "Where's the problem?" Where's the problem, Mr Abbott?  The problem is that millions of Australians are hurting, Mr Abbott. The problem,  Mr Abbott, is that you are problem for Australian families, Australian cost of  living.

What we expect when Mr Abbott comes back is he's had a good chance to think  about what's in the best interests of this nation and start to do a major repair job  on the unfair features of this Budget, of which there are many. So Mr Abbott, we  wish you well on your trip overseas. But don't forget that you've got problems at  home and that you need to fix this rotten Budget, and there are vast tracts of  this Budget which Labor will not support, we cannot support, we will never  support.

I'd like to ask my colleague Kate Ellis to again talk about some of the problems  which we're seeing for the future of the education of young Australians.

KATE ELLIS, SHADOW EDUCATION MINISTER: Thank you very much, Bill  Shorten. And thank you to local member Andrew Leigh for showing Ainslie  primary us around this great school at Ainslie primary school. In the Labor Party  we want every school across Australia to be a great school, which is why we look  with disgust at the $80 billion in cuts to schools and hospitals that were  contained within this Federal Budget.



We know what $80 billion in cuts to schools and hospitals means. It means the  equivalent of 30,000 teachers not in our schools. It means language programs  stripped from our schools. Literacy and numeracy support that just is not there in  our schools. It means a cut of sports programs. If means cuts to all sorts of  programs across our schools. We know how devastating $80 billion in cuts yet  Tony to schools and hospitals is.

Yet Tony Abbott, when asked about his budget in Parliament, says "Where's the  problem?" Well, Prime Minister, there is a very big problem with $80 billion in  cuts from schools and hospitals and it is a very big problem that is not just  acknowledged by the Labor Party, but is acknowledged by the Prime Minister's  own Liberal colleagues. We have seen New South Premier Mike Baird say that  these cuts to schools and hospitals were like a kick in the guts. And yesterday in  the Queensland budget, we saw their own budget papers say the most  significant federal change was an $80 billion funding cut to all states for schools  and hospitals.

An $80 billion cut to schools and hospitals is not OK. This is where the problem  is. The Prime Minister needs to open his eyes and see will every school across  Australia will be hit hard by these funding cuts, that every student will be denied  the quality education that we believe they deserve, that's where the problem is,  Prime Minister.

SHORTEN: Thanks, Kate. Are there any questions?

JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten, you described Tony Abbott's trip as a grand tour. Do  you think he shouldn't be going overseas?

SHORTEN: It's most important that Tony Abbott repairs the relationship with  Indonesia. It is appropriate that Prime Ministers of Australia attend overseas. But  there will be a lot of time on those aeroplanes flying to and from capitals. There  will be a lot of time sitting in waiting rooms as you meet leaders of the world. I'd  just ask Mr Abbott to use some of that valuable thinking time to think about  Australian families, to think about the harm this Budget is doing.

The problems of this Budget will not go away as much as Mr Abbott hopes they  will, and the problems of this Budget will still be here festering for the next 11  days. I would suggest to Mr Abbott, to use some of this time overseas to think  about repairing your Budget damage, reconsider the GP tax, reconsider the  petrol tax, reconsider the attack on pensioners, reconsider making university  degrees and the opportunity to go to university out of touch for some  Australians. Reconsider this rotten unfair Budget.

JOURNALIST: Would you consider blocking supply Andrew Wilkie has  suggested Labor should do?

SHORTEN: Labor has stated and I have stated on previous occasions we would  not block supply. We do not see why Australia's hard-working Commonwealth  public servants, Australia's soldiers, Australia's Federal Police, Australia's customs  officials should be used as a human shields in terms of fighting the rotten Budget  of the Abbott Government.

But I can make very clear that the Budget that Tony Abbott wants Australians to  submit to has to get through Labor first. We will not and never support this GP  tax, no amount of spin of this Government will ever make this GP tax a good  idea. We will not support a new tax on every Australian family every time they  get into a motorcar. We are not going to support a ruthless attack on pensioners,  contrary to what the promises that were made, the lies that were told by Tony  Abbott before the last election. This is a bad Budget. And Labor will make sure  that we oppose all of the bad effects on many Australians.

JOURNALIST: [Inaudible] relationship with Indonesia?

SHORTEN: We wish Mr Abbott well. This is not a matter of wanting one political  party not to do well. Our relationship with Indonesia is important. The Australian  people need a good relationship between Australia and Indonesia. But let's not  gild the lily. I don't think anyone gives Mr Abbott a pass mark so far for his  international people skills. The relationship before Mr Abbott was Prime Minister  was good. The relationship is not so good now. It is long overdue that some  repair work's done in our relationship with Indonesia.

JOURNALIST: [Inaudible] 71% of people support towing back boats. Is it time  that Labor rethinks its stance when it comes to asylum seekers and border  protection?

SHORTEN: Well, we've just said we wish Mr Abbott well going overseas and  doing the repair job, the overdue repair job with the Indonesian nation on behalf  of the Australian people. I'm not going to make his job any harder by starting to  contaminate his discussions with the domestic political debate that's underway in  Australia. I repeat: Labor wants Mr Abbott to do well, but let's face it: so far you  wouldn't give him a pass mark for international diplomacy.

The other thing we want Mr Abbott to do on this trip so to reconsider the nasty,  rotten, unfair features of his Budget, the cuts to pensioners, the attack on  Medicare, the unfair petrol tax, the attack on uni students, the impoverishment  and the creation of a new underclass in Australia with his attacks to unemployed  people.



JOURNALIST: Can I ask, this morning on the doors, Andrew Wilkie suggested  that if the Budget goes ahead as the Government wants, it could lead to  suicides, is that a bit over the top?

SHORTEN: Well, I would just say about this Budget and I'm not going to get  into the language of cross-benchers here, Mr Wilkie. What I would say is that  Labor believes that the GP tax is an attack on universal, accessible Medicare.  Labor will do everything we can to defeat the attack on Medicare. When push  comes to shove and when Australian people have got their backs up against the  wall, the Labor Party will be standing in front of them to make sure that Tony  Abbott cannot wreck this country with the lies he told before the last election.

There is real anger in the Australian people. No amount of happy snaps of Mr  Abbott on a grand tour is going to change the upset, the hurt and the outrage of  ordinary Australians, and for those Liberal MPs who think that somehow the  Budget's going to disappear without trace, we make you this promise: Labor’s  going to stand up for the Australian people and we will make sure that we have  a Medicare system. We will make sure that we have a proper pensions system in  this country. We won't lie to the veterans. We won't lie to the university  students. We won’t lie to the pensioners. We won't lie to sick people.

JOURNALIST: So do you think that the public will resent Tony Abbott going  overseas?

SHORTEN: I think the public haven't moved beyond being upset at Mr Abbott's  election lies. If you want to look at relative mistakes and sins, you've got to look  first of all, Mr Abbott before the last election said no cuts to health and schools,  well that was just a lie. And Campbell Newman, hardly a friend of Labor's called  it for the lie it is. I mean, this Government's got a credibility crisis of some  dramatic proportion. On one hand Tony Abbott's pretending where's the  problem? On the other hand, Campbell Newman in his budget papers is saying  here's the problem, it's an $80 billion cut. Someone's not telling the truth,  Campbell Newman or Tony Abbott.

JOURNALIST: Should there be an election in Victoria?

SHORTEN: In terms of Victoria - it is a matter for the Victorian Parliament to  deal with. It's a Victorian political issue. I note that Premier Napthine has relied  upon this rogue MP to sustain the Liberal Government in Victoria for the last  three and a half years. Clearly, the wheels have come off the cart for the Liberal  Government in Victoria. I have full confidence in Daniel Andrews, the Labor  Leader, standing up for the best interests of all Victorians. There is no doubt in  my mind though that the last thing Denis Napthine wants is a by-election

because we know that any by-election in Australia will become a referendum on  Tony Abbott's rotten Budget and I tell you what, there’s not a big queue of  people wanting to be the Liberal candidate at the moment or face a by-election  because we all know this budget is poison for the Australian people and it is toxic  for Tony Abbott's Budget.

JOURNALIST: Daniel Andrews says that there’s a constitutional crisis in Victoria  at the moment do. You agree with that?

SHORTEN: Again, I would say it’s a matter for the Victorian Parliament not the  national Parliament but we all know why Denis Napthine doesn't want to have a  by-election now. It's because any by-election will become a referendum on Tony  Abbott's rotten Budget. And in Frankston, where the by-election could occur,  cuts to health care, cuts to schools, cuts to pensioners, attacks on Medicare,  that's going down like a lead balloon and people across Australia are  fundamentally angry at Tony Abbott lying before the election, saying and doing  anything to get elected and once he's in there, pretending to people where's the  problem? Where's the problem? It's Tony Abbott, and Denis Napthine knows that  too.

JOURNALIST: Should Labor force the issue with a vote of no confidence?

SHORTEN: Again, it's a matter for the Victorian Parliament. But I have no doubt  that the federal implications are clear here. No Liberal Premier wants a by-election at the moment in Victoria, because everyone knows that Tony Abbott  has fundamentally damaged Liberal credibility across Australia, because they said  one thing before an election and did something afterwards. People in Frankston  rely upon bulk-billing. People in Frankston want to have good schools for their  kids. People in Frankston want to be able to send their kids to universities and  not have it pushed out of reach by large debts and increasing university fees. No  one, no Liberal Premier wants a by-election at the moment, because if there's  one person other than Geoff Shaw that Denis Napthine's unhappy with, it's Tony  Abbott.

JOURNALIST: There were a couple of State and Territory Budgets handed  down yesterday. And yes, while they were angry at the Federal Government both  seemed to be able to keep their schools and hospitals running. Doesn't that  mean that you're going a bit over the top on these cuts?

SHORTEN: I've read the Budget papers for Queensland and for the ACT in  terms of what they say about these cuts. Let's be straight, let's call it as it is.  Campbell Newman has no trouble telling the truth about Tony Abbott. He said  that there's a $16 billion cut which will affect hospitals and schools in  Queensland. The ACT has made equally clear that this Federal Budget is going to

affect the ability of the Territory assembly here to deliver services across health  and schools. So no amount of pretending that there isn't a problem denies the  truth. Tony Abbott, in this Budget, is systematically hacking into health,  education, the pensions, Medicare, access to university. He's creating a  permanent underclass in Australia. He’s got a sterile vision which would see poor  people poorer and every State and Territory knows the truth. It's a bad Budget.

JOURNALIST: Kate do you mind if I just ask you, this morning just before the  PM flew out, he was asked about Peta Credlin and he said that blokes around  here underestimate women at their own peril. In your experience, do they and  what did you make of Clive Palmer’s comments the other night?

ELLIS: Look, I made very clear my views on Clive Palmer's remarks yesterday. I  said that they were wrong. I said that they were low and I said that they were  unacceptable, and I absolutely believe that. I believe in this place that staff  should be off limits. I believe that family members should be off limits and I  must say I absolutely and particularly think that using someone’s fertility to make  a public political debating point is absolutely got to be off limits and we're all  very clear on that.

JOURNALIST: Do you think that women are underestimated, some women are  underestimated?

ELLIS: Well, look, I think we've seen many examples in recent times in the  Parliament, but I'm also very proud that we have seen many examples of strong  women in this Parliament standing up and proving people wrong.

SHORTEN: Thanks everyone.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: LEADER’S OFFICE MEDIA UNIT 02 6277 4053



