





THE HON RICHARD MARLES MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER  PROTECTION  MEMBER FOR CORIO



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  SKY NEWS, PM AGENDA  TUESDAY, 22 APRIL 2014

SUBJECT / S:  Manus lsland interim report, Rebuilding Labor.

DAVID SPEERS: Today we’ve seen some rather disturbing images Fairfax Media have  obtained, what appears to be hidden camera footage of that riot that took place on the  Manus Island detention centre back in February in which a 23-year-old Iranian asylum  seeker, Reza Berati was killed. Now Fairfax is quoting un-named sources about what  exactly went on and they suggest that the local PNG G4S security staff were throwing  rocks and chairs at one of the accommodation buildings where asylum seekers ran for  cover and then it’s alleged that Reza Berati was beaten and thrown from the top of a  staircase before a rock was hit on his head, a fatal blow. Let me show you a little of this  video before we bring in our next guest.

Now we have invited the Immigration Minister, Scott Morrison on the program, he  points out that there is still an investigation underway into this, there is a police inquiry  in PNG but also the inquiry, independent inquiry, his department has commissioned into  this, he’s not going to make any judgments until those reports are back.  Shadow  Immigration Minister, Richard Marles, is with me now from Melbourne.  You’ve seen this  video what does it tell you that perhaps you didn’t already know?

RICHARD MARLES, SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER  PROTECTION: These are disturbing images, there is no question about that and what  it highlights to me is the absolute need to get to the bottom of the events that occurred  around this incident. We should not forget, as you said in your introduction, that a man

lost his life in an Australian funded facility and that is an unacceptable tragedy and so  we need to see, first and foremost the interim report from the independent inquiry that  the Government launched.  We need to see that made public. We know it’s sitting on  the Minister’s desk. They promised it at the end of March, we need to see that now and  we need to see an unequivocal guarantee from the Government that when the full  report comes to the fore, that it will be released in full.  Already we have seen them  fudge on that and it is simply not good enough.

SPEERS: Well the interim report, you say should be made public but did Labor release  such interim reports in relation to riots that took place during your watch?

MARLES: What we are talking about here David is a situation where a man has lost his  life within an Australian funded facility.  A facility which should be guaranteeing safety  and security and yet what we have seen is someone lose their life in those  circumstances. Given that, I think it’s really important that the Government lives up to  the commitment that it made when it put in place the independent inquiry and that was  to give us the interim report at the end of March. Now when faced with the proposition  of having a Senate inquiry delay the beginning of that inquiry until April so that this  report could run its course, but what we are seeing time and again with this  Government is that when information gets in its hands, it fails to release it to the  Australia people and we are seeing they have fudged the question now about whether  the full report, when it comes out will be released in total to the Australian people.

SPEERS: At the end of the day if this report does find some blame on the part of the  G4S personnel, either Australian or local personnel what are you saying should happen  because G4S have been replaced by Transfield at the end of last month and I don’t  think you’re going to suggest, are you, that Manus Island should all together be shut  down?

MARLES: First of all, this is not just about who’s doing the contractual work, of course  the report may say something about that and there may be lessons that can be learnt  there. There will obviously be implications if there are any individuals cited in this  report, but I think beyond that David, what we need to see here is an understanding of  what this Government, what the Abbott Government is doing wrong in relation to the  management of the Manus Island facility -

SPEERS: What are they doing wrong?

MARLES: Well, what we have seen them do is drop the ball from the time that they  were elected, this was a facility that operated under Labor, operated under a different  guise under the Howard Government, it’s been melting down under their watch and it’s  essentially because on coming to power they dropped the ball when it came to the PNG  arrangement, when it came to the Manus Island facility.

SPEERS: With respect Richard Marles, when Labor set this situation up where more  and more asylum seekers were going to continue to pile in with no prospect of ever  leaving wasn’t always going to be a key but yes it blew up in that February riot but it  was based on the policy that you put in place?

MARLES: It wasn’t, because the policy we put in place saw people, was meant to see  people, being processed and then if found to be refugees, resettled in PNG.  As we  stand here today in April we are none the wiser as to how or when that processing or  that re-settlement will take place in relation to people who are found to be genuine  refugees and so it should be no surprise to people that in circumstances where no  processing has been going on that tension has built up in the place and that is because  this Government failed to actively manage this area and this piece of public policy from  the day that they were sworn in.

They never liked it from the outset, I think they have always regarded it as one of  Labor’s ideas and so their pride has gotten in the way of them actively working this  issue, even though it has been clear that the PNG arrangement, more than any other  action that an Australian Government has taken is what is responsible for the reduction  of the flow of boats and the reduction in the loss of life at sea in between Australia and  Indonesia. Now this Government actually needs to get onto the ball and it should not  have taken the tragedy of February to see Scott Morrison go up to PNG and do  something about this issue.

SPEERS: Can I turn to the Labor Party reforms that Bill Shorten has outlined today.   The most contentious is obviously union control over who is chosen, pre-selected, for  Senate and State Upper House seats. Now he’s asked Labor’s National Executive and  Labor’s National Secretary, George Wright, to come up with a model here, what do you  think should happen? How do you think Senate candidates should be selected?

MARLES: In relation to the relationship with the union movement, I think the  statement that Bill Shorten made today was both a historic one but also a very  important one in the evolution of the Labor Party. It acknowledges the significant role  that unions play within our community and the significant role that unions have played  within our history and the Labor Party.

SPEERS: But its role has become a factional, centralised decision making role -

MARLES: Well it is to say a couple of other things, that we as a Labor Party need to be  more than the union movement, it’s a part of it, but we need to be more than that, we  need to be reaching out to new constituencies like small business, like regional  Australia. I think it’s also important that while we see factions exist in all organisations  we do, I think, need to do something to decrease the level of factionalisation that exists  within the ALP. So when it comes to -

SPEERS: So how should the Senate candidates be chosen?

MARLES: Well what Bill Shorten articulated today and I agree with him, is that there  needs to be local voices when it comes to Senate pre-selections that these cannot be an  entirely central process as they have been up until now and in that sense that will have  the effect of reducing the factional input which goes into those pre-selections and I  think that the specifics of that need to be worked through but I think that direction is  exactly the direction that we should be going in and I think Bill has flagged that today.

SPEERS: Shadow Immigration Minister, Richard Marles, we will have to leave it there  but thank you for joining us this afternoon.

MARLES: Thanks David.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: LIDIJA IVANOVSKI 0427 051 563

