

THE HON RICHARD MARLES MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER  PROTECTION  MEMBER FOR CORIO



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  ABC NEWS 24 WITH MICHAEL ROWLAND  MONDAY, 24 FEBRUARY 2014

SUBJECT/S:  Manus Island, Cabinet documents in Royal Commissions

MICHAEL ROWLAND: Let’s go back to our top story now and those calls for the  Immigration Minister Scott Morrison to resign over his handling of the Manus  Island riot controversy, we’re joined now by the Opposition’s Immigration  spokesperson Richard Marles at Parliament House in Canberra, Mr Marles good  morning to you.

RICHARD MARLES, SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER  PROTECTION: Good morning Michael how are you?

ROWLAND: I’m very well, the Greens are calling for Mr Morrison to go, will you  go that far?

MARLES: Look ultimately that’s a matter for the Prime Minister but I certainly  think if you look at how things have been handled in the last week there is a  question about the Minister’s competence and there’s a question about the grip  that he has got on his portfolio and the certainty with which he’s handling the  Manus Island detention facility.

ROWLAND: What are those questions in your view?

MARLES:  Well what we see is a detention facility which is utterly fundamental to  Australia’ s strategy of preventing boats coming from Indonesia which is really  important in terms of preventing people from drowning at sea, Manus is central to

that. We’ve had three very serious incidents since Scott Morrison has become  Minister since the Abbott Government came to power, two in two days last week  with the tragic result of a young man losing his life, and what we’ve got is a  Minister who has absolutely no idea of what’s going on, makes emphatic  statements a week ago about what he saw as being the occurrences that  happened and they turn out to be totally wrong. And he tries to bury that by  putting his place his retraction in the dead of night. All of this is not the behaviour  of somebody who should be managing what is an incredibly important facility.

ROWLAND: But as a former Minister wouldn’t you appreciate that information  you get from down the food chain can sometimes be wrong, particularly when  we’re talking about such a volatile situation on the ground at Manus Island?

MARLES: Of course, which is why one needs to be very cautious in terms of how  you present information but also very transparent in the way in which the way  you present information, and that’s not what Scott Morrison has done.  From day  one we have seen a trickiness about the way in which he and the Government  has gone about providing information in relation to asylum seeker policy and  transparency in Government and that has meant many things have not been  provided to the public and we’ve got plenty of evidence of that in terms of things  being hidden behind operational matters or operational reasons.  But similarly  when information does come to hand, rather than talking in terms of advice, what  we had last week were emphatic and very personal statements about pointing  the finger at asylum seekers, saying that these matters happened outside, saying  that if asylum seekers were going to breach the perimeter that that was going to  be a matter for them but at the same time, giving a guarantee of safety if you  stayed inside the boundaries of the facility and obviously the question today is  where does that guarantee stand now?

ROWLAND: Well Mr Morrison made a point of re-iterating that guarantee when  he popped up yesterday, how long can that guarantee stand given all we’ve seen  transpire on the ground in Manus Island?

MARLES: Well I think that’s a very good question and we now need to  understand the value of that guarantee but more importantly I think we need to  have this independent inquiry which has got to be full ranging and it has to  include the Minister and his office, what they knew and when, and how the chain  of information is getting to the Minister and how that information is getting to the  Australian public, but we need to see that inquiry so that we can understand  where the Government is going wrong in the management of this facility and  what steps can be taken to fix this so that this guarantee can have some value  going forward.

ROWLAND: Well to be fair Richard Marles, and you made the point as well, that  Labor supports Manus Island and you were just as hairy chested as the Coalition  when you were in Government in terms of being hard-line on asylum seekers

coming to Australia. There’s really not much difference in the overall approach is  there?

MARLES: Well firstly, I don’t like the term hairy chested, this isn’t a testosterone  contest and I have to say that the comments of the Prime Minster saying that we  don’t want a wimp looking after this is really the kind of comments that you would  expect to hear in a school yard not the sober statesman-like comments which  relate to the running of a very, very serious facility.  But let’s be clear, the Manus  Island Detention Facility is at the heart of the arrangement that Australia has with  PNG and that arrangement more than anything else has been responsible for  stopping the flow of boats coming from Indonesia and that in turn, has meant that  people are not drowning at sea in the numbers that we have seen in previous  years. So from that point of view I think the Manus Island Detention Facility has  unquestionably saved lives, it is a very important facility, it’s difficult policy there’s  no question about that, but it needs to be run well, it needs to be obviously run in  a dignified and humanitarian way, but it has to work and Australia cannot afford  for it to fall over which is why we need to understand what’s going wrong up there  and what steps the Government’s going to take to fix it.

ROWLAND: And as the Government will keep telling us the boats have indeed  stopped therefore Richard Marles do you see we’re getting closer to a point  where we should consider closing down Manus Island?

MARLES: Well I think Manus Island has an ongoing role.  What Manus Island  does is take Australia off the table and in taking Australia off the table that was  the piece of public policy which principally resulted in a reduction in the flow of  boats coming from Indonesia.  We saw a 90 per cent reduction between the 19th  of July and the time of our federal election so we cannot underestimate the  significance of Manus, and we cannot understate the number of lives that Manus  is saving. And that’s an important point for everyone to remember during these  difficult times, but what it says is we need to have this facility running right and  therefore the Government have got to work out what they are doing wrong so  they can fix it.

ROWLAND: And finally just on another issue, as a former Labor Minister Richard  Marles, how would you feel about Cabinet documents that you were involved in  appearing at Royal Commissions that the new Government has called?

MARLES:  Well there is a long standing principle about Cabinet confidentially  and it goes to the heart of the Westminster system and the way in which our  Government is run. For more than a century since Federation, the sanctity of  Cabinet confidentiality has been maintained so I look with concern as I think  many people do at what this Government is seeking to do in relation to the Royal  Commission and those documents in particular. We know that the Royal  Commissions that this Government have put in place are much more about  politics than they are about dealing with any matter going forward. The Labor

Government put in place a Royal Commission which was all about people, the  Child Abuse in Institutions Royal Commission was all about people, the Royal  Commissions that this Government puts in place are all about politics.

ROWLAND: Richard Marles in Canberra we’ll leave it there thank you very much  for your time this morning.

MARLES:  Thanks Michael.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: LIDIJA IVANOVSKI 0425 051 563

