

THE HON RICHARD MARLES MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER  PROTECTION  MEMBER FOR CORIO

E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW   ABC NEWS RADIO WITH MARIUS BENSON  MONDAY, 17 FEBRUARY 2014

SUBJECT/S: Border Protection Secrecy; Polls; Job Losses Under Tony  Abbott.

MARIUS BENSON: Richard Marles there has been no official word about what has  happened on Manus Island beyond the fact that there has been a disturbance in the  official report, there are unofficial reports which give more detail, do you have any  information yourself that clarifies what’s going on at Manus Island?

RICHARD MARLES:  I don’t Marius, I’ve seen the reports to which you are  referring and I note that it appears as though this has literally just occurred. I think  what is important here is that as information comes to hand for the Government that  they make that publicly available. The last time there was an incident at Manus  Island the first response by Scott Morrison was that this was essentially a matter for  Papua New Guinea, that is obviously not right, this is a facility which is integral to  Australia’s asylum seeker policy, it’s a facility where there are many Australians  working and it is very important that the Australian public be made fully aware as  soon as possible as information comes to light for the Government.

BENSON: Are you, from the knowledge you do have of Manus Island, satisfied that  it is being operated properly?

MARLES:  Well again, I have read reports in relation to the state of Manus Island,  I’ve not been there, and I absolutely accept that running the facility on Manus Island  is not easy, but it is very important that the situation on Manus Island in relation to  this incident is ultimately made completely public and it is important for the  Government that they give information to the Australian people not just when it is in  their interest, not just when it is the kind of information that they want to give, but  that they give news to the Australian people which is good and bad as it happens.  Last week we saw Minister Morrison answering questions very fully in the Parliament

that were staged questions from his own side, it is really important now that as  information comes to light about this matter that it be made public to the Australian  people.

BENSON: More broadly, Scott Morrison the Immigration Minister is not claiming  victory in stopping asylum boats coming to Australia but he is claiming continuing  success with no arrival in eight weeks, is that justified?

MARLES:  Well, we are as happy as anyone about seeing a reduction in boats  coming from Indonesia, we have always been of the view that the flow of boats has  been a bad thing principally in terms of the drowning’s that have been caused as a  result of them. 90 per-cent of the flow of boats had actually stopped by the time of  the election, the PNG arrangement has been the piece of public policy which has had  the single biggest effect in slowing down the flow of boats so we are pleased that  the Government has continued to prosecute the PNG policy. We are obviously willing  to do what we can to try and support the Government in continuing to stop the flow  of boats, but I would make this point, it is very important that in having a  sustainable arrangement in relation to the cessation of the flow of boats that there is

a co-operative relationship with Indonesia, that’s plain common sense, because it’s  the country from which the boats are coming, it’s our nearest neighbour in the  context of the asylum seeker issue and we are going to have to have an ongoing co-operative relationship with Indonesia if this is going to be a sustainable situation.

BENSON:  Can I just turn to the Nielsen poll which is out in the Fairfax papers  today which shows that the Government is again ahead of Labor in support, does  that show public support for the policies which have been central to politics in the

last couple of weeks, the end of the age of entitlement in the phrase of the  Government?

MARLES:  I don’t read that into the polls, you can spend a lot of time poring over  what polls mean, what they don’t mean, I can tell you that in my community in  Geelong the numbers that are of most concern to people are the number of  Australian jobs which are being lost, we are obviously a car town in Geelong and  people watched with horror at the events last week with the announcement by  Toyota and that came on the heels last year of the announcement of Holden and I  think what concerned people here mostly about that was that it was really in  response to the Government goading Holden to leave. You know we’ve got very big  decisions that are looming from both Alcoa and Shell about their future and there  are many jobs tied up with both of those companies so I think they’re the issues that  people are worried about and we’ll see lots of polls over the next few months as we  always do but the focus right now has to be seeing a Government fight for  Australian jobs and frankly that’s not what we’re seeing.

BENSON: Richard Marles thank you very much.

MARLES:  Thanks Marius.



ENDS



