

2 July 2014

TRANSCRIPT - Doorstop with Islamic Community Leaders  - Canberra

Subjects: Meeting with Islamic Community; National Security

E&OE

ATTORNEY-GENERAL:  Good morning ladies and gentlemen.  Thank you very much for  being here.  I’d like to introduce some of the distinguished leaders of the Australian Islamic  community.  Beside me is Sheikh Mohamadu Nawas Saleem, from the Australian National  Imams Council.  Beside him is Professor Abdullah Saeed, University of Melbourne.  Beside  me on my right is Dr Haas Dellal, the Executive Director of the Australian Multicultural  Foundation.  And beside him is Sheikh Ali Dirani of the Al Sadiq Foundation.  This morning  I met with these gentlemen as well as Sheikh Shady Alsuleiman, the Secretary of the  Australian National Imams Council and Mr Samir Bennegadi, the Senior Advisor to the  Grand Mufti of Australia .

The purpose of the meeting this morning was to discuss with leaders of Australia’s Muslim  community the importance of their role in the Government’s program to counter violent  extremism.  As you know the events in the Middle East and the increasing aggression of ISIL  in both the Syrian civil war and now in the proclamation of a Caliphate in eastern Syria and  north-western Iraq has been an issue much in discussion in recent days.  The Abbott  Government is absolutely determined that the troubles in the Middle East will not have an  impact on Australia’s domestic population.  We acknowledge that this is an important  national security issue.  We know that there are approximately 60 Australians currently  engaged in war fighting in the Syrian, north-western Iraqi theatre.  We know that there are  approximately 150, including that 60 or so, who are actively involved as either participants or  facilitators.

The Government will, in the week after next, be bringing forward legislation giving effect to  recommendations of the Joint Parliamentary Committee on Intelligence and Security that  were made during the last Parliament.  Those were bipartisan recommendations on which we  expect the Labor Party’s support.  One of the purposes of my meeting this morning was to  brief the leaders of Australia’s Muslim community on that legislation - legislation that is  designed, among other things, to assist them in saving the young men, mainly young men and  also young women, within their communities who might be tempted to embrace the evil  cause of ISIL and radical Islamist ideology.

The main message I gave on behalf of the Government to the leaders of Australia’s Muslim  community is that we regard them as partners.  They are key partners in our fight against  violent extremism in our attempts to counter the development of violent extremism within  Australia.  These and the other senior Imams of Australia are among the most respected  leaders of Muslim communities. They have a unique capacity and have an impressive  willingness to spread the message within their faith communities that the radical Islamist

ideology, propagated by organisations such as ISIL and Al-Nusra, holds nothing for young  Australians.  These men are agents of peace and stability within their communities.  The  Australian Government is very proud that we have such fine leaders who are willing to work  with and partner with the Australian Government and its agencies in countering violent  extremism.  During the course of the meeting we suggested various other initiatives which  will be announced in coming days and weeks.  But we’ve had a very good meeting and the  principal purpose of that meeting was to reinforce that partnership, our common goals, and  our common purposes.  Now I’d like to invite Sheihk Saleem who stands beside me to make  a few remarks of his own on behalf of the group and then we’ll take some questions.

SHEIKH SALEEM: Thank you very much ladies and gentlemen and thank you very much  honourable Attorney-General. It’s a pleasure to have a meeting with you at such short notice.   We really appreciate the fact that you have recognised the role of the Imams in peace  building in this country, and we are overwhelmed   by your description of Imams in such a  high esteem.  And we also recognise that it is a matter for all of us in Australia to build a  secure and peaceful Australia and this is a very challenging time.  The news that over 60  Australians are participating in war in Syria and Iraq is a shock to every individual Muslim in  this country and we are looking forward to work with the community, as well as the  Government in partnership, to ensure that Australia is protected from any violent extremism  here.   The Muslim community is to be reassured that the leaders from among the Imams and  other community leaders are engaged with the Australian Government in its effect to  introduce new laws to fight against violent extremism in this country, and of course we have  discussed various ways of de-radicalising youths, if there is a need for it we will be  cooperating with the Government.  And we have been of, course,  an instrument in the past  encouraging you to engage positively rather than negatively in Australia.

ATTORNEY-GENERAL:  Thank you very much indeed Sheikh Saleem, and if I may say  so, thank you personally for your extremely constructive role, not just in our meeting this  morning, but over many years in what is a common problem.  Are there any questions?

QUESTION:  You’ve been saying in recent days, or signalling, that the Government wants  to detain people at the border who are returning from conflicts in Iraq and Syria.  Given that  Bret Walker has recently indicated that you have a number problems with your capacity to  gather evidence and produce evidence [inaudible] for conflicts overseas, how exactly do you  propose to detain Australian citizens at the border without charge in a situation when the  national security adviser has told you that the law that you are working with is not up to the  task?

ATTORNEY-GENERAL:              Well it’s not quite right to say that Mr Walker said it’s  not up to the task.  Mr Walker did however, as you correctly point out, identified a certain  evidentiary problem and that’s one of the reasons, having regard to Mr Walker’s  recommendations which we have studied carefully, and also with regard to the report of the  Parliamentary Joint Committee on Intelligence and Security to which I referred, we are  reviewing the entire suite of legislation to ensure that if there are identified gaps in that  legislation those gaps will be corrected so as to make the Australian people secure.  And it

was one of the purposes of this morning’s meeting to raise that with the Muslim community  leaders.

QUESTION:  What is the practical impact of this legislation [inaudible], what changes….?

ATTORNEY-GENERAL:  Legislation that I will be introducing into the Senate in the week  after next will give effect to the recommendations, the 21 recommendations in Chapter-Four  of the Joint Parliamentary Committee Report on Intelligence and Security.  That was, as I  say, a bipartisan report.  That legislation will primarily be directed to agency powers and also  aspects of the Telecommunications Interception Act, which is a 1979 act, an act that actually  predates the internet.  Now I’m not saying that the legislation that will be introduced the  week after next will be the only legislative reform because it won’t be. The Government is, as  I said a moment ago, looking carefully at all existing legislation that bears upon this issue, in  particular the terrorism provisions of the criminal code, to ensure that there are no gaps in our  capacity to keep Australia safe.

QUESTION: That bipartisan report recommended there be an exposure draft of the  legislation, there be time for scrutiny and debate about it [inaudible]

ATTORNEY-GENERAL:  We’ve been in discussion with the Shadow Attorney-General’s  office.

QUESTION:  [inaudible] closing those gaps, ideally what should the grounds for detaining  someone returning to Australia?

ATTORNEY-GENERAL:  I’m not going to get ahead of discussions that are current within  the Government.  That, as I say, is a matter that is being examined at the moment in the  context, among other things, of the INSLM’s report and you can expect further information in  the very near future.

QUESTION: [inaudible], in November last year an Australian citizen, Christopher Harvard,  was killed by a drone strike in Yemen.  Had he had his passport confiscated and did the  Australian Government know….

ATTORNEY-GENERAL:  I’m not going to comment on the Harvard matter.

QUESTION:  Just for clarity if I may, so what you’re saying in relation to the Syria and the  Iraq question is that future reforms that the Government will bring forward along the lines  that Mr Walker recommended will have retrospective effect?

ATTORNEY-GENERAL:  I didn’t say that.

QUESTION  Sheikh Saleem, how do you propose to communicate with the Muslim  community here about the issues in the Iraq and Syria war that will [inaudible] not to be part  of it?

SHEIKH SALEEM: There are Imams in every part of Australia.  We have about 150 Imams  who are meeting their community day in day out, especially in the month of Ramadan.  Every

day they have that festival then. So by providing the correct interpretation of Islamic  principle and by giving them proper guidance as to what is correct and what is proper and  acceptable to Islam.  Through their sermons on Fridays, and also especially every night of  this month of Ramadan.  So the community have access to the Imams.  If they have any  specific questions to come and ask, particularly in this month , they are welcome to discuss  with their Imams.

QUESTION: [inaudible] sympathy for ISIL’s cause.

SHEIKH SALEEM: I’m sure everybody in Australia is concerned with people who are  being attracted to their cause or sympathise with the struggles that they are having in the  name of Islam. Definitely

QUESTION:  With regards to the Junaid Thorne, I believe that the Government would have  looked very closely at some of his preachings and his sermons. Are you aware of him  breaking any laws in what he has said, his sermons that are on YouTube, and are their  grounds for preventing him leaving Australia?

SALEEM:      As I said before I’m not going to comment on individual cases.

QUESTION:  Senator, it sounds like you’re fairly confident of securing Labor’s support for  these legislative changes [inaudible] no further consultation?  How extensively I guess has  Mr Dreyfus been briefed?

ATTORNEY-GENERAL: My office and Mr Dreyfus’s office have been in extensive  discussions.

QUESTION:  You mentioned [inaudible] agencies, will those powers include greater powers  for ASIS to pursue and perhaps contain Australians abroad [inaudible]?

ATTORNEY-GENERAL:  Well one of the recommendations of the report was to break  down what are some of the existing silos between the domestic and foreign intelligence  agencies’ powers,  so that we’ve had this bizarre situation up to now that two agencies, in  particular ASIS and ASIO, may perhaps in a hypothetical case be working together but  powers exercisable by one were not exercisable by the other although it’s a joint operation.  So the effect of the legislation will be to break down those silos which have inhibited  operability.

QUESTION:  Minister, has the Australian Government [inaudible] a department of  homeland security [inaudible]?

ATTORNEY-GENERAL:  That’s not part of the current discussion.

QUESTION:  In terms of the religious leaders sermonising, what are the existing laws that  they can break, and just speaking in general here, could you [inaudible] on that for us and  how these people could be ….

ATTORNEY-GENERAL:  I’m not going to answer a hypothetical question like that.  The  whole point of this press conference has been to convey to you the message that the  Australian Government is working in grateful partnership with the leaders of the Islamic  community in Australia to attack the vice of recruitment of young Australians to be war  fighters in the Middle East, and one of the ways in which the Australian Government and the  leaders of the Muslim community are doing that is by encouraging the preaching of peaceful  doctrines and philosophies through the Imams who are leaders in those faith communities.

QUESTION:  On another matter, you’re the chief law officer of the land, would Australia be  in breach of international law if it were to hand asylum seekers over to a foreign navy….

ATTORNEY-GENERAL:  We’re not here to talk about that.  We’re here to talk about the  constructive engagement of the Australian Islamic community with the Government’s  attempts to prevent young Australians being recruited by ISIS and other extremist Islamist  groups to fight in the Middle East.

QUESTION: [inaudible]

ATTORNEY-GENERAL:  Well that’s what I’m here to discuss.

QUESTION:  A question for the Sheikh if I may.  Did you discuss today the proposed  changes to section 18C of the Racial Discrimination Act with the Attorney-General and what  is your opinion of those proposed changes?

SHEIKH SALEEM: That was not the purpose of this meeting.

[Ends]



