

THE HON RICHARD MARLES MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND  BORDER PROTECTION  MEMBER FOR CORIO



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW  TALKING CANBERRA 1206 2CC INTERVIEW With MARK PARTON  WEDNESDAY, 30 APRIL 2014

SUBJECT / S: Deceit Tax, Tony Abbott’s Broken Promises, proposed  Asylum seeker arrangement with Cambodia.

MARK PARTON: Richard Marles joins us on a regular basis from the Federal  Opposition, he’s the Immigration spokesperson sitting back and watching, well  he’s watching the Libs come apart at the seams in the lead up to the Budget and  it makes for fascinating viewing doesn’t it Richard?

RICHARD MARLES, SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND  BORDER PROTECTION: It is astounding Mark, and what we’ve witnessed over  the last couple of weeks is a breaking of one promise after another, and you  know Tony Abbott really presented himself to the Australian people before the  last election asking us to accept his word, and say that he would bring a new  level of trustworthiness to Government, well what we’ve seen is nine promises  around Medicare, that has now been broken, nine promises around the pension.  He said that he was going to be a Government that would reduce taxes rather  than increase them, would abolish taxes rather than introduce new ones, and  now he’s effectively saying that at this Budget, he will put in place an effective  increase to income tax, it is genuinely astounding.

PARTON: I don’t know, I get the distinct impression that if he’d just come out  and said look we’re going to do this deficit levy and yes it’s a tax, and I said I  wasn’t going to, but I’m going to have to, that it would actually be received  better than tip toeing around and suggesting oh no it’s a levy. When was the last

time you saw any Government anywhere introduce a means by which to get  revenue, that they then decided down the track to remove. It doesn’t happen  does it?

MARLES: Well he’s not going to win the argument about whether a levy is a tax  or not a tax, at the end of the day people are paying money out of their pockets  and anyone who went to the last election thinking they’d vote for this  Government because they were going to abolish the carbon tax and that would  see them have more money in their pockets, well that idea has gone up in  smoke today because what is really clear if you earn more than $80,000 then at  the starting point you’re going to be paying $800 a year extra through this  Budget deficit levy and it’s an effective increase in the income tax rate and it’s an  astounding decision from a man who said that he was going to be about  abolishing taxes rather than introducing new ones, his first Budget and he’s  introduced a new big tax.

PARTON: I was debating with Malcolm Farr from News Limited this morning  who is the most stubborn Scott Morrison or Tony Abbott, Malcolm thinks it’s a  dead heat, but I reckon Morrison wins hands down, what are your thoughts on it  Richard?

MARLES: On a contest between Scott Morrison and Tony Abbott?

PARTON: On stubbornness.

MARLES: On stubbornness, well it’s a pretty competitive race I’d have to say  there, they both do very well in those stakes, I mean I think at the end of the  day it’s about listening to people, but it’s also, the problem for both Scott  Morrison and Tony Abbott is that they’re now being hung on their own rhetoric.  They spoke a really big game before the election and now after the election  when they’re involved in Government, they discover that it’s a whole lot harder,  and that the sorts of things that they were able to say before the election are  just not real, and it goes to this Government, that the Government that people  thought that they were voting for in September last year, is not turning out to be  the Government that is putting down this Budget in the next couple of weeks.

PARTON: Alright, it looks as though it’s on with Cambodia in terms of some sort  of arrangement between us and them involving asylum seekers, can there be  any possible benefit for anyone out of this?

MARLES: Well our concern about this is that the Foreign Minister goes to  Cambodia, we only discover that from the Cambodian Government, Scott  Morrison goes to Cambodia, again we hear about his visit from the Cambodian  Government, now it appears as though there is an agreement in principle we’re

hearing that from the Cambodian Government. Scott Morrison and the Abbott  Government really have a woeful track record in being upfront with the  Australian people about what they’re doing. And I think the fundamental answer  to your question is, it’s impossible to say whether this is a good idea or not  without having the proposal before us, and right now we don’t have that, and  that’s actually what we need to see so that we can make a judgement about  whether this will help the situation or not.

PARTON: I think and look I’ve defended in some instances in this immigration  debate the whole prospect of a lack of transparency because I think, and you’ll  give me that look here Richard, I think that on occasions when Minister Morrison  says for operational needs and such we can’t really tell you about this, I think on  occasions it’s warranted. But I’m sorry, there needs to be more transparency,  you’re absolutely right, I think we needed to know that there was something on  officially between Australia and Cambodia and it shouldn’t be the Cambodians  that are telling us.

MARLES: Well that’s right and when we talk about the public transparency of  this Government, and when I said that Scott Morrison plays a very different  game in opposition, we should remember that this was the man that sat in my  seat when he was the opposition spokesperson, put out a press release every  time a boat arrived in Australia. When he becomes the Minister, there is a totally  different attitude brought to bear and basically they go about their business in a  very secretive way where they try and manage information down, where they try  and make sure we have very little of it as possible and it’s impossible in those  circumstances to have a proper public debate, I mean public debate and public  scrutiny helps to get good public policy and that’s just not a philosophy that this  Government embraces and it’s a real problem.

PARTON: Well Richard from your perspective, make hay while the sun’s shining  because I’m sure that there is a bit more that’s going to be grown and made in  the next couple of weeks, thanks for coming on this morning.

MARLES: Great to talk to you Mark.

ENDS

MEDIA ENQUIRIES: LIDIJA IVANOVSKI 0427 051 563

