

THE HON RICHARD MARLES MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER  PROTECTION  MEMBER FOR CORIO



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW  TALKING CANBERRA 1206 2CC  WEDNESDAY, 17 DECEMBER 2014

SUBJECT/S:  Sydney siege.

MARK PARTON: Richard Marles is a regular guest on this program, he’s the  Opposition Immigration spokesman and he typically joins us on a Wednesday we’ve got  him on the line right now, g’day Richard.

RICHARD MARLES, SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER  PROTECTION: Good morning Mark how are you?

PARTON: Excellent, in the lead up to this you know I was thinking there has been so  much bloody doom and gloom that I was committed to actually talking to you about  Christmas’ past and things like that and I want to do that Richard, I want to do that but  I’ve just got a tough one to hurl at you first up and it’s something I haven’t see discussed  a great deal at all in the aftermath of this horrific siege in Sydney and that is that  whether it’s simplistic or not I think the reality for a lot of Australians now is that when  they discuss the asylum seeker issue this bloke, this idiot, this moron at the centre of  the siege will be front and centre for them because they won’t be able to get away from  the fact that he sought asylum successfully in Australia.  Would you agree?

MARLES: Well I think it’s really important that we don’t allow this incident to take us  down dark paths when we’re thinking about what is otherwise a really complicated and  difficult issue in terms of asylum seekers.  We do have obligations to afford protection to  people who seek asylum and that’s a commitment that we signed up to as a nation in  the aftermath of the Second World War and it’s a very sacred commitment and it’s one

that I think at that level every Australian would want to be a part of, we need to be rest

assured that we do have robust processes which look at the way in which we assess  peoples refugee claims - and -

PARTON: I get all that and I think what you’re saying is true and correct but I guess  what I’m saying is that more than any other single event what went on in Sydney in the  last two days is surely going to galvanise the ALP in its position on immigration policy  and the fact that the two major parties are very similar, those that are fighting for some  major changes and a swing to the left I think had a massive massive blow to their cause  over the last couple of days.

MARLES: I wouldn’t interpret what’s happened in the last couple of days in the context  of the asylum seeker debate, I really wouldn’t -

PARTON: I just think people will Richard.  I think as simplistic as it is I think there’ll be  many of Australians who do.

MARLES: Well I actually think that this was an event which was calculated to drive  Australians apart and yet the community response that we’ve seen to it has been  precise the opposite and brought Australians together, the floral tribute that we are  seeing growing in Martin Place is an expression of the very best of Australia -

PARTON: It’s astounding, it’s just amazing -

MARLES: And I think that’s where we need to be focused and obviously we need to be  focused on the families of the victims, on the other hostages and those that were  injured, they need our support as a community and I really think that’s where people’s  heads are at. There’ll be a whole lot of debate around a whole lot of the issues  associated with this, there are, we’ve got to remember, when we’re talking about people  who are radicalised, there are a whole lot of people born in Australia who have gone  through that, so I don’t think that this is something where we ought to be rushing to an  assessment of how this plays into a particular debate. I think right now we are seeing  Australia at its best, we have seen our really professional law enforcement officials and  emergency response officials and they did an incredible job and we are hearing in the  tragic story of Tori Johnson and Katrina Dawson acts of extraordinary heroism and we  need to remember that as well and I think this has been an extraordinary moment in  Australia’s story and going forward I just hope what this brings out is the very best in us.

PARTON: Now after starting our chat by saying I was going to focus on some positive  things I guess I also wanted to touch on what is going on in Pakistan in the last 20 hours  or so, you consider the shock and the grief that Australia’s experiencing and you  multiply that by 100, I just can’t get my head around what these evil mongrels have  done in Pakistan, how do you march into a school and methodically shoot 130 children?

MARLES: I completely agree. I’m a father of four and I just can’t get my head around it  and you hear the reports about gunman looking for kids who were hiding, I mean it’s  absolutely -



PARTON: I mean how do they sleep at night?  I just, it’s just pure evil.

MARLES: I think what we’ve seen in the conflict in Syria, well it’s the first time that I’ve  been aware of where the killing of children is used as an act of war, I mean it is  absolutely astonishing and it does render one completely speechless and it speaks of  an evil which does exist in the world and it’s important that obviously we stand up to that  evil and it is a terrible, terrible set of circumstances that we are hearing reported out of  Peshawar and like you, I cannot understand the motivation or the ideology or the act of  going about and making innocent children the focus of your attack, it just seems to me  to be completely counter to the human condition.

PARTON: Where are your memories of Christmas from young Richard as a boy?

MARLES: Well, I love Christmas and I think for me the focus is the Christmas tree and I  still am the person in our house who sets up the Christmas tree and I feel like I return to  my childhood every time I do and it’s a real joy for me to be doing it with my kids now

and I remember in doing it with them what it was like doing it when I was a kid.  For me  in my life I think in my twenties and early thirties when I didn’t have, or particularly in my  twenties when I didn’t have kids, in a sense Christmas receded a bit but it’s come back  into the equation and you can share the joy of that getting up in the morning and not  being able to wait and running down to look at the presents, for me that’s Christmas and  I really look forward the 25th to see that joy on my own kids’ faces when that occurs.

PARTON: Bring it on, it’s really close now Richard, thanks for being a guest on this  program this year and hopefully we can reacquaint ourselves on the electric wireless in  2015.

MARLES: Look forward to it Mark and you have a great Christmas with your family as  well and have a wonderful break over summer.

PARTON: Richard Marles who is the Opposition’s Immigration spokesman.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: CATHERINE BERGIN 0417 466 418

