13 April 2014

IPCC: Greens say PM Abbott must stop blocking renewable energy growth

With a new report from the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change calling for a rapid and  radical cut to greenhouse gas emissions, the Australian Greens say it’s time for the Abbott  government to get out of the way of Australia’s transformation into a low-carbon economy.

“The Abbott government needs to give up the protection racket for Australia’s big polluters and start  protecting communities. They need to get out of the way of the positive transition that’s happening  and stop trying to take this country backwards,” said Greens Leader Christine Milne.

“This IPCC report reinforces the Greens’ focus on evidence-based policies to help get Australia off  fossil fuels and onto renewable energy, now.

“The game is up, we have run out of time. The IPCC has confirmed what is clearly apparent - we are  not just predicting, but actually observing the impacts of global warming.

“We, as Australians, must not only accept our fair share of global responsibility, but it is in our  interest to limit climate change, in the face of extreme fires, cyclones, heat waves and storms.

“The good news is that if we act fast we can create jobs in new manufacturing and innovative  businesses. If we don't - if we keep digging up, cutting down and shipping away our resources -  there will be a huge opportunity cost to our economy.

“The Abbott government can no longer pretend that ‘business as usual’ is possible. The IPCC has  made it clear that we need to decouple economic growth from greenhouse gas emissions and that  means moving rapidly to renewable energy and away from fossil fuels.

“To limit global warming to 2 degrees we need a trebling of clean energy sources and Australia is  actually on course to get there. All Tony Abbott has to do is leave the existing laws in place and  retain or increase the ambition of the Renewable Energy Target and the Clean Energy Future  Package,” said Senator Milne.

“Governments around the world spend six times more supporting polluting fuels than they do  supporting renewables. If this were reversed, the new IPCC report says it’s not the poor that would  be hit, but the wealthy.

“Australia is a case in point. We could raise $10 billion by ending fuel subsidies for mining  companies, but instead this government is looking to raise $750 million with GP co-payments, not to  mention slashing the pension, reneging on Gonski school reforms, and attacking the ABC.

“So investors, beware. The future of Australia is not in coal or unconventional gas.

“Tony Abbott is governing for the big end of town, but that’s short-sighted and irresponsible and the  Greens will do everything in our power to increase action on global warming,” said Senator Milne.

Climate change is number one on the list of 10 key policy priorities agreed upon at the Greens’  National Council in Melbourne today, which Senator Milne is committed to leading her party to  deliver on, over the next three years:

1. Climate Change  Protect and build on the Clean Energy Package by abolishing subsidies and other support for  fossil fuel industries.

2. Coal, Coal Seam Gas, and Shale Gas  Stop new coal, coal seam gas, and shale gas projects through supporting local communities  to stand up against these projects to protect food and water security.

3. Health  Protect universal healthcare and address health inequalities by securing greater investment  for the publicly funded healthcare system.

4. Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Recognition  Achieve constitutional recognition of the first people of Australia.

5. Trans-Pacific Partnership  Oppose the Trans Pacific Partnership and other trade agreements that lack transparency and  that prioritise corporate rights over the public interest.

6. Housing Affordability  Implement fiscal measures to counter speculative investment in housing, which is a cause of  housing stress and homelessness.

7. Electoral Reform  Implement Optional Preferential above-the-line senate voting and campaign financing  reform to increase transparency and democratic accountability.

8. Refugees  Treat all asylum seekers with humanity and fairness, and in accordance with international  law, by firstly releasing all children from detention, closing off-shore detention centres,  increasing Australia’s humanitarian intake and providing safer pathways to Australia.

9. Education  Maintain public schools, TAFEs and universities in public hands, and prioritise the funding of  educational institutions to ensure they have sufficient resources and facilities to meet the  educational needs of all students.

10. Tax Reform  Reform the tax system to reduce inequality, remove tax loopholes and restructure the  economy by rewarding productive activity that avoids pollution, degradation of natural  resources and economic “rent seeking”.

Media contact: Jennifer Faerber - 0438 376 082

