

THE HON TANYA PLIBERSEK MP  DEPUTY LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND  INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT

MEMBER FOR SYDNEY



E&OE TRANSCRIPT

TELEVISION INTERVIEW   ABC NEWS 24 - WITH LYNDAL CURTIS

TUESDAY, 8 JULY 2014

SUBJECT/ S:  PRIME MINISTER SHINZO ABE; W HALING; ASYLUM SEEKERS

LYNDAL CURTIS: Tanya Plibersek, welcome to ABC News 24, if we could start with  Prime Minister Abe’s speech, he spoke about this being the birth of a special  relationship, we often hear the phrase good friendship or special relationship thrown  around in diplomacy, do you think this is something different?

TANYA PLIBERSEK: Look I think we’ve had a very good relationship with Japan  for many decades now and anything that advances that relationship of course is  welcomed by Labor.

CURTIS: Now he did speak about defence, there’s been a change in the  interpretation of Japan’s pacifist constitution. Clearly Japan wants to be more active  in the region, he said ‘Japan wants to be more willing to contribute to peace in the  wider region and beyond’. Do we take Japan at its word that its aims are peaceful  that it wants to contribute to building peace in the region?

PLIBERSEK: Yes of course I accept that interpretation. I think in the past Japan  has been prevented from taking part in peacekeeping missions. I think anything that  allows Japan to contribute internationally to broader peace is welcome.

CURTIS: Do you think though, China might be watching the words both of Prime  Minister Abe and Prime Minister Abbott. Mr Abbott kind of alluded to that talking  about the partnership with Japan not being a partnership against anyone. But both

Prime Ministers talk about upholding rule of law and that’s language that has been  used about the activities of China in the region, hasn’t it?

PLIBERSEK: Look I think it’s absolutely important that we as Australians are able to  walk and chew gum at the same time. We do have a close relationship with Japan  and a good friendship. So too, we have a very good and close relationship with  China. It’s important for us to continue to improve those relationships with both of  those major friends in our region.

CURTIS: And because of course a free trade deal between Japan and Australia has  been signed today. One with China is in prospect, do you think having those free  trade deals with two of our biggest Asian neighbours will help cement some of those  long term relationships?

PLIBERSEK: Look I think trade is an important part of our relationships both with  Japan and China. Both China and Japan look to Australia particularly for minerals  resources but also for I think increasingly to our agricultural sector and I hope in the  future more and more to our services sectors as well. We’re looking at two bigger  regional trade arrangements as well. Those, as long as they’re written in a way that  benefit Australian industries, I think will be terrific for jobs and investment in the  future.

CURTIS:  You will be joining your leader Bill Shorten in a meeting with Mr Abe,  what do you make of him? From his speech he’s clearly an interesting person,  driving reform in his own country. He mentioned not only economic reform but  getting more women involved and speaking about young people.

PLIBERSEK: Look I thought it was a very good speech. I thought it also showed a  little bit of the Prime Minister’s sense of humor. But I think talking about the role of  women in Japan is very interesting because it is something that can contribute vastly  to improvements of productivity in Japan as it has in Australia to have more women  in the workforce. I think that the matters around our shared history during the  Second World War were handled delicately. I think it was a good speech.

CURTIS:  One issue that hasn’t been talked about is the issue of whaling. It was  raised in talks between Prime Minister Abe and New Zealand’s Prime Minister John  Key yesterday. And Mr Key said Prime Minister Abe made it clear Japan is looking to  see what sort of whaling program could in theory be conducted within the rules. Will  that be raised in your meeting?

PLIBERSEK: Well of course being such close friends does allow us to raise issues  like whaling, where there has been some differences of opinion between Japan and  Australia, and we will do that in the meeting. I think the fact that Japan has  accepted the international verdict on its current whaling program in the southern  oceans is a very important step and a very good indication. And the fact that we’re

able to raise these issues where there are differences within the context of a strong  friendship are important to representing and defending Australia’s interest in this  too.

CURTIS:  Should Prime Minister Abbott be raising it too?

PLIBERSEK: Well that’s a matter for him.

CURTIS:  And finally on the issue of asylum seekers, 41 asylum seekers have been  returned to Sri Lanka. There is a question mark over the fate of another 150, we  don’t know where they are. Is the Government being in breach of its international  obligations or is it meeting them as Scott Morrison says it is?

PLIBERSEK: Well you’ve only got Scott Morrison’s statement to go on and it’s very  little very late. I think the first thing to say about this is it’s completely unacceptable  for any government to be using the resources of our nation with such secrecy. These  arguments about it helping people smugglers somehow to know that boats are being  turned back, simply don’t stack up. I think it’s appalling that we find out more about  our Government’s asylum seeker policies from the Governments of other nations  than we do from our own Government. They’re taxpayer funded resources that are  being used and taxpayers have a right to know how those resources are being used.  We simply don’t know whether international obligations are being upheld, we don’t  have enough information, that’s part of the problem.

CURTIS:  Tanya Plibersek, thank you very much for your time.

PLIBERSEK: Thank you.



ENDS



