

THE HON RICHARD MARLES MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND  BORDER PROTECTION  MEMBER FOR CORIO



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW  ABC NEWSRADIO INTERVIEW With MARIUS BENSON  WEDNESDAY, 2 APRIL 2014

SUBJECT / S: Government not releasing interim report on the violence  at Manus Island to the Australian people

MARIUS BENSON: Richard Marles you’re calling on the Government to release  the interim report on the violence at Manus Island, the Government says a full  report  is  coming  later  this  month,  that’s  when  it  will  be  made  public,  is  that   acceptable?

RICHARD MARLES, SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND  BORDER PROTECTION: We need to see the interim report be made public and  in full, obviously we need to see the final report do the same. This is a  Government which has had a woeful track record about being up front with the  Australian people. Monday, which was the day that the interim report was due,  passed without any comment from the Government at all, it was only until we  made the call that they confessed to having the report on their desk and given  the severity of this incident and the concern that the Australian people have that  Manus is operating properly, I think that the Australian people need the  confidence that would be gained by seeing the outcome of this report.

BENSON: And what are you looking to this report and the full report, what  questions are you expecting to be answered in those reports?

MARLES: Well firstly we need to understand circumstances of the death of Mr  Reza Barati, that’s the most important thing, a person whose died in a facility

that is funded by the Australian Government, it’s absolutely essential we  understand what happened there. But in a broader sense, it’s important that we  have an understanding about why Manus Island and the detention facility is  melting down under the Abbott Government’s watch. This is a facility which was  being run by the then Rudd and Gillard Governments, under a different guise by  the Howard Government, it’s melting down under Minister Morrison’s watch and  we’ve got to understand why because it is the lynchpin in Australia’s strategy in  reducing the flow of boats from Indonesia and Sri Lanka to Christmas Island.

BENSON: Well critics of Manus Island say it’s clear why it’s melting down, it’s  because of the pressure of numbers there, the number of boat arrivals that  happened during Labor’s watch, and that if you leave a large number of  individuals in a detention camp with no prospect of any better future that’s going  to happen, it’s happened now, it’s going to happen again, that’s the view of  critics.

MARLES: Well I think what comes from that view whilst I don’t agree with it  obviously, there is this point that what we have seen at Manus is no processing  and no determination of people’s refugee claims. At the heart of the regional  resettlement arrangement with PNG is resettlement in PNG, we need to  understand why that hasn’t proceeded and when it’s going to start proceeding. I  think this is an issue where the Government has dropped the ball in the way in  which it’s managed its relationship with Papua New Guinea, I note that Minister  Morrison is going to be in PNG this week and I think what’s very important from  his trip is that he comes back to Australia with a crystal clear guarantee that we  haven’t seen Australia put back on the table by the comments that we’ve heard  recently that there may need to be repatriations in Australia which would  obviously undermine the whole concept of the regional re-settlement  arrangement, and the role that the Manus Island Facility is playing, so that’s a  very important objective from Minister Morrison’s trip, but it goes to the heart of  the facility and the regional re-settlement arrangement.

BENSON: But Scott Morrison could hardly be clearer about no repatriation to  Australia, he’s spoken repeatedly about not putting the sugar back on the table.

MARLES: Well he’s good on the rhetoric but when it comes to the practice  Marius, what we saw was when the Australian Prime Minister went to go to PNG  what was a crystal clear situation became quite murky, and we were hearing  reports coming out of PNG saying that PNG did not think it was going to be in a  position to resettle all those people who were found to be refugees within the  facility, there is even some talk that some may need to be repatriated back in  Australia, that would be the effect of putting Australia back on the table, the  challenge to Minister Morrison in his trip this week is to make it crystal clear to  the Australian people that that’s not what’s going on, because nothing would be

more detrimental to Australia’s strategy in reducing the flow of boats from  Indonesia than that.

BENSON: Richard Marles thank you very much.

MARLES: Thank you Marius.

ENDS

MEDIA ENQUIRIES: LIDIJA IVANOVSKI 0427 051 563

