Minister for Immigration and Border Protection

Scott Morrison MP

Honouring our promise to provide more resettlement places to  offshore humanitarian applicants  6 March 2014

The Coalition Government is honouring its election commitment to quarantine 11 000  resettlement places under Australia's Refugee and Humanitarian programme for  offshore applicants, Minister for Immigration and Border Protection, the Hon Scott  Morrison said today.

'Effective today, the government has capped the number of places available to  onshore applicants under Australia's refugee and humanitarian programme  consistent with our proposed planning levels. This will ensure the government can,  for the 2013/14 refugee and humanitarian programme year, set aside 11 000  resettlement places for offshore applicants which includes an additional 4000 places  for the Special Humanitarian Program,' Minister Morrison said.

'These offshore applicants, including family members of Australian citizens, are often  in desperate situations, facing real persecution.

'These guaranteed 11 000 places including at least 1000 places for women at risk.

'This latest measure to restore fairness and integrity to our refugee and humanitarian  programme follows the government's actions last year to deny permanent visas to  those who arrived illegally by boat under Labor.

'Labor's billion dollar policy to increase the refugee and humanitarian programme to  20 000 places did not offer more places for people seeking protection offshore, it  only served to keep fulfilling the people smugglers' promise of granting permanent  visas for illegal boat arrivals.

'The Coalition Government will not give an inch when it comes to protecting our  borders and will take every step necessary to ensure that people who arrived illegally  by boat are not rewarded with permanent visas.

'Our refugee and humanitarian programme is now back under the control of the  Australian people, not people smugglers. The government makes no apology for  prioritizing places under our programme to those whose quest for resettlement in  Australia was impossible under Labor,' Minister Morrison said.



