

THE HON RICHARD MARLES MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND  BORDER PROTECTION  MEMBER FOR CORIO

E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW   ABC PM INTERVIEW WITH LOUISE YAXLEY  TUESDAY, 20 MAY 2014  SUBJECT / S: Proposed Refugee Resettlement Agreement With  Cambodia.  MARK COLVIN: The Federal Opposition is not ruling out supporting an asylum  deal between Australia and Cambodia.  Cambodia's Prime Minister, Hun Sen said  on Facebook today that his nation will sign a memorandum of understanding to  accept refugees.  He said they would have study and work rights without  discrimination.  The Immigration Minister, Scott Morrison, says there's no  arrangement yet, but talks are positive.  Labor's immigration spokesman, Richard  Marles, has criticised Mr Morrison for not releasing any information about the  proposal.  He says without those details, he can't say whether Labor would back  the deal or not.  Mr Marles spoke to Louise Yaxley.    RICHARD MARLES, SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND  BORDER PROTECTION: We don't know what is being proposed here; we don't  know what's being proposed in terms of aid. Most importantly, we don't know  what is being proposed in terms of who would go to Cambodia, how they would  be assessed and what support they would be given when they're there.  That's the  information that we need to be provided, along with how many people we're  talking about.  We know none of this. The Federal Government needs to get  passed its culture of secrecy. The Minister for Immigration needs to come forth  and explain plainly and simply what it is doing with the Cambodian government.    LOUISE YAXLEY: So you're not ruling out that Labor might support it, despite  the questions that have been raised by others, for example Catholic Bishops and  Amnesty International, a range of people who've said, but the fundamental point  is that there is a problem with corruption in Cambodia, a problem with its own  legal system and that should be a starting point for ruling this out.  

MARLES: Well, our view is, it would be irresponsible for us to speculate on what  our position would or wouldn't be in circumstances where we don't hear anything  from our Government at all about the basis on which people would be  transferred to Cambodia, and exactly what sort of proposal would apply there.    But, I'd also make this other point, Louise. This is all coming in a context of a  government which has not handled its relationship with other transparent  countries very well. We are yet to hear exactly what has occurred with Manus  Island - a report was meant to be provided to the Australian people about the  events that occurred on Manus Island back in February by the end of last month.  It is now the 20th of May, and we are still yet to hear from our government.   In  circumstances where they have an appalling track record in managing the Manus  Island detention facility, it strikes us as amazing that they are now going off and  looking at making arrangements elsewhere.    YAXLEY: But to be clear, you're not ruling out saying that, if you're satisfied,  then the Cambodia deal could be acceptable.    MARLES: Well I'm not going to speculate on that until we hear from our  Government about what it is that they are proposing to do. Let me make two  points: we need to see the Government resolve the issues of Manus Island first;  they remain unresolved, and the second point is: we only are hearing about  Cambodia from the Cambodian government, which is simply not good enough,  and for any of us to make a proper assessment about whether this is a sensible  way forward or not, we actually need to hear from our own Government about  what they are planning to do, and right now, the silence is deafening.    YAXLEY: Given Cambodia's recent history, it's a post-conflict nation, are you  personally comfortable with the idea?    MARLES: Well, I come back to the point that I made. The basis on which this  would be a good or a bad idea depends entirely upon how people would be  supported, how many we're talking about, the terms of any agreement that  might be reached with Cambodia.  We need to hear from our own Government  about what they are doing with Cambodia before we can sensibly make an  assessment about whether we would support the idea or not. The fact of the  matter is that the idea as it's been proposed with the Australian Government is  not in the public domain.    YAXLEY: The Australian Foreign Affairs Department's website warns that  Cambodia lacks an effective judicial and legal system. Is that enough to give you  concern about the idea?    MARLES: Well, again, it comes back to the basis on which people would be  there, and what safeguards might be put in place in relation to the issues that  you're raising. But, right now, all we're hearing from our Government is a  deafening silence.    YAXLEY: So is it conditional approval pending that information?    MARLES: What I'm very clearly attempting to do here is not speculate on this  until we actually hear from our own Government about what it is that they are

planning to do, but I'm also, in the same breath, making the criticism that it is  astounding that we are hearing from the Cambodian government, now even the  Cambodian prime minister, about this proposal before we're hearing from our  own Government at all about it, and that is simply not good enough.    

YAXLEY: Given the warning that have come from a range of groups, including  Amnesty International, why not apply the precautionary principle and say, 'No'  until you can be convinced otherwise?    MARLES: We just need to know what is the actual proposal which is being put  forward. When the Government puts forward a proposal, we will make an  assessment then about whether that's something we would support or not.    ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: LIDIJA IVANOVSKI 0427 051 563

