

SENATOR THE HON GEORGE BRANDIS QC

ATTORNEY-GENERAL  MINISTER FOR THE ARTS

24 June 2014



SPEECH:   Remarks at the National Imams Consultative Forum Workshop,   Canberra, ACT

Thank you very much.  Good morning ladies and gentlemen.  Can I acknowledge Shahram  Akbarzadeh - I thank you for those warm words.  Can I also acknowledge Sheik Abdul Azim  Al-Afifi, the President of the Australian National Imams’ Council and all of your religious  leaders of the Council of Imams.  I also want to acknowledge my parliamentary colleague  and friend from who’ve you’ve just heard, Senator Concetta Fierravanti-Wells, who has  responsibility within the Abbott Government for multicultural affairs.

It’s a very great honour to be invited to open today’s consultative forum and I’m only sorry  that I am not able to stay longer.

This forum is a valuable opportunity for leaders of the Islamic faith in Australia and  government to come together to share our experience and perspectives on community safety,  radicalisation and violent extremism.  And may I say, at the outset, how much I am aware  that, as the faith leaders of the Islamic community, each of you has a critical role to play in  the development and implementation of public policy on those issues.

I know your previous workshops have explored the many challenges generated by the  ongoing conflict in Syria and its surrounding region. The Australian Government, of course,  deplores the violence and suffering that is occurring in Syria, and now northern Iraq, and  supports international efforts to find common ground for a peaceful resolution to the conflict.

A political solution to the conflict is needed, and Australia has urged the parties to the  conflict to end the violence and negotiate a political transition. The Government of Australia  also strongly condemns the actions of the terrorist group ISIL which has taken over  substantial parts of Mosul and other areas of northwest and central Iraq. We extend our  condolences for the loss of life and displacement of people due to the conflict.

Australia stands ready to support the humanitarian crisis in Iraq, should a request be made in  the same way that we have supported humanitarian efforts for the people of Syria.

The Australian Government continues to be gravely concerned by the humanitarian crisis in  Syria and in the surrounding region, including Iraq.

Since your last workshop, the Minister for Foreign Affairs, my colleague Julie Bishop,  announced that the Australian Government is providing $20 million for children in Lebanon  and Jordan who have fled across the borders as refugees due to the Syrian civil war.

Last week, Minister Bishop also announced that the Government will provide a further  $5 million in assistance, through United Nations partners, to support the hundreds of  thousands of people fleeing violence in north and north-western Iraq. This brings Australia’s  aid to Syria and the adjacent region to over $130 million since the conflict began in 2011.

It is understandable that the conflict in Syria and the ISIL insurgency in Iraq have evoked  strong reactions in the community here—many Australians, many people in this room no  doubt, have close ties to the region, including family and friends directly affected by the  conflict.

As the Minister responsible for Australia’s national security, one of my greatest concerns is  the unprecedentedly large number of Australian citizens travelling offshore to participate in  the Syrian conflict and now, evidently, in northern Iraq as well.  The Australian Government  is currently investigating approximately 150 people in Australia and offshore due to their  substantial involvement with extremist groups in Syria and now Iraq.

Your leadership, as faith leaders in your respective communities, in addressing this issue is of  absolutely critical importance.  I can’t stress that strongly enough and it’s the main message I  want to bring to you on behalf of the Government this morning. The role of imams as faith  leaders of the Muslim community is absolutely critical in dealing with the challenges  presented by the conflicts of which I have spoken, domestically within Australia.

It is especially important that you help your communities to understand that, while  acknowledging the strong emotional response we have to the devastating events in the  Middle East, it is illegal under Australian law for any person in Australia to provide any kind  of support to any armed group in Syria and Iraq. It is a serious crime to do so and it is very  important that members of your communities understand that.

As the Australian Government continues to address the significant challenges created by the  ongoing conflict, I’d like to share with you some key elements of the work we must do  together.

First, we must address the significant humanitarian crisis unfolding in the region.  The  Australian Government strongly supports you, as leaders in your communities, to encourage  community members to help the victims of the Syrian conflict, including through supporting  the humanitarian assistance delivered by United Nations agencies and other non-government  organisations that do not support either party to the conflict.   It’s very important that  humanitarian assistance be delivered through United Nations agencies and other reputable  and established aid providers.

I understand you discussed this with the secretary of the Attorney-General’s Department,  Mr Wilkins, in November of last year and that those conversations included the importance  of knowing who you are sending money to.  I would like to reiterate the advice that  Mr  Wilkins told you then — groups have been known to establish charitable organisations as  fronts for funding terrorist organisations or others participating in the fighting and the onus is  on individuals to ensure their money and support is not being channelled to these groups but  is being given to bona fide and reputable humanitarian organisations.

Over the next 12 months, staff within my Department will continue to work with other  agencies, the private sector, non-government organisations and communities to raise  awareness of these issues relating to humanitarian aid in Syria and now in Iraq.  Through  these efforts we hope to raise awareness of safe, legal channels to make humanitarian  contributions that will reach those most in need; provide alternative pathways for individuals  to take action in response to the conflict; raise awareness of the dangers of trying to help by

travelling offshore to the Syrian and Iraq conflict zones; and most importantly, make a  significant humanitarian contribution to help the people of Syria, Iraq and the region.

Our national security, law enforcement and intelligence agencies will continue their efforts to  prevent people from travelling to Syria and the region with the intention of fighting or  participating in the conflict, and we will investigate and prosecute those who break the law by  doing so.  We already have legislation that makes it illegal for any Australian, including dual  citizens, to fight, provide funding, provide training, or supply weapons to either side of the  conflict.

Our legislation also provides the national security agencies with powers to recommend that  the Minister for Foreign Affairs cancel or withhold passports on security grounds. The  Government will continue to discuss all appropriate measures to counter violent extremism.

I note that one of the members of this conference, Sheikh Mohamadu Saleem, who is among  us this morning, is reported to have said that the National Council of Imams welcomes  tougher security measures to deal with Australians fighting overseas. He observed that any  measures to improve national safety are a priority but the Government should consult with  community leaders in developing those measures.  I give you my assurance that we shall do  so.  My officers, as I said at the start, will be with you throughout the morning and I  understand that the Director-General of Security, Mr David Irvine, will be addressing you  later in the morning as well.

I would like to stress again that the Government sees you as partners and collaborators in  trying to ensure that the conflict in Syria does not have implications for Australia’s domestic  security.  Because of your leadership role, because of your moral authority, because of your  prominence as faith leaders in your communities, you are absolutely vital partners in that task  and it is a task in which all Australians, and your communities in particular, only stand to  benefit.

So let me conclude by thanking you for the efforts that you have already contributed and for  gathering here today.  The Government’s efforts to counter extremism in Australia would not  be possible without your support and engagement and the support and engagement of leaders  like you who are equally committed to ensuring our communities are safe and resilient.  The  Government is committed to working with you and your communities and I look forward to  continuing to engage with you on these important issues. And with those words, let me  officially declare open the 2014 National Imams Consultative Forum.

[Ends]





