Scott Morrison MP

Minister for Immigration and Border Protection

Changes to resettlement another blow to people smugglers, ebola, Senate, timing of  AHRC inquiry, Police Commissioners stand up against violence against women and  children

Monday, 24 November 2014

Interview with Ray Hadley, 2GB Ray Hadley Programme

Ray Hadley: Minister good morning.

Minister Morrison: G'day Ray.

Hadley: Now last week you announced changes to immigration policy concerning  Indonesia. Australia won't resettle any refugees from Indonesia who registered after  July 1. We are also reducing the annual quota of refugees that Australia will take  from Indonesia from 600 to 450. Now take me through the reasoning behind what  you are doing.

Minister Morrison: Well people were still coming into Indonesia hoping to get a visa  to Australia out of Indonesia. So that is not good for Indonesia. It just means that  there will be more people there and we want to help Indonesia by taking the sugar  off the table and that is what we did in making that decision. There will still be people  who will be resettled there who turned up prior to July. We are taking 450 people  there each year, that's 150 less from what we were doing before. We have taken  those 150 places and allocated them elsewhere in the programme. You can say they  were to support what we are doing out of the Middle East with those affected by the  conflicts in Syria and Iraq so we have reprioritised things and we are seeking to help  Indonesia by making sure that there is not a growing pool of people there who are  coming for one reason and that is to get a visa to Australia.

Hadley: Do the Indonesians see it that way?

Minister Morrison: Well I think what we will see in time is they will see the results of  this and that is really what I always think is the best advocate for any policy and that  is what are the results. The results we have had on our other policies, particularly our  turn back policy, I think are indisputable.

Hadley: Ok, I don't think you answered the question.

Minister Morrison: Well they were advised of our decision Ray and they were  consulted over some months both under the previous government and the new  government were advised of this. We will provide whatever other assistance that  Indonesia is seeking to help them effectively drain the pool of people. Around ten  thousand people up there they largely got there under the previous government and  we just don't want to add to that problem by having the prospect of an Australian visa

enticing people to get on 747's and bigger planes and flying to Indonesia and sit  there and wait for a visa.

Hadley: There have been conflicting statements about another matter, our response  to the ebola crisis. You have declared our borders were closed to people trying to  come here from those Ebola affected countries, that included the humanitarian  intake, but the Foreign Minister suggested that we were in fact processing  applications from these countries. Which is true?

Minister Morrison: There has been no change to our policy. It is effectively closed  for a period of time and that is under regular review but there are exceptional cases  which I am sure is what the Foreign Minister was referring to. We had an  international conference recently and we made some exceptions there and if there  are exceptions that have to be made from time to time on a case then we will we  make those. I think people have tried to play that up but it is just us being practical  but the settings haven't changed.

Hadley: Of course people are kept in quarantine so to speak and the normal checks  and balances before they go into the community.

Minister Morrison: And we have had no issues there as we have run that process  and I think the overall whole of government job done on ebola to date has been very  strong.

Hadley: I'd be interested in a politician's view on what the Daily Telegraph poll  shows today. 67 per cent of voters are in favour of a fresh election because of the  ongoing and unworkable relationship between members of the Palmer United Party,  particularly Clive Palmer and Jacqui Lambie. But I have got to tell you from my point  of view I am becoming very bored with it all. I mean it is him saying things about her,  her replying and it is just childish and it brings the whole system of government down  to a really ordinary level, particularly the Senate.

Minister Morrison: Well I think we have Bill Shorten to thank for all this because it is  Bill Shorten who has decided not to support the government's mandated outcomes  of the last election. I have a Bill in the Senate at the moment which is to restore  temporary protection visas. Now I don't think anyone can say even if they disagree  with temporary protection visas that we didn't have a mandate to do that. We had a  mandate to get rid of the carbon tax and they voted against that. The reason we are  in the position of talking to the cross benchers is because the Labor party didn't get  the message from the last election. So much so they want to go to the next election  wanting to restore the carbon tax and go back to Kevin Rudd's policies on border  protection. So if Bill Shorten would just turn up to work on this and support clearly  mandated policies of the government then these issues that we are dealing with in  the Senate really wouldn't be present.

Hadley: That's not going to happen so we then deal with Jacqui Lambie, Clive  Palmer and Glenn Lazarus and the other crossbenchers on all of this and while the  others are reasonable and can be dealt with surely we come back to what I have  been talking to you and the Prime Minister about for the last number of months, you  can't deal with these people. There is a lunacy attached to both of them that  suggests that you simply can't deal with them.

Minister Morrison: Well any government has to deal with the Senate in front of  them Ray and that is what we are doing. My bill I am still working through the  crossbenchers right now. That will likely come up in this sitting fortnight if we are able  to get an outcome here and I am working hard on that. That is what people expect  Ministers to do, that's what they expect Senators to do, that is what they expect the  Opposition to do and that is to do their job and not engage in the sideshows that can  sometimes occur in this place. We are very focused on getting an outcome here and  the outcome for me on this bill is that we would ensure we got temporary protection  visas back, we would be putting greater protection for our people out there doing turn  backs - the men and women of our Defence Forces and Customs and Border  Protection Service. We are going to toughen the Migration Act when it comes to  these issues and process this backlog of 30,000 cases that Labor left behind. If we  can get that passed it will be a good day at the office and it will be the government  and the Parliament getting on with its job which we were all elected to do.

Hadley: I have spoken to you in the past particularly after your appearance in front  of her, the Human Rights Commission President Gillian Triggs. There was a story on  the front page of the Australian newspaper I dealt with during my Saturday  programme where it was suggested her future is in doubt after she contradicted  herself before a Senate committee. Now she said she decided on an inquiry into  children in detention was necessary early last year but did not act until after the  federal election because she feared it would be highly publicised, politicised and very  destructive. She denied raising the matter with Labor before the election but then  later admitted she had discussed it with both the former Immigration Ministers  Bowen and Burke. Just explain to us what can happen with someone like this, the  Human Rights Commissioner Gillian Triggs, is she immune as many other public  servants are from being answerable to her masters in this case your government?

Minister Morrison: She is appointed by the Attorney-General and there are some  pretty strict conditions which apply to someone departing their role in such a position  and it involves serious misconduct issues and things like that. That is really a matter  for the Attorney-General. On this issue more broadly she was appointed in August of  2012 and we all know what happened over the next 18 to 20 months under that  government in terms of boats turning up and most importantly almost 2000 children  peak detention population under the previous government. Now while all of that  happened the Human Rights Commission said nothing, asked no questions and held  no inquiry and then when the boats start stopping they couldn't be too quick to  actually launch an inquiry. I think Australians will make up their own mind in terms of  how credible any report comes and frankly for it to not having a serious look at the  evidence and these sorts of things is disappointing. It is a wasted opportunity. It risks  being a complete waste of taxpayers' money.

Hadley: Ok. One of the features of our Saturday programme is that I invite people  into the studio for an extended chat. The first week we had Mike Baird then Karl  Stefanovic. What about between now and Christmas if you can see your way clear  and I will leave if for your staff to organise with our staff here, one Saturday morning  and it won't be a normal type interview where we go through the sort of things like we  are now but more about Scott Morrison the man as opposed to Scott Morrison the  Minister.

Minister Morrison: I would love to. I could be there Saturday if you like mate…

Hadley: Alright.

Minister Morrison: It would be great to have a longer chat about a lot of these and  different things. Just on one thing before we go, today we had all the state and  territory and New Zealand police commissioners here to stand up against violence  against women and children. This is only the second time I understand this has  happened. Michaelia Cash my Assistant Minister but also the Minister Assisting the  Prime Minister on the Status of Women brought all this together and we heard a very  passionate plea from Ken Lay the Victorian Police Commissioner supported by all of  them and it was really about blokes coming to terms with this and talking to each  other about these sorts of issues and collectively standing up. You are the father of a  daughter, two isn't it Ray?

Hadley: Three actually.

Minister Morrison: Three daughters. I have two.

Hadley: I have two here and one away in the United States of America and it is  something we talk about regularly.

Minister Morrison: I know you do and good on you for doing it. I would commend  Ken Lay's speech to everybody today. It was absolutely outstanding.

Hadley: I am just looking at the list of people and of course it is a day of significance  where we stand up and it is not just about women it is about children as well.

Minister Morrison: That's right.

Hadley: Ken Lay, Andrew Colvin, from the Australian Federal Police, Andrew  Scipione from NSW, Mike Bush the NZ Police Commissioner, John McRoberts from  the NT, Ian Stewart from QLD, Gary Burns from SA, Darren Hine from Tasmania,  Western Australia Dr Karl O'Callaghan and ACT Chief Police Officer Rudi Lammers.  All gathering together and the Prime Minister spoke as well as other people.

Minister Morrison: He did.

Hadley: An important initiative. Ok well you are locked in for Saturday 10 o'clock I  will see you there.

Minister Morrison: I am Ray and looking forward to it.

Hadley: Ok all the best.

Minister Morrison: Thanks.



