

CHRIS BOWEN MP  SHADOW TREASURER  MEMBER FOR MCMAHON



E&OE TRANSCRIPT   RADIO INTERVIEW  RN BREAKFAST  FRIDAY, 7 FEBURARY 2014

SUBJECT/ S: ‘Age of Entitlement’; Coalition’s cuts agenda; Labor’s  economic record; SPC Ardmona; Coalition border protection secrecy.

FRAN KELLY: The Shadow Treasurer, Chris Bowen, says all this talk about  personal and corporate responsibility is code for deep cuts. Chris Bowen, good  morning, welcome to breakfast.

CHRIS BOWEN, SHADOW TREASURER: Good to be back Fran. How are you  today?

KELLY: I’m well thank you. Treasurer Joe Hockey there reminding us that tough  decisions are required now so we don’t face near impossible decisions later.  You’re suggesting that cuts in the budget will hurt families. But when you were  Treasurer in government, seven or eight months ago, you were flagging tough  cuts were needed too. Some of which the Government has even adopted.

BOWEN: Well we instituted sensible measures to keep control on government  spending with very little support from the then Opposition. So for example, the  fastest growing area of government spending is the private health insurance  rebate. So we brought that under control; means tested it. The then Liberal  Party apposed that, and it’s their policy to reverse it.

And when we took measures to bring the baby bonus under control Joe Hockey  accused us of one child policy, China-like. That’s a huge credibility problem. But  he’s also got this problem Fran - this is code for cuts, and it’s code for cuts for  people who can least afford it. So Joe Hockey talks about the age of entitlement  and calls its end, at the same time as his government implements Paid Parental  Leave Scheme which is extravagant and unaffordable, and would extend welfare  to areas that it has never been seen before. While flagging things like a $6  charge to visit your local GP which many people could not afford and would have

a big impact. So their priorities are all wrong, and Joe Hockey is full of bluff and  bluster and talks tough to those doing it tough. But at the same time his  government is implementing policies which could wind back some sensible  measures to bring the budget under control, which were implemented with a  view to making sure that government expenditure is targeted to those who need  it most.

KELLY: Well according to the Treasurer, and I’m quoting him from the speech  yesterday, “We now find we are not able to finance projected growth in  government spending from our existing tax base”. Is that fact an indictment on  Labor’s economic management over the previous six years, that the structural  budget is now unsustainable? Did you spend too much and cut too little?

BOWEN: Absolutely not, and we brought spending under control, and spending  under us was less than under the Howard government. We had sensible  measures in place. We are not going to cop a lecture from Joe Hockey for one  second about this. His speech yesterday was a particularly disingenuous one. He  talked about the strength of the Australian economy and how it was one of the  strongest economies in the world. Apparently that was due to everybody apart  from the people who were in charge at the time, the previous government. He  claimed credit for the government before and the government that came after,  not the one that was actually in charge during the global financial crisis. He  talked about the impact of the global financial crisis on Australia, and how  Australia handled it differently, but somehow or the other it was all due to the  Liberal Party. He seemed to have forgotten the fact that the Labor Party was in  charge at the time.

KELLY: Yes, but you did have a big surplus there to help buffer us.

BOWEN: And as we have always acknowledged, and we did stimulate the  economy because that was exactly the right thing to do; and if we hadn’t  Australia would be seeing the sorts of economic overhang that the rest of the  world is still experiencing and still suffering from which Joe Hockey seems almost  pathologically incapable of recognising.

KELLY: Joe Hockey’s message this week, and we have just been discussing this  for all of us, including corporate Australia, the age of entitlement is over. He’s  sending that message very strongly out to corporate Australia, don’t come  looking for handouts. Can you point to an example where government assistance  to struggling companies has worked, it has worked in the very long term?

BOWEN: Well yes, absolutely. There has been industry policy right through the  ‘80s and ‘90s implemented by governments of both persuasions which assisted  structural adjustment. Structural adjustment is very important, that is where the

jobs come from changes. But that has an impact on regional economies, it has  an impact on individuals and you can, governments can and should ensure that  that process works as smoothly as possible.

KELLY: Well can they? Because I’m thinking we’ve heard a lot about structural  adjustment in the motor car industry and yet the Australian car industry has  averaged government subsidies of about $550 million a year for the past six  years. And it looks as though it’s all coming to nought.

BOWEN: And there is not a car in the world that doesn’t receive some sort of  government assistance. Not a car made around the world Fran.

KELLY: Yeah, but the structural adjustment hasn’t worked to keep the car  industry going.

BOWEN: Well the car industry in Australia was vibrant for a very long time and  Holden, in my view, did have a future in Australia but the government goaded  them into leaving. In my very strong view, and where you have, look  government intervention in terms of industry assistance should not be rushed  into, and it should be very much be the exception. I make that very clear, but  there are occasions when it can be justified. Now SPC Ardmona is the case in  point at the moment in public discussions. Now, you’ve seen the government

demonise the wages outcomes there, and they have been shown to be factually  incorrect, and they have frankly been lying as one of their own members has  pointed out.

Secondly, you have SPC Ardmona willing to make an investment of $160 million  to ensure that this cannery can survive and prosper, but wanting to work with  governments to ensure that that is the case, and this government walking away  from that, for reasons best known to themselves.

KELLY: Yes, but is it time for governments to walk away a bit more? Because  businesses make promises, I’m thinking about Alcoa in 2012, the Gillard  Government gave $40 million to Alcoa’s troubled Port Henry aluminium smelter  near Geelong, in an effort to keep it open. Now there are pretty ominous signs  coming from Alcoa itself this week. It looks as though it could close this year  with a loss of 500 jobs. If that plant does close, it proves it wasn’t a good  investment of tax payer’s money doesn’t it?

BOWEN: Well it doesn’t necessarily prove that Fran because that was an  investment made at the time and the economic circumstances of the time and  it’s been operating for three years since, and we’ll need to see what the  economic circumstances affecting that particular outfit are today.

But I make this point, with SPC Ardmona you’ve got the Department of Industry  who’ve looked at it, you’ve got an expert panel consisting of some of Australia’s  most eminent business people, Dick Warburton and Catherine Livingston, they’ve  looked at this matter and made recommendations to the government. Tony  Abbott refused to even meet with them, I find that extraordinary. I know both  those individuals and they are both very eminent businesspeople and if we were  in government we would listen to people like that and take their views into  account.

The government has really mishandled this issue, unemployment is a growing  problem in Australia. We got through the global financial crisis with an increase  in unemployment much less that around the world but since then, even over the  last few months, the situation has worsened and this government appears to be  very much determined to avoid dealing with that problem.

KELLY: Chris Bowen, we’ve only got a minute or so to the news, but just on  another matter because the ABC showed footage last night of another bright  orange lifeboat carrying asylum seekers turning up on Indonesian shores. Those  on board say they got all the way to Christmas Island before they were turned  around. No boat arrivals have disembarked at Australian detention facilities since  mid-January, according to the government. As the former Immigration Minister  of Australia, do you concede that the turn back to boat policy of the Abbott  Government is working?

BOWEN: Well the point I make as a former Immigration Minister Fran is that as  a former Immigration Minister you front up and you explain what you are doing.  You are upfront with the Australian people. I mean when I was Minister for  Immigration if I tried this sort of secrecy, Scott Morrison would have been calling  for my resignation.

KELLY: Do you think Australian people care more about the secrecy, or are  interested in the fact that less people are coming and therefore there’s no  chance of them drowning because they’re not coming?

BOWEN: I think the Australian people want a policy that works and they want to  know what that policy is. Now, we obviously when we were in office, we  implemented the Papua New Guinea agreement, not universally popular, but it  did see a big reduction in boat arrivals. But we were upfront about it, we  explained to the Australian people what it was, and whoever it was when Labor  was in office, whether it was myself, or Brendan O’Connor or Tony Burke, we  were upfront with people, we fronted up to the press conferences, we answered  the difficult questions and we didn’t hide from scrutiny, as Scott Morrison  appears to be devoted to doing.

KELLY: Alright, Chris Bowen thank you very much for joining us.

BOWEN: Always nice to talk to you Fran.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: JAMES CULLEN 0409 719 879

