

CHRIS BOWEN MP  SHADOW TREASURER  MEMBER FOR MCMAHON







E&OE TRANSCRIPT   RADIO INTERVIEW  ABC NEWSRADIO WITH STEVE CHASE  FRIDAY, 7 FEBRUARY 2014

SUBJECTS: Griffith by-election; ‘Age of Entitlement’; Coalition’s cuts  agenda; Trade Unions; Industrial relations; Coalition border protection  secrecy.

REPORTER: Chris Bowen has been telling Steve Chase the result in Griffith will  be tight and he doesn’t think Kevin Rudd’s early departure will be a major issue.

CHRIS BOWEN: Well there’s no doubt that Kevin had a very strong following in  that seat and a high personal vote. There’s no doubt about that. I do think that  people understand that former Prime Ministers and former party leaders, after an  election defeat often make the decision to vacate the field and leave the fight to  the next generation. That’s what Malcolm Fraiser did, it’s what Peter Costello and  Alexander Downer did.

STEVE CHASE: What about the role of national issues in the Griffith By-election,  there’s a few of them. We’ll start with Joe Hockey’s comments earlier in the week  about the end of the age of entitlement. He revisited it yesterday, inviting  businesses to ready their check books, talking about a new era of privatisation.  As Shadow Treasurer, what is your response to those comments?

BOWEN: Well, what we’re seeing here is Joe Hockey trying to yet again soften  the field for cuts he always intended to make, which the Labor party warned that  he would make. And he mastered in this rhetoric about the age of entitlement, I  don’t think he understands the irony of him talking about an age of entitlement  and railing against middle class welfare when he’s the Treasurer introducing the  most extravagant Paid Parental Leave Scheme in the world, which is financed by  a tax on Australia’s self-funded retirees and superannuants, and would receive  $75,000 to people regardless of their income, when they have a baby, which is a

massive extension of what he would call middle class welfare. Joe’s Hockey’s  very tough, very good at talking tough when it comes to those doing it tough,  but while he’s a member of a government, a senior member of a government  who’s introducing policies like that, he has very little credibility.

CHASE: Joe Hockey’s coalition partner Barnaby Joyce has been speaking to the  big four banks urging them to go easy on drought stricken farmers, in your mind,  have the banks got a social responsibility to help farmers in trouble?

BOWEN: Well of course they do, of course I think the banks have a  responsibility to treat all their customers with a degree of compassion when  there are circumstances out of their control. And in my experience banks do that,  and obviously there are times when we would prefer them to do it differently or  better, but there are banks who talk to their customers because it’s in their best  interest to talk to their customers about the way through. It’s not in their best  interest to foreclose on people prematurely or unnecessarily, and so we’d  certainly encourage them to continue to do that and to do more where possible.

CHASE: Voters in the Griffith by-election would have been listening intently in  the last couple of days when Paul Howes made those comments about a union  compact with Government and businesses, claiming that some workers as you  know are pricing themselves out of jobs with high wage demands. That this  morning has reportedly split the ALP, and at least one Shadow Minister has  spoken out, albeit anonymously saying the speech is one that Bill Shorten should  have made. Where do you stand on all this?

BOWEN: Well, I think the Labor party is mature enough to have a discussion  about a suggestion made by somebody outside the Parliamentary Labor Party  and that’s what Mr Howes has done. Certainly I think that talking about business  and unions and government working together is a sensible thing, and clearly we  did that in office. Kevin Rudd as Prime Minister for example convened the  Business Council, the ACTU and the Government to talk about a national  productivity agenda. But I’d make this point: Firstly, a Government’s got to be  willing to do that, Tony Abbott very clearly is not a Prime Minister who has it  within him to work with unions. It needs a Prime Minister who understands that  working together beats confrontation. Secondly, we don’t have centralised wage  fixing in Australia anymore, that was the model of the accord. With wage  bargaining much more decentralised than any tripartite arrangement of those  three groups working together would work very differently. And thirdly, much of  the wages growth we’ve seen is in the non-unionised sector. You see people in  the resources sector negotiating directly with their employers in a tight labour  market. That’s seen some wages growth but across the board, if you look at the  economy as a whole, wages growth has been very subdued.

CHASE: Just reflecting on what you were saying there about the  union/business/government compact, you seem to be entertaining the idea,  whereas Bill Shorten yesterday flatly said it was fantasy stuff.

BOWEN: Well Bill Shorten correctly made the point that its fanciful to image  that Tony Abbott would be remotely interested in doing that. Now clearly  working together with unions, working together with business particularly on  matters relating to competitiveness and productivity, nothing wrong with that,  nothing wrong with talking about that, but it’s just not going to happen under  this Government, and Tony Abbott’s made that clear himself.

CHASE: One final question, you can’t get away from the fact that you’re a  former Immigration Minister and the Daily Telegraph in Sydney today is  suggesting that the Government’s turn back to boats policy has been a success.  They’re quoting Malaysian officials as saying that the people are returning to  Malaysia from Indonesia, because they can’t get into Australia. Would that, on  the face of it, be a vindication of the Government’s policy?

BOWEN: Well, what is the Government’s policy? Well the Government’s policy  seems to be secrecy, and they’re not telling us what their policy is. The only  policy we know about is the Papua New Guinea arrangement bought in by the  previous Government which saw a very dramatic fall in boat arrivals. It’s very  hard for the Government to claim any sort of credit for any further turn around  when they won’t tell us what’s actually happening out there. And certainly…

CHASE: Well, they are saying that people aren’t coming in the numbers that  they were.

BOWEN: Well that’s when they say anything, they seem to be addicted to  secrecy and addicted to hiding from the Australian people the true facts of the  situation on our borders.

REPORTER: That’s the Shadow Treasurer, Chris Bowen, speaking to Steve  Chase.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: JAMES CULLEN 0409 719 879

