The Hon. Scott Morrison MP  Minister for Immigration and Border Protection





Operation Sovereign Borders, Manus Island  incident, Manus Island claims, Senator Conroy  Monday, 03 March 2014

Interview with Ray Hadley, 2GB Ray Hadley Program

Ray Hadley: Immigration Minister Scott Morrison on the line from our Canberra  studio as he does every Monday. Minister good morning.

Minister Morrison: Good morning Ray.

Ray Hadley: What have we got now two months since any boats have arrived or a  bit more?

Minister Morrison: Just over two months in fact 74 days, Ray, without a successful  people smuggling venture to Australia and that has been principally achieved by the  great work that our people are doing out there at sea as part of our maritime  operations. They are preventing these ventures getting to Australia and they  continue to do that job well. I was up in Darwin with the Prime Minister with them on  Friday and we got the opportunity to say thank you to them, not just for the great job  they are doing but the decency in the way they do it.

Ray Hadley: I just have to refer to one of your former colleagues writing today in  news limited papers, Amanda Vanstone, a former minister. She says and I quote 'by  all accounts Morrison has faced the media much sooner, much much sooner than  previous Labor ministers after riots at detention facilities. Strange that comparison  gets little coverage, perhaps some in the media just can't stand the fact that this  government and their policies are bearing fruit. Quite a few media commentators  refuse to accept that Labor's dismantling of the strong border protection policies  under the Howard government opened the flood gates. Labor spun out the line that  the increased boat arrivals were due to 'push factors' it was garbage, it was a cruel  hoax. Now with strong policies, a strong Minister and a government with some  gumption everyone can see the truth. How many journalists let Labor run that stupid,  pathetic excuse. Do they feel guilty or at least complicit in one of the greatest hoaxes  a government ever tried on.' Well I am glad Amanda Vanstone is reflecting what  many of us think.

Minister Morrison: Well she called it as it is. I mean that fact is around ten and a  half million refugees back five, six years ago and that is the same number as there is  today. Sadly there always is these push factors the difference is when you have got  a government that has got strong policies and when you have got the previous

government who decided to dismantle them and the evidence is there for us all to  see, and I think that evidence is proving very difficult for many to digest but for most  Australians I think they are very pleased about the results. We still have a way to go  but these operations are working and we want them to continue to work.

Ray Hadley: Ok, let's go back in time. We didn't chat last week. Since we spoke we  have had a death of a boat person Reza Barati on Manus Island killed during the  violence in the detention centre, which we now know to be a fact not outside. Do you  know anything about the specific cause of death or how it occurred inside the  detention centre?

Minister Morrison: Well it was a cause of head trauma and that is what the coroner  will be looking into and there has been an autopsy and now the arrangements are in  place for the body of Mr Barati to be returned to his family in Iran but Ray I am going  to let the review do the job. I am going to let the police investigation do its job, the  coronial inquiry, and I was in Port Moresby on Saturday and met with my  counterparts up there and what we have agreed to try and do is get all of these  reviews and inquiries sharing information, working together so you get a  convergence of information so we find out exactly what happened and in addition to  that I will be up there every month now to ensure that we are getting progress on the  processing of people and the resettlement of people because what I inherited from  Tony Burke was a blank sheet of paper when it came to resettlement arrangements.  I mean there was just nothing there, it was a big bluff.

Ray Hadley: Ok, I saw some figures this morning about how many people had been  returned to their place of origin. Almost 200 or close to it. Are they people who have  returned voluntarily?

Minister Morrison: Yes, they are people who are returned voluntarily and that  doesn't include the large numbers of Sri Lankans in particular who were put on a  plane and sent straight back. Those figures when you take into account involuntary  returns and returns off the mainland were up almost 500 now, since we came to  office. The returns are an important part of what we do, what we do at sea is an  important part of what we do, offshore processing is an important part, as well  temporary protection visas which the Labor party and the Greens continue to seek to  frustrate.

Ray Hadley: I noticed the co-owner of this radio station has again pointed out in the  newspapers today, John Singleton, that he is at odds with myself and Alan Jones on  how you dealt with this matter and he is pointing to it that there is no editorial  interference because we think one thing, he thinks another. But every time I have an  argument with John about it and it is not frequently we have arguments about it but I  point out to him that for every person who arrives having thrown their passport  overboard, some poor coot in another part of the world who is waiting beyond hope  to come here is put back in the list. It seems to be lost on those people including  John who say open up we can take as many people as we possibly can. If we are  going to take as many people as we can take them from refugee camps not those  who throw their passports overboard who are economic refugees.

Minister Morrison: Yes, we are deciding now who is coming to the country, Ray,  under this government and that was the promise we made to the Australian people  and that is exactly what we are doing and your assessment is spot on and that  process of place is being taken by others coming by boat for those who are in camps  and places. That is no longer happening and we are not seeing the drownings at  sea, God forbid that that should happen again, and we are doing everything we can  to prevent that. The other area of commentary which I think is very disturbing is that  somehow the 1200 deaths that occurred at sea including the deaths of children at  sea somehow don't morally equate to the very tragic death of Mr Barati. Now I think  all of these deaths are tragic, I have had 47 people die at sea while I have been  Minister very early on, after we were elected. And those 47 losses are equal to those  of Mr Barati which is a tragic death and one that we all greatly regret but by stopping  the boats we are stopping those deaths at sea.

Ray Hadley: Now if I could just go just interrupting, I'm talking to the Immigration  Minister Scott Morrison, Steve has phoned for our Sydney listeners there is a very  important problem. Three car pile-up in the Lane Cove tunnel west bound, centre  lane is open. There is debris on the road so please take care. Lane Cove tunnel,  three car pile-up west bound, centre lane open but there is debris on the road so  take care. That's west bound Lane Cove tunnel coming out of town.  Now there is a report today which I found hard to understand, Fairfax is reporting a  PNG local employed by the Salvation Army, so now we are going after the Salvation  Army, was involved in the fatal attack. Have you seen that report? Is there any  validity to it?

Minister Morrison: Well I have seen the report and we have a police investigation  underway and they will find out who was responsible at the end of the day for these  matters and I am happy for that investigation to take its course. I mean as you know,  Ray, we have changed the contracting arrangements up on PNG particularly in  relation to security. Not long after coming into the job I visited Manus Island, I was  there with General Molan on that occasion not General Campbell and we very  quickly formed the view that the security arrangements we inherited were not  adequate and we commissioned a force protection assessment review, which was  done by our military, and we took a number of steps since that report. Now there  were more steps that need to be taken there but I am quite certain that the steps we  have taken before the incident a fortnight ago saved lives.

Ray Hadley: Now we get to the next accusation and again in Fairfax, that asylum  seekers have been chanting 'F PNG' and bearing their buttocks to the locals. Is there  any validity in that?

Minister Morrison: Well again Ray, I will let the review do its job. I have seen those  reports, I have heard those reports. It is not uncommon in these centres when  people are seeking to disrupt the centres to engage in behaviour which is intended to  create disorder to invoke a response. Now I will leave it to the review to be specific  about what happened in this case and to confirm those reports which you have  referred to. We have seen it in other places, we saw it in Nauru before the place  burnt down and this happens in detention centres and you need to manage those  environments. They are difficult environments to manage. We have put Transfield in  to oversee and run all of the operations up there, from Australia, for those that we

fund and support, the centre technically and not just technically in reality I should  stress is run by the Government of Papua New Guinea. We support them in doing  that, it is their sovereign territory.

Ray Hadley: Well you pay the bill don't you?

Minister Morrison: We pay the bills. That is what the arrangement is in place for.

Ray Hadley: What about the $3.5 million for the toll holdings kitchen on Manus  Island. It must be a fair kitchen.

Minister Morrison: Well it is an expensive place to run a centre. There is no doubt  about that and there is no walking away from that and it is a remote part of the world  and these companies are experienced in doing these things. But all of these stories  get put around and some of them are true but running a centre up there is  expensive.

Ray Hadley: Just some happening news at the moment Scott, not related to what  we are talking about. You wouldn't believe it Rory McIlroy has just had a triple bogey  on 16, he has gone back to minus 7. Ryan Palmer has finished at 8 under. Russell  Knox is on the course with one to play 8 under. Russell Henley is on the course at 8  under and all of a sudden Rory McIlroy is out of contention back at 7 under. One  would imagine unless he can birdie 18. Quite remarkable, that's the golf that is  happening at the Classic at the moment.

Now I have had a request from listeners, we spoke last time about Captain Emad's  family (inaudible) in Canberra. You said you would try to find out where we are up to  with that. What is happening?

Minister Morrison: I have still got nothing further for you on that Ray. I will  endeavour to get that to you as soon as I have the information.

Ray Hadley: I'd really appreciate it because I mean that fact that they are living here  and they lied about why they came here saying he was deceased and they needed  protection and then he lobbed here and was carting shopping trolleys around and  since he was identified by the ABC he has nicked off again.

Minister Morrison: No, look I agree and I will get you that update Ray and it is  overdue I acknowledge.

Ray Hadley: Good. Now, a story in yesterday's Sun Herald. Your department has a  66 strong team of spin doctors along with another 33 personnel working for the  Australian Customs and Border Protection service. They say that that is compared to  39 media and communication staff for the PM and Minister's on the front bench. Is  that accurate?

Minister Morrison: Well this is what I inherited from the previous government Ray. I  have actually got a few less, not that they work directly for me, they work in the  Department. There is a small group that work supporting requests for media for  information on all sorts of issues.

Ray Hadley: Sandi has gone.

Minister Morrison: Sandi is no longer there.

Ray Hadley: Sandi Logan has gone.

Minister Morrison: Sandi Logan has moved on.

Ray Hadley: He went when you came.

Minister Morrison: Not long after there was that change made Ray.

Ray Hadley: No more tweets from Sandi.

Minister Morrison: Well I understand he is still an active tweeter in his own, which  of course he is entitled to do.

Ray Hadley: No one takes any notice of Sandi anymore.

Minister Morrison: The implication of the story was somehow this had been built up  under this government which is actually not true.

Ray Hadley: Well let's get this clear, so if you do have a 66 strong team of spin  doctors that is how many were there under the previous government.

Minister Morrison: That is right.

Ray Hadley: And you have still got them there. Is there any view to removing some  of the 66 because it does seem a large number?

Minister Morrison: Well look it is a big department but most of them are involved in  internal communications and managing issues within the department itself. But we  are putting a fine eye over all of the costs not just within my department but across  all departments and that is something that the Treasurer is very focussed on and  there is no area of my department which would avoid that scrutiny.

Ray Hadley: Just finally, Labor Senator Stephen Conroy former Communications  Minister his comments about Lieutenant General Angus Campbell. Most people  including those writing about it from Canberra seemed to think it was a diversionary  tactic to take the pressure off him in relation to the NBN, $7 billion for 3 per cent  coverage. Surely, surely someone has to tug his coat from his side of politics and  say Stephen pull your head in.

Minister Morrison: Well of course they should, and that is the point I made in the  parliament last week and Bill Shorten had the opportunity to do that and it was  actually the Member for Denison who moved the motion in the parliament to get him  to have that opportunity, which he said the Labor party would vote against to  admonish Senator Conroy. Now what Senator Conroy said was outrageous, it was a  pathetic and cowardly thing to say. I described it last Friday as a coward sledge and I  think that is exactly what it was and I think the leader of the Opposition has proved

himself very small in how he has responded to this and very weak in how he has  responded to it. I mean clearly Senator Conroy is his numbers person and he is the  one shoring him up and the union mates stick together and right wing factional mates  in the Labor party stick together whether they are from Victoria or New South Wales  or anywhere else and that is how the show is run. So he has allowed a cowardly  sledge to be put against one of the finest people ever to pull on a uniform for  Australia because he is insecure in his own position.

Ray Hadley: Thanks for your time and we will get an update on Captain Emad's  family for sure Monday.

Minister Morrison: We will Ray, thank you.

Ray Hadley: Thank you very much, the Immigration Minister Scott Morrison from our  Canberra studio.



See: Index of Speeches

URL:http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/sm/2014/sm212267.htm   Last update: Tuesday, 04 March 2014 at 09:08 AEST



