

THE HON. BILL SHORTEN  LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  MEMBER FOR MARIBYRNONG



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW  ABC AM  TUESDAY, 16 SEPTEMBER 2014

SUBJECT/S: Iraq; Refugees; Offshore processing; Tony Abbott’s debt  sentence for uni students; Youth unemployment; Renewable Energy  Target.

CHRIS UHLMANN: Bill Shorten is the Opposition Leader and he’s touring  Tasmanian at the moment, he joins me from Burnie. Welcome to AM.

BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Good morning Chris.

UHLMANN: Bill Shorten is the Labor Party united in its support for the Abbott  Government’s decision to send troops to Iraq?

SHORTEN: The Labor Party that I lead is united in promoting national security.  I sympathise with the anxiety which Melissa Parke has expressed that matters  are moving very quickly and again I express my horror too at the murder of aid  workers who go to these countries to help people not to be harmed themselves.  But I do believe the Labor Party recognises that this is not the same as the 2003  Gulf War and we have set clear parameters in terms of what we think Australia  needs to be doing but there is an important point here. Some people would say  that if we did nothing then these problems wouldn’t be a problem for Australia, I  don’t accept that. The briefings, which I can’t go into detail about, have  convinced me that what happens in northern Iraq and Syria has repercussions  for our safety in Australia.

UHLMANN: But what happens in Syria has been happening for some time -

200,000 people have been killed there, Australians joined that fight a long time  ago so why join this fight now?

SHORTEN: I think you make a good point that the Syrian tragedy has been  carried out for quite a period of time. There’s a million refugees in Jordan,  there’s a million refugees in Lebanon, but what seems to I think have attracted  world attention is that the world is not automatically on the side of the Syrian  Government, Assad, but when it comes to the undermining of the Iraqi national  government I think the world takes a different view. The Iraqi national  government has reached out and become less sectarian; it’s reached out the  have a deputy prime minister whose Kurdish, a deputy prime minister whose  Sunni and the Iraqi Government through the Americans have asked for our  assistance, this is a material difference to 2003.

UHLMANN: It’s a legitimate concern though isn’t it that these things sometime  start small and end up being quite a bit larger the experience going all the way  back to Vietnam has shown that?

SHORTEN: I think you’re right; these matters have to be proceeded through  very carefully step by step. Labor has made it clear that whilst we do support  what has been done so far and that we’re all in this together when it comes to  fighting terrorism, we’ve also made it clear that we don’t want Australian combat  troops and formed up units directly engaged in combat with IS. We want the  operations of our military to be confined to the territory of Iraq where that  government has asked for our assistance. We think that the air offensive  operations, and they haven’t actually formally started, there’s just been a pre-deployment request to the Middle-East, to the UAE, should only continue as long  as is necessary to place the Iraqi Government and their forces in a position to be  able ensure the security of their country.

UHLMANN: That’s a fine judgement thought isn’t, how would you know when  that’s the case?

SHORTEN: Well first of all you’ve got to have principles by which guide your  actions and what I’m annunciating is Labor’s principles. We also think that it is  possible to work through objectives when you know when you should finish, and  I think that is an important debate. And legitimately some of the commentators  and some people who are expressing concern have a right to see what the  objectives are and Labor is up for working that through with the government.

UHLMANN: Now some of the same people in the left are concerned about your  border protection policies, is there any likelihood that you will abandon your  commitment to offshore processing?



SHORTEN: No.

UHLMANN: That’s a firm rolled gold commitment; you’re not going to abandon  it?

SHORTEN: No.

UHLMANN: Will it be changed in anyway?

SHORTEN: No, we support regional resettlement and we support the offshore  processing. I think you raise an interesting question in terms of refugees. When  we talk about humanitarian, if I can combine the two topics, we talk about  humanitarian assistance in Iraq and Syria perhaps, and I’ll be having further  discussions with my deputy leader Tanya Plibersek and others, perhaps it’s time  to discuss do we take more refugees from these countries? I think that when we  look at the fact that were having military, potentially military operations,  humanitarian relief comes in many forms but not the least of which is support for  refugees to come to Australia, especially if they can’t live in their old towns and  villages.

UHLMANN: So you’d like to see an increase in the humanitarian intake again,  up to 20,000 which is what it was under Labor before the change of  government?

SHORTEN: I won’t give a final number until I’ve consulted my colleagues but  that’s in the right direction.

UHLMANN: Now you’re touring Tasmania at the moment talking about jobs,  how can you help?

SHORTEN: Well first of all people don’t understand how knocked around parts  of Tasmania are. Youth unemployment in north-western Tasmania is nearly 20  per cent. That’s a lifetime of hopelessness and the Abbott Government really  don’t have a plan so I think for instance we have to make sure that we’re not  cutting back on university and TAFE funding. We visited the Cradle Coast  Campus of the University of Tasmanian and they’ve got a lot of people there who  are mature aged students. The increase in the HECS debt is discouraging people  from doing studies, it’s got existing students worried. There’s a lot of women  enrolled here, they worry about their ability to refinance university related debt.  How on earth can we help people get out of the cycle of unemployment if we  make the walls they’ve got to climb of education so costly, so high they can’t  even think about it.



UHLMANN: But isn’t a 20 per cent unemployment rate in Burnie a legacy of 16  years of state Labor rule?

SHORTEN: No, is a consequence of changing economy. I’m visiting Queenstown  today, the two mines there are closing, world metal prices are down and so the  cost of extracting the metal from underneath the ground is now been deemed to  be too expensive.  But in Queenstown to lose 350 jobs is massive. I mean, I will  say that the Queenstown footy club won the local footy competition here, that’s  a bit of good news but really it’s been some pretty bad news for Queenstown in  recent weeks and months. Again, this is unemployment; the Abbott Government  hasn’t got a plan for jobs in Australia or jobs in Tasmania. Tony Abbott famously  said recently well for hundreds of years people have been moving for jobs, so his  advice to Tasmania is leave Tasmania. I don’t know, that’s just not a recipe for  anything.

UHLMANN: Look, one final brief question, are you prepared to negotiate with  the Coalition over the future of the Renewable Energy Target?

SHORTEN: We believe renewable energy and the Renewable Energy Target  should be bipartisan, but we’re not prepared to go with silly options such as was  proposed in the Warburton report. It’s not a negotiation to either get rid of  renewable energy targets or to make renewable energy targets so low as that  they’re meaningless. We do believe in bipartisanship, I cannot believe this  Government’s got away with undermining billions of dollars of investment and  uncertainty over thousands of jobs, it’s just vandalism.

UHLMANN: Bill Shorten, we’ll have to leave it there, but thank you.

SHORTEN: Thank you.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: LEADER’S OFFICE MEDIA UNIT 02 6277 4053

