Minister for Immigration and Border Protection

Scott Morrison

Senate, Operation Sovereign Borders, Manus Island, Senate inquiry

Tuesday, 10 June 2014

Interview with Ray Hadley, 2GB Ray Hadley Program

Ray Hadley: Minister good morning.

Minister Morrison: G'day Ray.

Ray Hadley: Good luck dealing with the PUP party from July 1 you will need it.

Minister Morrison: Well look every member of parliament I think is going to be,  when they come in, on a steep learning curve, some more than others. But as  people get into their jobs I think they will be assessed on how they do their job. Now  it is up to the government and ministers and others to explain our legislation and the  relevance of that legislation and the consequences of why it is needed and that is  what we will be doing and we will be working with members right across the cross  bench and that is our job.

Ray Hadley: Maybe I have found a job for Senator Heffernan.

Minister Morrison: Bill is very well employed.

Ray Hadley: Well Bill is a very, very forthright and straight talking man. Maybe he  could spend some time with Ricky and Jacqui and Lazo explaining to them the inner  workings of the Senate.

Minister Morrison: Well look that's I think a sensible suggestion and I suspect many  Senators will do exactly that and you know when people get in there they will form  relationships and gravitate towards people they can trust I think and they will seek  guidance and that is not uncommon in the Parliament particularly for new Senators  and they will be on a steep learning curve there is no doubt about it.

Ray Hadley: Honestly you need to go to The Hague. I have never...

Minister Morrison: I have never been accused of being a diplomat.

Ray Hadley: I have never heard you so diplomatic. Have you actually seen the show  or have you been too busy?

Minister Morrison: Mate, I was watching the Voice that is what I was watching.

Ray Hadley: You were watching the Voice well I want you to go when you finish this  interview and have a look at what Mike Willesee did in 14 minutes and then another  12 minutes after that. And then you might not be as diplomatic as you currently are.

Minister Morrison: Well look I have had some tough interviews but we will just have  to work with everybody in the Senate Ray. But look that is just the bottom line and I  know people make their judgements about what they saw and they are free to do  that but my job doesn't change, and neither does the Prime Minister's or Joe  Hockey's. We have got to get legislation through the Senate and we are going to  apply ourselves to that.

Ray Hadley: You might have to talk slower.

Minister Morrison: Well we will get the job done mate. You know that.

Ray Hadley: Ok, now back to what we wanted to talk to you about. The number of  boat people returning home since the election last year is now past the number of  people coming. Now to explain this, a total of 1127 people from onshore and  offshore processing have gone back since September 18, that's compared to 1111  people who arrived, but of course they only arrived between September 18 and  December 19 because none have arrived since. So how many went home  voluntarily, how many did you have to remove against their will?

Minister Morrison: 177 people were returned involuntarily and the vast majority, the  balance, were returned voluntarily. What is interesting about these statistics Ray is  that the largest number of voluntary removals were of people who were onshore on  bridging visas in the community. Now there were 376 people who were in the  community who decided to go home since the 18th of September and under the  previous government where that policy had been in place for several years only 117  had done that. Now what I would say is a compelling contributor to this is that after  the 18th of September they weren't getting permanent visas anymore, they were  going to get a temporary protection visa and the rate of return more than doubled as  a result and that is why we need to have temporary protection visas in place. There  are some more than 27 000 people who are still onshore here who are in the  community on bridging visas or in community detention and it is important that  people know that they are not going to get what the people smugglers promised  them.

Ray Hadley: Ok, reports today about the circumstances leading up to the fatal riot  on Manus Island in February. A secret recording apparently of a security meeting  shows processing of arrivals was frozen prior to the violence. In January you said  processing had recommenced on Manus Island, was that not the case?

Minister Morrison: What this is about is a statement I made in mid-January. They  are talking about something that happened in late January and they are talking about  something that someone said someone else said and look the Cornall report has  gone through all of this. It is a very comprehensive report, it gets into what is the  horrible and gruesome and brutal details of what occurred over that event. What I  have noticed whether it is from Fairfax or the Greens or Labor or anyone else so  incensed are they that the Coalition's policies are working when they said for years

and years that they never would that they will get into this nit-picking over the next  few weeks. What I said at the time was my understanding of what was occurring at  the time. There is a difference between refugee status determinations which is a final  recommendation being handed down and the overall processing. We have had over  850 initial interviews conducted on Manus Island and they didn't just start in the last  month they have been going on from the time from before when I made those  comments which was what I was referring to.

Ray Hadley: Senate inquiry into the riot starts today with various people giving  evidence. Now we need to make sure everyone knows that Steve Kilburn is going to  give evidence. He is the one who presented himself as a whistle blower having  worked on Manus Island but he hasn't identified himself as we have as a former  Queensland Labor MP in the former state Labor Government in Queensland.

Minister Morrison: Yeah well look this is what we are going to see in the Senate.  We are going to see Sarah Hanson Young carrying on like she always does...

Ray Hadley: Well don't criticise her I will get another song out of it and a few good  quotes.

Minister Morrison: I'm sure the boys will put one together. But she will do that today  and she will grandstand over this but the theme of all of this will be one big dummy  spit over the fact that they said that we couldn't stop the boats. That is exactly what  we are doing and now they are in some sort of hysterical fit trying to basically make  hay over this terrible, terrible incident where the government has already undertaken  a very fulsome report and we acting on the recommendations. So that is what we are  going to do. We are going to get on with the job of running these, our end of these  facilities; we support the PNG Government in doing that. Sarah Hanson Young and  the Labor party can hook up all they like and carry on and belly ache because that is  what they do…

Ray Hadley: Hang on, hang on. Just before you, Sarah Hanson Young can hook up  and hook up with who?

Minister Morrison: With the Labor party.

Ray Hadley: Oh well now you have got to understand that I have used that  expression before and been investigated. Hook up circa Ray Hadley and then circa  Scott Morrison has a different connotation in 2014 than it used to.

Minister Morrison: You will have to educate me Ray.

Ray Hadley: Well a hook up.

Minister Morrison: No, not on air.

Ray Hadley: Oh well, I just wouldn't use that expression in relation to Sarah Hanson  Young in future. I know that it wouldn't be deliberate but...

Minister Morrison: It wasn't the meaning I was getting at.

Ray Hadley: No, I know. I mean 'joined forces with' would be a better expression.

Minister Morrison: They are not much of a force when they join but they do get  together on these things.

Ray Hadley: The sight of her hooking up with Chris Bowen is not something I want  to contemplate, I can tell you.

Minister Morrison: Well I was just not going there.

Ray Hadley: Alright, well before you go I know you love the Robertson Brothers, just  have a listen to this one.

{Song plays}

Scott would you like that for your ring tone?

Minister Morrison: Mate I think I am just going to maintain diplomatic silence.

Ray Hadley: I am disappointed. Ok thanks a lot we will talk to you next week.

Minister Morrison: Thanks a lot Ray.





