

THE HON RICHARD MARLES MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND  BORDER PROTECTION  MEMBER FOR CORIO



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  INTERVIEW  2CC BREAKFAST RADIO WITH MARK PARTON  WEDNESDAY, 5 FEBRUARY 2014

SUBJECT/ S: SPC Ardmona; Penalty rates; Boats.



MARK PARTON, 2CC BREAKFAST: Richard Marles, Federal Member for Corio,  joins  us  regularly  representing,  I  keep  on  going  to  say  the  Government  just   because they were there for so long, representing the Opposition and there are a  lot  of  things  we’ve  got  to  talk  about  this  morning.  Richard,  you  haven’t  been   coaching Sharman Stone have you Richard?

RICHARD MARLES, SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND  BORDER PROTECTION: No I can’t claim that, but I know Sharman, and she  seems to be making a lot of sense to me, I mean she is calling this Government  out for what it is and that is trying to blame working people for its own woes, at  the end of the day, they need to make a decision to support manufacturing in  this country and they’ve got to stop blaming workers because of the decisions  they’re making.  MARK PARTON: It’s an extraordinary attack though isn’t it? Malcolm Farr joined  us earlier and he was just looking into a crystal ball and he said can you imagine  if Sharman Stone became an independent, she’d have a seat for life.  RICHARD MARLES: Yes well who knows how that all plays out but look I think  Sharman Stone, I mean I know Sharman very well, she’s a dedicated Liberal, but  she’s  a  very  dedicated  local  MP  who  cares  about  her  community  and  she  has   been  a  strong  advocate  for  SPC  because  she  knows  what  those  jobs  mean  to   that region,  and I  really  understand that coming from  a regional  city  myself. I  know what big employers mean in terms of the jobs they provide and the good  jobs which puts money into the local economy. And she knew what it meant, and  she also knows what it means that the Federal Government is not standing up to  seeing SPC  continue and  to  support  those  jobs  so  I  understand  her  anger  and

she’s expressing it. And I think she’s making a good point and that is that the   Government  is  desperately  trying  to  blame  working  people  and  working   conditions  for  what  is  their  failure  to  make  a  conscious  choice  to  keeping   manufacturing in this country and really that in a sense is picking on the most  vulnerable.

MARK PARTON: I don’t disagree with Tony Abbott’s decision to knockback that  call  for  cash,  but  I  think  that  you’ve  got  to  understand,  everyone’s  got  to   understand  what’s  going  on  here,  it’s  not  just  about  SPC  Ardmona,  and  it’s  a   much bigger argument, it’s a much bigger story that’s going to be told over the  next 6-12 months, it’s pretty obvious that they’re opening the door to changing a  lot of things, and I know that there’s talk this morning of cutting penalty rates  and asking the Fair Work Commission to consider changes to the award system,  are WorkChoices dead, buried and burnt?

RICHARD MARLES: If it is, it’s reaching out of the grave. I think what we’re  seeing  now  with  the  Government  raising  the  prospect  of  reviewing  modern   awards and particularly seeing penalty rates on the table in terms of a condition

which is up for review, is first of all a breach of the promise that this party gave  to the Australian people prior to the election, but it ought to send a shiver down  the spine of every working Australian. I think we need to understand this, I think  there  is  a  difference  in  ideology  between  Labor  and  Liberal  when  it  comes  to   attitudes towards Governments’ role with having a manufacturing industry. Now  you  can  look  at countries  from  Japan  to Germany  even the  US, all  understand  the importance of manufacturing within their economy and public money is spent  in  ensuring  that  manufacturing  is  a  strong  part  of  those  economies.  This   Government, the Abbott Government, is very clearly making a statement that it’s  not going to do that, now from a very kind of fundamentalist economic point of  view  there  is  consistency  in  that,  but  what  it  means  is  we  are  going  to  lose   manufacturing in Australia, we are going to witness the largest haemorrhaging of  manufacturing that Australia has seen and that will be a conscious choice of this  Government  and  it  is  the  pursuit  of  economic  fundamentalism  in  making  that   choice and to then blame working conditions as the reason these companies are  leaving is utterly ridiculous.

MARK PARTON: Tony Abbott and Joe Hockey and Co. continue to cling to the  hope  that  somehow  the  conditions  that  they’re  setting  up  for  employers  as   opposed  to  workers  is  going  to  translate  to  business  becoming  easier  and  it’s   going to turn around for them.

RICHARD MARLES: Well that’s their hope, but because this is a furphy at the  outset,  let’s  be  clear,  we  live  now  in  a  deregulated  labour  market,  that  was   actually something that Labor put in place in the Keating years in the early ‘90s,  so conditions of employment are principally set by workers and their employers  at  the  workplace  level  that’s  where  these  conditions  are  established,  that’s

actually something which has been part of the conservative credo in this country  for a long time, but now we’ve actually got conservative Government out there  trying  to  talk  downturn  and  intervene  almost  as  a  3rd party  about  the  way  in   which people are to be employed. This is something which should be left up to  employers and employees in the workplace. That’s where thing stand in terms of  workplace  conditions  but  as  I’ve  said  earlier,  there  might  be,  from  a   fundamentalist point of view consistency, where there is not consistency from a  liberal  point  of  view,  is  in  relation  to  investment,  so  whilst  we’re  seeing  them   walk  down  the  path  of  taking  Government entirely  out  of  any  role  in  keeping   manufacturing  in  this  country,  they  are  very  into  measures  and  they  are  very   much about picking and choosing when it comes to foreign investment coming  into  this  country  so  there  is  no  prospect  of  seeing  some  other  areas  of  the   economy opening up and replacing these jobs and I think that’s a matter of deep  concern.

MARK PARTON: Richard, you’re the Shadow Immigration Minister, we’re what,  six weeks now without a single boat arrival, at what point will declare or agree,  that the boats have been stopped?

RICHARD MARLES: Well, firstly, boats not coming to Australia is a very good  thing,  let’s  be  clear  about  that.  We,  Labor  supports  that,  and  we  want  to  do   everything we can to see that occur and any idea out there which helps in that is  something that we will consider. But let’s also be clear, the reason the boats are  stopping  are  principally  because  of  the  arrangement  that  we  put  in  place  with   PNG. 90% of the flow of boats had already stopped at the time of the election.  At the time of the PNG arrangement came in to the time of the election - 90%  reduction.

MARK PARTON: So give me an actual, because I just can’t remember the exact  date, give me an actual month when that PNG agreement came into place.

RICHARD MARLES: 19th of July.

MARK PARTON: But what you’re talking about is what, five, six weeks?

RICHARD MARLES: At one level Mark, we’re talking about a matter of months,  so I think from now until when boats were out there at their peak. So I think it’s  very important that no-one, not Labor not Liberal, proclaim victory prematurely,  we’ve  just  all  got  to  do  everything  we  can  to  be  sure  about  the  reduction  in   boats. But the point I do make is if you do look at the graph of when boats do  start to decline, it’s not from the 7th of September, it’s from the 19th of July.

MARK  PARTON:  I  just  don’t  believe  that  Australians  are  going  to  judge  your   border protection policy on the last five weeks that you were in office when you  were there for six years.



RICHARD MARLES: Well, I mean Australians will make their own judgement,  but  the  facts  of  the  matter  are  there,  and  the  inconvenient  truth  for  this   Government is that 90% of the flow of boats had already stopped before they  were  sworn  in  as  the  Government  and  that’s  the  fact  of  the  matter  and  I  am

absolutely going to make that point. But in making that point, it’s also very clear  we want to see the boats stopped and so we’ve done everything we can to assist  in that and where we have a really big difference now is that both parties want  to  see  an  end  to  the  stopping  of  the  boats,  what  we  saw  when  Labor  was  in   office,  was  the  Liberals  doing  everything  they  could  to  undermine  every  effort   that  we  made  to  try  to  stop  the  boats,  as  we  saw  with  the  Malaysian   arrangement. That is a different situation now, we are here to do everything we  can  to  work  with  the  Government  in  stopping  the  boats  and  that’s  what  we’re   doing.

MARK PARTON: Richard, thanks for your time again, we appreciate it.

RICHARD MARLES: It’s a pleasure Mark, good to talk to you.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: SOPHIE ANDREW 0401 443 524

