

THE HON MARK DREYFUS QC MP  ACTING SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND  BORDER PROTECTION  SHADOW ATTORNEY-GENERAL

SHADOW MINISTER FOR THE ARTS  MEMBER FOR ISAACS



E&OE TRANSCRIPT   RADIO INTERVIEW   ABC NEWSRADIO INTERVIEW WITH MARIUS BENSON  THURSDAY, 9 JANUARY 2014

SUBJECT/S: Immigration; Relationship with Indonesia.

MARIUS BENSON: Mark Dreyfus, there is no official word from the Australian  government, but it does appear that tow backs have been attempted by the  Australian Naval authorities and that they have been successful. Is that your  impression?

MARK DREYFUS: Scott Morrison can’t continue to keep Australians in the dark.  I think Australians expect more from their government and what we need from  the Minister is for him to front up and explain what the government is doing,  otherwise Australians have been left guessing. They’re getting more information  from the Jakarta Post than from our own government.

BENSON: But the information from the Jakarta Post, and also from other  sources, from people who are actually on these asylum seekers boats, have  given accounts of being towed back. The tow backs took days, they were  executed successfully in terms of of the government’s mission and the people  were returned to Indonesian waters. Is that a success for the government?

DREYFUS: Well, we’ve got a Minister who is refusing to confirm or deny  anything, and the Minister, the Prime Minister, need to answer a whole lot of  questions. Did these events occur? How many asylum seekers were involved?  How many Australian Navy vessels were involved? What’s the cost of these  operations?

And most importantly, what attempts have been made to obtain Indonesian  cooperation, because yesterday we heard the from the Foreign Minister of  Indonesia, rejecting this policy based on intercepting boats on the high seas.  There’s a whole lot of questions that need to be answered here by the  government.

BENSON: You mentioned there that the Foreign Minister there has objected to  the turn backs, but the Indonesian Military Chief, General Meoldoko, has in fact  said that he believes they’re justified and that both countries had agreed to the  action. So there appears to be military support for the Australian turn backs.

DREYFUS: Well, again, as you’re saying there - there appears to be this, there  appears to be that. Our government can clarify all this. Australians expect to be  informed by their government. We shouldn’t be left to guess at what our  government is doing in our nations name. We shouldn’t be left to guess at what  the Navy is being asked to do. We shouldn't be left to guess at who’s giving the  orders here.

There’s a whole lot of questions that still need to be answered and until they are  Australians are just being left in the dark. It’s not acceptable.

BENSON: But on the evidence of the account given by the asylum seekers who  were actually on the boats that were turned back, the turn backs took five or six  days, they were executed safely and the result was that the people were landed  on Indonesian territory - the objective stated by the Abbott Government. In those  terms do you accept that it’s a success for the Abbott Government?

DREYFUS: We can’t accept anything here because we still need to know what  conditions have these events been carried out in.

I’d remind listeners that Angus Houston, when he did his report for the  government back in 2012, former head of the Defence Forces, carefully  explained that there’s a need for certain conditions to be satisfied before you can  intercept boats on the high seas.

We’re not being told by our government whether those conditions have been  satisfied. We’re not being told whether maritime law is being complied with,  whether our obligations under the Refugees Convention are being complied with.  And it’s simply not an acceptable state of affairs that our Navy is being  apparently sent out onto the high seas to engage with boats carrying people

seeking asylum. We don’t know anything about the circumstances in which these  events have occurred.

BENSON: On the evidence that is available, on the first-hand accounts of the  asylum seekers, do you believe Australia’s action does comply with international  law?

DREYFUS: I’m not going to speculate, Marius. I’m not going to speculate  because it’s for the government to explain the circumstances. It’s for the  government to reassure Australians that everything that’s been done does  comply with international law, that everything that’s been done complies with our  obligations under the Refugees Convention.

But to simply speculate on the basis of partial reports, based on statements  made by Indonesian authorities, or partial reports - which I point out the Minister  wishes to deny - based on statements made by asylum seekers, or partial reports  in the Jakarta Post.

That’s not an acceptable base to discuss Australian government actions.

BENSON: The Minister, Scott Morrison, has said repeatedly that this is like a  military action, secrecy is necessary, otherwise you assist the people smugglers.  Do you not accept that?

DREYFUS: Certainly we do not accept that. It doesn’t actually stack up that you  would want to conceal from people smugglers that their operations are no longer  being successful. Why would you want to do that in secrecy?

The only reason for the secrecy here is a cover up of what the Minister is doing,  a cover up of, indeed, of what seems to be real disruption to our relationship with  Indonesia. Because I’ve got to go on what Indonesian Ministers say, and what  the Indonesian Minister made very clear yesterday was that Indonesia rejects  this policy based on interception of boats on the high seas.

BENSON: Mark Dreyfus, thank you very much.

DREYFUS: Thanks Marius.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: ANNIE WILLIAMS 0428 040 522



