TRANSCRIPT

1





MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS

The Hon Julie Bishop MP  6 September 2015



WEEKEND SUNRISE, PERTH

INTERVIEW WITH ANDREW O’KEEFE AND MONIQUE WRIGHT



JOURNALIST:     Foreign Minister Julie Bishop joins us now to discuss. Thank you  very much Minister for being with us this morning.

JULIE BISHOP:   My pleasure.

JOURNALIST:     This intake of an extra 4,400 refugees we are saying that’s our fair  share. Given the numbers we are talking about is that right?

JULIE BISHOP:   In fact, the Prime Minister and I had a very long discussion about  this yesterday. We recognise that this is an international crisis. It's beyond the capacity  of any one country or indeed any one region to resolve it.  So we are reaching out to  our partners and friends and allies in Europe, Middle East, including United States, to  see how we can be part of a coordinated international solution. There are obviously a  number of responses that could be undertaken - more resources to the refugee camps  that already exist in Lebanon and Jordan and Turkey; other countries increasing their  refugee intake, their humanitarian intake, not just in Europe, but also in the Middle  East, the Persian Gulf and beyond; and of course other countries, looking at what  further aid we can provide.

So we are talking to our partners and allies. I have been in touch with some overnight.  We will do our fair share. There are a number of options that people could look at,  including the establishment of safe havens within Syria and Iraq, safe havens along  the border. I was in Lebanon and Jordan last year, of course many people do not want  to leave Syria, they want to stay there - it's their home. So if there were a temporary  safe haven somewhere they would consider that.

I went to UNHCR resettlement registration places and spoke to people, a number said  if they were able to return when the conflict was over, that would be their choice. So I  think that there are a lot of options and a number of different responses we should  consider, but it is an international crisis and Australia will play its part.

TRANSCRIPT

2



JOURNALIST:     Minister up until this point, at least publicly, you mentioned that you  had long discussions with the Prime Minister yesterday. Up until this point his primary  response has been to lord Australia's efforts to stop the boats. How do you respond to  the New South Wales Premier Mike Baird's comments on his Facebook page that  stopping the boats can't be where this ends, it is surely where humanitarianism  begins? And he is challenging the Federal Government to do more, to take more  people.

JULIE BISHOP:   The point the Prime Minister is making in that now we have stopped  the boats we have more flexibility within our humanitarian program. We take 13,750  each year, we want to increase that to 18,750 over time. That would be the highest  intake under our humanitarian program in 30 years.

We did, within that 13,750 have places - 4,400 places - for people from Syria and Iraq  that was just in the last financial year. We are obviously considering that. We welcome  Mike Baird's comments about this, he’s making a very positive contribution, he’s  suggesting that the NSW government will be able to help. Indeed, a number of  members of parliament in the Coalition have suggested that we could increase the  intake and of course they may well have resources available that we could draw upon.  So the Prime Minister and I have been discussing this, as the Minister for Immigration  has been discussing it with me and the Prime Minister over the last few days to see  how we can help in an international response. And the point about stopping the boats  means that we now have the flexibility to provide places to those most in need,  whereas in the past under Labor they provided all of those humanitarian places or  most of the places by those who had arrived via the people smuggling trade. We have  stopped that trade, we can use the humanitarian program as it was meant to be used,  to provide support for people coming out of the camps.

JOURNALIST:     I think that's quite a generous reading of what the Prime Minister  was saying there ‘cause he was saying that the European Union leaders are looking to  Australia saying we should stop the boats too. And you know, stopping the boats in  this situation certainly means that people just die in Syria rather than on beaches in  Italy and Greece.

JULIE BISHOP:   The fact is when I was in Europe this year, there were many  European Union parliamentarians asking what Australia had done. These are things  that Europe could have done a long time did ago, and didn't. And now we are in a  situation where there are millions of people displaced because of the conflict in the  Middle East.

This is another point. We are doing our fair share to defeat the terrorist organisations  that are driving people out of Iraq and Syria in the first place. These people are  displaced from their homes because of the conflict, and that's caused by this terrorist  organisation Da’esh. So we are doing our part in Iraq, in trying to defeat the terrorist  organisations, by attacking their military bases, their supply lines. We were asked to  do the same in relation to Syria and that is a matter under consideration at present.

JOURNALIST:     So you have raised a number of issues there. Number one our  humanitarian intake. Number two, how we support aid on the ground in the Middle  East, which is after all the main reason why people are fleeing to countries  surrounding Syria. But the third point that you raise is our military presence in Syria.

TRANSCRIPT

3



Now of course this week former defence force chief Peter Gration described a  proposed operation to scale up our actions in Syria as strategically dumb, to increase  the number of casualties and refugees. So what evidence is there that air strikes on  Islamic State targets within Syria won't worsen this humanitarian crisis?

JULIE BISHOP:   See well that overlooks the fact that air strikes are targeted at the  military bases and supply lines for the terrorist organisations. There is zero tolerance  when it comes to air strikes that would affect civilians; so the whole idea of air strikes  is to take out the military capacity of ISIL or Da’esh to continue to carry out its brutal  and violent activities in Syria and Iraq. So it does make strategic sense. Indeed there  is logic in relation to air strikes in Iraq and Syria, because the terrorist organisation  considers it to be one theatre of conflict, with no respect for the boundary of Syria and  Iraq and they are crossing that boundary each day and carrying out their activities  against the Iraqi people against Syrian people. If we are able to prevent the terrorist  organisation carrying out its brutal activities there is some chance of returning Syria  and Iraq to stability and peace.

JOURNALIST:     A lot more to come on that. Just before we let you go Minister we  want to get your response on the News Corp report overnight which is talking about  the Treasurer Joe Hockey and possibly removing him. Now, the Prime Minister has  said not one person has raised that. News Corp is claiming that you had a discussion  with the Prime Minister just before Christmas where you discussed that very issue.  What's your response to that report?

JULIE BISHOP:   I think this is an old story that was put out some time ago, so it's just  rehashing an old story. I think it was a Fairfax story, indeed. I don't comment on that  kind of gossip. And the Treasurer has a very tough job dealing with the debt and deficit  that we inherited from Labor and is doing a very good job in tough circumstances.

JOURNALIST:     Julie Bishop, always very good to talk to you. Thank you very much  for your time.

JULIE BISHOP:   My pleasure.





- Ends -





Foreign Minister’s Office:  Rachel Obradovic 0478 488 874  Gabrielle Young 0408 275 340

