





THE HON DAVID FEENEY MP

ACTING SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER  PROTECTION  MEMBER FOR BATMAN

TURNBULL MUST ACT ON CANCELLED UN VISIT

Today’s decision by the United Nations to cancel an official visit to Australia warrants immediate  intervention by Malcolm Turnbull.

The UN Special Rapporteur on human rights of migrants, Mr Francois Crepeau was due to visit  from tomorrow to review Australia’s refugee processing network but has abandoned his trip citing a  ‘lack of full co-operation from the Government regarding protection concerns and access to  detention centres’ according to an official statement released today.

This is a sad indictment on the way Australia views its international obligations and treatment of  asylum seekers.

Malcolm Turnbull must immediately provide an assurance to the UN that Australia stands ready to  co-operate with the UN visit and facilitates access.

Mr Turnbull needs to also provide an official assurance that staff operating within Australian-funded  facilities are free to provide information to the Special Rapporteur.

Fair-minded Australians would be rightly fed up with the continuing disdain the Liberal Government  has shown in providing transparency around the treatment of refugee and asylum seekers.

Mr Turnbull must immediately advise the UN that Australia is willing to co-operate with this visit.

Labor believes in a compassionate approach to asylum seekers, that means running Australian  funded offshore detention facilities in a safe, humane and decent manner.

Labor supports the establishment of independent oversight of facilities, and creating an  independent statutory advocate to protect the interests in children seeking asylum.

We will also legislate mandatory reporting of any instances of abuse of children in immigration  detention.

Labor has sought independent advice on the effect provisions in the Australian Border Force Act  regarding the disclosure of information by staff and contractors such as medical professionals. This

advice confirmed that there are no provisions preventing an employee or contractor from making a  public interest disclosure in accordance with the Public Interest Disclosures Act 2013, which  provides protection for whistle blowers.

Again, the Liberal Government’s refusal to provide this assurance publicly has unnecessarily  created concerns around this issue.

SATURDAY, 26 SEPTEMBER 2015

MEDIA CONTACT: LIDIJA IVANOVSKI 0427 051 563

