

Hon. J.B. HOCKEY MP  Treasurer  Hon. PETER DUTTON MP  Minister for Immigration and Border Protection

Friday, 20 March 2015

Productivity Commission inquiry into the use of charges to determine the intake  of migrants

The Treasurer, Joe Hockey, and the Minister for Immigration and Border Protection,  Peter Dutton, today announced that the Productivity Commission will commence an  inquiry into the impact of charges relative to quotas and qualitative criteria to determine  Australia’s migration programme settings.

Treasurer Joe Hockey released the Terms of Reference for the review today.

Mr Hockey said that this review would look at potential future options for determining the  settings of the temporary and permanent migration programmes to improve the  Australian economy and standard of living.

Mr Dutton said the migration programme is currently regulated through a mix of  qualitative requirements - such as skills, family connections, refugee-status, health,  character and security - as well as quotas and imposts.

Mr Dutton made clear that this is an independent inquiry, not government policy.

The Government is keen to see the Productivity Commission analyse these issues  thoroughly, however there are no plans to make significant changes to the migration  programme.

The Productivity Commission is due to report within 12 months.  Public consultation will be undertaken as part of the inquiry, with information available at  www.pc.gov.au.

The Terms of Reference for the inquiry are attached.  [ENDS]

MEDIA CONTACTS:         Mike Willesee: 0408 383 07  John Wiseman: 0417 498 570





Productivity Commission Inquiry into the   Use of Charges to Determine the Intake of Migrants

Terms of Reference

I, Joseph Benedict Hockey, Treasurer, pursuant to Parts 2 and 3 of the Productivity Commission  Act 1998, hereby request that the Productivity Commission undertake an inquiry into the greater  use of charges relative to quotas and qualitative criteria to determine the intake of temporary and  permanent entrants into Australia.

Background

The intake of temporary and permanent entrants is currently regulated through a mix of  qualitative requirements (e.g. skills, family connections, refugee-status, health, character and  security), quotas (e.g. the size of the Migration and Humanitarian Programmes, and of  components within these Programmes) and imposts (including the cost of investing under the  Significant Investor Visa).

The Australian Government's objectives in commissioning this inquiry are to examine and  identify future options for the intake of temporary and permanent entrants that improve the  income, wealth and living standards of Australian citizens, improve the budgets and balance  sheets of Australian governments, minimise administration and compliance costs associated with  immigration, and provide pathways both for Australian citizens to be altruistic towards  foreigners including refugees, and for Australia’s international responsibilities and obligations to  foreign residents to be met.

Scope of the inquiry

In undertaking this inquiry, the Productivity Commission should use evidence from Australia  and overseas to report on and make recommendations about the following:

1. The benefits and costs that the intake of permanent entrants can generate with respect to:

(a) the budgets and balance sheets of Australian governments, including from:

(i) entry charges;

(ii) government services used (including public health, education, housing, social and  employment services) now and in the future;

(iii) taxes paid now and in the future;

(iv) the dilution of existing, government-held assets and liabilities across a larger  population; and

(b) the income, wealth and living standards of Australian citizens, including with respect to:

(i) impacts on the salaries and employment of Australian citizens, knowledge and skill  transfer, productivity, foreign investment, and linkages to global value chains;

(ii) cultural, social and demographic impacts; and

(iii) agglomeration, environmental, amenity and congestion effects.





2. An examination of the scope to use alternative methods for determining intakes - including  through payment - and the effects these would have. This should include examination of a  specific scenario in which entry charges for migrants are the primary basis for selection of  migrants, such that:

(a) there would be no requirements relating to skills and family connections;

(b) qualitative requirements relating to health, character and security would remain;

(c) all entrants would have the right to work;

(d) entrants would have limited access to social security or subsidised education, housing or  healthcare; and

(e) the charge could be waived for genuine confirmed refugees, whose entry would remain  subject to current constraints.

The scenario should examine the way in which the above charges could be set, and what they  might be, to maintain the current levels of the migrant intake or to maximise the benefits for  Australian citizens.  The scenario should also examine the impacts of such charges - based  on assessment of the factors listed in (1) above and also taking account of:

(f) opportunities for Australian citizens to be altruistic towards foreigners including  refugees;

(g) the administration and compliance costs associated with immigration, including costs  associated with criminal behaviour and the use of migration agents; and

(h) interactions with citizenship criteria and existing and potential bilateral agreements.

3. The benefits and costs of temporary migration with an examination of the use of charges as  the primary basis for regulating the level and composition of this migration, having regard to:

(a) complementarity with the Australian workforce; and

(b) achieving flexibility in responding to structural and cyclical adjustments in the  Australian economy.

4. Mechanisms for achieving an optimal interaction between temporary and permanent  migration noting that temporary migration is an established pathway to permanent migration.

Process

The Commission is to undertake an appropriate public consultation process including holding  hearings and roundtables (where appropriate), and releasing a draft report to the public.

The final report should be provided within 12 months of receipt of these terms of reference.







J. B. HOCKEY  Treasurer

