

THE HON RICHARD MARLES MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER  PROTECTION   MEMBER FOR CORIO



E&EO TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW  ABC RN BREAKFAST  THURSDAY, 23 JULY 2015

SUBJECT/S: Asylum seeker boat turn backs

FRAN KELLY:  Richard Marles welcome to breakfast.

RICHARD MARLES:  Good morning Fran, how are you?

KELLY: I’m well thank you. Now how do you and Bill Shorten sell this to voters  as anything other than a total surrender on border protection?

MARLES: Well this is, we saw over the time of the former Labor Government  1,200 people lose their lives at sea. We saw a situation where people smugglers,  not Oscar Schindlers, but criminal syndicates making huge profits, preying upon  some of the world’s most vulnerable people with the result that hundreds and  ultimately more than a thousand people died at sea. There is simply no way that  a future Labor Government can re-open this journey. I mean in my view it would  be profoundly immoral to see that happen again and I think knowing what we  now know were we to be a party to that in the future we would be rightly  condemned.

KELLY: In the past you have condemned this policy as a three word slogan, one  of Tony Abbott’s three word slogans and Labor’s criticised turn backs as unsafe,  they’ve criticised it for damaging the relationship with Indonesia, are all those  things not true?

MARLES: No, we’ve had concerns about this policy and we’ve raised those  concerns and to be frank the Government have been, have refused to answer  our concerns about that and in many respects they still haven’t.

KELLY: But you’re adopting the policy now?

MARLES: If I can finish Fran. The facts are these: we know what played out  when we were last in government, we know that people smugglers now are  largely out of business, we know that turn backs have had an impact and that is  something which I have consistently said now for a long time. And we also know  that since 2013  with the way in which turn backs have been conducted no one  has lost their life at sea, and no one has lost their life in the course of a turn back  operation. Now they are compelling facts and whilst we don’t have all the  answers, and we should have all the answers, the fact that is being conducted by  the Government under a veil of secrecy is a disgrace.

KELLY: So would that not be your policy?

MARLES: We would be absolutely be conducting all our operations with  transparency I can assure you of that, and we would be doing so in way which  absolutely met our international obligations at every step along the way. But I  think given what we do know, it is now important to say that to rule this out as an  option for us in the future would be in my view a big mistake and it is very  important that Labor is not a party to seeing the reopening of this journey, it is  really important that we do not see a loss of life at sea again and that we do not  put people smugglers back into business. And on that basis we simply cannot  move forward on terms where we rule this out. We must retain this in my view as  an option for a future Labor Government.

KELLY: This will be divisive within your party, you’ve acknowledged that, Bill  Shorten acknowledged that, your former Parliamentary colleague Steve Gibbons  tweeted last night this policy is being quote ‘driven by those gutless Western  suburbs MPs who let rednecks determine Labor policy’.  How much of this is also  being driven by pure electoral fear? Depriving Tony Abbott of his most potent  three world slogan is how you’ve described this in the past.

MARLES: I think this has been a, this is a complex issue, but it’s been a terrible  debate that our country has gone through in my view since 2001. There is so  much baggage that is carried into this and what began as a terrible debate, again  in my view was that back in 2001, John Howard really in the way he handled the  Tampa appealed to the very darkest angels of our humanity and he did so in my  view for political gain.  But I think what we now need to be doing as a party and  for that matter, we need to be doing as a country is trying to not be distracted by  all the noise. We actually need to make sure that we are analysing this not from  the point of view of politics and this is not about politics. We just need to be doing  our best to apply values which make sense to us as a Labor Party and as a

country, I think values like compassion and fairness and generosity and applying  them with sincerity to what is a complicated issue and if we can get it right I think  the politics will follow.

KELLY: But one man’s values does not necessarily match another man’s values.  You’re saying this will improve the debate, doesn’t it just take the point of debate  off the table, what does it do, how does it allay the concerns of all those people  who have heartfelt concerns for the people who are travelling here by boat, what  does it do, it might stop those boats coming, but what does it do for the people  who have suffered persecution, who are genuine refugees who are stuck in  Indonesia and can’t move?

MARLES: One person’s values are not the same as another’s but that is why I  articulated values in the answer I just gave before and I think that values of  compassion, fairness and generosity are values which would resonate with  members of the Labor Party and we need to be applying them to this issue and  we need to be just trying get the issue right and the politics will follow. Now there  is nothing compassionate about having a situation where more than 1,000 people  died at a rate of more than one a day on our border.

KELLY: That is absolutely true.

MARLES: There is nothing compassionate about putting people smugglers back  into business so that they can prey upon the very people that you described in  Indonesia.

KELLY: I understand that Richard Marles and I’m not trying to say there is, but  it’s also, we’ve got to be clear here, it’s not just a one or the other because what  is compassionate about leaving people, who have fled persecution, who are  essentially homeless, with little rights, as stuck somewhere? Where’s the  compassion in this policy?

MARLES:  But, in a sense your question goes to the very point here. We live in a  world today where there are about 100,000 humanitarian places on offer by  resettlement countries, which the UNHCR estimates meets about 1 per cent of  global demand.  That implies something like 10 million people out there today  seeking permanent resettlement.  No one, no resettlement country, and indeed  no one in Australia, not even the Greens, are putting forward policies which can  answer the question to the totality of that sum of human misery.  All we can do at  the end of the day is make sure we have a generous offering, and we will be  doing that.  I mean a generous offering by global standards, a generous offering  by Australian historic standards, and doing so in a way which reduces the sum of  global human misery.  Now I think that is a mission statement for us, and that is  not about politics.  But can we honestly say that we are doing that when 1,200  people die on our border? I don’t think we can and I think if we actually want to  play a bigger role in world, if we want to see more refugees come here, and if we

want to see them do that in a way which is safe, we cannot be doing that with this  journey open.  Because what this journey ultimately does is completely the  reverse - less refugees come here and more asylum seekers die, and there is  nothing compassionate about that.

KELLY:  Richard Marles, thank you very much for joining us.

MARLES:  Thanks Fran.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: LIDIJA IVANOVSKI - 0427 051 563

