

THE HON RICHARD MARLES MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER  PROTECTION   MEMBER FOR CORIO



E&EO TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  ABC 24, CAPITAL HILL  WEDNESDAY, 17 JUNE 2015

SUBJECT/S: Citizenship; Asylum seeker policy; Allegations of payments to  people smugglers

GREG JENNETT: Richard Marles is Labor's Immigration spokesman and he is with us  now. Richard, if all this passes, it may fall to you as a future Immigration Minister to be  responsible for stripping citizenship away from dual nationals who are terrorists. Are you  comfortable with doing that only on the advice of the security establishment?

RICHARD MARLES, SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER  PROTECTION: Well, I think if that's all that was there, there would be real concerns  about that, as a proposition. We actually do need to see the legislation from the  Government, so we can properly comment on this, but I think the starting point is really  the advice is that was provided by Bret Walker who is the former National Security  Legislation Monitor, who wrote the report upon which these reforms are meant to be  based. He made the point that he was only imagining people's citizenship being stripped  where there had been a conviction, so he implies a full judicial process.

JENNETT: Is that the standard that you are seeking to apply?

MARLES: Well, that's what makes sense to me, and that was the - the report upon to  which these reforms are meant to be based. We now need to see what the Government  is going to come forward with. I think these are really important questions, but what  we've got at the moment is a Government which is completely divided on this issue.  There is total chaos, and I think a situation where legal advice which questions the very  constitutionality of this proposed legislation not being provided to the Cabinet, is  unbelievable.



JENNETT: Well, you've been before. involved in these processes before. What's  important for them to see, the legal advice behind it or the bill that they are going to  bring to the Parliament? Do they have to see both?

MARLES: Both, obviously they have to see both. Cabinet is the supreme decision-making body in executive government. The Australian people need to have confidence  that they have a government which is running a proper Cabinet process. I mean, the  fact of the matter Greg, is at the end of the day this Government, when it comes to  national security, is totally hopeless. I mean, they really are. They mistake chest-beating  and rhetoric for actually doing things in the nation's interest, and keeping our people  safe. What we need to see is a calm, methodical, thorough decision-making process  because that's the way in which we do national security best. This Government is  presenting us with a dog's breakfast.

JENNETT: Just wrapping up on citizenship, we did hear the remarks of Mark Dreyfus.  Is Labor now trying to walk back from the initial expression of in-principled support  around this. Is it a live option that Labor might go outright opposition to the citizenship-stripping proposal?

MARLES: We've been very clear and very consistent, including the comments that  Mark Dreyfus just made, and he made them in those comments then, it is contained  within our law right now. You take up arms against Australia, you lose your citizenship.  That is about a state-on-state conflict, the idea of updating that to take into account a  phenomenon such as ISIS is something that we support. We need to make sure that  when that happens, we are not rendering people stateless. Now, we have been  articulating that from the very outset, what we now need to see is the legislation so that  we can properly get into the detail, and the really important questions that you ask about  the role of ministers versus the role of the judiciary, making sure that there are proper  oversight in all of that and we get a proper balance in relation to that.

JENNETT: Let's turn to boats now, there are reports in the West Australian newspaper  that Labor is preparing to harden its stance on asylum seekers, are you, and if so, what  are you looking at?

MARLES: Well, our position again in relation to turn backs is well-known, and I actually  think that the events of the last week illustrate our concerns quite dramatically. Firstly,  we think that it is critical, if we are going to have an enduring resolution to the issue of  vessels coming from Java to Christmas Island that we have a constructive working  relationship with Indonesia on this issue. Now, we heard a pretty extraordinary outburst  from our Foreign Minister on Monday. I think what that highlighted is exactly the need  for that co-operative relationship, and we're clearly seeing that the events of the last  week have eroded that co-operation.



The relation question we've asked in relation to turn backs, therefore, is how do you in  maintain a policy of turn backs in a context where that is clearly having an impact on our  relationship with Indonesia.

JENNETT: Okay, that’s the question, what’s the answer?

MARLES: Well, we need to hear the Government answer that question. Right now,  we’ve raised that as a concern and it is a very obvious one, we've heard nothing from  the Government on that and we need to hear that.



JENNETT: Okay you can ask that question internally and you can go to an ALP national  conference in a few weeks and put the question to them. Ultimately as a matter of  policy, Labor will have to have a position on whether you can reconcile this relationship  that you say is important with the action that is going on, on the seas, maybe even  today. So which way do you land?

MARLES: Well, we are not in the driver's seat at the moment, I don't have access to all  the cables that exist - which detail our relationship and the conversations that have  been had between Australia and Indonesia.

JENNETT: What's your gut, though?

MARLES: Well we're not about to walk down a path of giving a gut reaction to a matter  of such significance. It comes back to my point before, national security is best done  with a thorough and a methodical decision-making process. We've raised what appear  to us to be very legitimate concerns and questions around the policy of turn backs and  we are not hearing an answer and the events of last week illustrate it. But Greg, I want  to make another point, the second point is this has all been down around a shroud of  secrecy. Now, we’ve been saying that for a long time, the fact that we have a question  outstanding from last week about whether or not this Government paid people  smugglers to turn boats around and we are still waiting for the question to be answered.

JENNETT: But that's not a question that you've pursued since moving the censure and  the appearance of past practices under the Labor Government where agents may have  been out there doing this sort of thing, not necessarily at sea, possibly on land, so did  you make a mistake in going as far as a censure?

MARLES: This is a question where we are absolutely pursuing, we need to know the  answer to whether or not the Government paid people smugglers to turn boats around,  and let me make it completely clear, Labor never did that in Government. Now, to pick  up the point that you've raised there, we've seen the Government desperately try to  muddy this area all up by throwing ASIS under a bus, to try to distract people from an  incompetent Minister. It’s a disgrace that they have put ASIS into the frame here. It  makes questions very difficult to answer, but let me put it this way: Police agencies and  intelligence agencies around the world would pay informants to infiltrate, to provide  information, to disrupt criminal syndicates. That is very, very different to paying those

criminal syndicates to go out and do something, to providing those criminal syndicates  with a new business opportunity.

JENNETT: But are we sure that never happen during the Labor years?

MARLES: Absolutely in terms of the latter and we never paid people smugglers to turn  boats around and the point is, that is the equivalent of paying murderers not to murder,  paying drug dealers no to go out there and make ice. I mean, If that allegation is true, it  is a disgrace, and that allegation was denied immediately, that is the allegation that is  out there. It was denied immediately by the Immigration Minister and the Foreign  Minister as you would expect, but the Prime Minister on Friday invited the entire  Australian public to believe that that's exactly what did occur, and that's now the idea  which is lingering out there.



JENNETT: So will we will see you go back into Parliament and pursue these questions  again?

MARLES: Let's not get hung up on the question of parliamentary tactics and Question  Time tactics. I know that a lot has been made of that in the last 24 hours.

JENNETT: But you were advancing at one point and we haven't heard very much  since?

MARLES: Well, not true, I did TV and radio interviews on this yesterday. I actually  asked the Immigration Minister last night in the House on this, we raised it in Senate  Question Time, so the idea we've dropped off on this is just not right, but rather than  getting into debates about parliamentary tactics, we actually need to hear from our  Prime Minister that this ain't so, that this did not happen. If it did, it is a disgrace. If it  didn't, he has got to send the message out there to people smugglers that there is not a  new business opportunity here that they can take advantage of.

JENNETT: Alright, Richard Marles, thanks for that.

MARLES: Thanks, Greg.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: LIDIJA IVANOVSKI 0427 051 563

