

THE HON AMANDA RISHWORTH MP  SHADOW ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR EDUCATION  SHADOW ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR HIGHER EDUCATION  FEDERAL MEMBER FOR KINGSTON



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  SKY NEWS, AM AGENDA  WEDNESDAY, 21 JANUARY 2015

SUBJECT/S: Pyne’s double backflip on higher education; Manus Island crisis

KIERAN GILBERT: This is AM Agenda. With me now Labor frontbencher Amanda  Rishworth and also the Parliamentary Secretary for Communications Paul Fletcher,  good morning to you both. Amanda first to you on this report in The Australian  newspaper suggesting the Government is willing to compromise further on the issue of  higher education reform and not go ahead with those 20 per cent in cuts in terms of  university funding. That would make their proposals on higher education more palatable  wouldn’t it?

AMANDA RISHWORTH, SHADOW ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR EDUCATION AND  SHADOW ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR HIGHER EDUCATION: What the proposals  still do is leave the door open for $100,000 degrees for students attending university,  because what the proposal still does is allow universities to choose to charge what they  want. And what we do know is that Joe Hockey has said he will make savings from  higher education. So what is likely to happen if these changes were to get through,  there would be cuts to higher education in terms of funding down the line. Labor stands  opposed to allowing universities to charge what they want because we believe that  young people should get the opportunity to go to university.

GILBERT: Paul Fletcher, Dio Wang of the Palmer Party, while Amanda Rishworth  obviously is not budging and Labor not budging despite this apparent compromise from  the Government, the Palmer Party looks like it might. Dio Wang, the Palmer Senator  says that this story, that this proposal would make that Bill more attractive.

FLETCHER: Well Kieran the key point is the higher education sector is absolutely vital  to Australia’s productivity and competitiveness and to future opportunities for  Australians. Under our package some 80,000 additional Australians by 2018 will be in a  position to have Commonwealth Assistance for their places. Now Labor knows that the  present system is unsustainable. The higher education sector, Universities Australia  and across the sector supports the package that Minister Pyne has been taking forward.  Now what Minister Pyne has signalled very clearly is a willingness to negotiate. In the  amended version of the Bill that he reintroduced in December he took a count of a

number of measures that had been suggested by crossbench senators, for example the  notion of a five year pause in the indexation of HECS for primary carers. So there has  been a very clear signal at every stage that the Government and Minister Pyne in  particular are willing to engage constructively with senators. But this is a vital package;  this is vital package to provide additional funding into the university sector which is so  important to our competitiveness as a nation. If you look at great Australian companies  like Cochlear for example, that company is based upon revenue of $900 million a year,  a world leader in hearing implants, based upon technology developed upon research  from Melbourne University in the 60’s. So the university system is critical to our  prosperity, we must have it sustainable and growing.

GILBERT: Amanda, in terms of the Labor criticism here, Labor’s saying that universities  are going to introduce $100,000 fees. But if this compromise does go ahead and the  Government doesn’t reduce university funding by 20 percent, doesn’t the Labor scare  campaign look a bit farfetched as if universities would be pursuing those enormous fee  rises if their current funding arrangements stay in place.



RISHWORTH: Under Christopher Pyne’s proposal the only cap on university fees for  domestic students is that of international students. And we have seen the fee levels of  international students go into significant amounts including up to $100,000. Indeed the  University of Western Australia has announced their fee schedule; if you want to

become a lawyer then it’s approximately going to cost you $95,000 and if you want to  be a doctor it’s over $100,000. We’re not talking a scare campaign, we’re talking reality.  What we know is that universities, those that have the market power will put their fees  up as much as they can and that will price many students out of the market. Now it’s not  going to price all students out of the market,  but it’s going to price some of our best and  brightest and actually discourage them from getting a university degree. So if we want  to have a sector with our human capacity that is able to do the job then we need to  ensure that our best and brightest get into university.

GILBERT: Paul Fletcher is this important for the Government to get some momentum,  some political momentum to start this year given there have been a few difficulties  elsewhere, certainly on health policy?

FLETCHER: Kieran, it’s important for Australia that we have a vibrant, successful,  growing university system. I just want to make the point that the higher education  contribution system, HECS, will remain. And that will mean that people are not paying  up front and of course there is no requirement to repay until you are earning a decent

wage of around $50,000 a year. But I also want to make the point; Amanda keeps  coming back to this scare campaign. Let’s look at what Maxine Mckew, former Labor  Parliamentary Secretary has had to say over the last couple of days. She’s effectively  made the point that Labor needs to engage constructively with the Government on the  future of this vital sector and at the moment we’ve had Labor refusing to engage  constructively.

GILBERT: Let’s move on. I want to ask you both about the Manus Island situation. Paul  Fletcher, Fairfax says 20 asylum-seekers were found with weapons and petrol after  raids at that facility according to a well-placed source. This remains a volatile situation  there on Manus Island. Are we heading to another situation like the incident that saw  Reza Berati lose his life?

FLETCHER: As Immigration Minister Dutton has said first of all he’s congratulated both  the Papua New Guinea Government and the contractors involved in running the facility,  Transfield, in terms of the way it’s being managed and the way that security and order  has been restored. He’s made the very strong point that people in that facility are not  going to be able to come to Australia and no attempt to contest the rules that apply to  the operation of that facility are going to change that. He’s also made the point that the  disobedience and the disorder that we’ve seen there has been a factor which has  compromised the availability of food and water to some within the facility, which was an  important reason for action being taken. He has further made the point, and this is a  very important point, that we have understood the lessons from the incident last year,  and that is obviously important in terms of learning from that for the future.

GILBERT: Amanda Rishworth, is the problem here a jurisdictional issue? Australia  doesn’t have sovereignty over this centre; it’s on PNG land. It’s a structural flaw in the  process that was established under the Rudd Government. Did Rudd rush this through  and therefore leave a situation where while the Government might want to deal with this  more effectively, they can’t because it’s on PNG soil?

RISHWORTH: Not at all, and I have to say quite frankly what we’ve seen from the  Minister is no details whatsoever. We are concerned about the heightened tensions in  the Manus Island detention centre, which is an Australian run centre, and yet we haven’t  seen anything from the Minister at all. Indeed he has not been transparent, he has not  been open with the Australian people and quite frankly we don’t know if he’s even been  in contact in any great depth with his PNG counterpart. So quite frankly the Minister  really needs to be more open with the Australian people. He can ensure the safety on  Manus Island at the same time as being transparent with the Australian people -

GILBERT: But how can he ensure it. While it’s an Australian run centre, it’s the PNG  authorities who have the end say, it’s on Manus Island. This was Labor’s approach that  created this situation.

RISHWORTH: We haven’t anything from the Minister about how he’s cooperating with  PNG authorities, how often he’s talking with PNG authorities and how they’re working

together. There’s been no detail about the operation whatsoever, and so we’ve heard  nothing and the Australian people are not able to have the full facts in front of them.  Instead we’re relying on unnamed sources in media reports. I mean the Minister needs  to give the Australian people a lot more, be transparent, not keep ducking and weaving  and ensure that he is doing everything he can and that the Government is committed to  reducing tensions so we don’t see a horrific tragedy like we saw almost 12 months ago.

GILBERT: Paul Fletcher, the Government keeps saying that the asylum-seekers, or  refugees when they’re found to be refugees as many of them have been, that they won’t  be resettled here. The issue is though that they now want, according to the advocates,  to be integrated into the UN system. They don’t want necessarily to come here now;  they just don’t want to end up in PNG. That’s the problem here; they want to be handled  by the UN. So the protests are going to continue.

FLETCHER: Let me just make the point firstly the Minister was speaking in the media  yesterday about these issues, and so the suggestion that he’s not been open and  transparent I think doesn’t square with the facts. But the second point I want to make is  it’s obviously important that order and safety in that facility be maintained. We obviously  want to ensure that those in that facility have personal safety and security, have proper  access to food and water, proper access to medical treatment and so on. That’s one of  the reasons why the Minister congratulated the Papua New Guinea authorities and  Transfield for acting to restore order. But the key point here is that we have a set of  obligations under international law which of course we meet. But at the same time we  came to Government with a commitment to stop the boats and to stop hundreds of  people drowning at sea as happened under Labor. And this facility and its orderly  management is part of that policy.

GILBERT: We’re almost out of time but on this issue that asylum-seekers want to end  up in the UN system. They’re not saying they want to come here now; they want to end  up under the UN umbrella. So I just don’t see how these protest end if that’s the end  outcome they want, they don’t want to be settled in PNG.

FLETCHER: We are committed to the maintenance of order and safety and security  within that facility.

GILBERT: OK, alright that’s it, we’re out of time. Paul Fletcher, Amanda Rishworth,  have a good day, appreciate it.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: TRISTAN RUST 0400 099 204

