

THE HON RICHARD MARLES MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER  PROTECTION   MEMBER FOR CORIO



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW  ABC RN BREAKFAST  MONDAY, 27 JULY 2015

SUBJECT/S: Labor’s humane and compassionate approach to asylum seekers

FRAN KELLY: Richard Marles, welcome again to Breakfast.

RICHARD MARLES, SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER  PROTECTION:  Thanks Fran how are you?

KELLY: I’m very well thank you, we now know more of the details of this policy, more  than just boat turn backs and we’ll get to some of those aspects in a moment. But first to  this notion of stopping the boats on the high seas, you told the conference on Saturday  ‘it does not mean we are the same as our political opponents’ well how does it mean  you’re not the same? All you’ve done is copy Coalition policy here isn’t it? How will the  voters tell you apart and is that part of the point for you politically?

MARLES: Well how we engage with the world is much broader of the issue simply of  the journey between Java and Christmas Island. It’s an important part of it and we need  to be getting our policy right there and I actually think the way in which Labor has come  to the view that we need to keep this journey shut is a very different road that we have  travel than our political opponents but what I was referring to there was that whereas for  the Liberal Party the shutting of this journey really is the central piece of an architecture  which is about Australia turning its back on the world, that’s not what we’re about, were  actually trying to open our door wider  so that we can bring more refugees here through  a higher humanitarian intake but doing it in a way where people come safer. And the  other point I was making is that if we don’t get this right and if we make the wrong  decision here and in a sense if we don’t make the difficult decision here inevitably what

happens is that we will be consumed by this journey again that’s what happened when  we were last in government and the result of that Fran is that you in fact see less  refugees coming to this country and more asylum seekers dying in the process and  there is simply nothing that is compassionate about that.

KELLY: In terms of being consumed by this, your colleague Chris Bowen is of the view  that once Labor’s elected, if it’s elected before you’re even sworn in as Ministers he said  quote ‘people smugglers will be considering their options they will test any new  administration’ I wonder if you agree with that and if you are the Immigration Minister it  means basically you could be called upon to turn back boats within days of being  elected. I think everyone listening wants to know what this means, will all boats under  Labor be turned around no exceptions no arguments regardless of who’s on board and  where they come from?

MARLES: Well firstly to pick up on Chris’s comments I think they’re right, I think it is  very likely that a new Labor Government would be tested by people smuggling networks  and I think it is very likely that within the first days of a Labor Government we would be  put in a position of needing to turn a boat around and we need to be very clear about  that, which is why we made sure we had this debate as transparently and honestly as  we can in the most important forum that our party has and that’s its national conference.  I mean it’s obviously a matter which has gone through Cabinet, through Shadow  Cabinet but we felt it was something that needed to be flagged to conference so that it  could be considered at that level as well. We would want to full suite of measures that  are available now is the answer to the next question Fran.

KELLY: So enable ships towing boats back to international waters, putting people on  orange lifeboats all of that stays?

MARLES: We would want to full suite of measures which are available to the  Government now, and I just make this point…

KELLY: So that’s what I just described yes?

MARLES: Yes and I’m answering that question we would want the full suite of  measures that the Government has available to it now. I would make this point because  you said irrespective of where people come from, where people come from or one of the  points of where vessels come from does matter, we’ve seen a couple of vessels come  from actually Southern India but they’ve had Sri Lankan asylum seekers on board,  we’ve had one vessel come from Vietnam and there’s a report in the media at the  moment that there is another vessel on the high seas which is from Vietnam and of  course we don’t know the answers to that question because the Government hasn’t  confirmed them.

KELLY: Lets deal with that, lets deal with that issue that might help us here this boat  with Vietnamese asylum seekers aboard that’s been sent back, would you have sent it  back if you were the Minister?



MARLES: Well firstly I think we need to know more about what that vessel is and I  haven’t seen in the media a full explanation from the Government about who is on  board or what has happened with that vessel. But let’s be clear if there are people on  board a vessel which have come from a source country that vessel is not going to be  turned back without those people on-board being subject to an assessment process as  to who they are and what claims they might have and lets also be clear that’s what the  Government is doing, the Government in that sense is not turning boats back to  countries, to source countries they haven’t done that to Sri Lanka and to my knowledge  it has not done that to Vietnam.

Now we’ve been critical of what they have done in terms of that assessment process,  we were critical a month or so ago when a boat did go back to Vietnam and we were  critical last year when we saw really the ridiculous farce of 150 Tamil asylum seekers  floating around on the Indian Ocean in an Australian Customs vessels for the better part  of a month as the Government tried to work out what it should do. What it should be  doing is going through an assessment of people where they are coming from a source  country and we would want to make sure as the Government that any process we put in  place passed muster with the UNHCR and we will be talking to them about that.

KELLY: Well that’s a big question isn’t it, because the UNHCR as far as I understand it  is not a big fan of on-board assessments. We had, we heard earlier from Misha  Coleman from the Australian Churches Refugee Taskforce that onshore assessments, I  mean on sea assessments don’t work, in this case the Vietnamese, she said they would  be so intimidated they wouldn’t be able to tell their story properly that it’s not a fair  hearing and you can’t really judge peoples claims for refugee status when you do it on  sea like this.

MARLES: Look, I think there’s some valid criticism in that, we’d need to understand  exactly the process by which the Government is claiming that assessments have  properly been done at sea. The detail here matters and I wouldn’t necessarily go as far  as what Misha has said in terms of the position of the UNHCR, in fact America does  assess people on water in terms of those coming from Cuba and Haiti to Florida the  UNHCR has had a good look at that process, it is different though, we are talking about  a smaller stretch of water and we are talking about much larger American ships where  there is an ability for example to get lawyers on board and to look at how refugee claims  can be put and properly assessed and I don’t know whether any of that can happen on  the size of the Australian ships that we’re talking about in the middle of the Indian  Ocean for example when we’re talking about Tamil asylum seekers, so they are good  questions that Misha has raised and if it requires people to come onshore to be  assessed before then being transferred to Nauru or Manus then so be it and indeed that  is what happened this time last year when the Government ultimately did bring the 150  Tamil asylum seekers to the Curtin Detention Centre before then transferring them to  Nauru.

KELLY: Richard Marles two quick questions on other elements of your policy we’ve  talked before about the increasing of the intake but what about, you say you want to get  kids out of detention as soon as possible what about the children current on Nauru  there’s 88 children in Nauru in detention?

MARLES: Well I think we, the principle in terms of getting children out of detention in  my view are same on Nauru as they are in Australia and actually there is a greater or a  faster rate of processing children on Nauru right now than there is in Australia which  itself is an appalling situation in terms of what’s happening here. But detention is not a  place for kids, there should be a situation where people, the system has a bias in favour  of getting children and their families out of detention first, in respect of Nauru as I  understand it there is processing, full processing underway in terms of refugee claims  and where those claims are found to be valid people are being moved out of the  detention centre into the community as quickly as possible.

KELLY: And that’s the big question that everybody is asking now, what is Labor’s plan  for getting these people, not just processed more quickly which is your pledge, but then  what, there’s two thousand people in detention on Nauru and Manus Island with no  prospect of ever being settled in Australia, where will they go? Because resettlement  into Manus Island for instance isn’t going so well.

MARLES: Look I think that’s a really good question, and what we’ve -

KELLY: It’s the critical question isn’t it?

MARLES: It is and what we’ve, and it is the critical failing of this Government in that  here we are almost two years into this Government and I think the Government has  essentially given up on trying to find resolution for the two thousand people on Manus  and Nauru.

KELLY: And where would you send them?

MARLES: Well we would be working with the world to find a resolution and it is difficult  to give a precise answer to that but what you can say is this, the Abbott Government  having turned their back on the world in terms of their immigration policy should not be  surprised that they are finding the world turning is back on them -

KELLY: But Richard Marles that’s also complicated by the fact that we’ve got a higher  number of people moving around the world looking for refuge than ever before.

MARLES: Sure, but can if I can just finish this Fran, it is because of the posture of the  Australian Government that they now find themselves in circumstance where they are  unable to come up with any kind of resolution for these two thousand people and I fear if  this Government was to be in power for the next ten years those people would be on  Manus and Nauru for that period of time at which point Australia would have done an  appalling harm to those people. I mean we have seen two years after the beginning of

the Regional Resettlement Arrangement with Papua New Guinea not a single person be  resettled in PNG, which is an utter condemnation on this Government’s capacity to  negotiate with our nearest neighbour. So I can tell you this, it will be absolutely core  business for a future Labor Government to find resolution for those two thousand  people, they won’t be coming to Australia but we will be engaged with the world and we  do believe that they will enable us to find opportunities which currently this Government  through its total ineptness are unable to find.

KELLY: Richard Marles thank you very much for joining us again for Breakfast.

MARLES: Thanks Fran.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: LIDIJA IVANOVSKI 0427 051 563

