





THE HON TANYA PLIBERSEK MP  DEPUTY LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS  AND INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT

MEMBER FOR SYDNEY



E&OE TRANSCRIPT   TELEVISION INTERVIEW  SUNDAY AGENDA, SKY NEWS  SUNDAY 15 NOVEMBER 2015

SUBJECTS: Paris attacks, South China Sea, Port of Darwin, the Pacific and  climate change.

PETER VAN ONSELEN, PRESENTER: Let me introduce and welcome to the program  our main guest today, Tanya Plibersek, Deputy Labor Leader and Shadow Foreign  Affairs Spokeswoman, thanks for your company.

TANYA PLIBERSEK, DEPUTY LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Thanks Peter.

VAN ONSELEN: This was a prearranged interview that we had, but obviously these  events are well within your purview as Shadow Foreign Affairs Spokeswomen as well. I  don’t know what there is to say other than to ask you, what is your reaction?

PLIBERSEK: Well I thought that the interview that you showed earlier with the surgeon  who said, “We can’t let these people win”, was about as articulate as you can get. This  is a shocking attack. So many Australians have been to Paris, have affection for the  country France - have travelled not just in Paris but in other parts of the country and  feel - can picture themselves there, so I think it has really struck home. But coming so  closely after the suicide bombing in Beirut where more than 40 people also lost their  lives, coming so quickly after the downing of the Russian passenger jet over Egypt, this  shows a concerted effort to project harm around the world by IS and its affiliate  organisations. So, I think it is, Paul’s very right to say that this does change the  complexion of the fight to a degree. I think Francois Hollande saying this is an act of war  I think expresses the sentiments of many Western governments. I don’t, I wouldn’t be at  all surprised if the discussions at the G20 in Turkey over the next few days will be

largely focussed on how this renewed threat might be met. But also again on a political  solution for what’s going on in Syria. Syria has driven so many of these - the conflict in  Syria has driven so many of these attacks outside the borders of Syria. It’s driven one of  the worst humanitarian crises we’ve ever seen internationally; millions of refugees  fleeing the sort of terror that we saw on our screens in Paris. So I think the renewed  effort for a political solution in Syria will have to be part of the discussion in the next few  days too.

PAUL KELLY: I appreciate that we’re still talking within hours of these attacks and that  it’s very difficult to make assessments. But you’ve recently, in recent weeks, stressed  the point that there’s a lack of clarity about the aims of the campaigns in Iraq and Syria,  so can I ask you, how do you feel this debate will play out in terms of the military  campaigns? Do you anticipate that there will be renewed pressure to build up and  intensify the strength of the America-led campaign, and what’s your particular view  about that?

PLIBERSEK: Well I think there’s three elements to this issue. The first is a search for a  political solution as I’ve said. The second is addressing the humanitarian need  particularly in countries of first asylum because the only way to reduce the movement of  millions of people into Europe is to make sure that there is food and shelter for the  coming winter for the Syrians that are in Lebanon, in Jordan, in Turkey. But the third  element of course is the military campaign against IS and its affiliate, or similar  organisations. I think certainly the attack in Paris will intensify pressure to find a  strengthened military solution to Syria and northern Iraq. Our involvement in initial  stages was simply to protect civilians against the onslaught of this organisation that has  indiscriminately killed anyone that has a different religious or political view, has  enslaved people, has used sexual abuse as a technique in its warfare, has been brutal  and indiscriminate. I think that there will renewed international search for a stronger  military solution, but this is the area of complexity now introduced because obviously the  Russians have experienced an attack, the Russians are supportive of the Assad  regime, the French have experienced attack. They will not accept IS or a sort of Assad  regime continuing on. How the international community agrees on what the specific aim  of the military action is, I think that is the question for the next few days.

VAN ONSELEN: There’s a lot more to discuss in that space, we’re talking to Tanya  Plibersek, the Labor Deputy Leader and well as Foreign Affairs Spokeswoman, but  we’re going to bring in David Speers now who is live in Turkey, just at the media  conference that the Prime Minister, Malcolm Turnbull just had.

[INTERVIEW WITH DAVID SPEERS PLAYS]

[PACKAGE OF PARIS TERROR ATTACK PLAYS]

VAN ONSELEN: Tanya Plibersek, can I ask you, I guess inevitably where this is going  to go in the coming months is to questions around flow of asylum seeks, questions of

what intent, amongst whom. How do we ensure that we have this debate in a way that  is both highly security-conscious but equally not too divisive?

PLIBERSEK: Well I think that every government around the world will accept that its  first responsibility is to keep its citizens safe and that’s why we’ve sought to work with  the Government as cooperatively as possible on the basis of the advice from our  security agencies about the best way of keeping Australians safe. Our security and  intelligence agencies tell us of course that they are monitoring several hundred people  and it is important that they are enabled to do that work as effectively as possible. One  of the differences, of course is that Australia, you know, we know who's here; the issue  that a lot of Europe is facing at the moment is this massive number of people travelling  from Syria and from some other countries as well, putting extraordinary pressure on  European countries. In the first instance to offer them proper humanitarian assistance  because the vast majority obviously are people who are desperately fleeing IS in Syria  and in Iraq. But secondly to be aware that there may be people with ill intent amongst  those people moving through Europe. It’s an enormous challenge and one of the keys  to dealing with this challenge of course is to find a political solution in Syria and we were  seeing from David earlier that the measures that are going on in that area, and to  provide assistance in countries of first asylum so that people are looked after as close to  Syria as possible, and that the push factors for these people moving through the rest of  Europe are reduced. In Australia, of course, as well as our security and intelligence  efforts, we need to work in cooperation with the broader Islamic community. We need to  ensure that parents, teachers, brothers and sisters are confident if they see changes in  the behaviour of family members or people that they’re associated with that they report  those concerns to authorities so that there can be intervention at the earliest possible  time.

KELLY: We are committed to taking 12 000 Syrian refugees offshore. How confident  are you, how satisfied are you that there will be the appropriate security clearances to  ensure that we don’t have someone coming in who is in fact a security risk?

PLIBERSEK: Well I think I’m confident that our authorities will check very carefully  because this sort of event obviously alerts them to the terrible consequences of not  being careful enough. We also have said - Australia has said - that we will target ethnic  minorities and religious minorities - they’re the people who are at greatest threat of IS in  Syria and in northern Iraq. I think by identifying the people who are most threatened by  this organisation, we can be pretty confident they’re not going to come here and act on,  as proxies, for IS in Australia.

KELLY: Just looking back at the Paris attack, if this is Islamic State, it seems to suggest  that it has got an organisational capacity which we didn’t really appreciate before to  reach into the heart of European cities and inflict this sort of damage. What’s your own  assessment about the extent to which this is a departure from expectations?

PLIBERSEK: Well I’m not sure that it's right that we didn’t think that IS had this  capacity; the French security and intelligence authorities warned months ago that there

has never been a greater threat in France. Our own, as you said earlier, our own alert is  set at high, I think around the world we are on high alert for this sort of event. Of course  the French authorities will be examining why they didn’t pick up chatter, what is new  about the organising of these people that let them fly under the radar - that will help us  prevent further attacks of this type - when we work out what’s changed in their  organising. A number of attacks in France have actually been prevented this year as  well, so we know that we are picking up potential attacks and we are preventing them.  We have in Australia as well, picked up potential threats and prevented attacks from  occurring. But just as the tactics of these terrorist organisations change, so we must be  able to keep changing the way that we collect information, survey and respond so we  are able to continue to stop attacks.

VAN ONSELEN: Is it too much to say that this is perhaps that this is the equivalent of a  modern September 11? And I don’t mean in terms of loss of life or anything that crude, I  mean culturally the impact of it. September 11 was such a moment in time for  Americans in particular, but for everyone and this, I wonder if you think, can have the  equivalent impact on people in countries

PLIBERSEK: Well I think if you look at the series of attacks in the last few weeks - and  I think it’s actually important to see them together - because you’ve got the Russian  passenger jet, you see the suicide bombing in Beirut in the heart of Hezbollah territory  and you see the attack in Paris. Each of them, really attacking different elements of the  fight against IS. If it does mean that there is a more united and coordinated response  against IS, against al-Nusra Front, against the number of organisations that are driving  the destruction of Syria, Iraq, the Middle East more generally, then that might be seen  as a turning point later.

VAN ONSELEN: I think a lot of people would worry that even if at this point, this far in,  the world was to coordinate a successful attack within Syria to isolate these extremist  groups and bring them to an end, essentially, they wouldn’t bring the terrorism to an end  in the sense that there are enough lone wolf, and even some coordinated elements of  that, that are out and about now. What’s your answer or response to that?

PLIBERSEK: Well I think Paul was right earlier in what he said, that there isn’t just a  military response required here, there is a battle of ideology going on and the Graeme  Wood article some time ago, “What ISIS Wants” talks about the desire of these “end of  days” kind of organisations for this “end of days” conflict between Islam and the West.  We need to be engaged with mainstream Islam so that they are part of the ideological  battle here that says that this is never acceptable - there is not victory here that the  world will fight against these brutal organisations. And yes a military response - we  absolutely need that, but the battle of ideas is important too.

KELLY: Would you like to see more voices - more views being expressed from the  Islamic community in this country? I mean clearly there are a range of different views  within the Islamic community and one of the arguments is the best way of engaging with

the community is for them to be speaking and for us to hear more voices from the  Islamic community in this country.

PLIBERSEK: Well, I actually want to hear the voices that are already speaking up  amplified, Paul. Because I know that there are people in the Islamic community who are  appalled and horrified by this minority group.

KELLY: Well, why don't they speak up with a louder voice?

PLIBERSEK: Well, I think, Paul, you would know that there are people in the Islamic  community who receive death threats when they speak up. It is important to back those  people, to amplify their voices and, you know, when we had that awful Hizb ut-Tahrir  meeting a few weeks ago - two or three weeks ago now - and it received an enormous  amount of reporting and, on the same day, it was the mosque open day, that thousands  of people would have attended. Of course, the shocking negative organisation is front  page news. The Muslims that are reaching out saying, "We want to be part of the  Australian mainstream," are not front page news. We need to, to make sure that we  don't divide our own community, that our community, you know, whatever religious  background you come from or no religious background, is united together against the  extremist - and we do have them in our community - but united together against those  people who profit from division. They profit from division.

KELLY: What should we do about Hizb ut-Tahrir? I mean, do we just let them go?  There's a debate about whether you try and ban them? What's your feeling about how  the best way to manage them?

PLIBERSEK: Well, there has been a lot of discussion over the years about whether to  ban them or not and my information is that our... the advice that governments of both  persuasions have received is that, in fact, having them operating underground would be  more dangerous than knowing where they are and knowing what they're saying. But I  think it is important that we have people saying organisations like this, that preach  violence and division, are rejected by us. And when they say things like, you know,  there are problems with the National Anthem and problems with the citizenship pledge  and people shouldn't be forced to, you know, back in these basic tenets of Australian  citizenship, that we, all of us, reject that sort of offensive and divisive talk.

KELLY: What's your view about attempting to prevent Australians who've gone to the  Middle East, Iraq and Syria to fight, from coming back into this country? We've had a big  debate about this. The Government's put forward the citizenship provisions and so on.  How important is it to take new legislative measures to prevent people returning to the  country?

PLIBERSEK: Well, we've worked very closely with the Government on changes to  legislation that would keep Australians safe and we have, in each tranche of national  security legislation, sought changes to the legislation to ensure that we don't impinge on  the rights that Australians hold dear. We want to keep people safe, but we also, as well

as wanting to protect our citizens, we want to protect the human rights of our citizens.  So it is a balance, but I think we've struck the right balance. There are many people on  the… you know, I suppose left, as you'd describe them, saying that we've gone too far,  that Labor has gone too far in backing some of these changes. There are people on the  right who say that the Government and the Opposition haven't gone far enough in  restricting the rights and liberties of Australians in the interests of national security. I  think we've struck a good balance, and we've done it by ensuring that the Security and  Intelligence Committee of the Parliament has had adequate time to look carefully at  legislative proposals from the Government and to amend them to ensure that they are  strong.

KELLY: But do you think, as a matter of principle, it's important to try and prevent such  people from getting back to this country?

PLIBERSEK: I think it's absolutely important to prevent anyone who would seek to do  us harm from having the opportunity of doing so. Of course I do.

VAN ONSELEN: What about in the context of Syria? We've seen the air campaign  extended from Iraq to Syria. We do have some Special Forces and trainees on the  ground. Is there an argument now, do you think, to amplify that, to have more boots on  the ground?

PLIBERSEK: Look, I think we have to have these discussions over coming days and  weeks. I don't think it's wise, you know, within 24 hours of an attack like this to be  making pronouncements about any changed role for Australia.

VAN ONSELEN: Sure.

PLIBERSEK: It really will depend a little on the international response, how it changes.  If there is… One of the things that we've been concerned about the whole way through  is what's the endgame here? What's the target? What's the explicit role for Australia?  We need to work with the international community to work out what the political  transition is and what military action would support that political transition.

VAN ONSELEN: We're talking to Tanya Plibersek, the Labor foreign affairs  spokeswoman. We're going to continue doing so when we come back. This is Australian  Agenda.

VAN ONSELEN: Welcome back. You're watching Australian Agenda where Paul Kelly  and I are speaking to the Shadow Foreign Affairs Spokeswoman as well as Deputy  Leader of the Labor Party, Tanya Plibersek. Moving on to other foreign policy issues if  we can in this final segment, South China Sea, enormous tensions there between China  and the United States, two very important powers, not just globally, but obviously to  Australia as well, both as allies and an economic trading partners. Can we balance this  if these tensions continue?

PLIBERSEK: Well, we can balance it, of course. I think it's important to say that  Australia doesn't take a position on any of the territorial disputes. We say that they  should be settled in accordance with international laws and norms. It's also, I think,  important to say - and I've said it publicly before - that the speed of land reclamation and  other building works on some of these islands, atolls and so on, does make China's  neighbourhood a little nervous, and it is very important that China, I think, now ceases  this process. It seems that the building work has come to an end. And it's very important  that we continue to sail and fly where we have always sailed and flown. A lot of our  trade goes through this area, and we'll continue to ensure that we're able to do that.

KELLY: Just on that point, President Obama sent a warship to assert freedom of  navigation in this disputed area. Does the Labor Party support what President Obama  did?

PLIBERSEK: Well, I think we have a very good and close relationship with the United  States, and, of course, we are happy to support the actions that they see as necessary.  What we would say is that it's important to reduce tensions in the area rather than  exacerbate them, though, so we look for ways of ensuring that we continue to have our  good relationship with China as well as supporting our closest military ally.

KELLY: On a related question about China, there have been many reports in recent  days about the Chinese company which has acquired the Port Darwin lease for a very  long period of time. There's a lot of concern being expressed about the national security  ramifications of this and claims are made that it wasn't properly scrutinised, this decision  wasn't properly scrutinised. Is Labor concerned about this at all?

PLIBERSEK: Well, I think it is important for the Government to give reassurances that  they have adequately considered the reports of the military links of the company that  has leased the port. It really is up to the Government to give those reassurances.

KELLY: At face value, though, does Labor think there's any problem with this  transaction, with the Chinese, the Chinese having control of this port for, you know, the  next century?

PLIBERSEK: Well, I think it's important that we examine any long-term leasing  arrangement like this very carefully.

VAN ONSELEN: Can I ask you about Taiwan just very quickly? Interestingly, right at a  time where you've got mounting tensions in the South China Sea, you've got the  Taiwanese leader meeting with the Chinese leadership for the very first time. That said,  the Taiwanese leader looks like he's going to lose the next election. My issue with  China, which I think is…which I'd love your comment on is it strikes me that China has a  view of what its boundaries should be, and they haven't really changed that view for a  very long time now, and the ability to sort of settle things down until such time as they  have that franchise fulfilled is unlikely. What do other nations do in that situation? The  Americans are reacting. Some people think they might be overreacting, but China, I

don't think, is going to let this go.

PLIBERSEK: Well, I think you're right to point out the historic meeting between  President Ma and President Xi in Singapore. I think it certainly has received a lot of  attention, particularly from Taiwan. I think the reporting in China hasn't been quite as  expansive. And you're asking has the Chinese position on its own territorial claims  changed. Well, no. I mean, this nine-dash line that they see as the - their boundary in  the South China Sea is fairly constant. What has changed, of course, is the building  program around the islands, atolls, rocky outcrops and so on.

VAN ONSELEN: Sure.

PLIBERSEK: The Chinese say other countries are building too, other countries are, you  know, putting oil rigs and other constructed, artificially constructed elements into  contested areas. We don't make any judgment about the right of one or another over  these territorial claims. We say that they should be determined in accordance to  international laws. There are some legal disputes currently afoot. We think that they  should be properly determined. But I think there is a…aside from the legal and territorial  disputes, there is an issue here of the message that is being projected and I think that it  would benefit all of us for a message to be a more...one that turns the temperature  down in these disputes rather than exacerbating them.

VAN ONSELEN: One final area - because we're almost out of time - you and Bill  Shorten, the Labor Leader, had your tour through the Pacific. What was the purpose for  that?

PLIBERSEK: Well, we really wanted to draw attention to the fact that climate change is  not a potential future threat for our Pacific neighbours. It's a real and present danger  that is washing away islands, that is washing away roads and causeways and homes,  that is changing the water table. On islands that have sustained human habitation,  they're having their water sources inundated with saltwater, that they're not able to grow  the crops -

KELLY: So what do we do about it?

PLIBERSEK: Well, we go to Paris with a more ambitious target than the target that we  have, and we act as part of an international community to keep global warming at below  two degrees change. And we can't do that, as the biggest per capita emitters of carbon  pollution, unless we are prepared to not just change our own behaviour and targets but  also amplify the voice of the Pacific nations, these tiny nations that are on the front line  of climate change.

KELLY: OK. Well, you want more ambitious targets to the minus 26% to 28%  announced by the Government. How much more ambitious will Labor be? And when will  we get the Labor announcement?

PLIBERSEK: Well, we've announced two targets already, which is keeping climate  change below two degrees and a 50% renewable energy target.

KELLY: I know that. I know that. But I'm asking about these specific, these specific  targets relating to minus 26% to minus 28%.   PLIBERSEK: We'll make our announcements in due course.

KELLY: But presumably, from what you said, Labor will have more ambitious targets.

PLIBERSEK: We're already more ambitious, Paul.

KELLY: OK, so you are more -

PLIBERSEK: We've got 50% -

KELLY: You are more ambitious.

PLIBERSEK: We've got 50% renewable energy. We've got the two degrees target. We  back a price on carbon that actually changes our economy to ensure that -

KELLY: And you don't think there's a risk?

PLIBERSEK: Less pollution.

KELLY: And you don't think there's a political risk doing that?

PLIBERSEK: Yeah, of course there is.

KELLY: There is.   PLIBERSEK: Of course there's a political risk. We've suffered electorally because of  our backing for real action on climate change, but it's the right thing to do, and we'll do  the right thing.

VAN ONSELEN: Alright, we're out of time. Tanya Plibersek we appreciate your time.  You've been very generous with it today on Australian Agenda. Thanks very much.

PLIBERSEK: Thank you.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: DAN DORAN 0427 464 350

