

THE HON RICHARD MARLES MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER  PROTECTION   MEMBER FOR CORIO

E&EO TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  SKY NEWS AM AGENDA  WEDNESDAY, 29 JULY 2015

SUBJECT/S: Women in Labor; Refugee intake; Choppergate; Bronwyn  Bishop; Adam Goodes.

KIERAN GILBERT: And with me this morning to discuss this and the other  issues of the day, the Assistant Infrastructure Minister Jamie Briggs and also  Labor frontbencher the Shadow Immigration Minister Richard Marles.  Richard I’ll  go to you first on this because Labor likes to lecture the Liberals but, its often the  case as Julie Bishop pointed out where you might have a union leader come in  and knock out a very talented, well-qualified female prospective MP and that  almost happened with Penny Wong, she was chosen as the second on the  Senate ticket in South Australia and that changed obviously, but it took the Prime  Minister to intervene, so Labor’s not perfect on this either is it?

RICHARD MARLES, SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER  PROTECTION: Well all of us need to be doing the best we can in terms of  seeing an increased representation of women and when you look at the way  we’ve managed our affairs and the outcomes that we’ve ultimately got, that is  what Labor has achieved, right now we have something like 44 per cent of our  representatives as women, we’ve just set over the weekend the target of getting  that to 50 per cent in the next ten years and that’s as it should be, because the  Parliament should reflect a makeup our society. But when you look at the Liberal  Party, I mean the real problem here is they’re going backwards, they’re actually  doing worse now than they’ve done in the past and a situation where only 10  per cent of the Cabinet are women, it started off just being five per cent of the  Cabinet are women, it just doesn’t bear any relationship to the makeup of the  Australian community and I think what it means is when people look at this

government and look at the Liberal Party they don’t see a reflection of  themselves.

GILBERT: Jamie Briggs what’s your take on this and specifically your response  to the proposals put by Sharman Stone and Teresa Gambaro for basically  targets or quotas?

JAMIE BRIGGS: Yeah look Kieran I’m disappointed Richard’s gone down that  path and Richard’s a smart guy and he goes through similar issues that I do too,  with the fact that when you have children it is more difficult for women to  ultimately deal with that than what it is with men and Richard knows that, we’ve  talked about it privately, because we’re going through similar circumstances.  So  I’m disappointed Richard’s trying to make it a political issue and I don’t think  that’s actually what he really thinks.  It is an issue we’ve got in society, it’s not  just politics, it’s senior management of our big companies, I go to boardroom  lunches often in my role, I’m very privileged in this role to be able to go around  Australia and build really important infrastructure, and I go to boardroom lunches  often and most often they’re filled with men.  Whether they be in senior  management positions or they be in the engineering type people, it’s more  difficult not just in politics but throughout senior positions for women in their 20s  and 30s to balance this desire to have children, I live it every day, my wife as you  know Kieran very well, is far more intelligent, has far more capacity than what I  do, but we’ve had three children over the last decade, she’s been out of the  workforce, there’s no easy solution to that, she’s got this great desire to raise  three children which is fantastic, we’re very privileged to have three children, but  there’s no simple way to deal with that challenge of being the homemaker and  raising children and at the same time maintaining that work life balance and I  think it is a difficult issue and I think Julie Bishop, like usual, gets it exactly right,  she is an example of a woman who’s made it to the Deputy Leadership of the  Federal Party in Government, the Foreign Minister of our country doing an  outstanding job, but it’s not easy and Julie makes that point she would become a  partner in a law firm -

GILBERT: Why does Labor have more in the Parliament then?  How come  they’re achieved more in this regard?

BRIGGS: Well they’ve obviously got this quota system which basically means  they’ve got a whole bunch of people who don’t get there on merit and you only  have to look at the quality or the lack of quality of female representatives in the  Senate from the Labor party to show that all they’re doing is actually ticking a box  on numbers, that’s what the truth of this is.  There’s a very high quality of Labor  women I think in the Federal Labor Party if you’re looking from South Australia, I  think Kate Ellis and Amanda Rishworth both obviously do a very good job and  are very high quality people and they got there on merit.  I don’t think anyone can  question the fact Kate Ellis is there on her own merit, I mean she, you know, I  can tell you Kieran, at the last federal election we thought Adelaide was a real

shot from the Liberal Party perspective but it was very difficult to beat Kate Ellis.   She is a very high quality, very smart, capable performer, the same with Amanda  Rishworth. So both in the South Australia perspective Labor’s pre-selected very  high quality people in the Lower House but I think what they do to bump up their  numbers, is with their union arrangements where there’s just dodgy deals all the  time in the Senate particularly, is they bump them up through this quota system.   I don’t think that’s what women in Australia really want.  They actually want more  of the Kate Ellis and Amanda Rishworth example and less of the dodgy union  deals in the Senate.

GILBERT: Richard Marles your reaction to Jamie’s points there.

MARLES: Well, if you look at the women that Labor have got in the Federal  Parliament, they are an outstanding crew, I mean Jamie’s mentioned Kate and  Amanda, that’s right.  You can look at Tanya Plibersek, you can look at Penny  Wong, a great woman in the Senate, Catherine King, Jenny Macklin, I could go  on.  These are all great women who are making incredible contributions to the  Labor Party and no doubt -

BRIGGS: Are you trying to roll Penny Wong?  Your faction tried to roll Penny  Wong?

MARLES:  Penny’s there and they are there on merit and Jamie’s right that  they’re there on merit but here’s the point, for a lot of the reasons that Jamie  eloquently articulated about the difficulties that women face in terms of balancing  work and family and we all have that difficulty and I know the three of us have  had these conversations, but I think Jamie’s right it is harder for women.  All of  those women that we’ve talked about support the notion of pushing the envelope  in a systemic way such that we can allow this merit to come through.  I mean the  way things are at the moment, good merit worthy women are unable to get there  because the system is to a degree, for a lot of the reasons that Jamie said, is  stacked against them which is actually why we need to have other measures in  place which do push the envelope, which do get women in there.  Women of  merit. And all the people that we’ve talked about are examples of that, so that’s  why we have been trying to push the envelope for decades now and it has had  results with really good people coming through.  The idea that unmeritorious  people have filled these ranks, I think, is just a compete bunkum, we’ve got really  good people coming through and we are a much better party for it, with much  greater intelligence in our ranks and a much better reflection of our society.

GILBERT: I want to ask you Richard Marles something in your area of  responsibility, the Daily Telegraph reports this morning, that your promise, your  vow to double the refugee intake to 27,000 by 2025, that’s going to cost  $1.9 billion over 10 years, what’s your response to that suggestion this morning?

MARLES: Well Kieran, that’s right, it is a very significant commitment and I am  really proud of that commitment and in actual fact it is probably the largest  commitment in expenditure terms that we have made in this term of Opposition.  And let me start by saying we will end up, as we get to the election, and already  now, committing to far more savings than we will expenditure. Over the course of  the next decade the reduction in the tax concession for superannuants saves  $14 billion alone over that period of time, so we are absolutely going to make  sure this is all fully costed, but this is a very significant commitment, we do  absolutely believe that Australia at this time should be playing a greater role in  the world today.  We are not like the Liberals who are basically turning their back  on the world’s problems, we do want to see a greater humanitarian intake and I  think that we should also just remember the great Australians who have come  here as refugees, people like Frank Lowy, people like Gus Nossel who have  made an enormous contribution, this ultimately is an investment in Australia’s  future, but we’re not shying away from the money we’re spending here, we think  this is a really important spend and that we are spending the money here says a  lot about Labor’s priorities.

GILBERT: And that figure, Richard Marles, is something you wouldn’t contest?  The number?

MARLES: No, no, so you’re clear, $1.9 billion over the next decade is exactly the  right figure. Over the course of the forward estimates we are essentially matching  the Government’s increase in the humanitarian intake so there’s no real  difference over the forward estimates, but over a period of a decade that is the  additional costs compared to the Government, and as I say we are very proud  about that expenditure, it’s probably the most significant expenditure that we  have announced during this term of Opposition, it’ll be absolutely more than  matched by savings.

GILBERT: Ok and Jamie Briggs I guess Labor will also make savings on money  that would otherwise be spent on trying to, well, in terms of detention centres and  so on, because they are adopting the same ‘stop the boats’ policy as the  Government did through Operation Sovereign Borders as Richard led that policy  development at the Conference at the weekend.

BRIGGS: Ah Kieran, I must admit, I didn’t realise we were on the comedy  channel this morning, this is a joke, I mean really, the idea that this is the biggest  spending announcement that Labor makes between now and the next election is  just pure comedy gold from Richard Marles, really I mean it will be a small  expenditure item compared to whatever else will come and there won’t be  savings and we know that because if you look at the history in 2007 they  inherited $20 billion in surpluses, no net debt and we ended up with nearly  $650 billion worth of debt and deficits as far as the eye can see.  We also heard  in 2007, Kevin Rudd, one of Richard’s good friends, say we will do the same as  John Howard did on border protection, we will turn back boats, we will implement

the same policies as John Howard did on border protection, well what happened  of course is the left of the Labor Party took over when they won government in  2008 and they implemented the policy that they dreamt of and the humanitarian  visa program was overtaken by people on boats, not by the Government’s choice  or the Australian people’s choice and when Richard talks about Frank Lowy and  others that wasn’t happening under Labor because it was being filled by people  provided by the people smugglers. I mean this is the issue here Kieran, the  Liberal Party fixes the borders, has an orderly immigration system like John  Howard did, like Tony Abbott’s implemented, the Labor Party undoes all that in  government and hands it over to people smugglers.  So they say one thing in  Opposition and they do a completely different thing in government.  No-one can  believe them or trust them on this Kieran because their record tells us what they  would really do.

GILBERT: We’ve got to go to a break, back in just a moment with Jamie Briggs  and Richard Marles.

GILBERT: This is AM Agenda, with me Richard Marles and Jamie Briggs.  Jamie  Briggs, page 3 of the Daily Telegraph today another story relating to Bronwyn  Bishop and another wedding, this one Teresa Gambaro back in 2007, $288  claimed for the night she was in Brisbane apparently for Committee Chair  business but no details as to what that business was.  What needs to be done  here in terms of clearing all of this up?  Should she make a full and detailed  explanation?

BRIGGS: Well I think the Speaker will obviously account appropriately with the  Finance Department for all of her travel. I mean look, I think this is getting to the  point of being a bit ridiculous, some of these issues.  Ah, Richard Marles and  Jamie Briggs and most other Federal Members of Parliament, particularly those  who are in Ministry positions, travel regularly because we have to and you would  criticise us Kieran, if we didn’t.  So we need to make judgements about what that  travel’s about, I think we are getting to the point however where there is a pursuit  of politicians and what we do which will lead to an impact on the quality of  representatives that you get.  Let’s think this through - um, I live in Adelaide, the  Adelaide Hills, best part of Australia by far, much better than Geelong where  Richard lives obviously, um we have to travel to get to Sydney today, I’m  speaking at the World Hotel Conference shortly after this, to talk about what is  important, to meet people who are big investors, to understand what our country  is trying to do with our Free Trade Agreements, to broaden our economy, to do  better in the world, that’s what you expect us to do Kieran and you’d be the first  person critical of us if we weren’t doing our job, of me and Richard, if we weren’t  doing our jobs, so I think we have to be careful here that we are taking examples  where there was inappropriate use of our allowances, which there was an  example of that in the last couple of weeks, it’s been repaid with a penalty, it’s  known about not because some brilliant investigative journalist went and digged  and dug and found it, it was because it was publicly declared.  So the system

does work as the Finance Minister has said and I think the Liberal Party, the  Labor Party, other Members of Parliament need to start to be clearer with the  Australian people that this is actually what you want us to do, you need in a  national Parliament for people to be moving around the country explaining what  we’re doing, articulating policies like Labor’s intention to backflip on our border  protection laws which Richard articulates across the country, and to do that you  need to be paid by the taxpayer to ensure that’s the case.

GILBERT: Richard Marles?

MARLES: I actually do agree with much of what Jamie said, although obviously  Jamie’s comments about the Adelaide Hills means that he actually needs to  come and fly to Geelong more often, it’s just that when he does, I really hope he  doesn’t take a helicopter. And that is what has been the issue at the outset here.   The decision by Bronwyn Bishop to come to Geelong in a helicopter from  Melbourne, bears no relationship to what people would expect and we have a  Government here who is saying that the age of entitlement is over, that just can’t  be reconciled with the decision that Bronwyn Bishop took and it’s that which has  really lead to the criticism of her, I mean Jamie’s right, that we do need to all  make judgements -

BRIGGS: but we agree -

MARLES: It was an appalling judgement, that she made -

BRIGGS:  - sure Richard, everyone agrees with that, I don’t think anyone’s  disagreeing -

MARLES: Well I’m not sure Bronwyn does - she hasn’t apologised -

BRIGGS: Well she absolutely does, she’s paid it back -

MARLES: - she’s paid it back because she saw that it was the only way of  getting out of this, but she then gave a very defiant press conference where she  clearly doesn’t have any sense of the wrong that she’s done.  She has no sense  of the message that this sends to the Australian people about what politicians are  doing and that of course makes life much more difficult for both Jamie and I.

BRIGGS: I think we are squeezing -

GILBERT: Gentlemen, we’ve only got a couple of minutes left, I want to get your  thoughts on something, where I know you’re both big football fans and it’s a very  sad story in relation to the dual Brownlow medallist, Adam Goodes.  The fact that  he’s considering calling it quits, Richard Marles, it’s prematurely, if would be a  sad outcome here.

MARLES: Look Kieran, I think this is one of the most tragic things I’ve seen in  footy.  If there is an organisation in Australia which does best in relation to  Indigenous affairs and Indigenous relations it is the AFL.  If you look at the DNA  of Indigenous kids around Australia, what you find is footy.  I can remember  going to Papunya, a couple hundred kilometres west of Alice Springs where life  is pretty tough, but the one thing which animates people on their faces and the  way they talk is the footy on the weekend.  It is so important for Indigenous  Australia and if we see a situation now where Adam Goodes is booed out of his  career, that is just so tragic and I think what we need to be doing is actually, as a  country, we need to be having a “cheer Adam Goodes” campaign, that whenever  he goes near the ball people should be cheering because he’s an Australian of  the Year, he’s a great Indigenous leader but in the context of what he does more  than all of that he is just a fantastic footy player and we should be celebrating him  and I really hope that that’s the way the footy public can go.

GILBERT: Jamie Briggs?

BRIGGS: Well, look I agree with Richard, I mean I think the happiest people this  morning will be Adelaide Crows’ supporters who think they’re not going to have  Adam Goodes play this weekend.  He’s a fantastic footballer, he’s done an  enormous amount for footy.  I think though we are getting a little bit, this may be  getting a bit exaggerated as well.  I mean, you know, Richard and I grew up in  the same era when Australians used to chant not very nice things about Richard  Hadley, and I’m not the biggest fan of New Zealand cricket, so I didn’t  necessarily disagree with that when I was a kid, but I think we need to be careful  that we’re not exaggerating what is ultimately something that happens on the  sporting field with broader issues.  Richard, what I do agree with, what Richard  said though is absolutely right, AFL footy has made more of an impact on the  Indigenous communities than pretty much anything that Australian policy or  government policy has ever tried to implement.  I opened, earlier this year the  Michael Long Education Centre up in Darwin, which was funded by, actually, the  previous government put the money in, it will make a huge difference to those  kids who are driven so much by their capacity to play football and so forth, we do  need to get that policy right but I think we need to be careful equally that we don’t  start to over exaggerate what is, I think, driven by a football issue not necessarily  an Indigenous issue.

GILBERT: Jamie Briggs, Richard Marles, thank you very much for that, let’s  hope that he doesn’t call it quits prematurely though, I think we can all agree on  that.  That’s all for our chat this morning gents, we’ll catch you soon.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: CATHERINE BERGIN, 0417 466 418

