

THE HON RICHARD MARLES MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER  PROTECTION   MEMBER FOR CORIO

E&EO TRANSCRIPT  TV INTERVIEW  Abc Capital Hill  THURSDAY, 29 OCTOBER 2015

SUBJECT/S: Liberal Government accused of paying people smugglers to turn  boats around; proper health care for asylum seekers; regional processing.

GREG JENNETT: Mr Marles, thanks for rushing out from a pretty busy schedule  there in the west. We do want to start with the matter of the asylum seekers and  Amnesty International's report. Because of the veil of secrecy that surrounds ASIS  activities there will probably never been any clarity over what was paid, but if you  look to the future and the Labor Government, are you prepared to take that tactic of  cash payments off the table?

RICHARD MARLES SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER  PROTECTION:  Well, I think paying people smugglers to turn around boats  represents a step that we would not go down. It seems to us to give rise to a really  concerning precedent in that it creates a business model for the people smugglers  themselves. If they turn up next to an Australian Navy vessel, there is half a chance  that they would get given a wad of cash, which is actually why we need to hear from  our Government as to what actually happened here. The report we've now seen from  Amnesty once again raises all the concerns we had at the time and Malcolm Turnbull  has to answer this question,  is this what occurred? What we saw from Tony Abbott  at the time was really an invitation for us to believe that that is what occurred, that in  fact Australian officials did pay people smugglers to turn around boats. We need to  know from Malcolm Turnbull what has happened. It is a test for him and his  transparency as to whether he is going to let us know that question, and obviously  this is an appalling thing for an Australian Government to do.

JENNETT: And in saying that you wouldn’t do it in office, have you been able to  satisfy yourself that Labor governments in the past weren't using that or similar  tactics?

MARLES: There were no paying people smugglers to turn around boats; I can  absolutely assure you of that.

JENNETT: Paying people smugglers in Indonesian ports, perhaps?

MARLES: This is a difficult area in terms of intelligence that is gathered in relation to  these questions, but let me put it this way, there is a vast difference between paying  people to infiltrate criminal networks around the world, which law enforcement  agencies do all over the world, and paying criminals to engage in the crime. Now,  when you’re paying a people smuggler to turn around boats, that’s in effect what is  happening. I can assure you that did not happen under us and it wouldn’t under a  future Labor Government.

JENNETT: Alright let’s move onto some other areas. There are a few things  happening in your portfolio. Abyan, the Somali refugee, you’ve said that the  Government should make it clear that this woman will continue to be provided with  unrestricted access to health and counselling professionals. In making that  statement, is there any reason to think that she wouldn't be provided with that care?

MARLES: Well, it is obviously difficult to go into an individual's case, but the  circumstances surrounding the treatment that this person requires is obviously a  matter ultimately between her and her physician, but the principle here is this: if there  are people, refugees on Nauru who are requiring treatment, and that includes the  termination of a pregnancy, that can only be provided for in Australia, well that's  treatment that has to be provided, and in giving that treatment and allowing that to  occur in Australia, it needs to be done on the basis that people have all the time they  need to receive that treatment. We would hope and expect that that is what applies  in relation to this woman, as it would expect it to apply in relation to all of those in  Nauru who are requiring treatment. But I think one of the difficulties here Greg is we  don't have transparency in relation to what our Government is doing in managing this  facility on Nauru. There isn't independent oversight off of the kind that we would like  to negotiate with Nauru and for that matter with PNG, so we can give the Australian  people a sense of confidence that what is being provided on both Nauru and Manus  Island is both dignified and humane refuge. At this moment obviously I think  Australians don’t have that confidence and that’s why it’s so important that the  transparency or the lack of it that we see from this government is removed and that  we do have independent oversight of these facilities.

JENNETT: Well you’re not going to Nauru next week I don't believe, but you are  going to Papua New Guinea. Will you start to make those diplomatic overture s to  the PNG Government for this transparency mechanism that Labor favours and also  to start to pin them down on when they might actually start to resettle refugees?

MARLES: Well, we will have all of those conversations with PNG when we meet with  them. obviously we meet with them in the capacity of being an Australian Opposition,  not an Australian Government, and so there are limitations as to the kinds of  conversations that you can have, but on the final point that you just raised then, it's  more than two years now since Labor negotiated the regional re-settlement  arrangement with PNG, and we still haven’t seen a single person resettled in Papua  New Guinea. Now Papua New Guinea has been coming to meet a request by  Australia, they are the ones helping us out here. It is another failure on the part of the  Australian Government in managing its relationship with PNG that we sit here more  than two years down the track and we don't have a person who has been resettled in  PNG, and it speaks to the failure in a broader sense of this Government in terms of  resolving the fate of the 2000 people on Nauru and Manus. They do need, as a

Government, the Turnbull Government, to re-engage with PNG and get re-settlement  happening as soon as humanly possible because it is essential that we actually start  to see some movement on Manus Island in terms of people being resettled and  processed

JENNETT: But it hasn't been for want of effort, has it? There have been many signs  on regular occasions that Papua New Guinea has actually been mired in its own  political problems around this and has been dragging its feet. You can't blame  Australia entirely for that, can you?

MARLES: No, I blame Australia and I think there has been a want of effort, to be  frank. It was months after this Government was elected before the very question of  resettlement was actually raised between the then Immigration Minister Scott  Morrison and his counterpart in PNG. That's utterly unacceptable, it was not until the  tragic events surrounding Reza Berati that you actually see some kind of dialogue  occurring between the Australian Government and the PNG Government on this  question, and it is because they were much more focused on other questions than  on the operation of the facility on Manus. And since then I think there has been an  ineptness in the way in which the Australian Government has gone about its  management of the relationship with PNG and particularly in respect of the facility on  Manus Island so this is an Australian initiative. It is Australian policy that gave rise to  both the Manus Island facility and the Nauru facility. Accordingly, it should be the  Australian Government which is driving the results here and the fact of the matter is  they are not.

JENNETT: Alright Richard Marles, time is against us and I know you have a bit on  there in Perth, but thanks for making at least a few minutes available to talk to us  today.

MARLES: Thanks, Greg.

ENDS

