

THE HON. BILL SHORTEN  LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  MEMBER FOR MARIBYRNONG

E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP INTERVIEW  SYDNEY  THURSDAY, 19 NOVEMBER 2015

SUBJECT/S: Labor’s positive plan to close the Indigenous justice gap; Syria; Mal  Brough; Entitlements; Darwin Port; S.Kidman &Co

BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Before I talk about our  announcement in terms of Closing the Gap and a justice target for Aboriginal and  Torres Strait Islanders, I'd just like to record our pleasure that the French security forces  have been able to make arrests overnight and clamp down and bring the perpetrators of  the terrible terrorist incident to justice.

Terrorist organisations should realise that the civilised world is combined to catch and  bring to justice the evil perpetrators of the terrible events in Paris, and indeed what  they're doing in Syria and northern Iraq. I'm very confident that just as we see the  redoubled French efforts to bring people to justice, that Australia's security forces are  equally on their game and doing everything they can to ensure that Australians are safe  both home and abroad.

Turning to the announcement that Labor made yesterday, it is long overdue in this  country to have a justice target in terms of closing the gap between the lives of  Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islanders and non-Indigenous. It is dreadful, it is a national  humiliation, that a young Aboriginal man is more likely to go to jail than to go to  university. It is shocking that Aboriginal women are 34 times more likely to  experience family violence than non-Aboriginal Australian women. It is shocking  that Aboriginal women are 11 times more likely to die from family violence than non-Aboriginal Australian women. We need to change the justice system in this country. We  need to close the gap. It is not right that Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islanders who  comprise between 2 and 3 per cent of our national population make up a much larger  proportion of our prison population.

I think in 2015 that some people say that we're on top of a lot of the social challenges in  Australia and a lot of the justice issues in Australia. Nothing could be further from the  truth when it comes to the way that Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islanders are  experiencing the legal system. It is very, very important that this nation looks into the  mirror and says it is not good enough what we see, in term of the fact that we need to  have more prevention, less crime and less incarceration.

Labor's committing to providing more resources and making it a first order national issue  that Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islanders shouldn't be processed in the legal system in  the way they are, it's a dysfunctional legal system and justice denied to some  Australians is justice denied to all Australians. Happy to take questions on this and  other matters.

JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten, would Labor be prepared to accept some sort of power  sharing deal in Syria between the Shia and the Sunni Muslims which could also  see Bashar Al-Assad remain in power at least at an interim level?

SHORTEN: The conflict in Syria is very deep, very complex and there's a lot of deep  enmities, sectarian or religious rivalries overlaid by the rise of these  terrorist organisations such as ISIL or Daesh. I do not believe that long-term peace in  Syria can be guaranteed while Assad, the butcher, remains in control. Now I  understand that in transition arrangements some compromises may have to be made  in the short term, but what I am completely convinced of is that if Assad was to remain  in charge of Syria then there is no prospect for any stability and peace for the millions of  people who live in Syria and there's very little chance for the millions of Syrian refugees  wanting to return to Syria whilst Assad remains in control.

JOURNALIST: So - this is what Malcolm Turnbull seems to be pushing, while he is  overseas, talks of some sort of interim deal. So you would back an interim deal but you  would eventually want to see Assad gone?

SHORTEN: Syria and the conflict in that region has its roots going back not just in years  but in decades and beyond. There are deep-seeded hatreds by people of different  religious faiths within Syria. You have a dictatorship in charge. Long before  even ISIS rose to make their evil contribution to that part of the world, there has  been atrocities committed by the Syrian Government against the Syrian population.  There can be no lasting peace if you keep the butcher Assad in power. I do understand  that some countries have a preference for Assad; being Russia and perhaps Iran. But  what I also understand is that you are not going to get long-term peace, you are not  going to get stability, you're not going to have people thinking they can live safe lives in  Syria or indeed refugees to return whilst he remains in power in the long term. But  I understand that in the transition that really you need to work with the nations of the  region. Long-term solutions are going to require the regions - the nations in that region  taking majority if not complete control about the processes. The history of western  intervention in that part of the world has not been a very satisfactory experiment; it  hasn't delivered the outcomes I think that people hope. The only way you are going to

get peace in the Middle East is when the nations of the Middle East and the peoples in  the Middle East take control of their own future.

JOURNALIST: Bill Shorten, the first nation’s disability network went to the  United Nations last week to push for those prisoners who are unable to plead due to  mental illness. He'd like to see that, and this is Damian McGrath, who'd like to see that  as a part of COAG and having a universal bit of legislation to support those prisoners  who shouldn't be in prison. In particular the Indigenous people with disabilities, what are  your thoughts on that?

SHORTEN:  You’re right, there is a higher than national average proportion of  Indigenous Australians with a mental illness or cognitive impairment and they're  basically being slotted in jail, because there's no pathway to noncustodial sentences  and there's very little in the way of support for people with disabilities. Labor in  2013 proposed that by 2020, 90 per cent of our Indigenous population should have  access to the National Disability Insurance Scheme. It is not right that our prison system  is becoming the sort of accommodation, the venue of last resort when people have got  challenging behaviours or indeed have got challenges which do not make them criminal.  The real challenge in terms of our legal system and it's at the heart of your question, is  why is it that we see much higher rates of custodial sentences being awarded to people  of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander background than not of that background? There  is no doubt in my mind that the system in communities, the legal system despite all the  good work of magistrates, police, community legal service representatives is seeing that  it's almost become a processing, the justice system has become a processing sausage  factory where the conclusion is that more Indigenous Australians get put there - it  becomes almost a riot of passage. It's a dysfunctional justice system for  our communities. Justice denied to these people is really the toleration of  injustice everywhere. It doesn't have to be this way.

JOURNALIST: Is it something though that could be taken at the COAG meeting?

SHORTEN: Yes, I've said that if a Labor Government was elected after the  next election, the whole debate about justice targets would be at the first COAG  meeting we have - Council of Australian Governments. There have been some success  stories and I congratulate the New South Wales Government working with the  community of Burke, where two years ago it was written that if Burke was a country it  would be one of the most dangerous places in the world. The community there said  enough is enough. 18 different organisations came together, they said let's work on it  and congratulations to the New South Wales State Government for working with them  and they've seen significant improvements. What we want to do is take those sort of  examples, put them on the COAG agenda at the first meeting. You know,  there's elections aren't going to be won or lost by what happens to Aboriginal and  Torres Strait Islanders in our prison system, but the sort of nation that we want our

kids to admire, the sort of nation we want strangers who come to Australia to see who  we are, means that we cannot sweep this problem of ridiculous rates of incarceration for  one group of Australians, our first Australians, we can't sweep it under the carpet.

JOURNALIST: In your speech last night in Melbourne, you spoke about the  referendum and the current Prime Minister's inability, if you like, to see that push  forward. What are your thoughts there in terms of the referendum council?

SHORTEN: Well I think it's now time to announce a referendum council. I think it  should be equally balanced between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australians. It  should be equally balanced between men and women. I am concerned, though, that on  the one hand I think there is a deep reservoir of goodwill for constitutional recognition of  our first Australians in the constitution, but it needs to be more than just a piece  of poetry stapled to the front page on the Constitution. It needs to be more than just a  minimalist sort of reference to Indigenous Australians. We need to change our  Constitution in meaningful ways and I really respect the mounting concern, cynicism of  a lot of Indigenous Australians who say well what else is going to happen along with this  constitutional recognition? What's the post-constitutional recognition settlement with  Indigenous Australians going to look like? That's why we're putting the justice target on  the map. As I say, it's an uncomfortable, difficult matter to have a look at our  prison system and say are people in there who really shouldn't be in there? But this  nation has to be able to do tough things and what's happening is completely wrong. So  along with constitutional recognition, we want the Government to announce with myself  as soon as possible the membership of that council. We need to understand  there's now, I think, a level of frustration within Indigenous Australia that if all it's going  to be is a talkfest well that really isn't good enough.

JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten, can I just ask you about Mal Brough. He says he's  received a visit by the AFP over Peter Slipper's diary. Is it a good look for the police to  be raiding the office of a senior government minister?

SHORTEN: No, it's not. The position of Mal Brough is he's Minister for State. That's a  minister responsible for government integrity. He and Christopher Pyne and Wyatt Roy  need to come out and spell out their role working with James Ashby in bringing down  the former Speaker, Peter Slipper. I think Australians do deserve to find out  what happened here. It's not a good look and I think what they need to do is just really  spell out their involvement, what was their role and when that happens, then I  think people will be satisfied.

JOURNALIST: Should Brough step down while this investigation is going on?

SHORTEN: I don't know about that. I think what he just needs to do is sometimes in  politics we can overcomplicate issues, can't we? Just tell us what happened. Tell us  what happened.

JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten, in regards to federal travel entitlements, you've spent more  than $23,000 on family travel in the second half of last year. Should taxpayers be  footing this bill and and should this particular entitlement be overhauled?

SHORTEN: There's about three points in your question. First of all, with my  own entitlements, I'm more than confident they're above board and I'd appreciate  your question is not saying anything other than that.  In terms of the bigger issue  of entitlements, we did see the furor earlier this year with Bronwyn Bishop and the  helicopter. Tony Abbott responded, we were supportive of the response to bring in  respected elders to have a look at the current travel entitlement system and to see if it  lines up with community expectations. I, like all Australians, want to make sure that the  entitlement system matches community expectations and I await with interest the  findings of the report.

JOURNALIST: Does the family reunion allowance pass the infamous sniff test?

SHORTEN: I think it has so far but I think if this review has different views then we'll  look at it and probably implement it. Again I make this clear; when it comes to  entitlements, the community does have a legitimate right to ensure that the standards  being applied are consistent with community expectations. I'm more than confident  when you look at the calibre of the people doing the review including former  Speaker Harry Jenkins amongst others, that balance will be achieved. If there's need to  update well then it should be.

JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten, I'd just like to ask you about the sale of Darwin Port. Is  it embarrassing that the US President Barack Obama has reportedly chided the PM on  the lease deal with the Port of Darwin?

SHORTEN: Yeah, that was pretty remarkable, wasn't it? I just want to make sure that  this Government doesn't still have its training wheels on. What happens is you've got a  new Treasurer, a new Prime Minister. What they need to do is to have a  consistent application Foreign Investment Review Board procedures. I noticed on  the sale of the Kidman properties they've gone through a process, they've been  very clear on that - that's fair enough, I can see that. What does concern me is when it  comes to other matters they're not consistent. Business and investors, be they foreign  or domestic, want consistency. I think it is remarkable if the US president has made  those comments. I also think that they need to explain clearly the processes for  the long-term lease of the Darwin Port, I think there is community concern. It

doesn't seem to be going away as your questions reflected. I do think they need to  explain did they follow the same procedures here.

I also want to make another point about foreign investment more generally. When it  comes to the National Party and farms, this Government's all over foreign investment  and you know, they're very diligent and they're on their guard against  foreign investment, but when it comes to admitting people into Australia with temporary  work rights visa holders, this Government is basically asleep at the wheel. We've seen  the 7-Eleven scandal, we've seen their unwillingness to improve compliance regimes to  make sure that foreign trades people come into Australia meet Australian occupational  licenses. So this is a Government with double standards. When it comes to some  matters, when it's in their political interest, they move really fast but be it the apparently  clumsy handling of the Port of Darwin or indeed, their lack of interest in Australian  jobs, then this Government is, I think, a lot more disappointing.

JOURNALIST: On the Kidman sale, do you welcome the fact the Government has  blocked it?

SHORTEN: I look at the process, it was a big parcel of land. I think it's 1.3 per cent of  land, 2.5 per cent of agricultural land. Now, personally I had concerns. It's a big issue  but that's why we have a Foreign Investment Review Board process. The thing this  Government needs to be careful what message it sends to foreign investors. On the one  hand, they say Australia's open for business, that's a fair point. But on the other hand  we're seeing issues they're handling getting mired in politics from the Kidman land to  the Port of Darwin to the way they handle the fact there's 800,000 people  with temporary work rights in Australia, 800,000. And the compliance regime really  is they'll only do anything once there's a problem. We've got hundreds of thousands of  people unemployed. I think this Government has a lot of rhetoric about  foreign investment and trade, but when it comes to checking some of the detail as it  affects Australian jobs and Australian land, they're a lot more inconsistent.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: LEADER’S OFFICE MEDIA UNIT - 02 6277 4053

