

THE HON RICHARD MARLES MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER  PROTECTION   MEMBER FOR CORIO



E&EO TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW  2UE    MONDAY, 15 JUNE 2015

SUBJECT/S:  Payments to people smugglers.

STUART BOCKING: Richard Marles is Labor’s Immigration spokesman he’s on  the line, Richard Marles good morning.

RICHARD MARLES, SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER  PROTECTION:  Good morning, Stuart how are you?

BOCKING: Yeah I’m well thank you, do you think we’ve paid these people  smugglers?

MARLES: Well I think the way in which the Prime Minister has been answering  these questions over the last few days invites us all to believe that that’s what’s  happened. I mean that’s the only inference that you can draw; there has been  ample opportunity for the Prime Minister to tell us all that it ain’t so, that it never  happened and he’s patiently refused to do that and so when I first heard his  comments I wondered but he has been repeatedly asked this question and he  has repeatedly ducked it and I think the only thing we can take from that is he is  inviting us to believe that that’s exactly what happened.

BOCKING: Now of course the argument from some will be, well it is a case of  whatever it takes to stop these boats; we don’t want the boats arriving here and  therefore the Prime Minister and the Government is justified in paying people  smugglers to turn back boats, if that’s the case and if that is the argument why  wouldn’t you come out and say it?

MARLES:  Well I think one of the things we need to be really careful about here  is that people don’t, the Government doesn’t rush into a quick fix, we all want to  see an end to the flow of asylum seeker vessels from Java to Christmas Island,  we want to see an end to the loss of life at sea and hopefully that’s what we have  seen. That needs to endure not just for a year or two but over the course of  decades and to have a situation where you would put in play, if that’s what’s  occurred, another pull factor, I think is very dangerous. We’ve put a lot of effort,  both sides of government, both sides of politics into trying to put people  smugglers out of business, if this story is true it seems that what the Government  is doing is offering people smugglers a new business.

BOCKING: Well is does potentially open up certainly a new line of their  business, it’s a very lucrative idea - US$5000 to every crew member on board  one of these boats.

MARLES:  So we’re all for stopping the boats that’s what we should all be trying  to do, my question is simply if this is what the Government is doing, I’m not sure  how that helps, I’m really not sure how that’s helps.

BOCKING: So how far do we go then, I mean what’s the moral boundary in  some of this when we talk about stopping the boats because there are some the  Greens and others who have moral concerns about us simply turning back boats  to start with, we know Indonesia has complained about it despite the fact it  seems there’s evidence that they have been doing that themselves, when we talk  about some of the moral boundaries as a sovereign nation, what is the point in  which we can no longer go, does that involve paying people who might have  provided paid rewards to people to give us information on bombers and others,  people see that as a legitimate payment, could this be seen as a legitimate  payment.

MARLES: Well, I think the point here, if you’re talking about a moral boundary  we do want to see an end to the flow of asylum seeker vessels because we need  to see an end to the loss of life at sea, we watched a human tragedy play out on  our borders, we can never see that again, I think that is the moral imperative in  this set of circumstances, the point I would raise in relation to this current  situation and if money has been paid to people smugglers is simply the question  of how that helps the end of actually reducing, seeing reducing the flow of asylum  seeker vessels and not in fact creating a pull factor of its own.

BOCKING: Well it does potentially create an incentive for them to have another  go doesn’t it? Figuring well there will be more bags of money on offer.

MARLES: And that’s the point, it’s not so much how far we go, it’s whether this  was a smart step to take in the overall objective of seeing an end to the flow of  asylum seeker vessels and not just measured over the last year or two but over

the next decade or two and that I think is the way in which we need to view this  question.

BOCKING: So how do we go about getting an answer on this question because  we know the Government has been very secretive, on water matters have been  off limits we simply don’t discuss it, how do we get the detail given that when the  story first arose the Immigration Minister, your opposite in the Government, Peter  Dutton, he was very forthright it was denial, denial, denial as the days have gone  by certainly Tony Abbott has well and truly backed away from an outright denial.

MARLES: And that’s right and when Peter Dutton originally denied these  allegations or this assertion when it was first made, I’ve got to say personally I  took him at his word and I assumed it didn’t happen it seemed a ludicrous  proposition; the Immigration Minister when asked says it never happened - that  makes sense. If in fact it now turns out that that is what has occurred Peter  Dutton has got an issue here and not just an issue in terms of the policy of this  but a personal issue in terms of him as a minister, because he flatly denied this  up front if he has denied something which has turned out to have actually  occurred, if that’s the way this pans out he has a real issue here and he has a lot  of explaining to do and it highlights the fact that what we need in relation to this  area of policy as in fact we should have in all areas of policy is transparency, I  mean Australians do have a fundamental right to know how their government  spends its money and their money and the issue we have seen from day one on  this area of policy is this operational matter being raised by the Government, not,  not really for any national security reason, not really as a strategic reason about  defeating people smugglers, but much more as a media strategy and what it  does is deny the Australian people the opportunity to scrutinise a matter which is  very, very clearly in the public interest.

BOCKING: So is there a mid-way point, because I think often you guys probably  in government did go too far, there was this regular shipping news, every second  a new boat arrived, it was just one after another. Is there some sort of mid-point  between the outright secrecy that we’ve seen now and the operation of the  shipping news of the last time you were in government?

MARLES: Well I don’t accept the characterisation of how it played under the last  government, I mean I’ve been the first to say that there were mistakes made by  the former Labor Government, no question about that, I actually don’t think the  question of telling people what is going on out there was a fundamental mistake  and actually I don’t understand the logic which says that telling people smugglers  that a policy is being successful in bringing an end to the flow of asylum seeker  vessels isn’t a very good message to send back up the line to people smugglers  to let them know that their business is over and that there is no point in coming  and so I don’t think this has ever been a real question about trying to achieve  some strategic objective in the fight against people smugglers, it has always  been just a media strategy. And I make this point as well Stuart, the height of

when, you know, operational security or operational matters was being invoked  by the Government, they were still on a weekly basis briefing the media with how  many boats came anyway so you were talking about withholding information for a  day or two, I don’t think that’s the big difference here I think it was a matter of  trying to make sure that you weren’t in the media the whole time now that’s fine  but let’s call it for what it is, it is a media strategy and it does deny the Australian  people in an instance like this the opportunity to properly scrutinise and talk  about what is a really legitimate matter in the public interest and that is whether  this has been an appropriate expense of Australian tax payer money.

BOCKING: So how do we go about trying to find out whether it has happened or  not, what do you do now?

MARLES: Well we need to hear from, we really need to hear from the Prime  Minister today I think, we need some clarity on this matter and frankly as long as  this is allowed to go on without the Prime Minister coming clean about exactly  what happened out there and the about the basis on which decision were made  then we are still going to have confusion, that’s why last night I actually wrote to  the Auditor General, I’ve asked the Auditor General to firstly investigate whether  or not these payments did occur, I mean it’s a threshold question, but if they did,  to get a sense of how they were authorised and whether it would be a proper  expenditure of tax payer money, to give wads of cash to the people smugglers  who turn up at the side of an Australian Navy vessel.

BOCKING: And if money was paid who would have had to have authorised that  payment?

MARLES: All good questions which is why we’ve asked the Auditor General to  investigate this and to provide us with answers to precisely that question. But I  can tell you this, this is a matter that needs to be pursued we do need to hear  from the Government what exactly they have done and we need to clear up the  discrepancies which exist now between the Prime Minister on the one hand and  his Immigration and his Foreign Minister on the other, who both of whom flatly  denied that this ever occurred.

BOCKING: Look appreciate your time, I wish you well.

MARLES: Thanks Stuart.

BOCKING: Thank you very much, Richard Marles, Labor’s spokesman on  Immigration.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: LIDIJA IVANOVSKI 0427051563

