

THE HON RICHARD MARLES MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER  PROTECTION   MEMBER FOR CORIO

E&EO TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  SKY NEWS AM AGENDA  WEDNESDAY, 1 JUNE 2015

SUBJECT/S: Reports of the death of an Australian in Syria; Iraq; Michael  Thawley’s comments on China; Boat turn-backs

KIERAN GILBERT: This is AM Agenda, with me now the Shadow Immigration  Minister Richard Marles. Mr Marles, thanks for your time. First of all your reaction  to these reports of another Australian killed in that conflict, not fighting for IS, but  fighting against them with the Kurds?

RICHARD MARLES, SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER  PROTECTION: Well if this news turns out to be correct it’s obviously very sad,  our thoughts go out to the family of the young man concerned. I think what it also  highlights is this is a very dangerous part of the world and Australians shouldn’t  be travelling there, shouldn’t be engaged in this conflict in this way. I mean, the  way we need to combat Islamic State, and we obviously need to be doing that, is  through the international mission which is there in Iraq at the moment. But I think  it’s very important that this serves as a warning to anybody else seeking to  participate in the conflict in this way.

GILBERT: Now to some broader issues on the conflict, Asian nations, Dennis  Shanahan reporting this morning, particularly Singapore urging the United States  to do more on the ground in the fight against Islamic State. Is that your  understanding?

MARLES: Well look, I think it’s important that America and her allies, including  Australia, are doing everything we can to combat ISIS. It’s very important that we  are doing that. I can absolutely understand a sense that exists within our region  that ISIS needs to be confronted as much as humanly possible. Of course, that’s  a complicated question and any observer of the situation in Iraq can see

immediately that any particular action needs to be calibrated in a way that makes  things better and not the opposite. We also obviously need to be working very  closely with the Iraqi government and making sure that whatever international  engagement there is done in accordance with the wishes of the Iraqi  government. So from the point of view of Australia I think our position is clear.  We need to be working very closely with the US, very closely with the  international mission and that, in turn, needs to be working hand-in-glove with the  Iraqi government. We do need to be doing everything we can to combat ISIS.

GILBERT: In terms of that, would you be open to - the Foreign Minister didn’t  give any indication there, she says that there hasn’t been a request from Iraq at  this stage - but for the ANZAC forces, the Australian advise and assist roles  would expand to also include accompanying the Iraqi forces?

MARLES: Well I reiterate what the Foreign Minister said: there have been no  requests of that kind by the Iraqi government. It’s obviously very important that  we are working closely with the Iraqi government. From the point of view of Labor  we have made it very clear: we don’t think that ground troops should be  deployed. What we would be doing is working very closely with the Government  on a matter of national security such as this. We would want to be getting  briefings from the Government about what their intentions are, but I hear what  you just heard from the Foreign Minister that there has been no requests so I  don’t think that is a prospect which is on the table.

GILBERT: Let’s look at the comments of Michael Thawley, the Secretary of the  Prime Minister’s Department. When asked whether China is willing or able to  play a global leadership role he was pretty blunt, he said ‘the answer is no, it’s  not willing or able to play a serious global leadership role’. Your reaction to his  comments?

MARLES: Well China is relevant, China is very relevant right now globally and if  you project forward you can only see China becoming more relevant - more  relevant economically and more relevant in a security sense. So I’m not exactly  sure where Michael Thawley’s comments lead but what’s clear from the interests  of Australia is that we need to be continually engaging with China. We do need to  be encouraging China into the international rules based system, and we need to  be finding as many avenues as possible for China and America to be talking with  each other in the context of East Asian affairs. That’s why, when we were in  government, we worked very hard to get America as a member of the East Asian  Summit - to provide a really important forum at a leadership level where those  countries can be talking together and we can be present. So we need to be  engaging with China, because they are only going to become more relevant, and  of course in an economic sense that’s the case as well. Our economic  relationship with China is going to continue to grow and we have been an  enormous beneficiary of that. So we need to be working with China and  encouraging China to participate in as many regional pieces of architecture as

possible. Now the other point that Michael Thawley is making is, of course, the  American alliance. The American alliance is fundamental to Australia’s foreign  policy. The more America is involved in the region the better and that’s why we,  of course, were very encouraging and keen to establish the marine rotation out of  Darwin. So the American alliance is going to be absolutely critical to our future.

GILBERT: Ok, now finally I’ve got to ask you about the boat turn-backs issue.  There’s been mixed reporting on this and not a great deal of certainty on where  this is going to land for Labor heading into your conference. It looks like there is  going to be a fight at the ALP National Conference, but post that conference will  the Australian community have a clear sense of what your policy will be when it  comes to boat turn-backs?

MARLES: Well the answer to that question is yes. I obviously don’t want to pre-empt what happens at National Conference, but I can assure you that there will  be an intelligent, dignified debate about all this. What I can also say is we will do  nothing which sees a re-opening of the journey between Java and Christmas  Island. This was a flow of asylum seeker vessels which saw hundreds, ultimately  thousands of people die, a human tragedy unfold on our border. We’re not going  to do anything which re-opens that. Now we will have a detailed, intelligent,  compassionate discussion about the best way forward, but we are absolutely  resolute about the question of ensuring that that journey does not start up again.  I think in that there is actually unity -

GILBERT: Is everyone in Labor? Is everyone in Labor, because there are those  in the Left who would be a bit softer on this surely?

MARLES: I think there is a resolution across the party that the reopening of the  journey between Java and Christmas Island would only be a bad thing. We  cannot see that human tragedy unfold on our border again and it’s very important  that that not be allowed to occur. Now there are legitimate questions in relation to  turn-backs and I’ve raised concerns about that. The fact of the matter is the  government has been hopeless in answering those. Part of that goes to our  ongoing relationship with Indonesia on this question, which is going to be  fundamental to having an enduring solution to keeping that route shut, not just  over the last year and this, but over this decade and the next. But we’ll work that  through, there will be a clear outcome and there is a very clear resolve that the  journey is not going to reopen.

GILBERT: Richard Marles thanks for your time, I appreciate it.

MARLES: Thanks Kieran.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: NICK TRAINOR 0407 078 138

