

THE HON RICHARD MARLES MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER  PROTECTION   MEMBER FOR CORIO



E&EO TRANSCRIPT  TV INTERVIEW  ABC NEWSRADIO   MONDAY, 15 JUNE 2015

SUBJECT/S:  Payments to people smugglers; citizenship; Fairfax poll.

MARIUS BENSON: Richard Marles, Indonesia has made it clear it’s not happy with  Australian action in terms of the reported bribing of people smugglers, but Julie Bishop  has responded quite strongly as Foreign Minister to that saying that Indonesia needs to  get its own house in order; do you support her view there?

RICHARD MARLES, SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER  PROTECTION:  Well, I don’t think now is a time for the Australian Government to be walking  down that path. I mean the point here is we actually need to have a co-operative  relationship with Indonesia in respect of how we treat asylum seeker vessels  coming from Java to Christmas Island and we need to do that if we want to make  sure those vessel stop coming and that is an enduring solution measured over  not just a year or two but the course of decades. We have to have a co-operative  relationship with Indonesia in this respect and that’s why what we’ve seen play  out in the last few days has been of enormous concern, it is having an impact on  our relationship with Indonesia, the fact that the Indonesian Foreign Minister has  got engaged in this issue now bares that out, and what we really need to hear  from our Prime Minister is what has actually happened, I mean if these payments  have been made, and the Prime Minister is inviting us to believe that they have,  well then that is obviously a very serious matter it raises real questions about  their legality, it raises obvious question around the prudence of working in effect  paying people smugglers and creating a pull factor which doesn’t exists now,  these are issues that the Prime Minister needs to clarify and he needs to be  talking to the Australian people on this issue today.



BENSON: From the Labor side it’s being reported in the Sydney Morning Herald  that Bill Shorten has written to the Auditor General asking him to investigate  these claims of bribes is that what Labor’s done?

MARLES: Well in fact last night I wrote to the Auditor General and have asked  firstly whether an investigation as to whether or not these bribes have actually  been paid, whether this has is what has occurred, and if it has occurred raising  the question about the basis upon which a payment of that kind could be  authorised, and if so whether any process was gone through in authorising those  payments. Again, we come back to the fact that if this happened there are  serious questions about the legal basis upon which it has happened and so I  have written to the Auditor General asking first of all an investigation as to  whether payments have been made but secondly if they have on what basis they  could properly be authorised.

BENSON: Could I turn to another matter which is going to be central to  Parliament over the next two weeks, which is the Government’s plan to strip  citizenship from terror suspects. In principle Labor is still on side with that  proposal?

MARLES: Well we support updating the Citizenship Act to include the principle  which currently exists which is that people who take up arms against Australia  lose their citizenship, to take into account the phenomenon of an organisation  like ISIS, bearing in mind that we need to make sure that we are not rendering  people stateless. Now that’s a principle that we’ve been articulating now for  weeks and weeks, our position is very clear, but on the Government’s side what  we’ve got here is a dogs breakfast, it is hard to know exactly what the  Government is proposing, they are split down the middle in terms of both their  Cabinet and their party room and now it appears as though the legislation that  they have prepared, they themselves are not confident would survive a  challenge, a legal challenge. So we need to again get some clarity from the  Government and what we want to do is have an adult conversation with them  about how we can update the Citizenship Act in this very important way but  instead we are witnessing basically kids in a school yard scrapping with each  other over Australia’s Citizenship Act which is about profound a piece of  legislation as any country could have.

BENSON: Could I turn finally to the opinion poll out in Fairfax papers today, an  Ipsos poll shows Labor doing a bit better, it’s gone from fifty-fifty to Labor ahead  fifty-three, forty-seven - you’d obviously be happy if that’s the case.

MARLES: Well that’s fine but we’re not, we genuinely are not going to operate  on the basis of opinion polls. All I know Marius is that when I talk to people in my  own electorate they have for a long time now been very disappointed with the  performance of Tony Abbott as Prime Minister and the Abbott Government, this

is not the group that they thought they had elected. This is not a Government  which is undertaking its business in a fair way, but I think the other point Marius  is that it’s not a government which is operating in a predictable way; it seems like  every day there is a new surprise, be it a new tax, a new level of unfairness or  indeed in relation to what we’ve seen over the last few days a new issue which  the Government refuses to explain.

BENSON: Richard Marles thank you very much.

MARLES: Thankyou Marius.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: LIDIJA IVANOVSKI 0427 051 563

