attorneygeneral.gov.au https://www.attorneygeneral.gov.au/transcripts/Pages/2015/FourthQuarter/18-November-2015-Interview-with-Graham-Richardson-Richo-Program-Sky-News.aspx

Interview with Graham Richardson, Richo Program, Sky News

18 November 2015

Topics: National security

E&OE

Richo: Welcome George.

Attorney-General: Hi Richo.

Richo: I don’t think anything I said there is terribly radical but I was extremely disappointed by the statement the Mufti  put out. What is your view?

Attorney-General: Well I agree with what you said Richo. I think it was very disappointing. This was an occasion,  where ever there was an occasion, that called for unequivocal condemnation. No equivocation, no hesitation, no  nuance, unequivocal condemnation. This was the cold blooded, mass-slaughter of 130 innocent people in the name  of religious totalitarianism and there is no excuse what so ever for failing to call this for what it is. Now I think frankly  the Grand Mufti let the Australian Muslim community down by his hesitant and equivocal response, and it’s not typical  by the way of what other leaders of that community have said. I’ve just been reading some of the statements that  have been put out by other leaders of the Islamic community in Australia - by the Islamic Council of Victoria, which  says that we unequivocally condemn this callous and senseless act of violence, and there were statements of similar  effect from the Islamic Council of Queensland, the Islamic Council of Western Australia and from many other groups  representing Australian Muslims. I think the Grand Mufti, as the titular leader of Australia Muslims, should have made  a statement just as strong as his co-religionists made through the various other Muslim peak bodies.

Richo: I agree and I am frightened by some of the things I hearing. Now I think it’s only in the last few days there’s a  suggestion that ASIO, which as I said at the start of the show for which you have ministerial responsibility, is saying  that they are investigating 475 plots. How scared should I be about that?

Attorney-General: Well the figure is in fact 400, it’s approximately 400. I know that figure of 475 has been put around  in recent days but I spoke to the Director-General of ASIO at length yesterday. I was in Sydney yesterday and I had a  very long briefing with the Director-General and his senior officers. The figure is approximately 400 priority  investigations being conducted by ASIO at the moment into this problem and there are, we estimate, approximately  190 people actively involved in facilitating or financing other Australian Muslims, almost all of them very young people,  to travel to fight with ISIL in the Middle East. Now let’s put this into context Richo, you were quoting comparative  figures before. There are between 400,000 and 500,000 Muslim people in Australia. We are talking about 400 high  priority investigations and about 190 people we can identify as being involved in facilitation, and financing, and  recruitment, so we are talking about 1 in 1000 at most who are of concern to ASIO. It is a very severe problem, I’m  not for a moment making light of the problem, because in fact we have never seen anything on this scale in Australia  before. But that being said, it’s important to put this into the context of the fact that the overwhelming majority of  Australian Muslims are as horrified as we are, as the statement that I’ve just read to you from the Islamic Council of  Victoria and other Islamic bodies, state peak bodies demonstrates. That’s a particular reason why the weak response  from the Grand Mufti is so disappointing because he has let his own co-religionists down.

Richo: He has and I think he gives those people who want to excite anti-Muslim feeling he gives them an excuse, I  always worry about that. But when I look at what happened in Paris, and we’ve got film of it running while you and I



are talking. One of the things that worries me is that, from what I have read over the last few years, the French



intelligence service is supposed to be really really good, top notch. And here they are, this ring-leader they thought



was in Syria, looks like they are catching him tonight three to four kilometres away from where it all happened the



other day.



Attorney-General



: Well look Richo, it’s not really appropriate for me to comment on what is an operation, a law



enforcement operation that’s underway as we speak on the other side of the world. But the French intelligence



services will obviously want to be having a very close look at themselves and how it was that this massacre was



coordinated across many individuals who obviously escaped undetected. President Hollonde in his address to the



French Assembly I think said similar words that French security and intelligence services would need to look very



carefully at why this was missed.



But what I want to say to you Richo if I may, and your viewers’, is that they should be reassured about the capability,



and skill, and thoroughness, and preparation of Australia’s intelligence agencies. ASIO, the Australian Federal Police,



the state and territory police forces and those elements of them in particular that are tasked to do counter-terrorism,



they are the best in the world. And I see the intelligence every day Richo, it crosses my desk and you can never say



that it can’t happen in Australia. I don’t say that it can’t happen in Australia but I am very confident and the Australian



people should be very confident that we have the best intelligence and law enforcement agencies in the world to



minimise the risk of that happening to the lowest possible level it could be.



Richo



: Now obviously with what has happened, a Syrian passport being found as they say at the scene of the crime



and we’re bringing in 12,000, or whatever the number it turns out to be in the end, people from Syria. Again people



are frightened of these migrants.



They’re saying how can we make sure that there are no bad guys among them. Now



by the way that ignores the fact that if I were in ISIL and I wanted to send someone to this country, they would be



flying in first class, they’d be armed with a brief case, and they’d be wearing an Amani suit. I’d make sure they didn’t



look anything like a terrorist is supposed to look like. But nonetheless, I can’t go anywhere without people saying we



shouldn’t let them in, this is too dangerous.



Attorney-General



: Well I can understand that community sentiment but I think the Australian Government did the



right thing, it was in fact in Mr. Abbott’s last week as Prime Minister and I think it was quite a noble gesture for his



term to finish on to make this important humanitarian decision. Every one of the 12,000 will be subject to exhaustive



health, character, and security checks, every last one of them. Nobody will be allowed in unless they pass those



health, and character, and security checks and ASIO, which does the security assessments is very, very good at this.



Richo



: But how do you have a security check when there are no records, there’s nobody to check with, it’s just



virtually impossible in Syria to know a) where somebody comes from, and b) what their record might be?



Attorney-General



: Well we are selecting people who we can be satisfied with. Remember Richo there are millions of



refugees, most of them by the way internally displaced, refugees within the Syrian border. But we will identify within



that vast number of humanity 12,000 people who need, who are legitimate refugees, about whom we can have the



level of assurance.



Richo



: Well I hope you are right. Now originally I asked, and remember I did ask you to come on this show before the



Paris incident of Friday night, and the reason I did it was that you wanted to extend the surveillance orders to 14 year



olds.



Attorney-General



: Yes.



Richo



: Now that seems like a hell of a thing to do but as I said in my intro, and I’m not sure if you heard it all, I mean



there is a 15 year in Parramatta, they are getting younger and younger aren’t they?



Attorney-General



: Well they are. It’s one of the most alarming trends and the legislation that I introduced into the



Senate last week, which has now gone off to be considered by the Parliamentary Joint Committee on Intelligence and



Security, does provide for the lower age threshold for control orders to be moved from 16 to 14. And as you just



pointed out, the Parramatta shooter wouldn’t have been caught, if we had identified him in advance, there couldn’t



have been a control order made in respect of him because he would have been too young. People are getting



younger and younger, they are being ensnared and enticed by, in an almost cultish way, by the terrorism recruiters



and we have to deal with that and we are determined to write laws that are strong enough to deal with all eventualities



to keep the community safe.



Richo



: Well I’ve got to say George Brandis, I don’t envy your task, which is an extraordinarily difficult one but I have



to say, despite the fact you are a Liberal and you do have a right to be wrong, I’ve got to say I’ve got great confidence



in the fact that someone like you is doing this job. Thanks very much for your time.



Attorney-General



: That’s very kind of you to say that Richo but can I just say that the people we should have the



greatest confidence in are the men and women of ASIO, the men and women of the Australian Federal Police, the



men and women of the counter-terrorism units of the state and territory police. They’re the people who put their lives



on the line. They are very skilled, they are great Australians and the reason we walk in relative safety in our streets in



Australia today, the reason we haven’t had an episode like we’ve seen in Paris in recent days is because of those



very fine men and women.



Richo



: Indeed it is. Thanks very much George Brandis.



[Ends]

