

THE HON AMANDA RISHWORTH MP  SHADOW ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR EDUCATION  SHADOW ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR HIGHER  EDUCATION

FEDERAL MEMBER FOR KINGSTON



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW  FIVEAA BREAKFAST  FRIDAY, 27 JULY 2015

SUBJECT/S: ALP National Conference, boat turnbacks, marriage equality,  renewable energy

DAVID PENBERTHY: Well he was battered and bruised but eventually Labor  leader Bill Shorten did get his way after a series of compromises were made at  the ALP national conference in Melbourne over the weekend. One of the many  Labor figures that was there was the Member for the excellent southern suburbs,  the Member for Kingston, Amanda Rishworth who joins us now. Amanda thank  you so much for your time. Just in terms of boat people and boat turnbacks first.  Bill Shorten did prevail on this issue. But has his leadership been damaged by  the images of Tanya Plibersek, Penny Wong, Anthony Albanese, so many senior  members of cabinet refusing to back the alternative Prime Minister?

AMANDA RISHWORTH, SHADOW ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR EDUCATION  AND SHADOW ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR HIGHER EDUCATION: Well not  at all, and I think this is one thing that the Labor does which neither the Greens  Party or the Liberal Party does, and that’s have our debates on the floor of  conference and actually have a discussion about it. I think unlike some other  Labor leaders in the past, Bill Shorten didn’t try and wait until it was all sorted, he  actually came out very clearly and articulated what he believed, which is a bold  move, but one that I think was a very brave move and a very important move for  a leader to do, and I think it showed really good leadership. Now, we have our  discussions and our debates, we’re a very broad party, and we’ve now come to a  conclusion and Tanya Plibersek, Penny Wong, Anthony Albanese have all made

it very clear that they will back our policy, which if you actually listen to the  debate, everyone who spoke on it said we have more in common than in  disagreement. There was one part on which we disagreed, and the conference  had their say.

PENBERTHY: Now, in your seat at the last election, you must have got a lot of  feedback from the community, particularly given how hard Tony Abbott  campaigned on his stop-the-boats slogan. There was a view that Labor had lost  control of our borders. Is Bill Shorten’s policy designed to completely neutralise  the issue going into an election next year?

RISHWORTH: I don’t think that the issue that we debated on the conference  floor was about how to win an election. It really the concern of people, and  people have raised this with me in my electorate, the concern that people were  dying at sea, and that there was a very dangerous journey between Java and  Christmas Island, and because of the chaos around seeing people die. I think  that what Bill Shorten and everyone was really clear about is that we did not want  to re-open that journey between Java and Christmas Island, and we discussed it  within the party about how we get there. I think that was has been very clear,  from my perspective, we can’t ignore that turn-back has been a part of the  solution, and we should not close that option off to the Labor Party when we’re  back in Government.

PENBERTHY: Just on the question of gay marriage. Labor resolved that they  would make it a conscience vote for the next two Parliaments’, which is around  about 6 years, and after that it will become a binding policy. Was that because of  the fear that there are people in your faction, the right faction of the party, who  have a strong view perhaps informed by their religious beliefs that opposes gay  marriage, they might have actually quit the party or had to have been expelled  from the party for not supporting the policy?

RISHWORTH: Yes, well I think we’ve always had a very broad church so-to-speak in the Labor Party. There are people that have very strongly held religious  beliefs around the issue of marriage equality and same-sex marriage. So of  course, there were concerns that we would be binding them on issues that for a  long time have been a conscience vote. At the same time I think it is a practical  issue as well, and that is if we want Tony Abbott to give a free vote, to give a  conscience vote, then we need to be arguing the same, and I think that if Tony  Abbott were to give a conscience vote, we may see marriage equality come to  Australia within this term of Parliament. So I think there are two elements. One of  course that there are people who have strong religious beliefs, and I think there’s  also the expectation that if we were to be patient, if we were to see Tony Abbott  put this issue up, it would potentially become law by the end of the year. So at  this stage we still preserve it as a conscience vote. It is only a small number of  MP’s on the Labor side of politics, we’re respecting their views while at the same

time putting pressure on Tony Abbott to actually do what he says and make sure  that in this term in this Parliament, this issue will be dealt with.

JANE REILLY: Amanda, earlier in this show we were talking to Kevin Scarce  who’s the nuclear Royal Commissioner, he’s just returned from North America.  Will the Federal Labor Government support a nuclear industry in South Australia  in the future?

RISHWORTH: We’ve said we’ll wait and see the outcomes of the Royal  Commission, and certainly we’re waiting to see that. Of course focussing on jobs  in South Australia is really important. In saying that though we’ve been very clear  we think the role for nuclear power doesn’t stack up necessarily and with our  conference we announced I think a very ambitious target but I think a very  achievable target of getting to 50% renewable energy. Most people know we’ve  got lots of sun, lots of wind, and lots of potential to really diversify our energy  source when it comes to renewable energy. So we’ll wait and see what the Royal  Commission has to say.

PENBERTHY: But don’t you think though, Amanda Rishworth, particularly when  you look at suburbs like Hackham in your seat, and looking up north to Nick  Champion’s seat in Elizabeth where unemployment is about 30%, that there’s an  opportunity for Federal Labor people in South Australia to be a bit bolder on this  issue on behalf of the many South Australians post-manufacturing who are  desperate for jobs?

RISHWORTH: Absolutely, I’m always fighting for jobs and one of those fights  includes building our submarines here in South Australia, but also I don’t think we  can ignore the jobs that are created by the renewable energy sector. Often this  debate is characterised as only jobs in the old coal industry, and there’s a lot of  jobs in that, but there’s also jobs in the renewable sector - investment is huge  and there are a lot of jobs there as well. But I’m always fighting for jobs, I don’t  necessarily pick just one industry in which I fight for jobs, I fight for them right  across the board and I have to say as a Federal Labor Member I haven’t seen  the Liberal party either state or federal really committed to South Australian jobs.  PENBERTHY: We’ll have to leave it there.  ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: BEK HUPPATZ 0422 687 199

