





THE HON. BILL SHORTEN  LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  MEMBER FOR MARIBYRNONG

E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  ABC’S 7:30   WEDNESDAY, 22 JULY 2015

SUBJECT/S: Boat turn-back policy; Labor’s plan for 50 per cent renewable  energy; Tony Abbott’s royal commission

LEIGH SALES, HOST: And with me now from our Melbourne studio is the Opposition  Leader, Bill Shorten. Welcome to the program.

BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Good evening, Leigh.

SALES: Why is Labor finally agreeing to turn back the boats?

SHORTEN: Because Labor wants to defeat the people smugglers and we want to  prevent drownings at sea. And therefore one of the options which we believe has to be  on the table, if we're given the privilege of forming a government, has to be the option to  turn back boats.

SALES: But less than a year ago you said there was no evidence that turn backs were  effective, what's changed your mind?

SHORTEN: I think it's clear that the combination of regional resettlement with offshore  processing, and also the turn back policy, is defeating people smugglers. It's not an  easy issue for Labor because on one hand we're absolutely committed to the humane  treatment of refugees and on the other hand we also want to prevent people drowning  at sea, and we want to make sure that the people smugglers and the criminal  syndicates can't get back into action by exploiting government policies. It's not easy,  though, because it involves the admission, I think, that mistakes were made when Labor  was last in government. And for myself, if I want to be the leader of this nation, I've got  to be able to face the truth and the truth for me is that if we have policies in place which

gives sustenance and support to people smugglers to exploit vulnerable people, where  they put these vulnerable people on unsafe boats and then people drown at sea, I can't  support any policies which do that.

SALES: You admit that Labor got it wrong, how many lives would have been saved if  Labor had adopted these policies in government?

SHORTEN: Well, if we're going to go back and look at the history, I really wish that the  Liberals hadn't teamed up the Greens to defeat the Malaysia solution. That, I believe,  was the basis, regional resettlement has principally driven the defeat of people  smugglers. So I believe that there was a great opportunity missed when Tony Abbott  when he was Opposition Leader, wouldn't work with the then Labor Government. He  played politics rather than took a bipartisan national interest. Very recently before  Parliament rose Mr Abbott came to me and he said that there was a problem with the  law and would Labor work with him to preserve the model which defeats people  smugglers? The Labor caucus debated it and we said yes, we would. I wish that the  then Opposition had shown the same leadership that we're prepared to show in  Opposition now.

SALES: Nonetheless you were in government, why did you stick with a failing policy for  so long when it clearly did cost lives?

SHORTEN: We did try the Malaysia solution, so I'm not going to allow history to be  rewritten. That was struck down by the High Court so then we had to go and ask the  then Opposition to work with us and in my opinion, to the everlasting shame of Mr  Abbott and his then Opposition, they wouldn't work with us.

SALES: But Mr Shorten, it was your judgment that you didn't want to try turn backs then  and now you're saying turn backs would make a difference?

SHORTEN: I'm leader now and after a lot of looking at the question and working with  my shadow cabinet team and the shadow immigration spokesperson, Richard Marles - I  can no longer escape the conclusion that Labor, if we form a government, needs to  have all the options on the table. We're committed to regional resettlement, I should  also say - and that would include boat turn backs as an option, where safe to do so - but  I also have to say that I believe that the challenge of dealing with refugees and  supporting and being humane, a humane nation, doesn't just start at the low watermark  of our shoreline. We will have more to say in coming days about being willing to support  more refugees and to take up our burden internationally because -

SALES: Can I take that as you're going to increase Australia's refugee intake?

SHORTEN: We'll have more to say. I do believe we can probably take more refugees  but this is really an important point. I appreciate you giving me the time to answer it.  Boat turn backs is only one of the issues in a pretty complex situation. What we have is  more displaced people, more refugees than the world has ever seen. We have those

dreadful scenes in the Mediterranean in recent months where people smugglers are  putting hundreds and hundreds of people on boats, they sink and hundreds and  hundreds of people drown. I just think that we have to be realistic that this is a global  problem, Australia should do its fair share and that's why we're prepared to consider  things which previously we might not have because we get that it's a big problem and  we've got to be humane. The issue is not refugees, the issue is making sure people are  safe.

SALES: How do you think embracing this particular aspect, the turn backs, will go down  at the Labor conference on the weekend and what will you do if your rank and file  doesn't endorse it?

SHORTEN: Well first of all, all Labor people, people who disagree with boat turn backs  or people who accept it, we're all committed to defeating people smugglers, we're all  committed to preventing drownings at sea and we're all committed to the humane  treatment of refugees.

SALES: I'd like to get through a lot of things so what would you do if the Labor  conference doesn't endorse this turn backs policy?

SHORTEN: Leigh, I'm not the sort of person who gives up. I hope people will work and  understand why we're saying what we're saying.

SALES: When will Labor announce the full details of its carbon emissions reduction  policy?

SHORTEN: We're starting to outline our policies now. We've said today that we support,  by 2030, the ambition of having 50 per cent of our energy mix that Australians use and  households and business, being derived from renewable energy sources.

SALES: And how much will that cost government to do that?

SHORTEN: I believe in the long term it's going to save consumers money. I think it will  support the creation of jobs, I think it will be a fair dinkum attempt and a fair dinkum  accomplishment to help reduce pollution and improve and tackle climate change. So I  think when you look at jobs, investment, tackling climate change, it ticks all the boxes.



SALES: But that industry is heavily subsidised so what are your costings on how much  it would cost you to reach that 50 per cent target by 2030?

SHORTEN: The Liberals are already out trying to scare everyone, that's what they do.  They're the party of the past, they're not focused on the future -

SALES: I wasn't asking about them.

SHORTEN: I'm just explaining the context of the policy decisions which we're going to  talk about at our conference. When we look at the issue of cost, and that's a very valid  issue, I haven't met a single person who has solar roof panels who regrets putting solar  roof panels on. The only question I get from the 1.3 million households who have put  solar panels on their roofs is why did they take so long to do it? I'm optimistic that as we  see emerging technology with solar power, with the storage and batteries, I think more  and more small businesses and consumers are going to look to become a price setters,  not price takers of energy costs -

SALES: If I can just take up your point on the solar though, say, for example, that's  been very popular in Queensland, that's because the Government gave people big , big  rebates to do that. When they realised how much money it was costing it's been scaled  back.

SHORTEN: I think we're going to find if you have a government who is elected who  actually will provide policy certainty on a commitment to put renewable energy as part of  our energy mix, like the rest of the world's already doing - I think what will happen is that  the solar industry and investors will react with confidence. It is quite startling the  progress that technology is making in terms of using solar power. I mean a fact which  some people probably don't realise is that we have more solar coverage in terms of per  square metre in our continent than any other continent in the world. We should be  leading the way, not following.

SALES: You mentioned the need for policy certainty, in both of these policy areas we've  been discussing tonight, climate change and asylum seekers, Labor has held numerous  different positions in recent years. How can voters trust that A, you know what you're  doing and B, that you will actually implement what you're promising here?

SHORTEN: Well, I think by the interest you're showing in our policy positions these are  serious matters and the fact that I'm here saying these things to you, and also through  you to the Australian people, show that we are making clear decisions about the future.

SALES: But Labor has chopped and changed a lot in these areas in the past. I guess  what I'm asking is how can voters now have faith you won't do that?

SHORTEN: Because we're discussing our policies well out from an election. We're  trusting in the Australian public by putting our ideas out there, people will look at them  and take them seriously. When it comes to renewable energy, I will tell you who has  chopped and changed their policies, it's not Labor, it is not Labor at all. We've always  backed it in. It's Mr Abbott who has basically been vandalising investment certainty in  renewable energy with those sort of absurd comments that he doesn't like the look of  wind farms -

SALES: Let's talk about what you're doing and not what Mr Abbott's doing in the same  way as I prefer him to talk about what he's doing and not what you're doing -

SHORTEN: Sorry Leigh, in all fairness, it is a comparison and you were saying how can  people be certain Labor will maintain these positions -

SALES: Based against Labor's track record, not based against what Tony Abbott's  doing.

SHORTEN: I'm saying in an election it's a beauty parade and Mr Abbott's stuck in the  past.

SALES: Over the past month or so Australians have watched a TV show where you're  role knifing two Prime Ministers was laid out. You apologised for publicly lying on radio,  you had to declare $40,000 given to your 2007 political campaign by a company with  which your union was negotiating and a royal commissioner questioned your credibility  on the witness stand,  how do viewers watching this interview know they can trust  anything you say?

SHORTEN: Let's go to a few points you raise, there's a few in that question. When it  comes to Tony Abbott's royal commission, I am very proud of my record of standing up  for members, very proud. I think we all know that he's spending $80 million of taxpayer  money to smear his opponents. I will stand by my record and what's more, if you want to  talk about trust when it comes to workplace relations. I'll back my record of delivering  wage rises, safer job, better jobs against Mr Abbott's. In my time when I was  representing workers and helping companies do well through the better treatment of  their workers, Mr Abbott was taking the conditions off millions of Australians.

SALES: Let me just ask you one thing that goes to this issue about the royal  commission for our viewers. The company Unibilt, that gave your 2007 election  campaign $40,000 that I just alluded to there - what did the company get in return for  that?

SHORTEN: People make donations to political parties all the time.

SALES: What did they get in return though? What in this case did they get in return for  you?

SHORTEN: They got the chance to donate to a political party and to provide support for  my candidacy.

SALES: But what does that actually deliver to them?

SHORTEN: Well it was just a political donation. If there's any implication that somehow  they got any favour, that's just not the case and that isn't born out by the evidence -

SALES: But most people watching the program - sorry, I really want to explore this so  people understand it.

SHORTEN: Please do, I would welcome that.

SALES: Most people watching the program would think if they were given $40,000 that  something would be expected from them in return, whether it's something minor like  access or whether it was something major. So, you know, what did the company get in  return for that $40,000?

SHORTEN: We have a system where elections are partly publicly funded by taxpayers  and the rest is by people who choose to donate, be it unions or business or other  groups. So when people make donations, it isn't on the basis of a particular issue or  proposition, it's based on a view that people either respect one side of politics or the  other, or indeed they like the candidates or people and what they stand for. This is not  unusual at all. And when we go to this issue that you were going to earlier about trust,  let's also be clear when we talk about trust, Labor went through terrible times of disunity  in the year of Prime Ministers Rudd and Gillard and Labor's learned its lesson. I don't  think any fair-minded observer in the last 2 years has seen anything other than  complete unity from Labor and by Labor because we understand that we need to be  united to win the trust of the Australian people.

SALES: In hindsight do you have any regrets about your role in the ousting of both  Kevin Rudd and Julia Gillard?

SHORTEN: They were difficult times. I regret that we didn't explain more what was  going on -

SALES: What about you personally, though?

SHORTEN: I'm going to that. But what I also believe is that I regret the instability and all  of the circumstances which saw Labor more distracted and absorbed by ourselves. I  regret that we looked as if we were more focused on ourselves than the Australian  people.  But I can assure you, and you've seen it as a seasoned observer yourself over  the last 2 years, since I became leader, the Labor Party has been far more united than  ever and I think when we go to the fundamental issue of trust, who on Earth is ever  going to trust Mr Abbott's Liberals to keep an election promise. This is an important  point -

SALES: Sorry, just don't want to move off that because I do want to try to help people  understand what went on there because they're trying to figure out if they want to vote  for you. So I just want to return to that point about your own personal role in both of  those Rudd and Gillard matters. Do you have any regrets about the decisions you  yourself made personally?

SHORTEN: I certainly believe, if given our time again, the Labor Party should have  explained what was going on -

SALES: I'm not asking about our, I'm asking about you?



SHORTEN: I'm certainly part of the Labor Party so that goes for me as well. They were  very difficult times but I think that the big lesson which I and the Labor Party have learnt,  is that disunity is death in politics and I think that the Labor Party has shown a far  greater degree of unity, which is the sort of the green fee you pay to enter the political  process with the Australian people and I believe the Labor Party is going through its  most united period in decades which is nothing less than Australian people should  expect from us. But your question -

SALES: Given your direct hand in the knifing of Rudd and Gillard, does it keep you  awake at night that you can never be sure when one of your trusted allies might be  coming for you?

SHORTEN: Leigh, you know, you use those adjectives and it's all, you know, designed  to paint a picture. I'm making it very clear to you and to the Australian people -

SALES: It's what politics is like though, isn't it?

SHORTEN: Well I'm making it very clear to you and the Australian people, that I and the  party I lead have learned the price you pay for disunity and looking like you're more  focused on yourselves -

SALES: Do you believe in the adage live by the sword, die by the sword.

SHORTEN: Sorry Leigh, you've certainly asked several times about trust, I would like it  if I could just explain this final proposition. I will be as brief as I can.

I've made it clear when it comes to workplace relations, I will put my record up against  Mr Abbott's. I've made it clear when it comes to instability in the ranks of the Labor Party  during the period of Prime Ministers Rudd and Gillard there was a terrible time and the  Labor Party has learned a lesson which will last a generation, I believe.

But when we talk about trust there is also this proposition: who do you trust in terms of  the future of Australia? You've got a Prime Minister and a Government who are stuck  firmly in the past. They haven't kept their election promises. They said there would be  no cuts to health or education, that is clearly not the case now. They said there will be  no increase in taxes and they're gagging to introduce a GST and put it on a whole range  of items where there's no tax paid.

And what we also see when it comes to the future is Labor is offering a positive plan for  the future. We talk about renewable energy. We talk about restoring our proper funding  to universities. We believe in a needs-based funding of schools. When it comes to  education, hospitals, when it comes to renewable energy, when it comes to fairness and  indeed the most important question of jobs, we have a plan for the future and that's  what Australians want to hear. They don't like the tit-for-tat negativity which has  occupied politics for such a long period of time now.



SALES: Bill Shorten, thank you very much for your time this evening.

SHORTEN: Thanks very much Leigh.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: LEADER’S OFFICE MEDIA UNIT - 02 6277 4053

