SH





E&EO T TV INTE ABC CA WEDNE

SUBJEC resettle

JULIE D war on u

RICHAR SPOKE understa there's n active th to do us make in  everyda measure country, well then our lives enemy w possibly

PRESEN Obama. no sugg scope fo

HADOW

TRANSCRI ERVIEW  APITAL HIL ESDAY, 18

CT/S: Attac ement of Sy

DOYLE: Th us. Do you

RD MARLE SPERSON and the ene no question heatre of wa

harm and  that. The p y lives and

es in place   enjoying th n in a sense s as we alw

we are facin y can.

NTER: Let'  They talke estion of se or expandin

THE H MINIST

M

PT

LL  NOVEMBE

cks in Pari yrian refug

anks for joi agree with

ES, SHADO N: Look, I th emy that we n there are A

ar, that's cle change the point of terr it's importa

and be sen hat in the w e this terror ways have b

ng and we a

s talk abou ed about ram ending in A ng Middle A

ON RICH ER FOR PRO MEMBER

ER 2015

is; Prime M gees.

ining me. T that?

OW IMMIGR ink it's less e face and  Australian s ear. It's also e way we liv rorism is to

ant we don' nsible. It's im way that we  rism ultimat

but it is also are doing th

t the meeti mping up th Australian gr Australia's m

HARD M R IMMIGR OTECTIO R FOR C

Minister’s t

The Attorney

RATION AN s important  to know wh service per

o clear we  ve. But I thi change the t do that. W

mportant w always hav tely wins an o important

hat in a foc

ng between he campaig round troop mission in th

MARLES RATION ON   CORIO

talks with U

y-General h

ND BORDE what we ca hat we are d rsonnel righ

have an en nk there is  e way in wh We need to  we go on livi

ve, becaus nd so it is im that we kno cused and e

n Malcolm T gn against I ps, for exam he Middle E

S MP  N AND B

US Preside

has said IS

ER PROTE all this as it  doing abou ht now who

nemy out th an importa hich we go a have appro

ing the life w e if we do t mportant th ow what we energetic w

Turnbull an slamic Stat mple. Do yo East?

ORDER

ent;

IL has decl

CTION  is to  ut it. I mean are serving here who m

ant point to  about our  opriate sec we have in  that differen hat we go a

e're facing,  way as we

nd Barack  te but there ou see any



R

lared



g in  ean

urity  this  ntly,  bout

the

e is



MARLES: I think it's very important that we are working in co-operation with our allies,  with the United States but also the other allies who are participating in this conflict in  Syria and Iraq. We are, if you like, a part of that family of nations and it's important that  as a family member we play our part in that. At the moment no-one is talking about  there being an involvement of ground troops and, you know, there are obvious  difficulties associated with that, in that you can put troops on the ground but that doesn't  resolve situations going forward and I think we've seen that experience in the Middle  East in recent times. Going and occupying territory is one thing but resolving the  situation over the long-term in the context of that is actually pretty difficult. It is  important, in my view, that we are contesting what ISIS are doing. I think that’s what  military action in the Middle East is doing right now and it's important that we play our  part in that, it's important we are doing that in a proportionate way, it's important we are  that in a considered way. Up until now I think that's the way in which the Australian  Government has gone about things, from the point of view of the Opposition we have  been offering our bipartisan support. But it's not a blank cheque. We have been going  through a process of trying to really set out step-by-step what we think is a balanced,  proportionate, appropriate engagement for Australia and making sure, if you like the  Government meets that test and we have, but that’s how we should be going about it.

PRESENTER: Do you think then that Islamic State can be defeated just through the  campaign of air strikes we are seeing at the moment?

MARLES: Well I certainly think that the ability for Islamic State to have an impact on  that part of the world can be seriously degraded by that action. I certainly think that what  is going on now is contesting ISIS in a way which prevents them from expanding and  becoming something which would be truly appalling. The question you ask in terms of  defeating them, I think is a longer term question and it is a much more complicated one.  We need to be in there playing our part, I think you cannot allow the kind of barbarity  that we have seen played out by ISIS to happen and to happen in a way which is  uncontested and is allowed to run rampant.

PRESENTER: Now, there has been a discussion about Russia joining the Coalition led  by the United States and working together as one force there. Do you think that would  be a positive? What kind of dimension do you think that would add there?

MARLES: At one level, the broader coalition that you have, the better, in terms of the  ability to deal with what ISIS are seeking to do. It's also true that there are a lot of  agendas going on in the context of the civil war which has been playing out in Syria over  many years now but I think as a starting proposition, the more you see Russia and the  United States talking with each other about how to engage in Syria, the better. Only  good can come from that.

PRESENTER: On another area, we have seen the first refugees from Syria arrive in  Australia this week. Are you satisfied with the process that's gone through as far as  security checks, for example?



MARLES: Well, it's important that there is a thorough security check which is  undertaken in relation to anyone who comes to Australia and that's been the case over  the period of many governments now and that's applied in relation to those under our  humanitarian program which is what we are talking about with those coming from Syria.  Obviously those security checks need to occur. It's also clear to say that the people  coming from Syria are fleeing the same kind of evil and violence that we saw on display  in Paris and for that matter in Beirut over the course of the weekend. In that sense it's  really important they are brought to Australia as soon as possible. In saying what that  means in a sense of timing, it is important that security checks form part of the process  by which people ultimately come here and I note that a key determinant in bringing  people on the program, on the humanitarian program from Syria is registration with the  UNHCR. I was in Jordan earlier this year and in fact the UNHCR used very  sophisticated biometric information in terms of their own registration processes, so there  is a lot of information available to the Australian Government by working closely with the  UNHCR in that regard. But it is clearly the case we need to be going through these  thorough security checks when we bring people here and we should be doing that as  quickly and efficiently as we can.

PRESENTER: Just finally, there have been calls by people such as Jacqui Lambie,  questioning whether this program to bring in the extra refugees should continue now in  light of Paris attacks. What is your response to that?

MARLES: It should certainly continue and it gets things completely wrong if people walk  down a path of saying that that kind of program should stop. I mean security checks are  a key part of it. We just can't forget that we are looking at helping out people that are  fleeing precisely the evil and violence that we saw on display in Paris and in Beirut over  the course of the weekend. So if people have a sense of compassion and solidarity with  the people of France and with the people of Lebanon, as we rightly should, given the  appalling incidents we saw play out over the weekend, it stands to reason then that we  ought to be displaying that compassion to people seeking to flee that evil and violence  being perpetrated in Syria and Iraq. This is certainly a program that should go forward  and we should be a place of refuge for these people.

PRESENTER: Richard Marles, thank you very much.

MARLES: Thanks Julie.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: LIDIJA IVANOVSKI - 0427 051 563

