





THE HON MARK BUTLER MP  ACTING SHADOW MINISTER FOR EDUCATION  SHADOW MINISTER FOR ENVIRONMENT, CLIMATE  CHANGE AND WATER

MEMBER FOR PORT ADELAIDE



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP INTERVIEW  ADELAIDE  SUNDAY, 28 JUNE 2015

SUBJECT/S: Education, people smugglers, same sex marriage, ABC Q&A

MARK BUTLER, ACTING SHADOW MINISTER FOR EDUCATION: This morning we  saw a shameless attempt by Christopher Pyne to distract attention from the funding  crisis that is starting to envelope Australia’s 9,500 schools. It’s worth remembering that  this week focused very real attention the $30 billion of cuts imposed by the Abbott  Government on Australia’s schools. The NSW Liberal Treasurer, in handing down the  NSW Budget this week, said those cuts for NSW schools were simply not sustainable.  And the Catholic education system has said that because of those cuts, fees will rise  and some schools are at real risk of having to close.

We also saw this week the release of a paper from the Prime Minister’s own department  that raises the prospect of the Commonwealth Government, under Tony Abbott,  withdrawing every single dollar of Commonwealth support for Australian schools, a  prospect that would almost certainly raise the need of state governments imposing a  schools tax on all government schools.

So in the face of this funding crisis, in the face of a horror week, Christopher Pyne this  morning I see has issued a release taking credit for a Labor program that we  announced in 2013 to start to introduce literacy and numeracy tests for Australia’s  student teachers.

Well, we don’t allow plagiarism in Australia’s schools and we shouldn’t tolerate it from  Australia’s Education Minister. Instead of trying to take credit for Labor’s programs,

Christopher Pyne should focus on fixing the funding crisis that’s enveloping Australia’s  schools.

JOURNALIST: What are the benefits of this program?

BUTLER: Well, we know that literacy and numeracy skills are the basis for all other  subjects. We want to make sure that teachers going into classrooms, in our 9,500  schools, have the best possible literacy and numeracy skills so they can give Australia’s  students the best possible education.

JOURNALIST: What do you hope to gain out of the 5,000 tests - the guinea pigs, so to  say?

BUTLER: No, this is very important pilot that is subject to evaluation, which will make  sure that Australia’s student teachers can go into classrooms with confidence in  themselves, but also with principals and parents having confidence that our next  generation of teachers have great literacy and numeracy skills.

We want to build on that, as you’ll have seen in Bill Shorten’s Budget Reply, by making  sure that Australia’s next generation of teachers, as well as our current generation, also  have skills of science and mathematics.

JOURNALIST: Do you feel like Christopher Pyne snatched this idea?

BUTLER: Plagiarism is the ultimate form of flattery. But, Christopher Pyne should be  honest with everyone: this is a Labor program. The real challenge for Christopher Pyne  is not to take credit for Labor programs that are two years old, but to deal with the  funding crisis that is enveloping Australia’s schools.

JOURNALIST: But are you in support of this progam?

BUTLER: Of course we’re in support of this program, it was a Labor program, a very  important part of the broad reforms that we introduced. Now if you remember before the  last election, Christopher Pyne and Tony Abbott said that Labor and Liberals were on a  unity ticket around the Gonski school funding model and immediately after being elected  to Government, he walked away from that promise. He promised Australians there  would be no cuts to education and instead he’s already introduced $30 billion of cuts,  which his own Liberal colleagues at state level say are simply not sustainable.

JOURNALIST: Mark, on another matter, we’ve seen Joel Fitzgibbon’s comments on  boat turnbacks. What’s your take?

BUTLER: Labor is committed to making sure the boat passageway between Java and  Australia remains closed, that boats that undertake very dangerous journeys with  desperate people on board simply don’t take place anymore.

That’s why we introduced the Regional Resettlement Program, after very clear advice  from an expert panel that was headed by Angus Houston. Those Regional Resettlement  Arrangements, particularly with Papua New Guinea and Nauru, led to an immediate  reduction, by almost 90 per cent, of boat arrivals to Australia. So, we are absolutely  committed to making sure that passageway stays closed.

JOURNALIST: As Party President, do you believe that turnbacks should be part of  Labor’s policy?

BUTLER: One of the concerns Australians generally have with this policy area is the  Government’s obsession with secrecy, particularly their obsession with secrecy they  have around the turnbacks operations they have in place. Particularly around questions  involving safety at sea, for everyone involved including Navy personnel, but also the  impact on relations with our important neighbour, Indonesia. And it’s very clear, in this  area, the Abbott Government in incapable of taking Australians into their confidence.

JOURNALIST: Do you believe that the turnback policy should be part of Labor’s policy?

BUTLER: We’re going through the process of developing policies in this area. Our  focus is on making sure that the passageway between Java and Australia remains  closed. We took very clear advice at the time in government from Angus Houston, and a  range of other people, which led to the Regional Resettlement Arrangements, which are  the thing that did more than anything else to start to see boat arrivals plummet in  numbers. We’re very much focused on that. We’re still going through a policy  development process in this area, as in all other major policy areas, which will be  released in good time before the next election.

JOURNALIST: Can you see any reason why it shouldn’t be part of Labor party policy?

BUTLER: As I said before, Australians remain very concerned about the Abbott  Government’s secrecy in this area. When we were in government we were advised  around questions of safety at sea, including by the head of Navy at the time, and also  about the impact of such a policy on relations with Indonesia. Now, the Abbott  Government is incapable of taking the Australian Parliament and the Australian  community into their confidence on this question. At the moment, we are focused on the  policies we put in place in government, which undoubtedly worked - an immediate  reduction of more than 90 per cent in boat arrival numbers - as for the rest of our policy,  we’re going through the proper policy, as all Australians would expect, in this area, as in  all other areas - health, education, climate change and others - to make sure we have  a comprehensive suite of policies out to the Australian people in good time before the  election.

JOURNALIST: Labor’s copped a good deal of political damage on this in the past,  could this be a way to stop that?

BUTLER: I don’t have anything to add to what I’ve said previously about this.



JOURNALIST: On one more issue, senior Liberals have said they’re looking for a free  vote on same sex marriage. Do you think there’ll be a vote this year?

BUTLER: Well I very much hope so. Surely the momentum that’s building now both in  Australia and around the world is irresistible. All of the major countries to which we’ve  historically compared ourselves - the US, the UK, Canada, New Zealand, Ireland and  South Africa - all have legalised same sex marriage and marriage equality.

Malcolm Turnbull was out this morning calling on the Prime Minister to allow a free vote  within the party room. If he does this, if he recognises that community opinion is  irresistibly moving towards us joining all of those other nations, we will have a vote in  the Parliament later this year. But Tony Abbott’s got to wake up to the need to allow his  own colleagues a free vote.

JOURNALIST: And speaking of Malcolm Turnbull, he says that the investigation into  the ABC won’t be about editorial matters, or free speech. Do you believe that?

BUTLER: There are so many different voices in the Liberal Party about this. We need to  see a single voice from the Communications Minister about quite what will happen  about this, so that all of the political posturing from Liberal Party members can stop and  we can actually move forward from the very unfortunate episode last week.

JOURNALIST: Are you worried about government interference in the ABC?

BUTLER: Editorial independence is obviously an important part of our entire system of  media, particularly the public broadcaster. But there’s no question - and Bill Shorten  has made this clear - there needs to be an investigation into what happened on Q&A  this week. But that needs to take place in a way that is calm, methodical and makes  sure that all of those fantastic things we love about our national broadcaster are  protected, while getting to the bottom of exactly what happened last Monday.

Thanks very much everyone.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: JO MEEHAN 0408 803 428

