

CHRIS BOWEN MP  SHADOW TREASURER  MEMBER FOR MCMAHON



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  SKY NEWS BUSINESS  TUESDAY, 20 JANUARY 2015

SUBJECT/ S: Crow d-sourced equity funding; innovation; entrepreneurs  visa; Labor Party policy development; bracket creep; economy.

PRESENTER: Welcome to the program Chris Bowen.

CHRIS BOWEN, SHADOW TREASURER: Thanks very much.

PRESENTER: You’ve been a long believe in crowd-sourced funding to foster  innovation and entrepreneurialism. So what is the thrust of this recently released  position paper, what are you hoping to achieve?

BOWEN: Well, what we want to say that crowd-sourced funding is vital for  Australia’s start-ups, particularly going forward. It needs to be regulated but the  regulation needs to be appropriate, and this is very important, as you know right  around the world 270,000 jobs have been created this year because of crowd-sourced funding. But Australia is missing out, Australia is too restrictive, in fact in  many senses, crowd-sourced funding is illegal because of the restrictions. When we  were last in office, when I was Treasurer, we commissioned a study into this, and  that study has been received by this Government, but nowhere near enough has  happened, nothing in effect has happened.

We looked at what the corporations advisory committee recommended and they  recommended caps of $10,000 for individual investors and $2 million in total,  bringing us broadly in line with New Zealand, but we think given the size of the  Australian economy we can do better than that, and that our regime should be a  lighter approach that balances consumer protection with innovation and risk-taking.  We think this is so important going forward that the regime does need to be  reviewed and if the Government was to make positive changes it would have our  complete and total bipartisan support.



We want to set the agenda by putting some ideas out there for consultation and  that’s what we have been doing.

PRESENTER: Okay, so you talked about the light touch regulatory framework, you  talked about some of the restrictions that are in place in terms of dollar amounts. Is  that primarily what you see holding back start-ups and their ability to source  funding?

BOWEN: Yes. In effect it’s illegal in Australia. There’s a proposal at the moment  that would regulate it and make it legal, which is good, but the proposal that’s on  the table is for $10,000 caps for individuals and $2 million in total. My Parliamentary  Secretary has done a great job talking with the sector and all of the relevant players.  His advice to me was that we should think about doing a bit better than that, having  some more liberal restrictions in place, and I agree with him on that. We have  issued this paper, we want to consult further with the sector about exactly where  the line should be drawn, and Ed is leading that work on my behalf.

We do believe that this is a really important area. There are start-ups who are  leaving Australia or who aren’t starting up because of this black hole when it comes  to regulation of crowd-sourced funding. It’s really important that we get this fixed.  It’s important for the sector and it’s important for the economy.

PRESENTER: Do we have any concrete figures on how many people could  potentially be employed in the start-up sector in the coming years, if we do move  fast on this regulatory reform to make it easier for start-ups to access crowd  funding. PwC released a report a while ago said that we could have half of the jobs  coming from the start-up sector. That just doesn’t sound realistic does it?

BOWEN: Well that is an important report, I was going to refer you to that PwC  report, and what I am 100 per cent sure is that most of the jobs that are going to be  created in Australia over the five to ten years, will come from companies that don’t  currently exist. Jobs will be created by new companies, by companies taking risks,  but people taking risks need capital to do it, and investors need to with their eyes  open, with the proper protections in place, be able to take those risks. And crowd-sourced funding is the best way for individuals who might nave huge amounts of  money to put into ventures, but have some, to do it. Our advice through Ed Husic is  that start-ups have the capacity to raise up to $2 million and bigger operators can  raise over $5 million, but between that $2 million and $5 million mark is almost  impossible. So we really do need to lift these restrictions to make crowd-source  funding in Australia effectively legal, to make the regulation appropriate,  appropriately light touch so that crowd-source funding can proceed as it does  around the world and Australian start-ups don’t miss out on that really important  opportunity.

PRESENTER: I guess crowd-source funding can’t do it alone, in the cost you’ve also  proposed a new class of entrepreneur visa. What’s the difference between that

opposed to the significant investor visa? How does it foster entrepreneurialism in a  nutshell?

BOWEN: Well they would be very different visa. The significant investor visa was  one I introduced when I was Minister for Immigration. If you have $5 million that  you’re prepared to invest in Australia you can get that visa. This would be very  different. This would be saying to venture capitalists living overseas, if you’ve got an  idea and you’re thinking about Australia as a place to ferment the idea you could get  a temporary visa to Australia, stay for three years and if at the end of that three  years you’ve employed 15 people and your business is taking off then we would  make that visa permanent. If it hasn’t, then you would have to return to your home  country. A very different concept. I think it’s an important step, just one of many  steps that we think is important to get much more of an entrepreneurial spirit  around the Australian economy, we want to be the party of entrepreneurialism, we  want Australians to be much more embracing of the start-up sector. We’re not doing  as well as we should. New Zealand is beating us to the punch, never mind the USA  and United Kingdom. We really need a national focus in ensuring our regulatory  settings are right and the entrepreneurs visa is just one more idea we’ve put out  there, and something we will pursue further and you’ll hear more from us.

PRESENTER: Yes, that was my next question because you’ve gone through  innovation, entrepreneurialism. Mr Shorten has made it very clear that science and  education will be a cornerstone policy area, in fact he said in a Press Club speech in  2014 that 2015 will be the year of ideas. Is this the start?

BOWEN: Absolutely, it’s one of the ideas that Bill and I asked Ed Husic to do that  work and he’s been very diligent in doing that work and it just shows the process we  have been talking about. We are not going to rush out thought bubbles and silly  ideas, we will take the time to consult on them, and when we are ready to announce  policies doing that. This is just one of the first policy ideas that you will see  promoted by the Labor Party. It’s not the end of January yet, there’s plenty more to  come in this space in particular, and across the board.

PRESENTER: Okay, well the head of Rio has called on the Government to fix the  tax rot, calling for reform of taxes and spending. You’ve told The Australian today  that Labor will release detailed economic policies before the 2016 federal election,  saying that difficult decisions need to be made. Mr Bowen, on what front?

BOWEN: Well I’ve said consistently that there is a need for Budget repair in  Australia and the best way to do it is through economic growth but it’s not enough.  And what we’re not going to do is the same mistake that Tony Abbott made and  hide our plans. We’ll be upfront with people. There are choices to be made, we’ll  have fairness at the core of those choices but we’ll also have honesty and openness  at the core of those choices and by that I mean we’ll be revealing our policies. We’ve  done a good deal of work on our policy development, there will be decisions to be  taken for Budget repair, they’ll be well considered by us, the work is well advanced  and we’ll have an alternative vision for the nation and the economy but it will be

underpinned by detailed our policies. I think that’s what the Australian people  deserve, that’s what they’ll get from us.

PRESENTER: You said you’re prepared to lose voters so what kind of voters are  you talking about? Wealthy voters perhaps?

BOWEN: Well I’m simply making the point that the days of Santa Claus politics, in  my view, are over. An Opposition pretending they can return to surplus, no hard  decisions are necessary, no spending cuts , no new tax rises, that’s what Tony  Abbott said before the election, the Australian people said they don’t believe that  anymore. And the day of Santa Claus politics where you can pretend to be some sort  of magician, if you return the budget to surplus without decisions taken in either the  spending or taxation area is just not sustainable going forward.



We believe in promoting economic growth and we’ll have fairness at the core of all  the decisions we take but there will be tough decisions taken which won’t be  universally popular. That’s simply the point I’m making. That we won’t be rolling into  a little ball and pretending that we’ll be all things to all people, that’s what Tony  Abbott does. That’s not the approach we’ll take.

PRESENTER: We’re hearing from Treasurer Joe Hockey that he wants to fight  bracket creep that no doubt will resonate with many voters, is bracket creep an  urgent matter in your books?



BOWEN: Well Joe made a pretty fundamental error yesterday when he wrongly  claimed that most people pay 50 per cent tax in Australia, just fundamentally  misunderstands the tax system that he is meant to be administering. Obviously, as I  said, we’ll have detailed policies out there in the tax space, in the spending space.

Obviously what we want to see is a proper discussion about the future of the  taxation system. A proper discussion will be not only constructive in our process but  pro-active. There are real issues to be faced for Australia’s taxation system. We  won’t be taking an irresponsible approach as the Opposition; we’ll be taking a  responsible, mature and proactive approach.

PRESENTER: If the Opposition is being in your opinion disingenuous when it comes  to bracket creep, what about Medicare rebates, GP visits. Shadow Assistant  Treasurer Andrew Leigh says that Medicare is sustainable, and that the emergency  pretty much being made up by the Government. Is that the full truth or in your  opinion are their areas of waste that do need to be addressed when it comes to the

system here in Australia?

BOWEN: Well this of course has been a rolling farce of incompetence from the  government in terms of Medicare. They’ve had several different plans, some which  haven’t lasted more than a couple of months. Of course Medicare is sustainable, we  have one of the best health care systems in Australia, we spend around half of what  the United States spends as a percentage of the economy on health and we get  better outcomes. There are plenty of other countries I would say don’t have a  sustainable health care system and the government seems to think that you need a

price signal to stop people going to the doctor. Well we don’t think that. When don’t  think people go to the doctor lightly, they don’t go to the doctor because they want  to. We want to see people getting preventative health through their GP, going early  before health problems get worse which becomes worse for them and more  expensive for the economy. So I think the Government has approached this issue all  in the wrong way.

PRESENTER: Separately Mr Bowen, as former Immigration Minister do you support  the way that asylum seekers are being treated on Manus Island?

BOWEN: Look, I’ll leave our Immigration Spokesmen to talk in detail but I think the  important thing here is again, this is a difficult area. The important thing is for the  Government to be completely upfront with all details about what’s happening in  detention facilities, whether they be onshore or overseas where Australia is involved.  I don’t think that’s what we’re seeing from this Government thus far. These are

always difficult circumstances, I can vouch for that. But I always took the approach  in Government to provide maximum information wherever possible, that’s what the  Government should be doing.

PRESENTER: Okay so back to crowd-sourced equity funding. What now? You’ve  got this position paper out, what stakeholders are you still consulting with?

BOWEN: Well, we’ve been talking to the sector, we’ll obviously talk to consumer  groups further, we’ve done a lot of that. Ed Husic’ s been doing that exhaustively.  He’s currently in the United States talking to the tech sector. He’s being doing it here  in Australia. This is not a project which we have confined to Australia’s shore. We  have, I think, outlined some pretty strong positions in this paper. We do want to  have some further consultations with the start-up sector, with industry more  generally and with consumer groups to make sure that the final settings that we  release are right. What we’re doing here is also sending a signal to the Government,  very clearly, that we’ll be very pro-active in supporting any sensible steps that they  want to take to support and promote crowd source funding. This is about what we  will do in office but it’s also about what we would support if the Government gets  around to responding to the CAMAC report on crowdsource funding.

PRESENTER: Shadow Treasurer Chris Bowen thanks for joining us on Sky News  Business.

BOWEN: My great pleasure, always nice to talk to you.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT - JAMES CULLEN 0409 719 879

