

1





The Hon Christopher Pyne MP

Minister for Education and Training

Leader of the House

Member for Sturt







THE SIR ROBERT MENZIES LECTURE

Liberal values and an agenda for Australia’s future









WEDNESDAY 29 APRIL 2015, 6.30 PM

Windsor Hotel, Melbourne





2



It is a great pleasure to be with you tonight to speak in memory of the greatest

of Australian liberals, Sir Robert Menzies, and to do so in the presence of his

daughter, Heather Henderson, Patron of the Sir Robert Menzies Lecture Trust,

and other supporters of the Trust. I am delighted that these include members

of the Monash University Liberal Club, the successors of the student initiators

of this lecture series nearly 40 years ago.

It is also very gratifying that recent years have seen renewed focus on the

ideas and impact of Sir Robert Menzies. This renewed recognition has come in

many ways. It has, for example, come partly through previous Sir Robert

Menzies Lectures, partly through the public attention being paid to Menzies by

a number of my colleagues in Government, and partly through various other

important publications, including John Howard’s major work on The Menzies

Era, Anne Henderson’s recent book on Menzies at War, and of course the

delightful and invaluable books of Heather Henderson - the collection of

Menzies’s Letters to My Daughter and A Smile for My Parents.

It is a particular privilege for me to give the Sir Robert Menzies Lecture both

because I have been profoundly influenced by his political philosophy, and

because as Minister for Education I am deeply conscious of Menzies’

commitment to and deep thoughtfulness about education. Indeed, I have

quoted him often, especially on the importance of universities and the

importance of their autonomy.

In her foreword in 1999 to the published volume of the first 20 years of

Menzies Lectures, Heather Henderson wrote: “Education always occupied

pride of place in my father’s family. It began with reading. My grandfather

Menzies”, Heather wrote, “was something of a martinet, and from all accounts



3



every young person who entered the house was expected to read aloud.

Robert was no exception.”

Referring to how scholarships opened up opportunities for him, Heather

continued: “Education was vital to his whole career. Anyone who heard him

speak, or anyone reading his speeches now, will be aware of how often he

plucked a phrase from the air appropriate to his subject: from Shakespeare,

the Bible, even from popular songs.”

Heather’s writings have provided us with so many insights into just how good

Menzies was as a father who loved his children. In this lecture in memory of Sir

Robert Menzies, as I discuss a wide agenda of issues - from Indigenous well-being, to promoting productivity and the jobs of the future, to developing the

best education system in the world - in which liberal values can help guide

Australia in the 21st century, I hope you will indulge me if I occasionally,

conscious of Menzies the father, also mention some of the impact on me of my

own late father.



Liberal values

What parents want for their children is one way of beginning to think about

the kind of society we want, and the role of government in it. Like Sir Robert

and Dame Pattie Menzies and my own parents, I want my children to be able

to live good lives. Shaped by my upbringing, my personal sense of a good life is

one marked by the characteristics of perseverance, compassion, conviction

and confidence, adventure, love of life, love of family and commitment to

public service. Of being “a man or woman for others”. This is my personal

choice for a good life. But these are certainly not the only values or attributes



4



someone might choose. My children might want to lead very different lives. I

want my children - everyone’s children - to be free to choose that good life for

themselves, and to have the best opportunity to live that life to the full.

My political philosophy has at its heart the importance of the freedom of the

individual - the importance of each individual being free to choose for

themselves in as many aspects of life as possible. The opportunities open to

individuals depend on the nature of the society in which they live. I want a

society in which individuals have the greatest and fairest possible

opportunities - for example, through opportunities for education and

employment.

The importance of freedom, opportunity, and social justice means a limited

role for government. It must not threaten but protect the freedom of the

individual. It must also be active in promoting justice and creating

opportunities for individuals to flourish, able to live the good lives they choose.

As I have so often done throughout my political career, I drew on the

inspiration of Sir Robert Menzies in my first speech to Parliament in August

1993. I pointed out - as many others have done - that, while steeped in all

things British, when he founded a new political party for Australia in 1944, he

chose to call it the Liberal Party rather than the Conservative Party. Menzies

considered himself a liberal rather than a conservative, and wanted his party

to be liberal. In truth, of course, the Liberal Party, to borrow the phrase of our

other great Prime Minister, John Howard, is a “broad church” of liberal and

conservative thinking, in which many of us have kept both flames burning

brightly.



5



In that first speech in Parliament in 1993, quoting Sir Robert, I tried to express

the liberal philosophy and some of what it meant for contemporary Australia.

We were in the midst of a recession. A blight on the lives of countless

Australians, including my fellow young Australians. I had just turned 26. I said

then that “to we who are liberals, there is a place for government in promoting

economic growth and the recovery of this country; in protecting the weak from

the strong; and in ensuring that all citizens are treated fairly and equitably.

That does not imply that the state will always be right or will always have the

panacea for our country’s ills. Indeed, a true liberal will expect government to

limit itself, to encourage the freedom of its people and broaden the

opportunities for choices to be made by each individual as free as possible

from government intervention.”

Classical liberal values provide a sound basis for Australia to face the

challenges and seize the opportunities of the future. As liberals, we place a

strong emphasis on the freedom of the individual. While recognising the

necessary role of government, we believe that free enterprise should be -

must be - the primary driver of economic prosperity and individual

opportunity in a free society. Sir Robert wrote in The Measure of the Years

that:

“[T]he basic philosophy of Australian Liberalism is that the prime duty of

government is to encourage enterprise, to provide a climate favourable to its

growth, to remember that it is the individual whose energies produce

progress, and that all social benefits derive from his efforts.”



We Liberals believe that government power must be sufficiently strong to be

effective in fulfilling the necessary responsibilities of government, but it must



6



be limited and dispersed so as to prevent incursions on the freedom of the

individual. In the Australian context, this includes a presumption in favour of

federalism - that is, that Australia is a federal system in which the roles of the

states must be respected and not crushed through the excessive growth of

central power, while acknowledging the need for practical action to deal with

emerging issues. Liberals also recognise the importance of the family as a

building block of our society - yet see no conflict in recognising the changing

nature of families. We seek not to be prescriptive but encourage responsibility.



Australia is a great country, a wonderful country in which to grow up and raise

a family. But it faces many challenges, and as someone committed to public

service, I am committed to doing all I can to help us respond well to those

challenges.



Closing the gap for Indigenous well-being

For me, one of the highest, most urgent priorities is the promotion of mental

health, and in particular of youth mental health, particularly as it relates to the

tragedy and waste of youth suicide. Another is the overcoming of Indigenous

disadvantage. My father was an ophthalmologist who lived for some time in

Central Australia, and visited there often to work with Indigenous people. His

involvement with Indigenous health has contributed to my life-time

commitment to promoting Indigenous well-being - from the outback to urban

Australia. I have pursued my commitment to Indigenous well-being from my

earliest days as a Member of Parliament. This has contributed to my

determination as Minister for Education to promoting opportunities for



7



Indigenous students - from the encouragement of phonics based instruction,

where the lessons of Noel Pearson’s initiatives can be applied, to supporting

boarding opportunities for Indigenous students, and more. The annual report

to Parliament on “closing the gap” between Indigenous and non-Indigenous

Australia shows how great the challenge of overcoming Indigenous

disadvantage remains. The gap is something that, along with colleagues in all

parties, I am utterly determined to close.

Ensuring educational opportunities for Indigenous students is an essential part

of this. The Abbott Government has taken a number of initiatives to improve

outcomes for Indigenous students. One of these was the provision of interim

funding in the 2014-15 Budget to support non-government schools who have

large numbers of Indigenous boarders from remote areas.

It is clear from an independent review that additional funding is required to

meet the costs of providing boarding and tuition that caters for the needs of

these students.

I am delighted tonight to be able to announce that the Government will

provide $5.4 million to extend the current interim funding for remote

Indigenous students attending non-government boarding schools for a further

two years (2015-16 and 2016-17). This funding will assist non-government

boarding schools with large numbers of Indigenous boarding students from

remote and very remote areas to meet the additional costs associated with

boarding and educating these students.

The funding will allow them to deliver improved services to students and

provide effective additional support to boost school attendance and

engagement.



8



I believe that this initiative is very much in the spirit of the Menzies

Government, with its strong emphasis on the continuing expansion of

educational opportunity for students around Australia.

In 1960, it was put to the Menzies Government that “unless some urgent

action was taken to further aboriginal studies”, major aspects of Indigenous

cultural heritage would simply disappear, including music and languages held

in the memories of then-ageing Indigenous people. And so in 1964, the

Menzies Government created the Australian Institute of Aboriginal Studies,

now the Australian Institute of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Studies

(AIATSIS). Over the last fifty years, AIATSIS has played a central leadership role

as a cultural and research centre for the advancement of Aboriginal and Torres

Strait Island studies.

AIATSIS’ purpose is to preserve, understand and communicate Australia’s

Indigenous culture and heritage. It is a culturally, nationally and internationally

significant collection - some Indigenous communities and languages only exist

now in its audio-visual recordings. The collection includes over a million items

which span a variety of media, some in historic formats well over a hundred

years old. AIATSIS’ Languages Collection is on the UNESCO Australian Memory

of the World Register.

The Abbott Government, like the Menzies Government, is proud to support

AIATSIS in its work. It gives me great pleasure to announce tonight that the

Federal government will be providing additional funding of $5 million to

AIATSIS in 2015-16 through the upcoming Federal Budget.  This funding will

increase the capacity of AIATSIS to manage and preserve its unique

collection.   It will support the engagement of additional highly-skilled

employees to undertake essential conservation and curatorial functions



9



relating to the most at risk items in the collection, including audio-visual

material, manuscripts, and publications.

This decision reflects the importance we as a Government attach to supporting

AIATSIS in managing its collection in a way that reflects its enduring

importance to the nation.



Engaging with Asia and securing our nation

My father’s life had lessons for me on two other priorities: that Australia

should engage more deeply with our Asia-Pacific neighbours, and that we must

provide more adequately for our nation’s defence, in part by securing an

adequate defence industry capability.

My father’s experience of Asia was initially through Korea and Japan - two

countries which have for decades been important friends and trading partners

of Australia. Today, as Australia’s future is more than ever tied to the Asia-Pacific region, we face different challenges and opportunities to those my

father witnessed in North Asia in the 1950s. One of the most important

questions of the 21st century is how the rise of China will take shape, and how

well other countries - including Australia and our greatest ally, the United

States - will respond. Constructive engagement with China, while standing firm

with regional neighbours including India and Japan, is vital.

One of the greatest challenges to Australian security in the present century has

come from the rise of terrorism. It is driven by a radical, fundamentalist and

extremist perversion of Islam. Australia must do all it can to combat this threat,

both at home and abroad. “The price of liberty is eternal vigilance” is a lesson

we learn again and again. Meeting the challenge involves supporting moderate



10



Islam in responding to extremism. By promoting inter-faith dialogue and

understanding. As a committed Christian and practising Catholic, I believe that

promoting inter-faith understanding within Australia and our region is

increasingly important to our own social and inter-cultural cohesion.

Of course, other security issues confront us. Border protection is one -

including preventing any recurrence of the deaths at sea of over 1,000 asylum-seekers trying to enter Australia by boat as they did under the Rudd and Gillard

Governments. Cyber-security is another. One part of defence preparedness is

ensuring that we have sufficiently strong defence industries within Australia.

As we mark the centenary of Anzac, we are all now especially conscious that

we must fulfil our obligation of gratitude to our veterans.



Good process in policy formulation

My own experience as Manager of Opposition Business in the House of

Representatives from 2009 to 2013 and as Leader of the House since the 2013

election has heightened my long-standing interest in ensuring good processes

of public policy-making, including through getting our Parliament to work as

well as it could.

At various points in my career, I have advocated ideas to improve policy-making processes. Through my work on mental health and Indigenous well-being and in my other actions as a Minister, I have been a consistent  advocate

of involving people in finding solutions to their own problems by bringing their

lived experiences to bear in policy discussions. As a Cabinet Minister since

September 2013, I have sought to make my own contribution to ensuring good

process in policy formulation, including through the various consultative and



11



review processes I have initiated. I have learnt something of the difficulties for

good policy-making from the composition and conduct of the current

Australian Senate, as you may imagine. I have been profoundly disappointed

by the unwillingness of the Opposition to engage in constructive discussion on

necessary reforms. I have watched them block measures they themselves

initiated when in government. Continuing to pursue good process will remain a

theme of my political career.

The importance of this to our national well-being is difficult to overstate. In

November 2012, in the final year of the Rudd-Gillard-Rudd experience, the

retiring Chair of the Productivity Commission, Gary Banks, made a speech in

which he gave a “to do list” for improved productivity. He was obviously

concerned that far too little was being done. He said “Good process in policy

formulation is ... the most important thing of all on the ‘to do list’, if we are

serious about securing Australia’s productivity and the prosperity that depends

on it”. The equally independent Governor of the Reserve Bank, Glenn Stevens,

quoted and endorsed these words in a speech he gave a few weeks later.





Promoting productivity and the jobs of the future

Promoting productivity is essential for any realistic agenda for growth, jobs,

and competitiveness - for the economic prosperity that promotes jobs and job

security, and enables families to manage the cost of living as well as they can. I

want my children to live in an Australia that is prosperous, with high and rising

standards of living, good jobs for all who seek them, and the ability of families

and individuals to cover the cost of living with as little anxiety as possible. This



12



is becoming harder to achieve with the growth of fiscal deficits and debt, the

slowing of the mining boom, the decline of resource prices, and generally

increased volatility in the international economy.

At the heart of Australia’s future prosperity - and so of the economic well-being of all Australians - is productivity and international competitiveness. We

need each hour of effort to produce as much economic benefit as possible. We

need to ensure that Australian goods and services compete strongly - are

attractive both for quality and price - in competitive international markets. We

need to ensure that Australia can compete and earn increasingly in

international trade with knowledge-based goods and services, and rely less

than we have done on selling what we extract from the ground (crucial though

this will long remain). We are arguably an intellectual powerhouse, punching

well above our weight in science and research. We now need to develop

advanced manufacturing and transition from old industries to those where we

apply our knowledge. We need to see jobs created in businesses small as well

as large around all parts of our nation.

If Australia is to prosper in the 21st century, with all that this means for our

people, we need to ensure that all aspects of government policy - at state and

local levels, as well as federal - promote productivity and do not stifle it. We

need an ethos of entrepreneurship and innovation.

We need a tax system that creates incentive for individuals and companies,

and that does not penalise or discourage entrepreneurship. We also need a tax

system that raises the revenue that government needs in a way that is efficient

and fair.



13



The period of the last Labor Government in Australia saw a considerable

growth in government regulation and red tape. The automatic response to

almost any problem or issue seemed to be to increase government intrusion

and regulation. This growth of the nanny state was seen in countless ways.

Charities were to be regulated by an unnecessary Charities and Not-for-profits

Commission. The autonomy of universities was challenged by the early over-reach (now corrected) of the Tertiary Education Quality and Standards Agency.

The idea that a government agency should control the media seemed

uncontroversial to Labor ministers - when it is in my view a fundamental

threat to a liberal democracy. All this stood in sharp relief for those of us who

believe the protection of individual freedom and the prosperity of our

economy lies in limiting the power of the state, and that the growth of state

power undermines individuals, families and communities.

Big government deters the entrepreneurship on which prosperity depends.

Red tape and regulation create major and costly burdens for the businesses

which create jobs. They place a burden on individuals and families trying to

“make a go of it” by supplying goods and services in their local communities. If

we are to create jobs and help alleviate cost of living pressures, we must

reduce the burden of regulation and red tape wherever we can.

Productivity also depends on having an industrial relations system that is fair to

workers and which makes it as straightforward as possible for employers to

offer jobs, and for employers and employees to increase the efficiency of their

work. Not only should such a system help to promote economic prosperity, it

should also help more and more people to have fulfilling lives.

Productivity also depends on having the best infrastructure we can, whether

roads, rail, airports and ports or information technology. The most efficient



14



movement of people and of goods is crucial to our economy. Having the best

infrastructure for the 21st century includes facilitating the movement of

exports on which our prosperity depends, but it also includes making our cities

work better and so improving the lives of families. Making our cities work

seems to me something to which governments at all levels will need to give

increasingly co-ordinated attention.

To be a knowledge-intensive international economy, how well Australia

performs - and so the opportunities for our people - will depend on how well

we use our intellectual capacity. We need to position ourselves at the cutting-edge of knowledge. While Australian research is of high quality by international

standards (though not as high as we might think or want), Australia does not

perform well in the linkage between industry and universities, and in the

application of research to achieve positive economic, social or other impact.

Boosting the commercial returns from research is important, though we must

hold on to research driven by curiosity which just may hold a key to an

unimagined future.

That also means having the best education system we can. Fulfilling careers for

individuals and a productive economy depend on individuals having - and

taking up - the best opportunities for education and skills training. It is my

aspiration that, building on a good system, Australia should develop the best

education and training system in the world. This is my goal as the Australian

Minister for Education, and I will say more about this later.

Australia needs to position ourselves well to compete internationally. We are

right to strive for bilateral free trade agreements such as the Coalition

Government secured in 2014 with Korea, Japan, and China, and is now seeking

with India.



15



The competitive environment never stands still. Our competitors are

continually seeking to improve their positions. All aspects of our economy and

government that affect our productivity and international competitiveness

must be in play. This was realised by Hawke and Keating in the 1980s, and was

demonstrated again during the Howard Government. Australia’s remarkably

long run of economic growth owes much to that era of reform. If Australia is

not to fall behind economically - with terrible results for jobs and living

standards in Australia - we need to renew and sustain a momentum for

reform. All responsible political leaders of whatever political persuasion need,

like both Labor and Liberal leaders in the 1980s and 1990s, to emphasise that

Australians’ best hopes of good careers and good living standards, including

opportunities for their children, rest with Australia being willing to make the

changes needed to keep up with the world.

Naturally, an agenda for growth and productivity depends on sound economic

management. This, like national security, must always be central to any

government’s thinking. Governments must live within their means. There are

times when governments may need to run deficits to stimulate an economy in

recession or depression. But governments spending more than they raise and

so running deficit after deficit, year in, year out, and increasing the public debt

without limit is unsustainable. Endless deficits mean that we don’t have the

ability to respond well to future crises, like another Global Financial Crisis.

Governments running up massive deficits mean that the present generation is

leaving a debt for their children to repay. This truly is a form of inter-generational unfairness - even, as has been said by Prime Minister, Tony

Abbott, of “intergenerational theft”. Just as I want to leave my children with a

positive inheritance and not with debts I have run up for them to pay, so I



16



believe that we as a country need to discipline our public spending so that we

can pay for what we spend now and not amass crushing debts for our children.

We cannot indefinitely live beyond our means. We must strive for a more

mature public discourse. Purely partisan oppositionism, with excessive rhetoric

and no consideration for the long-term national interest, is an anachronism.



Developing the best education system in the world

As I have said, my aim as Minister for Education is that Australia should

develop our good educational system into the best educational system in the

world. Why should it be anything less?

Australia has many excellent schools and many dedicated and good teachers,

to whom we have much reason for gratitude. But, overall, the performance of

our school students by comparison with students in other OECD countries has

been disappointing especially in literacy and numeracy. We have not

developed the strength in science, technology, engineering, and maths that is

needed in the technological age in which we live. We are falling behind.

As Minister for Education and Training, I have given attention to the “four

pillars” of what is needed for Australia to have school education of the quality

that our children need and deserve.

The first pillar is a robust curriculum. What is taught in our schools is obviously

crucial. The review of the national curriculum which I commissioned and which

was undertaken in 2014 has received widespread support for streamlining the

national curriculum, and eliminating politically correct thematic requirements



17



that ignored real educational needs. We are working with the states to give

effect to our curriculum review.

A second pillar of improving our school system is teacher quality. I greatly

admire the quality of so many teachers and want to see them encouraged and

supported. I am keen to raise the esteem in which our teachers are held. But

too much teacher training in Australia has failed to equip teachers with the

practical classroom skills they need. The review of teacher education

undertaken in 2014-15 by an advisory group that I appointed has also made a

widely-welcomed contribution to improving this, and I am working with the

states, universities, and others to act on what it has found.

Research internationally as well as within Australia has shown a strong

correlation between the quality of educational results and the degree of

autonomy individual schools enjoy. School autonomy is a third pillar of my

programme to improve school education in Australia. For schools to have the

freedom to appoint staff and allocate resources to meet their particular local

needs, rather than be dictated to by a distant central bureaucracy, will improve

the quality of education for our children. We have made Commonwealth

Government funds available to all states which take part in our “independent

public schools” initiative - giving their schools greater freedom to act in

response to their local needs. Different states are doing this in different ways

and using different words to describe it, and every state and territory has

signed up to the Government’s independent public schools initiative.

My wife and I have tried to be actively engaged in the education of our

children - though I have deeply regretted the limits that public life place on

that. The more parents are actively engaged in the education of their children,



18



the more their children will learn. Promoting parental engagement is the

fourth pillar of my programme to improve our schools.

There are, of course, other and related aspects to what the Australian

Government can do to promote school education around Australia, typically

working in what should be constructive partnership with the states. We need a

sustainable and fair funding model - and not one that creates false hopes and

illusions. We need funding that ensures a fair deal for students with

disabilities. I have a passionate commitment to helping students with dyslexia

and other learning difficulties, and to the need for research and teaching to

this end.  We need measures to promote cyber safety for young people. We

need school report cards that parents can understand (and so promote that

all-important parental engagement). We need to support the states to

promote salaries and conditions for teachers that encourage and reward the

best performance by teachers for the benefit of students. We need to stop

wasting massive amounts of money on the collection of data that isn’t put to

good use, and we need to try to reduce red tape and excessive regulatory and

reporting requirements generally - ending the “command and control” system

that fetters our education system.

We need also to free up and to reform our higher education system to ensure

that Australia is not left behind in growing international competition and to

spread opportunity to more students to have the life-changing opportunities

that higher education can give.

In February 2014, I spoke at the Universities Australia conference under the

heading “Embracing the new freedom: classical values and new frontiers for

Australia’s universities”. I drew heavily on the remarkable legacy of Sir Robert

Menzies in espousing classical values in university education and in massively



19



expanding Australia’s university system and creating opportunities for far more

Australian students to benefit from it. My speech discussed Menzies’ values

and my approach as Minister for Education and Training on why universities

are so important for Australia, in teaching and research, both for ensuring a

civilised society and a competitive economy; the importance of the autonomy

of universities; the importance of quality, both in teaching and research; the

crucial role of universities in creating opportunity for individuals from all parts

of our community; the importance of research, be it in science or the

humanities  or other disciplines; the need for deep international engagement

for our universities; and the vital challenge of adequately resourcing our

universities, through both public and private means.

In line with these values, to respond to a variety of inescapable challenges, I

embarked in 2014 on a major programme of higher education and research

reform, aiming to free our universities to be able to offer education of the

highest quality, provide Commonwealth support to tens of thousands more

students (in diploma and similar courses, and in non-university higher

education institutions, including TAFEs) who have not previously been

supported, greatly expand the scholarship support for students to cover living

costs, and abolish unfair loan fees that some students have to pay and other

don’t. The reform package embraced huge benefits for students.

It also included significant provision to support high-quality research in

Australia. The previous Labor Government had provided no future funding in

the forward estimates for two key research programmes - the National

Collaborative Research Infrastructure Strategy (NCRIS) and the Australian

Research Council’s Future Fellowships for mid-career researchers.



20



The higher education reform package was supported (with some amendments)

by all the university and other higher education peak bodies in Australia,

including Universities Australia and TAFE Directors Australia, as well as the

bodies representing private higher education, and 40 of 41 Vice-Chancellors -

quite an achievement in itself. They saw the reforms as necessary for the long-term good health of Australian higher education, including preventing a

decline into mediocrity in the face of international competition, and as fair to

students as well as to taxpayers. The scare campaign run against the reforms

was dishonest - vastly exaggerating the levels of fees that students would face,

and falsely suggesting that they would need to pay upfront. It was particularly

surprising given that the previous Labor Government, to their credit, created

the so-called demand-driven system of university funding. Under this,

universities were free to decide for themselves how many bachelor-degree

places to offer, and students (including many from disadvantaged

backgrounds) benefited from the opportunities this created which would not

otherwise have existed. But the Labor Government did not find a sustainable

and stable basis for funding the demand-driven system. This is why they cut

$6.6 billion in other areas of higher education and research. They should have

welcomed our reform package for completing what they started.

Instead they hint now at a return to the days when Canberra controlled both

how many places a university may offer and how much they can charge - a

system that Julia Gillard and many others in the Labor Party rightly recognised

had to change.

One aspect of Australian higher education about which I have long been

passionate, and which remains crucial today, is international education. In my

first speech to Parliament in 1993, I stressed that “using our intellectual ability”



21



was crucial for the future prosperity of Australia and specifically my home state

of South Australia. I mentioned that my father’s establishing with David David

the Australian Cranio-Facial Unit was “an example of health as an industry

capable of export and able to generate employment and investment”. I also

mentioned that making Australia attractive to students from around Asia and

beyond could have enormous benefits to Australia as an export industry. Of

course, it provides a high-quality education in a safe, secure and attractive

environment to young people from many countries who also contribute to the

cultural enrichment of Australia and who, we hope, develop lifelong

friendships with Australians and with Australia. Australia educating students

from other countries builds goodwill towards Australia in countries in our

region and beyond, and marks an important contribution that Australia can

make to the development of their intellectual capital.

Since 1993, international education has grown to be Australia’s third largest

export industry, and our largest non-resource export industry. It supports tens

of thousands of jobs around Australia - not only in educational institutions, but

in all the ways (such as accommodation, and retail) that flow from attracting

hundreds of thousands of overseas students to Australia. Our very important

tourism industry (which, perhaps surprisingly, is much smaller than our

international education industry) benefits hugely also - including from the

proud visiting parents and other relatives and friends of students who come to

Australia.

Unfortunately, under the previous Labor Government, there was a significant

drop in the numbers of students coming to Australia, and in our export

earnings. As Minister for Education and Training, with the strong support of

other relevant ministers, I have worked hard to promote Australia’s



22



international education effort, and numbers of students coming to Australia

have been rising strongly again. This is at the heart of why we have recently

released a Draft National Strategy for International Education for consultation

which is currently underway.

It is also imperative that the international flow of students is not just one way.

Young Australians need a much greater exposure to the Asia-Pacific region

than most now have. After all, it is in the Asia-Pacific region that so much of

our future lies - certainly including so much of what will determine our

economic prosperity and national security. It is for this reason that I have been

such an enthusiastic partner with my colleague Julie Bishop, Minister for

Foreign Affairs, in the implementation of the New Colombo Plan. It draws its

name and inspiration from the original Colombo Plan, created under Prime

Minister Menzies that brought thousands of students from around our region

to Australia from the 1950s on.

The New Colombo Plan is a signature initiative that encourages and supports

Australian undergraduates to undertake study abroad in the Asia-Pacific (or, as

we increasingly call it, Indo-Pacific) region. There are highly prestigious New

Colombo Plan Scholarships, and some thousands of students supported with

mobility grants. I see this exchange as nothing short of essential if we are to

develop a rounded citizenry comfortable in in a globalised world.



Conclusion

In tonight’s lecture, in seeking to honour the liberal values and the legacy of Sir

Robert Menzies, I have proposed an agenda for Australia’s future - especially,

closing the gap for Indigenous well-being; engaging with Asia and securing our



23



nation; good process in policy formulation; promoting productivity and the

jobs of the future; and developing the best education system in the world.

This, I believe, is faithful to the enduring inspiration of Menzies and to the

values of the great Party he founded.



In my first speech in Parliament, I said that the Liberal Party exists to give

Australians “opportunities for all to live their lives with dignity”, and

concluded:

“I joined the Liberal Party because I believe that it represents the sort of

Australia I hope we can be - individualistic, determined, self-reliant,

compassionate and progressive.”

I continue to hope that Australia can be just that, and continue to believe that

these represent the values of Sir Robert Menzies - values which achieved so

much for Australia in the 20th century, and which can inspire so much in the

21st.



