

THE HON TANYA PLIBERSEK MP  DEPUTY LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND  INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT

MEMBER FOR SYDNEY

E&OE TRANSCRIPT  INTERVIEW  ABC WEEKEND BREAKFAST  SUNDAY, 27 SEPTEMBER 2015

HOST: Joining us now to discuss button holing and other matters of diplomacy and  politics is Deputy Leader of the Opposition and Shadow Minister for Foreign Affairs  Tanya Plibersek who is also in New York this week. Ms Plibersek, thanks for joining  us. Julie Bishop has indicated a reversal in Australia's policy to Bashar al-Assad  could involve a political solution with Assad remaining in power. Do you support  that?

TANYA PLIBERSEK, DEPUTY LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Well, I think  ultimately Bashar al-Assad cannot govern a country where he's killed at least  200,000 of his own citizens. But we've said all along that the first step is for a political  solution to be agreed to the crisis in Syria. A political solution inevitably involves  talking to US, Russia, Turkey, Saudi Arabia, Iran, there are other countries in the  region that have strong interests in the outcome here and they all need to be at the  table.

HOST: Given Russia's support for Assad, do you believe a political solution must  involve Bashar al-Assad?

PLIBERSEK: Well, I think it must involve him leaving after some period. There might  be a managed transition but I don't understand any proposal that has Bashar al-Assad indefinitely governing a country where he has killed well over 200,000 of his  own people.

HOST: Tony Abbott was also of that view, obviously, because he described the  conflict as baddies versus baddies with Assad's regimes committing monstrous  atrocities.

PLIBERSEK: Well, we're there fighting to help Iraq protect itself from IS, or Daish,  whatever you want to call it. It is a horrific, horrendous organisation and it has  murdered, raped, forced conversions, destroyed churches and historical sites and  the only reason that we can say Bashar al-Assad has killed maybe 5 times, maybe

10 times more people than IS or Daish is because they haven't had enough time yet  to carry out the sort of atrocities that they have in mind. So this is certainly a situation  where we need to be very careful to have all of the parties in the region at the table,  the Syrian people themselves obviously should have a choice of how they're  governed and by whom they're governed. When you've got Russia with significant  military bases in Syria, they have been there for a long time, they've had a very close  military relationship for some time obviously they have an interest, obviously they  must be at the table to talk about how this political transition should happen but there  should be, in the long run, a political transition. I can't see how you can allow a  leader who has committed these types of mass atrocities to stay on indefinitely.

HOST: Now another prominent issue at the moment at the UN is obviously China's  cap and trade policy, what are the implications for the US and Australia of that?

PLIBERSEK: Well I think it's extraordinarily embarrassing for Australia. We are the  only country in the world that's actually weakening our action on climate change.  We're going backwards. So the excuse that Tony Abbott always had was that China  pollutes more than us, the US pollutes more than us, why don't they take action?  We've seen very strong action from President Obama and President Xi. This  announcement about a national cap and trade system for China comes on top of  other commitments that they've made in the past. This means that the two biggest  polluters in the world will be going to Paris with a strong commitment to reduce  carbon pollution and Australia's going to be going to explain why we've actually gone  backwards, why we're doing less to reduce carbon pollution.

HOST: Although China is still going to increase those emissions.

PLIBERSEK: Let me finish. This it's not just embarrassing. One of the problems for  us is that the fact that other countries, major trading partners like China are moving  to this type of system, means that we will inevitably, over time, miss out on the  economic opportunities that may be presented as the world moves more commonly  to a cap and trade style emissions trading system approach to climate change.

HOST: One of the criticisms of the China policy is that they're allowed to increase  their emissions up to 2030, that's when they're going to start reducing them. Surely  that's not the best scenario?

PLIBERSEK: Well, China has said that they hope to reach their peak carbon  pollution before 2030. They've committed to substantially increasing energy sourcing  from renewables. But remember, China has managed in recent years to raise 600  million of its people out of poverty but hundreds of millions still live in desperate  poverty. Australia is an advanced economy that can make the most of the innovation  that we have here, the scientists, the engineers, the renewable energy companies  that want to invest in Australia to provide us with alternative energy sources and  what we've seen actually under this Government is a reduction in investment in  large-scale renewables because of the abandonment of the ETS. It is in Australia's  interests to make the most of the innovation that we have here and renewable  energies. It's good for our environment but it's actually also great for our economy.

HOST: And just still on China, what's the kind of security threat do you see the island  building in the south China Sea, what does that constitute?

PLIBERSEK: Well I think there's a substantial concern from many nations in the  region. They don't understand why - obvious China has claimed this area for many  years, many decades indeed, even hundreds of years in some cases - why this land  reclamation has proceeded so quickly now, why there are reports that some of the  islands are seeing runways built and other signs of militarisation. Of course Australia  takes no position on the legal claims but we say that it is absolutely vital that any  disputed territory in the South China Sea, or more broadly East China Sea, any  differences about the ownership of these islands is resolved using international law,  using all of the same norms and conventions that would otherwise apply.

HOST: Now, you would have seen the UN special rapporteur on migrants have  cancelled his trip to Australia on the basis that the staff at the detention centres are  not fwree to talk about this threat of revealing a crime by revealing that information.  Would you hope that Malcolm Turnbull, as PM, would now force a change to that  policy?

PLIBERSEK: Well, it's another Peter Dutton special, isn't it? Of course Australia  should give the special rapporteur an assurance that no-one speaking to the special  rapporteur would have subject to prosecution. Now we need to be careful with the  personal details of refugees or asylum seekers in detention but the idea that people  couldn't confidentially inform the special rapporteur of what's going on is ridiculous  and I think particularly given that the Australian Government has said that - well Julie  Bishop has said that the Australian Government wants to pursue a seat on the  Human Rights Council in 2018, it's pretty contradictory. It's contradictory, incidentally  in the same way that Australia was today talking about how great the sustainable  development goals were and yet we've cut $11.3 billion from our aid budget. We've  got these contradictions when it comes to climate change, when it comes to  refugees, when it comes to our aid budget where our Government is happy to  publicly claim to be a good international citizen but in fact is moving in exactly the  wrong direction and exactly the opposite direction to the rest of the international  community.

HOST: And just on Malcolm Turnbull still, he's shifted the polls back in favour of the  Coalition, what chance of Labor ousting Bill Shorten?

PLIBERSEK: None and, you know, it's interesting. In fact Malcolm Turnbull has had  a sugar hit, as we always said that he would, but he had less of an impact on the  Liberals' polling than the change to Julia Gillard or the change back to Kevin Rudd.  So we had some pretty tough times when we were in government with our  leadership changes. It's interesting to see that Malcolm Turnbull, although people  thought that he'd have a sugar hit, actually has had a bit less of one than people  expected. I think the real problem with Malcolm Turnbull, as Tony Abbott has said, is  that it's the same policies. Just take climate change as one example. Malcolm  Turnbull used to say that he wouldn't lead a party that wasn't as committed to climate  change as he is. Now he's taken instruction from the people in the Liberal and  National Parties who want to do nothing on climate change. He's signed up to a  policy that everybody knows is expensive and won't work effectively because he was  so desperate to get the Liberal Party leadership. So I mean same policies, different  spokesmodel.

HOST: You say even the polls have changed there's no chance of moving away  from Bill Shorten but obviously people in Australia know that that's been such a  motivating factor for Labor in the past, why would they believe you?

PLIBERSEK:  Well it's just a ridiculous proposition. We've done very strongly in  recent times. We did well in the Canning by-election. We're out there every single  day advancing a case for a Labor Government led by Bill Shorten. In this last week  we've been talking about attracting our entrepreneurs back who have gone  overseas, attracting other entrepreneurs overseas, investing in start-ups, helping uni  students with great ideas start their own businesses, we've spoken in the past about  our TAFE guarantee. $100,000 university degrees reversed under us. Our changes  that would make multinational companies pay their fair share of tax, trim the top rate  very generous superannuation concessions for high income earners. Our 50%  renewable energy target. We're out there week after week making the case for a  Labor Government.

HOST: Now, I just want to touch on the trade union royal commission. We've heard  serious allegations of corruption within the CFMEU, have you seen enough to  believe that Labor should severe ties.

PLIBERSEK: Well I'm in New York so I'm not following the details of the royal  commission reporting in a lot of detail. We've always said that wherever there is any  suggestion that there is criminal behaviour that should be fully investigated by the  police, anyone who has that sort of evidence should hand it over to the police and  anybody, if they have committed an offence, should face the full force of the law. In  fact when we're in Government, we tightened up many of the laws around  accountability and transparency, governance of union movement. I make no excuse  for people who do the wrong thing. They should face the full force of the law. But we  see this royal commission has gone on for many, many months, costing, well, tens of  millions of taxpayers' dollars. I hope that at the end of it we see that if there are  people who have to face the law they do, but that the disparagement, the suggestion  that this is a widespread problem in the union movement is put to bed.

HOST: Could I just go back to that question, what would it take to convince Labor  that it should severe ties based on the evidence at the trade union royal  commission?

PLIBERSEK: It's just an illogical question. I can't make up hypothetical scenarios of  people doing wrong things. What I say is that when people do the wrong thing they  should face the law, that this royal commission was set up deliberately by Tony  Abbott to try and besmirch union members and unions more generally and that there  are proper processes for taking legal action when someone's done the wrong thing  and I make no excuses for people who do the wrong thing. If they rip off their  members, if they do the wrong thing, I'm happy for them to, you know, get in as  much trouble as the law can deliver for them.

HOST: Tanya Plibersek, thanks very much for your time.

PLIBERSEK: Thank you.

ENDS

