

ANDREW GILES MP

CHAIR, LABOR’S CAUCUS COMMITTEE FOR CITIES  MEMBER FOR SCULLIN



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW   SKY NEWS, LUNCHTIME AGENDA

SUBJECTS: Slipper; Foreign investment into property; food labelling; Gillian  Triggs; more chaos from the Liberal Government

DAVID LIPSON: Joining me on Lunchtime Agenda is Nationals Senator, Matt Canavan,  and Labor MP, Andrew Giles, thank you very much both for joining us. I want to start  with Peter Slipper. News today, that his conviction and sentence has been overturned,  that sentence of course for allegedly misusing Cabcharge vouchers. It’s been thrown  out on appeal, the judge noted it’s up to MPs and ultimately the electorate to decide if  they are acting within their entitlements, Matt Canavan that seems pretty reasonable  doesn’t it?

MATT CANAVAN: Well, look, I’m, David, I’m not going to comment on what a Judge  thinks. That’s not my job, um, my job is to, to be as good a MP as I can be, an honoured  position and the privilege that I have, um, whatever the court decides, I do think that the  behaviour if Peter Slipper, in those last few years, particularly the revelations about his  communication with staff about his use of Government vehicles, were unbecoming of an  MP.

LIPSON: Do you have sympathy for him, and for what he’s been through?

CANAVAN: Oh, look, I, I, think Peter brought a lot of it on himself. Now, court cases are  never an easy things to go through, I’m glad, hopefully he can get some closure,  because I hope he can get on with his life, ah but ah, as I say, we have a very high  standard that we, we should adhere to as people that have been picked to represent  your nation, and I don’t think Peter Slipper actually reached that standard. I’m not  commenting on the court case, the broader issues.

LIPSON: Andrew Giles?

ANDREW GILES, MEMBER FOR SCULLIN: There is a very heavy onus on us to  uphold the standards that people expect from politicians, looking after our entitlements  and also the way we behave more generally in this place and how we deal with people.  I can’t comment on the court case, that’s not my job, I think all of our job is, as Matt  said, to hold the office that we are privileged to hold in the esteem it should be held in.

LIPSON: Okay, let’s get into some meatier issues, if you like. Foreign investment, the  Government looking at imposing these fees for investment in residential real estate,  $5,000, under $1 million, $10,000 after that. How much of it, how much solid evidence is  there Matt, that there is actually a problem in this area? I know you’re probably more  focussed on what’s happening in the bush, but we’ll start with you.

CANAVAN: Oh, I am more focussed on what happens in the bush. But it’s always been  strange to me that there’s this double standard. That, it’s actually not, it’s against the  law for any foreigner to buy an established dwelling without an approval, indeed many  approvals are knocked back, but in rural Australia you can buy a farm without any  approval, basically. Anything under $250 million until recently, actually until the 1st of  March, ah, you could buy. Now, we’ve actually got laws in place, that we’ve passed as a  Parliament, that say, if you’re a foreigner or a temporary resident, you need to get  approval to buy an established dwelling. Now it’s clear from the evidence from the  House of Reps Economic Committee that that is not very enforced at all, ah, there are  very few people in charge in Treasury, of making sure that that is complied with, and ah,  clearly if we pass a law saying you need approval before buying something, we should  enforce that law. And we haven’t been doing that.

LIPSON: Andrew, does Labor welcome this change? It is something that people who  are trying to buy often talk about, a lot of anecdotal evidence that there is a problem  here, but is this the solution?

GILES: Well, we don’t have an in principled difficulty with what’s been outlined, but we  need time to go through it. Our real concern is that this is just another example of a  chaotic Government making policy on the run. What seemed to be the case yesterday,  and we’ve seen reinforcement of that today in the comments of the Treasurer when he  said it would have, ‘no discernible impact’ is, again mixed signals. We see the Prime  Minister and the Treasurer, hop off on a VIP, on a Parliamentary sitting day to make an  announcement, when this is a complicated issue where the evidence is mixed.

LIPSON: We did know that this was coming. This has been foreshadowed -

GILES: Indeed -

LIPSON: For a long time -

CANAVAN: And, it’s an options paper.



LIPSON: Just on the actual impact of this change, there’s been some suggestion it will  have a dampening effect on foreign buyers, and some in the industry suggest that this  may see less foreign investment in some big new residential projects, which would  mean less supply, greater demand, push up prices for new residences.

CANAVAN: Look, David, I’m old-fashioned, I think that the law should be enforced. It’s  a law on the books, it was relaxed in 2008 by the former Labor Government, and I think  some of the problems we’ve got right now stem from that decision. In 2008, uh, Chris  Bowen decided to make it not, not require temporary residences to notify purchases any  more. Ah, that caused a huge increase in the amount of foreign purchases, they back  flipped on that in 2010, but I think we lost control of the enforcement of it then, and we  didn’t apply more resources to enforce it. So, we’re exploring these things. It’s an  options paper, um, nothing will happen tomorrow in this area, well in rural land, but it’s  appropriate we look at well how can we enforce this law better given it’s from the  Parliament. It’s the Government’s job, it’s the Executive’s job to do.

GILES: But things have happened today, already. Because of the nature of this  announcement we’ve seen a really extraordinary reaction in the community, in the  business community and a greater sense of uncertainty. I agree with Matt that  enforcement’s the issue, but why not make that the announcement, and work through in  a calm and considered way the policy process.

LIPSON: So, you say the signal that it sends could put off foreign investors?

GILES: Well, that appears to be the case.

LIPSON: Is that possible?

CANAVAN: If we’re going to enforce a law more rigorously, we’re going to have to  make an announcement sometime, obviously. And, we’ve done that yesterday, ah, as I  say, we’ve got a consultation process now which will run for I think about a month, and  then we’ll obviously consider, what, ah, what has been submitted, the concerns that  people might have, they are obviously welcome to participate in this process and the  Government will consider them and make a final decision.

LIPSON: Let’s look at food labelling, and we heard from the Industry Minister just earlier  in the program, Andrew Giles, a bit of extra red tape for business potentially, but as Ian  MacFarlane pointed out he reckons it will only be one or two cents per good, it’s hardly  going to break the bank, you know, it will though, end up probably being passed on to  consumers, he thinks, is it worth it?

GILES: Well, I think it is, but the Prime Minister doesn’t and that’s a really interesting  thing. You mentioned in your interview with Ian, the Prime Minister’s comments on this,  where he thought it was the last thing the Government should be doing. So we see

another extraordinary back flip, which has really characterised the Government’s  engagement on this issue.

LIPSON: He did say, ‘an unreasonable cost’, imposed on consumers would be the last  thing we’d want to do. One or two cents, is that unreasonable?

GILES: Well, let’s see the proposal, but I think it is a pretty clear statement of principle,  that Australian consumers should be entitled to understand what it is they are  consuming, I think that’s a pretty straight forward principle, the other thing is, when you  go to food safety issues, what they are entitled to expect from their Government, is a  Government that will be straight with them and a Government that will take immediate  action with a health scare like this one, and that was what did not happen.

LIPSON: Senator Canavan, John Hewson suggested today that there may be an  element of jingoism in this, is that -

CANAVAN: Well, I was in China last year David, and ah, Chinese people are just as  concerned about eating safe food as we are. Indeed, if you go to a Chinese  supermarket, it’s incredibly visible what comes from Australia and some other countries,  because their consumers want to buy food that they know is safe and they know that  food from Australia is generally safe. So, I don’t think there’s any jingoism here, it’s a  natural thing for consumers to want to know where there food is grown, it’s something  that I hear all the time, this is something that the National Party has been calling for, for  years, and I’m glad it’s being happened, I think it’s perhaps too late, it should have been  done years ago, but sometimes it takes a crisis to generate the pressure for change in  politics and when that happens, the change that usually happens is the ideas that are  lying around the table, and Barnaby and the Nationals Party have had this idea lying  around the table, this diagram that we could have, and I’m really glad that ah, the  Government is going to move on this policy that the Nationals Party has been pushing  for.

LIPSON: Just a quick correction, I’ve just double checked, and John Hewson was  actually talking about the foreign investment stuff with that comment, so apologies to all  for that. But this has come out of the berries scandal. If it’s about safety standards,  should the money be, or should the focus be on screening, to make sure that the  products coming into Australia, because they’re still going to keep coming into Australia,  but that is adequate in making sure.

CANAVAN: Well, absolutely that as well. Barnaby Joyce and Fiona Nash, and I believe  Andrew Robb, are involved in the process of trying to make sure as well if our  biosecurity regulations need to be strengthened, now it is the case after this incident,  that last week we’ve moved to screening 100 per cent of the berries from factories that  create these products -

GILES: Ten days too late.

CANAVAN: No, that happened last week, so so, ah, there is a process in place, now, I,  I, personally think our biosecurity laws can be strengthened. Well, our enforcement can  be strengthened, there’s been a number of cases in the last few years not just involving  Hepatitis, there was some soil that ended up in Coonabarabran last year -

LIPSON: Are you prepared to pay for that?

CANAVAN: Absolutely. It’s a fundamental, you know, thing that the Government should  do to keep our consumers safe and our biosecurity more generally safe from diseases  and impurities in products that come from offshore and we need a process that makes  sure that those risks are kept to almost minimum because we as a nation, this is not just  about the food we eat, it’s also about the food we grow, because we as a nation have  this high, you know, reputation for good food and we must protect that.

LIPSON: Do you agree with that? Do you think we should be diverting more resources  into protecting Australia from things coming in?

GILES: Well, I think there’s now a firm body of evidence that we need to and one of the  issues here is the relentless cuts on the public service that the Government has  undertaken and we’re only going to have effective screening if we’ve got the people  trained, the skilled people to do the job, and that’s a very important part of this.

LIPSON: Labor also, from memory, cut particularly border areas, border protection and  areas like that in the public service.

GILES: If you look at the overall map of the public service, it has been dramatically  decreased under this Government.

CANAVAN: Well, let’s just get some stats there David.

LIPSON: Thank you.

CANAVAN: Um, before we came to Government, the Labor Government were getting  rid of 12,000, just over 12,000 public servants, the last Budget, that increased it by  2,000 to 14,000 given the Budget pressures, ah, these guys did it just as much, they  weren’t always upfront about it -

GILES: That’s just not true.

CANAVAN: Because they called these things ‘efficiency dividends’, but they’re the last  refuge of the scoundrel. Ah, it was about job cuts.

LIPSON: Okay, I want to look a Gillian Triggs, I believe that Labor will continue this  point of questioning when Question Time gets underway in about five minutes time.  Matt Canavan, I know you haven’t been in the Chamber throughout this, but was it the  right strategy, do you think, for the Government to go after Gillian Triggs’ reputation

rather than use her report to highlight the successes that the Coalition has had in  actually getting children out of detention?

CANAVAN: Well, I think there’s a timing issue here. I don’t believe the Government has  gone after her reputation as a result of this report. What actually happened was that last  year at Senate Estimates, Professor Triggs gave evidence that was inconsistent and  evasive. She originally said she hadn’t had discussions with the former Labor  Government and Ministers in that Government. It was then revealed she actually had,  now I actually think giving evidence which is evasive and inconsistent to Senate and  Parliamentary Committees is a very, very serious matter. Particularly, from a statutory  office holder which is given an enormous amount of privilege by being an independent  office holder and therefore it’s extremely appropriate that the Government express its  displeasure when those people don’t live up to the standards they’re expected to.

LIPSON: So you don’t have a problem with the report itself?

CANAVAN: Well, I’ve looked at the report, I haven’t read all of it, but I’ve looked at it,  and I think there is some very serious concerns about the impacts of children on  detention, that’s why -

LIPSON: Do you think it’s a partisan report?

CANAVAN: I don’t believe the report itself is partisan, I think its timing and  development, absolutely, was partisan, and I make those comments not having read the  entire report, but clearly there is an issue. We don’t want kids to be in detention. It’s a  terrible thing for them to have to go through. But the way we stop that, both sides of  politics support a policy of detention. The way we stop it is to make sure illegal arrivals  coming here in the first place.

LIPSON: Andrew Giles, what will Labor actually focus on today? You’ve had a couple of  good goes at it over Question Time over the last couple of days and a failed attempt to  censure George Brandis yesterday, where do you go from here? You’ve already sent it  the AFP?

GILES: I think it was very interesting what Matt said a minute ago about what he  thought the consequences were of giving inconsistent evidence to a Parliamentary  Committee, what we saw yesterday Ministers in the Government giving inconsistent  evidence, inconsistent answers about who had done what in terms of offers made on  behalf of the Attorney-General to Professor Triggs. I think that’s a very serious issue,  and it goes to the heart of this question which is how our separation of powers can  function, how statutory office holders can hold the Government of the day, and indeed,  in this case, the previous Government to account. I have read much of the report and  it’s troubling reading, it’s worthy of a proper debate and I don’t think anyone who’s read  the report, even in part, could consider it a partisan document.

LIPSON: This has fed into the question of the leadership, Matt Canavan. What would  your advice be to your Coalition partners in the Liberal Party about Tony Abbott as  leader, would you advise them obviously to keep him and where else from there?

CANAVAN: I don’t pretend to be in a position to provide advice to my Liberal  colleagues. I’m in the Nationals Party. It’s a matter for the Liberal Party, but I have said  publically that I don’t think it’s a good idea to change aeroplanes mid-air, the, ah,  experience of, and I’ve been here while the Labor Party went through it, it’s a harrowing  and ongoing pain that happens by changing leaders and I don’t want that to happen in  this country, it’s not necessarily something about the Coalition, I just don’t want our  nation to go down the path where we’re changing Prime Ministers every time a poll  comes out.

LIPSON: Do you think if there’s change, there would it be a problem for the Coalition  agreement?

CANAVAN: Oh, I, I’ve also said publically and, as has the leader, Warren Truss, again I  don’t pretend to speak on behalf of the Nationals Party but we have said that, ah, our  support of the Coalition is never not unconditional, it’s conditional on getting a good deal  rural and regional Australia, so if, if, the Liberal Party make changes we’ll assess those  to make sure they are the best deal for rural and regional Australia.

LIPSON: Okay, we’re out of time. Matt Canavan, Andrew Giles, thank you both very  much for joining us on Lunchtime Agenda.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: PAUL FRAYNE 0438 44 1010

