

E&OE T INTERV THE BO SUNDA

SUBJEC Australi

ANDRE and Tran voted to

ANTHO Malcolm the subs

BOLT:   up the fi

ALBAN like mult that Mal to sugge authenti marriage desire to that. Sec Godwin

T

SHADO

S

TRANSCRI VIEW  OLT REPOR AY, 22 NOV

CTS:  Opin ia; immigra

W BOLT: J nsport Spo  be leader.

NY ALBAN m Turnbull. I stance, I thi

Well, how d ght to Malc

ESE:  Well ti-national t colm Turnb est that he's

city from M e equality.  o be prime  condly, the

Grech last

THE HO W MINIS

SHADO SHADOW MEM

PT

RT  VEMBER 20

nion polls;  ration, Darw

Joining me  kesman an Why is Lab

NESE: Well It's a shiny  ink we'll see

do you get  colm Turnbu

, we need t axation, inf bull was fail s changed.  Malcolm Tur

But he's ab minister be judgement time, alrea

N ANTH STER FO TRA OW MIN

W MINIS MBER FO

015

Malcolm T win port.

is Anthony nd the man  bor doing s

l, what we'r new thing f e a very dif

to that poin ull?

to continue frastructure lure last tim There's on rnbull. He b bandoned th efore his ow

t questions ady, early o

HONY AL OR INFR ANSPOR NISTER F

STER FO OR GRA

Turnbull; M

y Albanese, who 60% o so badly, An

re seeing is for people t fferent outc

nt? I mean,

to put forw e investmen me he was O ne additiona

believes in c hose policie wn principles are still the

n in his prim

LBANES RASTRU RT  FOR CIT

OR TOU AYNDLE

Mal Brough

Labor's Inf of Labor Pa nthony?

s an immed to look at. B come.

what does

ward policie nt, superann Opposition  al element,

climate cha es and put  s. And I thi ere. Just lik me minister

SE MP  UCTURE

TIES  RISM  ER

h; Islamic S

frastructure arty membe

diate lift in th But when pe

s Labor nee

s, as we ha nuation. Bu Leader. Th which is th ange action

his own pe nk people w ke he truste rship we sa

E AND

State; Muft

e

ers last year

he polls for  eople look

ed to do to t

ave in areas ut also, I thi here's nothi he lack of

. He believe rsonal polit will see thro ed

aw him appo



fti of

r

at

take

s

nk  ng

es in  tical  ough

oint

Mal Brough to the position in charge of ministerial responsibility for the integrity of the  parliamentary process and yet Mal Brough is under investigation from the AFP about  the Peter Slipper and James Ashby affairs and, indeed, there was a raid just this week  on Mal Brough's house. Now, Malcolm Turnbull should have been aware of that, and  should have avoided that potential conflict. And thirdly, of course, there's a great  Malcolm ego, which is still there for all to see. Malcolm Turnbull's idea of a  conversation with the Australian people is him talking and them listening.

BOLT: Well, why isn't Bill Shorten cutting through? Does he, too, lack that, you know,  authenticity factor?

ALBANESE:  Well, it's a difficult time for an Opposition Leader with a new leader of the  Liberal Party. The fact that the Coalition changed leaders suggests that Bill  Shorten had indeed been successful, particularly in his opposition to the draconian  measures of the 2014 budget.

BOLT:  Listen, this week, Malcolm Turnbull suggested a ceasefire and a power-sharing  deal in Syria that could involve supporters of the Islamic State. Can you see such  a peace plan working?

ALBANESE: Well, look, absolutely not and it's an extraordinary thing for Malcolm  Turnbull to leave open, such an option. But, again, it's typical of Malcolm Turnbull. He  doesn't know when to stop talking and make a clear statement. Clearly these people  who want to destroy Western civilisation and return to barbarism have no role to play in  any civilised arrangements going forward. These people need to be wiped out because  what they seek to do is to wipe us and our way of life out. It's that simple, and Malcolm  Turnbull needs to be very clear in his language about that.

BOLT: Tony Abbott says we can't defeat the Islamic State until we, and others, send  troops there, whether... probably Special Forces, something like that. Even Hillary  Clinton, running for president, Democratic nominee, is now suggesting the same thing.  Are they right?

ALBANESE: Well, what I'd be doing is taking advice not so much from politicians but  from the appropriate defence officials, if I was, again, a member of the National Security  Committee of the Cabinet. That's the way to go forward. But quite clearly, we need to  defeat this scourge, because it's not just what is happening on the ground in Syria and  Iraq. What they want to do to the populations if they were ever to get full control of Syria  - we would see a wipe out of the Alawites, of the Christians, of all the minority groups,  indeed also of those people in Sunni population who happen to disagree with them. But  also we see them expanding where the attacks are, not just in Paris, but in Beirut as  well.

BOLT:  But that support, you see, Anthony… That’s right, but after more than a year of  coalition bombing, they're still there, right? And in fact, they’re still there after four years.  Do you need to send in at least Special Forces in targeted raids in concert with other

countries to take them out on the ground? Because the military officials say you can't do  it from the air.

ALBANESE: Well, that, of course, is worthy of consideration, but upon advice of the  military officials. But also, of course, there is the Syrian army there as well.

BOLT:  The Mufti of Australia this week listed five causative factors he said led  to terrorism attacks like we saw in Paris. All involved claims about Australia's alleged  cruelty to Muslims, our racism, etcetera. How dangerous is that kind of victimology?

ALBANESE: Well, it's completely unacceptable, because what it does is provide some  sort of excuse for this behaviour. There is no excuse for the fundamentalist form  of Islam leading to terrorism being found to be somehow in the name of religion. What  we know is that no religion gives sanctity to death and the sort of ideology that has  come through that, and surely -

BOLT:  Well, I'm not sure about that in Islam's case. And that's the whole point. You  need the Mufti to actually start leading that interpretation. Listen, the…

ALBANESE: Well, the Mufti -

BOLT:  Yeah?

ALBANESE: - he has a critical role, particularly in sending messages to young people.  And I note that he made a further statement on the following day, but he needs to be  very careful about the messages that are sent out there, particularly to his own  community.

BOLT:  I agree. The 12,000 refugees we're now taking in from Syria and Iraq - isn't the  best way to help the persecuted without endangering Australians is to say that those  12,000 should all be Christians?

ALBANESE: No. What we do is we have a non-discriminatory policy. But what we'll do  is assessment of, appropriately, of people's status as asylum seekers. And there's no  doubt that Christians have, in particular, suffered since the Syrian civil war began.

BOLT:  It sounds like a no-but-yes, let's not discriminate, but let's take in Syrian  Christians. I think that's probably the way to go. But listen, quickly, before we run out of  time, President Obama this week complained to Malcolm Turnbull for not tipping him off  that the Northern Territory Government had just leased the port of Darwin to  a Chinese company linked to the China’s Communist Party when the port is actually  sometimes used by Australian and American Defence Forces. Turnbull laughed it off  saying Obama could have read about it in Darwin's newspaper, rather than the Wall  Street Journal. Have a look.

(CLIP) TURNBULL:  I suggested that they should invest in a subscription to the  Northern Territory News.

BOLT:  Well, do you think there's anything ... Reason to be concerned about this  leasing deal?

ALBANESE: Well, there's that lack of judgement from Malcolm Turnbull. Darwin Port is  an incredibly important strategic asset for our nation and because of our arrangement  with the United States for joint training in northern Australia, it is important for the US as  well. And it is extraordinary that there was no heads-up given to our ally in the United  States, but can I go a step further and say that there was no heads-up given to the  Australian public either? And of course the Federal Government is directly involved in  this because they have a policy as well of a 15% additional payment to any state or  territory government privatising an asset. Now, there are other... If, if the port needed to  be privatised, and I think there's an argument to keep it, frankly, in public hands, such a  strategic asset, but, of course, if you look at Sydney Port and other ports around  Australia, there are funds with Australian investors prepared to invest in such  assets. But to give up a strategic asset to a company that has links with the People's  Liberation Army in China is, I think, a grave error of judgement and the fact that Malcolm  Turnbull laughed this off is, again, I think, symptomatic of his lack of judgement  that characterised the last time he was Leader of the Opposition.

BOLT: Anthony Albanese. Thank you so much for your time.

ALBANESE:  Good to be with you.

MEDIA CONTACT: MATTHEW FRANKLIN 0411 659 868



