E&OE T DOORS DARWIN MONDA

SUBJEC cent; Te

LUKE G here to W Warren  as every with cos already  the Terr been tal

It's impo we can b to be ab and I kn in schoo here in D

BILL SH to be he accomp We are

Labor is we're ag commun you do,  GST of

TRANSCRI STOP INTE N  AY, 16 NOV

CT/S: Malc errorist att

GOSLING, L Wanguri. O and Nova.  yone in Dar st of living. W

high cost o itory. It's go king to not

ortant that w build the Te ble to afford ow how diff

ol. So that's Darwin to h

HORTEN, L ere in Darwi anying me  here today

dead again gainst it is b nities in the for instance

15 per cent

TH

LEAD MEMB PT  RVIEW

VEMBER 20

colm Turnb tacks in Pa

LABOR CA Obviously fa I've asked  rwin and Pa

What any G of living. So  oing to hurt  only familie

we get the s erritory. Infr  to live here fficult it is w s what we're have a look

LEADER O in. I'm here is Senator  to talk abo

nst creating because it's  Territory. F e, in Sydne

t will do, is

E HON.  DER OF  BER FO

015

bull and th aris; Airstri

ANDIDATE antastic to h Bill to come almerston k GST is obvio

what that m families, so es, but bus

settings righ rastructure' e, to stay h when you're

e absolutely at what's h

F THE OPP  with Luke  Nova Peris out Malcolm

g a 15 per c s going to p Families in  ey, just for t

it will increa

BILL SH THE OP R MARI

e Liberals  ikes in Syr

FOR SOL have Bill in t e up here to knows we've

ously going means is, th o it's great  iness peop

ht  to help p s one thing ere, to raise trying to pa y committed happening h

POSITION: Gosling, La s and the M m Turnbull's

cent GST o articularly h the Territor he househo ase the gap

HORTEN PPOSITIO BYRNO

plan to rai ria; Lease o

OMAN: Th town, also  o Darwin a e already g g to do is pu

his is going to have Bill ple.

people stay g, we need j e a family.  ay the bills,

d to and it's here, thank

: Good mor abor's cand Member for  proposed G

on everythin hit Darwin a ry already h old daily ne p; it will incr

N  ON  NG

ise the GS of the Port

hanks for co to be with o nd Palmers got a massiv

ut more cos g to essentia l here beca

y in the Terr jobs as we I've got a y , pay your m s fantastic t ks very muc

rning every didate for S Lingiari Wa GST.

ng. One of t and more re have to spe ecessities. A

rease even

ST to 15 per t of Darwin

oming down our colleag ston becaus ve problem sts on our

ally be a ta ause we've

ritory, so th ll, people n young family mortgage, k

to have Bill  ch.

yone, it's gre olomon, als arren Snow

the reasons emote  end more th And what a

more



r

n.

n

ues  se  m

x on

at  need  y

kids  up

eat  so  wdon.

s

han  a

disproportionately the amount that people in Darwin, Palmerston and indeed even  further, what people in remote communities in the Territory have to pay for the cost of  living.

Cost of living is the number one issue for Labor. We don't accept that the answer to  Australia's challenges is to put a blanket 15 per cent tax on everything. A 15 per  cent GST on everything is a tax on the Territory. Labor is not going to support it; we

don't think the case has been made out to increase the cost of living for everyone, and  we are deeply sceptical about the Liberals' plans.

So Labor is here today, we're telling the people of Darwin and indeed right through the  Territory, Labor has got your back, we're not going to sit by and watch Malcolm Turnbull  and the Liberals put a 15 per cent tax on everything. I might just get Warren Snowdon to  talk a bit more about some of the consequences in more remote communities where the  cost of living is even higher than it is in Darwin and Palmerston.

WARREN SNOWDON, MEMBER FOR LINGIARI: Well, it should come as no surprise  to anyone that the further you move away from Darwin or even Alice Springs for that  matter, the costs increase dramatically. So the poorest of Australians who live in these  remote communities will be impacted quite substantially, more than any other  Australians in fact, by an increase in the GST to 15 per cent across all items. This  includes fuel, so already we know the highest fuel price in Australia are paid by people  living in these remote communities. You add another 15 per cent on the GST which  ordinarily applies, that radically increases the amount of costs to buy fuel. If you apply  that to all foods, well you can see what it does to household budgets, and these are the  poorest of Australians. Food security is one of the most major issues for Aboriginal and  Torres Strait islander people around this country, in terms of getting good health  outcomes - a 15 per cent tax on Territorians is a tax on health.

SHORTEN: Thanks, before we take questions, I should just again reinforce what I said  yesterday about the Paris shootings, the atrocities there. Whilst in Australia we have our  domestic political debates and these are very important, I want to make it really clear  that when it comes to fighting terrorism, that all of our political differences get put to one  side and I've had a good conversation with Malcolm Turnbull overnight. Labor and  Liberal will work together in terms of national security. Okay, happy to take questions on  GST, domestic matters and anything else.

JOURNALIST: Should Australia expand its air strikes in Iraq and Syria or put Australian  soldiers on the ground?

SHORTEN: Well, we've all seen the dreadful atrocity, terrible criminal murders which  happened in Paris late Friday night, Paris time. It's been - it would appear that it's been  triggered by the ISIL or the ISIS terrorist organisation who Australia, as part of an  international coalition, are trying to militarily stop their actions in northern Iraq and in

Syria. Our defence forces, in particular our RAAF, but also our infantry and land forces  who are doing training of Iraqi forces are doing a great job. Labor will be guided by the

best military and defence and strategic advice. I believe our men and women in the  RAAF and indeed more generally in the ADF are doing an excellent job. They are  professionals who are trained for this and of course Labor will be guided by the best  military and strategic advice, and that's what should guide us in this matter and I just  want to put on record I congratulate the French for their speedy response overnight.  Obviously France is showing the terrorists that they're not going to take any of this  terrible behaviour sitting down and the French have already retaliated - I say good on  them.

JOURNALIST: Is it a good idea that we should really just get into a situation of a  country has a terror attack, and so that civilised country just decides, right our response  is we will just bomb you. I mean, is that a sensible way to deal with domestic terrorism  around the world?

SHORTEN: It is not the only way to deal with the domestic challenges of terrorism, but  what France has shown and what Australia and our coalition allies are showing and  indeed a lot of people in Iraq are showing is that the terrorists aren't going to succeed by  dividing us. So you're quite right, it's a lot more than just a military response - I  understand, but you're not going to drain a swamp of terrorism in this part of the Middle  East by military action alone. And it is really important that we make it clear in Australia  that we're an inclusive society. What the terrorists want to do is they want people to be  fearful and they want us to turn upon each other, that's what they want.

So it is really important that as Australians are looking with shock and horror and  sympathy to what's happened to the French, that we make sure that we don't fall for the  terrorist trick, the evil trick of turning, you know against people in our own population.  The best way we defeat this form of evil is by sticking together, and I've always taken

the attitude, as I said at my preliminary remarks, that when it comes to fighting terror,  Liberal and Labor are in this together and that's what Australians expect of us.

JOURNALIST: Are you keen for the Federal Government to review the Darwin Port  lease?

SHORTEN: We would like them to explain whether or not they've done all the foreign  investment review processes. We want to hear from our security and defence experts,  are there any implications in terms of our national security. I think what we need in this  climate is just the facts on the table and that's what we're seeking from the Government,  we want to make sure all the processes were properly followed.

JOURNALIST: Is Labor clear on whether or not the leases actually have been  registered, signed - registered yet (inaudible)?

SHORTEN: Well, the second part's a hypothetical question. I've requested from  Malcolm Turnbull on Friday, we want a thorough briefing, we want all the facts on the  table. I know that my colleague Senator Nova Peris was pursuing these matters in  Senate Estimates and I think it's fair to say, Nova, that you didn't get a

satisfactory answer. When you've got really important decisions, including ownership,  control of our key strategic infrastructure and the Port of Darwin certainly falls into that  category of being very important, it's just important to make sure that all the T's are  getting crossed, all the I's are getting dotted, that we see the procedures, that we have  all the facts at our command and that's what Labor is requesting next.

JOURNALIST: Do you want the deal put on hold if it can be?

SHORTEN: Well, again we need to see what are the circumstances and arrangements  behind it before we start going to the next stage.

JOURNALIST: But aren't you just saying that in the meantime, circumstances of  arrangements going forward, aren't you just making noise on the sidelines if you don't  actually want something about it?

SHORTEN: No, in your last three questions you said if - we want all the facts and  before I start going into hypotheticals about how we react upon whatever the set of  circumstances are, I think there has been and you know, I congratulate the media as  well for helping draw attention to this - I think there’s been a sufficient question mark.  People just want to know what all the facts are, have all the issues been gone into, has  all the detail been examined from every angle. And I think that is sensible from the  Opposition. We're not opposing things for opposition sake. I'm interested in the Territory  going ahead, I'm interested to see more infrastructure here, I'm interested to  see hospitals and schools properly funded, I'm interested to make sure that we don't  have a cost of living Territory tax through this 15 per cent GST, but when it comes to  something like the sale of the Port of Darwin, we just want to know what has  actually happened and have all the strategic interests of Australia being fully examined.

JOURNALIST: Has there been any re-evaluation of how refugees are assessed  particularly coming from Syria, following these attacks and the revelation that one of the  attackers was carrying a Syrian passport?

SHORTEN: Well there's plenty in your question, I'll just unpack it. First of all in terms of  the circumstances of the background of these seven criminal gunmen and their  associates and confederates, I think we need to get a lot more information about who

these people are and the circumstances whereby they are able to carry out these  crimes. When it comes to the issue of refugees more generally, Australia should  analyse the background of all these people who seek to come to Australia, not just  refugees, but everyone, so we've got to make sure that's done thoroughly. But I really  want to stress here, I do not believe that the vast bulk of refugees are bad people. They  will make a contribution to Australia. We've taken refugees for a very long time. What  we can't do to remind you of an earlier answer I gave is fall into the trap of increasing  suspicion and fear of each other in this country. So, yes, they should be fully checked,  absolutely, and if the Government says it needs to take a little longer to do that, fair  enough. But I for one am not going to support calls that we stop being an immigrant

nation, that we stop taking refugees because of this act of evil in Paris. If we do that,  then the evil people win.

JOURNALIST: Did you discuss the Port deal with Malcolm Turnbull last night?

SHORTEN: Whilst I won't go into what I did speak about with Malcolm Turnbull, that  matter did not come up.

JOURNALIST: Based on what you know about (inaudible) present time, does Labor  see any reason why it shouldn't go ahead?

SHORTEN: We want to get the briefing and information. I don't assume automatically  that the Government's made a mistake here, by the way, I don't assume that. but when  Senator Peris was trying to get to the bottom of it in Estimates, it's fair to say that the  answers weren't cleared up, and I’ve been watching the coverage in the Territory and I  think people do want to know what is happening, and also probably want to know what's  happening with infrastructure funding that is being raised from these privatisations and  whether or not the promises which underpinned the reason or rationale for these  privatisations have been kept; that Territorians are actually benefitting. In the meantime,  Labor is just doing what I think Australians expect of a constructive Opposition. We've  seen, there's been a fuss raised, there's inadequate detail out there, have all the  Foreign Investment Review Board processes been completed? Are there any strategic  implications which haven't been fully considered? I don't assume the Government has  done the wrong thing here, but i think because of genuine public concern, I think the  Opposition is right to say let's just see what are all the facts and I think that's what  makes Australians more satisfied with the process if there is transparency.

JOURNALIST: Do you have any concerns about the way the Northern Territory  Government is running the corrections system, particularly with youth justice. We've  heard the detainees tear gassed, hooded and tied to chairs, and in the adult system,  we've had sex offenders basically out in the community in work camps, moving freely  among the community which has annoyed a lot of the communities?

SHORTEN: What I might do is get one of my colleagues from the Territory about those  specific matters.

SNOWDON: I think there are legitimate concerns that have been raised around the  treatment of juveniles. Many years ago I used to work with the juvenile detention facility  here in Darwin and I understand the range of young people who might come through  the system, but there is no way in which you can agree that those sorts of activities are

reasonable, they are not. In terms of managing offenders wherever they might be, I  think judgments have got to be made, judgments are made and whether or not the  person who you were talking to - you were inferring to was the person in north-east  Arnhem Land, well, well perhaps that person shouldn't be there. But I think at the end of  the day the prison system is there to rehabilitate people as much as anything else, and  if people have done their time, then we need to be talking about how we get them back

into the community. These are difficult issues, I'm not sure how well they've been  handled sufficiently well by the Northern Territory Government at this point. But at the  end of the day, the community has got to be concerned that their safety is properly  being addressed and decisions are made about who actually works within their  communities.

JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten, can I ask you one more question?

SHORTEN: I did say last question but -

JOURNALIST: Last one.

SHORTEN: But because of my strong and deep bond with ‘The Australian'.

JOURNALIST: Thank you very much. Based on the thought process so far, do you  think it's necessary for there to be any changes to the way in which major asset sales  are handled around FIRB process, consultation with defence? What sort of changes  would you like to see?

SHORTEN: I think there is a fair bit of flexibility in our FIRB process, that's the Foreign  Investment Review Board. The issue there is that we're a nation who relies upon  foreign, direct investment, whether or not it's the Duke of Westminster or whether or not  it is an entity, a state-owned enterprise from another country, Australia benefits  generally from the flow of foreign capital.

Also Australia invests a lot of money elsewhere, so if we put up too many draw bridges  in Australia, other nations might genuinely say well you want to invest in our part of the  world, yet you don't make us welcome here. So foreign investment is a good thing, it  helps this country. But then of course you've got to make sure that when you have  foreign investment that you are meeting a certain set of tests, you know, is it something  which is against Australia's national security interests, for example. The Australian  Foreign Investment Review Board guidelines I think, has a fair bit of discretion, you've  got to look at each case. If you just want to dream up a set of rules rigidly and then  apply them, I think then you can create disincentives for investment.

In this particular matter, there is no doubt that there is some concern. Now, whether or  not the concerns are actually warranted, Labor wants to see what detail are. In the  United States, when foreign entities have sought to buy American ports, it has been an  incendiary issue, it's been very controversial. Australia, therefore, I think, is well advised  to make sure that we understand all of the dimensions. I do not as a starting point think  that there is something untoward here. But there has been sufficient concern raised,  and our job as the Opposition is to speak up for all Australians. Just because the  Government are in charge doesn't mean we've all got to genuflect and say, thank you  very much for every press release and decision you make and just rubber stamp it,  that's not who I am. So I think on balance, we will see what's happened and I think it  would actually be in the interests of Landbridge, in the interests of Territorian

Community and Australia generally, if we know that all the questions have been  answered, then I think everyone can be much more confident in the process.

Now, I should just say I'm looking forward to my visit to Darwin today. I don't know if  time will permit us to visit the most famous field in Australia, I speak of course of the  Palmerston Hospital where apparently under the CLP and the Liberals you get paid  money to dig a hole, then you claim credit and then after the cameras go, you excavate  it, you fill it in again. That really has been a disgrace, the Palmerston Hospital, because  the Palmerston Hospital is important not just for that community but indeed the whole  territory. So we will be talking about health care with experts here today and tonight

hopefully as many of you as possible are able to come to the Darwin Turf club and we'll  have a Q&A. We don't necessarily need Tony Jones to have a Q&A - I'm looking  forward  to hearing the issues of the Territorian community because Labor is  determined to be accessible. We are a party of the people, from the people, and we  think it's important that citizens are able to quiz their Members of Parliament directly. So  have a lovely day and thanks very much.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: LEADER’S OFFICE MEDIA UNIT - 02 6277 4053

