

ANDREW LEIGH MP  SHADOW ASSISTANT TREASURER  SHADOW MINISTER FOR COMPETITION  MEMBER FOR FRASER



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TV INTERVIEW  SKY AM AGENDA  MONDAY, 27 JULY 2015

SUBJECT/S: Marriage equality; refugee policy; emissions trading scheme.

KIERAN GILBERT:   The Shadow Assistant Treasurer, Andrew Leigh, is my guest, to look at the  various elements of this ALP conference. Andrew Leigh, first of all on the same-sex issue, wrapped up yesterday afternoon, a compromise deal with a binding  vote now on the Labor platform. This is not really what Bill Shorten had hoped  for.

ANDREW LEIGH, SHADOW ASSISTANT TREASURER:   Kieran, I think this is about how to get same-sex marriage done. Bill Shorten  supports same-sex marriage, as does Tanya Plibersek and the vast majority of  the Labor Party. We put it in our platform in 2011 and the question now is how to  best marshal the numbers in the Parliament for a change which according to the  polls has between two-thirds and three-quarters support of the Australian people.  Tony Abbott just needs to give MPs and Senators a conscience vote.

GILBERT:   So you're calling for him to give a conscience vote, just as you go to a binding  vote, or at least plan one?

LEIGH:   Kieran that question goes to exactly the considerations at play here. We'd like to  see this done and in practical terms the best way to get this done is for Tony  Abbott to unshackle his MPs and allow them to vote their conscience. So we're  keeping open our conscience vote for this Parliament and next but if we can't get  it done that way then the conscience vote will lapse.



GILBERT:   Isn't it all a bit confusing though, if you're saying to him OK give your people a  conscience vote yet we're going to, down the track, bind our MPs one way?

LEIGH:   The means might seem a little complicated but the end is very simple. The UK,  New Zealand, the United States, and Ireland have supported same-sex marriage.  In half of those countries it happened under conservative leaders. The idea that  people should be able to marry who they love regardless of whether they're  same-sex attracted or not is a very simple one. And it won't threaten  heterosexual marriages like my own. Indeed, the institution of marriage will be  broadened to a significant group of Australians many of whom already have  children.

GILBERT:   What do you say to Liberal criticism, the Liberal Party criticism and from others,  analysis around the place this morning, that the Labor Party is now bitterly  divided on a number of key issues including on the boats issue for example not  securing the support of three key frontbenchers, the deputy Labor leader in  Tanya Plibersek, the opposition Senate leader in Penny Wong, and also Anthony  Albanese?

LEIGH:   Kieran, I think it's a mistake to confuse division for healthy debate. What we saw  over the weekend was a debate in the great traditions of the Labor Party. One in  which people had firm disagreements on the floor of conference but with a lasting  respect for both sides. On the issue of refugees you had everyone united on the  notion of doubling the refugee intake, giving another $450 million to the UN High  Commissioner for Refugees and treating refugees compassionately. Yes there  were differences over turnbacks but when protesters invaded the stage on  Saturday, both sides of the debate said this isn't how we do it at the Labor Party  conference, if you want to win you do it on the force of your argument and the  strength of your intellect.

GILBERT:   So do you support the turn back move, were you supporting that?

LEIGH:   I wasn't a voting delegate over the weekend.

GILBERT:   What's your view on it, though?

LEIGH:

Well, it's our party policy and I think it gives us a firm policy to stop people  drowning en route to Australia. You saw Tony Burke in his speech talk about the  thirty-three asylum seekers who drowned on the way to Australia, including a ten-month-old child. We can't have those drownings continue but I also believe we  can be more decent and more compassionate in how offshore facilities are run  and in taking more refugees.

GILBERT:   How are we meant to believe though, you know Tanya Plibersek and Anthony  Albanese when they make this case now, when we know that they don't actually  believe it?

LEIGH:   Kieran, cabinets have disagreements all the time and the notion of cabinet  governance is that people disagree within the room but then a united position is  taken when they go out. Think of it if you like as like a sporting team who has a  debate in the locker room as to whether to run left or right but once you decide  what you're doing everyone plays the game the same way.

GILBERT:   But Tanya Plibersek would be the Foreign Minister if you win the next election,  you have a Foreign Minister who we know didn't vote for this policy of turning  back the boats, which is, you know, fairly crucial to the success of operation  sovereign borders.

LEIGH:   Kieran, I think in a healthy political party it's OK to differ around the means by  which you achieve ends such as reducing drownings at sea and treating  refugees compassionately. In fact, I would have been horrified if the weekend’s  conference was stage-managed, if there were no differences in any of the  debates, I would have felt like I was at a Liberal Party conference.

GILBERT:   No I understand that point but this is the would-be Foreign Minister, you know,  any other individual you'd say OK but the would be Foreign Minister whose got to  go on to the international stage and make the case and do the deals in the region  to make this all a success and she didn't support this key part of the policy.

LEIGH:   Kieran, it's a very difficult conversation part of the challenge is we don't know  exactly what the Government's doing on turnbacks, which they have shrouded in  secrecy, as they have done with so many other areas of government. So  reasonable people can disagree over that means but we had a sensible debate  at the conference. It was a debate, I think, is a great credit to the Labor Party. In  the Labor Party you see these things out in the open. If this had been a Greens  Party conference it would have all been held in secrecy behind closed doors. But

we have our differences and the quality of the speeches there, so many people I  spoke to, even people who were not Labor Party members said that they had  been impressed by the speeches on both sides by Andrew Giles, Richard Marles  and the other speakers.

GILBERT:   On the emissions trading scheme/renewable energy target or goal, Joel  Fitzgibbon yesterday on television said you call it a tax if you want, call it  whatever you like, he made that concession, did he not get the memo?

LEIGH:   Its simply not right to refer to an emissions trading scheme as a tax. This is a  scheme which has international linkage, puts a cap on pollution and the price  floats. Its a little complicated in its economic architecture, but its effect is very  simple: we reduce carbon pollution at the lowest possible cost. You look at the  carbon prices that are trading in the emissions trading schemes in over thirty  countries, none of them are as high as the $66 a tonne that Greg Hunt is paying  polluters through his slush fund to get emissions abatement.

GILBERT:   Why is $66 a tonne?

LEIGH:   Because paying polluters is a very expensive way of doing things.

GILBERT:   But they want to argue it is much less than that, it is nothing like that, in terms of  the price per tonne. Where does the $66 coming from?

LEIGH:   I'm doing a very simple exercise, Kieran. I am taking what they paid and how  much abatement they got and dividing the first by the second. They're paying  significant amounts of money out and getting very little abatement - as every  serious economist would expect. Direct action is an expensive slush fund, that  isn't scalable, which is why Australia is the only country which hasn't put in its  post-2020 targets for the upcoming international climate change talks. It is why  no one around the world take Tony Abbott and his gang seriously when it comes  to climate change.

GILBERT:   But your renewable energy plan, that is only a goal, it's an ambition, it's not a  target, it's not bound, we haven't seen any modelling on it, you can see why  people are worried the impact of electricity prices, when we just don't know how  you are going to achieve that goal.

LEIGH:

Kieran, you ask anyone who has got solar panels on their roof: has that brought  down their electricity bill? I suspect they would tell you yes. The Government set  up a Renewable Energy Target review headed by a climate sceptic and even that  review was reluctantly forced to concede the Renewable Energy Target put  downward pressure on power prices. Renewable energy also creates jobs. We  have a range of jobs coming out in wind and solar and other renewables and  they're an increasingly important part of our energy mix as well as moving along  the curve towards lowering emissions…

GILBERT:   We still don't have any detail do we? it's just on a hope and a prayer, isn't it? Set  the goal and fingers crossed.

LEIGH:   You want to know for our targets are for 2020? We can be absolutely clear. Then  for 2030, we have a clear aspiration to hit 50% renewables, I expect that that is  going to be achieved through a range of different sources. We will see more and  more Australian households putting solar panels on their roofs -

GILBERT:   But how soon will we get the details, in terms of the modelling and just how  you're going to go about trying to get to that goal?

LEIGH:   Let's not put the cart before the horse, Kieran. The Government are yet to  release their own post-2020 targets. We are talking from opposition about a  policy that is 15 years away. We have been very clear with the Australian people  that Labor supports renewables, that we believe we need to move down that  curve to reduce Australia's carbon pollution, and the early we start, the earlier we  set those long-term targets, the smoother the change can be. As an economist, I  want us to pay as little as possible for breaking the links between carbon  pollution and economic growth.

GILBERT:   Shadow Assistant Treasurer, Andrew Leigh, as always appreciate your time.

LEIGH:   Thanks Kieran.

MEDIA CONTACT: JENNIFER RAYNER 0428 214 856

