





THE HON. BILL SHORTEN  LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  MEMBER FOR MARIBYRNONG



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP INTERVIEW  CASINO, NSW  SATURDAY, 26 SEPTEMBER 2015

SUBJECT/S: County Labor; Divisions in the Coalition; China’s announcement of  an ETS; Regional Australia; Syria.

JOEL FITZGIBBON, SPOKESPERSON FOR COUNTRY CAUCUS: Today in Casino,  200 rank and file members of the Labor party gathered to express their support for rural  and regional Australia To plead a Labor commitment to those communities in rural and  regional Australia. To hold the Nats and Libs holding rural seats to account for their  complacency and their misguided policies which are having such an adverse impact on  rural and regional communities.

More particularly, we heard from our federal leader, Bill Shorten who outlined a plan for  regional and rural Australia. A better deal for regional and rural Australia. It was an  inspiring speech. Well received here and we welcome him to Casino, into the national  Country Labor Forum.

Thanks Bill.

BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Thanks Joel. It’s great to be in  Casino on the North Coast of New South Wales at the Federal Country Labor Forum.

Today, Labor has made it very clear that Labor is a party for all Australians; cities and  the regions. Whilst the Liberal party take the National party for granted and the National  party takes their voters for granted, Labor is getting on with the job of offering a positive  alternative for all Australians. Only Labor will stand up for schools in the regions, proper  hospital funding in the regions, making sure that kids from the country can get to  university and of course, that regional Australia gets a proper National Broadband  Network; not the more expensive but slower version that the Liberals are giving them.

So when it comes to Schools and Hospitals, access to universities and the NBN, Labor  has got the interest of regional Australians at heart.

And today, we’ve seen the first public appearance or reporting of the former Prime  Minister Tony Abbott’s comments on the change. Tony Abbott has said that the  salesman has changed, but not the policies. Labor agrees with Tony Abbott that the  salesman has changed but not the policies.

And it couldn’t be any clearer than the dramatic news overnight that the world's fastest-growing economy has decided to embrace an Emissions Trading Scheme to deal with  the harmful effects of carbon pollution. Now what is the case that China, the world's  largest economy by people, the United States, the world's largest economy by output,  and indeed Labor, have all got similar policies to deal with climate change. Yet Malcolm  Turnbull's turned his back on everything he said when he was previously the leader of  the Liberal Party and he is the only person practically in the world who is backing in  Tony Abbott's discredited policies on carbon pollution, which Reputex, a leading agency  has said, will actually not see any reduction in carbon pollution. So for regional and rural  Australians, Labor's here today in force committed to making sure that there are better  schools, better hospitals, access to universities not $100,000 degrees, a better NBN  and of course real action on climate change.

We are happy to take any questions people might have.

JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten, choosing the beef capital of Australia; is that part of Labor's  push back into National Party heartland?

SHORTEN: Well, the National Party is showing real signs of division. Whilst youth  unemployment in regional Australia is above the average, whilst unemployment in  regional Australia is unacceptably high, the only job which Barnaby Joyce seems  focused on is Warren Truss's job. So it is good to be here in Casino, which is one of the  beef capitals of Australia, and when I'm in Rockhampton I'll also recognise that they do  a lot of beef up there too.

But very importantly, Labor's here because we don't take voters for granted. We don't  accept that any political party has a monopoly; that it can treat voters like their personal  property and that this is National, this is Liberal or this is Labor areas. The truth of the  matter is that all Australians want to see better policies on jobs, better chance for their  kids to go to university or TAFE, better chance to make sure their parents get proper  aged care facilities in their later years. They want to see real action on climate change.  Our farmers are the best environmentalists in Australia. That's why it's very important  we treat the processes to protect our environment, including the developments in the  Liverpool plains and the Shenhua mine, that we treat the processes with respect and  don't right roughshod over country Australia.

JOURNALIST: What chance do you have of grabbing those seats?

SHORTEN: Well Janelle Saffin is our candidate in Page. She is the former member for  Page and she will hopefully be the future member for Page.  Everywhere I travel on the  north coast, be it in Justin Elliott's electorate or Janelle Saffin’s area she is running for,  you see what Labor's done. It is Labor that’s put the funding back into local hospitals.  It’s Labor who wants to make sure country kids get the same chance in life that city kids  get. It’s Labor who is committed to ensuring that we can connect our regional  communities, not only with our metropolitan cities, but the world. Labor wants to have a  National Broadband Network which is amongst the best in the world. Australians  deserve nothing less. And people like Justin Elliott and Janelle Saffin are very  committed to real action on climate change. We don't have to keep the Tony Abbott  supporters of the Liberal party happy. We don't have to get involved in the internal  arguments of the National party. People like Justine and Janelle, they know what's  going on in their communities and they’re committed to making sure the north coast,  and indeed led by Joel in terms of regional Australia, that all Australians in regional  Australia get treated equally and with the same consideration that voters do in the city.

JOURNALIST: How will Labor be targeting those seats during the election campaign?

SHORTEN: Well, I'm going to get Joel to supplement this answer but what I would say  is people in the country want to make sure that their schools have the same resources  as schools in the city. I think it's fair enough that if you need emergency help at your  hospital, that your regional hospital has facilities which will look after you in the same  way which you could hope for in an emergency ward in the city. It is reasonable if you  live outside the three big cities of the east coast, that you get access to comparable  National Broadband Network capacities, it's really important that we have an  environmental policy around renewable energy which actually go towards providing jobs  in the bush. One of the things which the conservatives in the Liberal and National  parties forget is that renewable energy policies create manufacturing jobs in regional  Australia that they give new options for new industries in regional Australia. Labor  understands how real people live their lives. We are not out of touch. We understand  how people need, the importance of a good industrial safety net and minimum wages  and penalty rates. We get that farmers want to be able to export overseas. We have got  to deep downward pressure in terms of the costs that they face.

JOURNALIST: Speaking of candidates, have you got a candidate ready for the North  Sydney by-election which will happen after Joe Hockey leaves Parliament?

SHORTEN: I wasn't aware that they'd announced that Joe Hockey was going to be  given the consolation prize of our senior diplomatic representative in America. But what  we do know is that I think Australians aren't happy if they just think that their MPs will  hop in and out of Parliament when it suits themselves. We believe that it's important that  MPs try and do their terms. So at this stage we don't know if there will be a by-election  in North Sydney, but when there is, Labor will certainly weigh up what is in the best  interests of the voters in North Sydney. I know one thing, if you are a voter in North  Sydney or if you are a voter on the North Coast, you want to make sure your kids get a  good education, you want to make sure it’s your Medicare card not your credit card that

gives you good quality health, you want to make sure that the public TAFE system in  this country  isn't being trashed by a rush to privatisation, you want to make sure  pensioners don't get promises broken at elections and we see pensioners who have  worked hard their whole life being stranded with unfair pension cuts. Doesn't matter  where you are in Australia, you want good leadership focused on jobs, schools,  education and fairness.

JOURNALIST: What about the seat of Warringah, Tony Abbott says he'll decide his  future after Christmas?

SHORTEN: I'm still dealing with Tony Abbott's comments today where he confirmed  what Labor has been saying. Tony Abbott has let the cat out of the bag which I don't  think Malcolm Turnbull and some of the other new sales people wanted out. It's the  same Government with the same policies. They have just got different people selling it.

JOURNALIST: Do you think he's white-anting in the wake of the leadership spill?

SHORTEN: I think the fact that several of the senior Liberals didn't even tell Mr Abbott  what was going on, on the day before the challenge, I think he's probably feeling a bit  bruised but that really is a matter for the Liberal Party. I think it seems that the next  challenge that's going on; Barnaby Joyce is desperate for Warren Truss's job. I just say  this again to Australians, we understand that the Liberals take the Nationals for granted,  we understand that the Nationals take the bush for granted. But Labor is here, and we  don't take any voter for granted. We want people to consider us seriously on the basis  we'll make sure your kids get the best education at school base according to need, that  your kids get the chance to go to TAFE or university, that we don't have $100,000  degrees. For all those mature age students who are thinking about changing their jobs,  Labor has a plan which means that you have downward pressure on fees for going to  university. We are also very committed to making sure that we win the race of jobs to  the future. That's why today be - sorry, on Thursday, we announced new policies to help  small business and start-up enterprises, be able to compete with the rest of the world  and win.

JOURNALIST: What about a new Cabinet? Because the Liberal Government; Coalition  Government has shown a little bit of generational change and recognising the need for  that. Why won’t you move out some of the old hands and factional warriors from your  side?

SHORTEN: First of all, I don’t accept the assumption of your question. What the Liberal  party has done is discover that there are women in politics other than Julie Bishop. They  make a big play of putting more women into the Cabinet. We already have more women  members in our Cabinet. When we talk about generational change, we are already a  younger Opposition than the Government. And I don't think that's particularly changed.  So I do applaud Malcolm Turnbull for recognising that women are in the workforce and  they deserve to be in positions of power. I do like the idea that we can have a debate in  the future about policies, not personalities. But I also have to say that the Liberals are

now engaging in two years of catch-up and just when they think they are drawing level  pegging with us, watch this space, because Labor's committed to making sure that  women are half our members of Parliament by 2025, we are committed to improving the  diversity of our MPs, but we have some good things to announce too coming up.

JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) In terms of leadership and stability in the past under Labor,  given that you led the way in terms of leadership and stability in this country?

SHORTEN: First of all, we have changed the rules of our party. What you saw done  with the Liberals or previously in Labor just can't happen. That's a concrete fact. But I  would also offer to you and through you to your readers and to Australians, for the last  two years the Labor Party has been very united. I'm very fortunate with the team that  I've got. And we'll keep obviously improving our team and working on new blood. But  Labor has been united for the last two years. We understand that a party that can't  govern itself can't govern Australia. We would perhaps invite our conservative  competitors to have a good look at what's going on at the moment in the National Party.  And you have to conclude, when regional unemployment is so high, when infrastructure  resources are diminishing in the bush, when the schools and hospitals are crying out for  continuity and consistency of funding, the last thing regional Australia needs is an  unedifying fight within the Nats. Indeed, if we want to talk about change, I might just ask  Mark Butler to again explain how when we are talking about the Liberals catching up on  people, or personalities or policies or on what we have learnt, I am just going to get  Mark to further talk briefly about climate change being an example of how Labor is  leading the way and we are in step with the rest of the world.

MARK BUTLER, SHADOW MINISTER FOR THE ENVIRONMENT, CLIMATE  CHANGE AND WATER: Thank you, Bill. Well, Labor's been making the case now for  years of the importance of putting a cap on carbon pollution that reduces over time and  then letting business work out the cheapest and most effective way to operate. That is  an Emissions Trading Scheme. You see this model working among our oldest trading  partners, the United Kingdom, France and Germany, many places in North America, but  as Bill outlined, we are starting to see it emerge in our own region. Our third largest  export partner, South Korea, started an emissions trading scheme this year and we  have seen spectacular news overnight that China will be joining so many countries  around the world, working on this market mechanism. A mechanism that the Australian  Labor Party has been arguing for, for years now in this country. Now, we see a leader in  the Liberal Party who in years gone past argued the merits of an Emissions Trading  Scheme but has now swallowed Tony Abbott's Direct Action policy hook, line and  sinker. We know this is a policy that will not work. We know from modelling done by  independent agencies, and the Government's own agencies, that carbon pollution will  rise by as much as 10 per cent between now and 2020. It will rise by 20 per cent  between now and 2030, without that Emissions Trading Scheme in place. We recognise  that there were many Australians who held out a hope that if Malcolm Turnbull returned  to the leadership, that he would drag his party back to the sensible centre on climate  change. Over the last couple of weeks, all of those Australians have had their hearts  broken. They have seen that Malcolm Turnbull has done a deal with the hard right of the

Liberal Party and National Party to keep in place holus-bolus, to keep in place Tony  Abbott's reckless Direct Action policies and his opposition to the expansion of  renewable energy. Only Labor is going to get with the rest of the world. Join this  momentum that's building towards the conference in Paris and put in place a  mechanism that will actually deliver meaningful reductions in carbon pollution in  Australia in the most effective and cheapest possible way.

SHORTEN: Are there any final questions?

JOURNALIST: Does Labor agree that the Syrian President Bashar al-Assad is part of  that solution in the Syrian war, or do you believe that he must go?

SHORTEN: I don't think it's as simple as a yes or no. Labor has no time for the  administration or the government of Assad. It has been a terrible government and it's  done terrible things to its population. So that's one thing we really do believe that Assad  and his government have been dreadful. We also understand that we are combatting  ISIL and the terrorist organisations which are occupying parts of Iraq and Syria. We  have supported the principle of collective self-defence in Iraq to see the Australian Air  Force as part of a Coalition effort to go after the ISIL terrorists across the border, such  as it is, into north Syria. I think this argument which we have seen advance, I have seen  advanced for the first time not from the Government to myself, but through the  newspapers, saying that there might be some greater support for Assad. We are going  to be very careful before we go down that path. We want to hear what the security  experts' logic is in this. I do not believe Australia should be picking sides in Syria. As far  as I can tell, between ISIL and Assad there's not a great deal to separate them. What I  also get is that the refugee crisis that's been caused in Syria is a combination of a whole  lot of bad operators and factions in that country. So we’re pretty cautious about this  latest development in the doctrine which we are seeing and we will expect the  Government to explain to us how this helps Australia's long-term security.

Very last question.

JOURNALIST: There's talk that he needs to be part of a political solution there, that's  the development today. Is Labor open to having that conversation about that?

SHORTEN: We'll hear what the Government has to say to repeat my previous answer.  But I want to put very clearly that Australia needs to be pretty careful about trying to  inject ourselves into understanding Syrian's civil war, Syrian politics. But it is a matter of  record that Assad has been a dreadful dictator. There are a whole lot of people in that  part of the world, ISIL and the other terrorist groups, which are genocidal, ethno fascists  for want of another word - they are dreadful people. I'm very wary about Australia trying  to pick winners. What we'll do is hear what the logic is, hear what the intelligence is from  European and American allies, but we are very cautious about trying to engage in some  sort of moral debate about the benefits of any particular side here. I think a lot of them  are very poor.

Thanks everyone. Cheers.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: LEADER’S OFFICE MEDIA UNIT - 02 6277 4053

