

THE HON BRENDAN O’CONNOR MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR EMPLOYMENT AND  WORKPLACE RELATIONS  MEMBER FOR GORTON

E&OE TRANSCRIPT  ABC 720 DRIVE WITH JOHN MCGLUE  PERTH  WEDNESDAY, 29 JULY 2015

SUBJECT/S: Western Australia Economy; Asylum Seekers; Buffett Rule.

JOHN MCGLUE: Brendan O’Connor, what brings you to Perth?

BRENDAN O’CONNOR, SHADOW MINISTER FOR EMPLOYMENT AND  WORKPLACE RELATIONS: Well firstly, it’s a very important part of Australia. I’ll  be talking to people about a whole range of challenges facing this State.  Tomorrow I go to Barrow Island as an invitation from Chevron to see the Gorgon  and Wheatstone project, so I’m looking forward to that. And I’ll be engaging with  people about the opportunities of growing jobs here too.

MCGLUE: And it’s a big issue here, and for this reason you’ll see it with the oil  and gas projects you go to - Barrow island are starting to scale back on a number  of people for example because the construction phase is just ending. We’ve seen  it with the hard rock mining industry, and we’re going to see it with the oil and gas  industry as well. Where do you think the next wave of jobs might come from here  in WA and who’s going to create them?

O’CONNOR: Well, they’re normally created in the private sector, but of course  you’ll see an increase in health and education services, financial services. What  we need to ensure, given that this part of Australia has been so successful for so  long now is that the economy is diversified sufficiently so the State does not just  rely on mining. I think there is a sense that’s happened, that’s not of course true.

MCGLUE: Really?

O’CONNOR: I think there has been a sense that the country, not just that  Western Australia, has been the beneficiary of a remarkable boom. But as you  say, the construction phase is ending so we need to look to other areas in our  economy. I think there are great opportunities in our region to provide for job  growth. So there are a whole range of things we can do, we just don’t see it  coming from the Federal government currently.

MCGLUE: Well who’s going to create these jobs?

O’CONNOR: Well as I say the creator of jobs predominantly are businesses  making decisions about engaging both in Australia and within the region. I think  for example we can see an increase in demand for our services. I think  government has a very significant role in increasing the skills required in  emerging areas of our market, in making sure we have the 21st century  infrastructure, that is connectivity. Making sure that small and medium  enterprises for example John, are able to grow their businesses by leveraging  the NBN so they can not only enter markets in Australia, but enter markets  throughout the region.  So there are plenty of opportunities I think given there is a  growing middle class in our region, great demand for our services and for our  goods. The government just has to cultivate the environment in which that can  happen.

MCGLUE: It’s also cultivating an environment in which people are prepared to  risk and to invest capital. And what we’ve seen in Australia in recent years and  this is going back beyond the life of the Abbott Government, it stretches back to  the life of the Gillard and Rudd governments is the capital has pretty much gone  on strike in Australia. You see a build-up of deposits in banks, credit growth is  very modest relative to the growth of deposits. People are afraid to invest money,  people are reluctant. People with capital can now take it offshore and invest it  elsewhere.  Private sector investment in Australia has peeled back dramatically.  What ideas has Labor got to increase or instil confidence among business and  capital providers to actually invest some of that money and create jobs?

O’CONNOR: Well I think some of that is the case. I accept that there has been a  contraction in private capital, particularly after the Global Financial Crisis. That’s  why when we were last in Government we responded by investing in jobs, by  building infrastructure to get us over the hump of that very significant recession -  the biggest global recession in 70 years. I think it’s also fair to say that we had  started to see a return to private investment, but when you have a government  scaring off investors, when you have Budget’s that have a dampening impact on  business and consumer confidence, of course that does impact adversely upon  opportunities to employ people.

MCGLUE: So what ideas have you got?

O’CONNOR: Well as we’ve said before we need firstly to create opportunities.  The way we do that is to start with the macroeconomic approach - that is  investing in education, investing infrastructure, making sure businesses feel there  is some certainty of that investment. Enabling businesses to grow through  infrastructure.

We don’t believe the Government is focussed on those issues at the Federal  level. We do believe, if you think about it now, human capital is our greatest  resource. Whatever else happens in the mining sector or other sectors of our  economy, in this sophisticated world, globalised economy, we need to make sure  we invest sufficiently in training and education of our people, of our labour force.  We need to make sure that when we do that, we equip them with the skills that  are emerging in our economy, namely those in the areas of science, technology,  engineering and mathematics. That’s why Bill Shorten has started to outline  some of our plans about that type of investment. Making sure we have more  graduates, making sure that teachers have the right qualities and providing  incentives for young people to go into those areas of demand.

MCGLUE: Ok, its 12 minutes after four on Drive, my guest is Brendan O’Connor  the Labor Opposition spokesman on Employment. But we’ve got a broad canvas  here, we can talk about many things. If there is anything Brendan O’Connor  raises that you’d like to chat about 1300 222 720. He’s quite happy to take a  question from you as well.  Do give me a bell 1300 222 720. I’d love to hear from  you, especially what you’re making of Labor’s new policies. We saw the new  policy of turning back asylum seeker boats, Brendan O’Connor, sending them  back to the country of origin - the policy that Bill Shorten enunciated last week  supported by your Conference. Had this policy been adopted during Labor’s last  term of government, how many thousands of lives might have been saved?

O’CONNOR: I think a better way of expressing it is that there would have been  more than 600 people possibly that may have survived if Tony Abbott had  supported us on the Malaysian arrangement. I think, even if you think that was  not going to work, the fact the then Opposition chose not to support Labor in  finding a safe deterrent to stop people getting on unsafe boats, was a mistake by  the Prime Minister when he was then Opposition Leader.

I mean I don’t like to blame people directly for lives lost, but my view is we’ve  always known that we needed to find a deterrent for people making the wrong  decision, disembarking or getting on unseaworthy vessels on perilous journeys,  leaving Indonesia, not even leaving a country of persecution, but a transit  country. We did not have the cooperation.  You might recall John, we had a  decision struck down by the High Court. We could have fixed it in the Parliament,  but it was not accepted. I’ll just make this point, and you might want to examine  what I say, but  I believe Tony Abbott didn’t support us, not because he thought it  wouldn’t work, he didn’t support us because he was scared that it might.

MCGLUE: What about your policy of not turning back boats? You were in  government for many years under Kevin Rudd, then Julia Gillard, then Kevin  Rudd, again. Why not turn back the boats during all of that time and how many  lives would have been saved if you had of adopted that policy at that time  because you’re now taking it on board in your platform.

O’CONNOR: As I say, if there are reasons why we saw lives lost at sea it must  include the inability of the Parliament to put in that deterrent. Now we have  accepted that there has been a change to things recently.  But the 90 per cent  reduction in boat flow commenced when we actually created the resettlement  approach, that is, to say we would look to resettle in our region. But there is no  doubt boats have stopped under this government and as a result of that  evidentially, Bill Shorten made clear that Labor did not want to see a return to  lives lost. For that reason, the Conference made a very difficult decision. But I  think the decision was the correct decision to say we will not proscribe any  deterrents and we will have the policies on the table to prevent any lives being  lost, including what happens now.

MCGLUE: OK, under this new policy Brendan O’Connor, what happens to the  people now locked up on Manus Island under this policy - what happens to  them?

O’CONNOR: What should happen for any people that are in detention centres is  that their claim should be processed. What’s happened since September 2013, is  this Government has not chosen to seek to ensure these people have been  properly processed and therefore settled or rejected. So the first thing you’d have  to do for any person in a centre whether it be in Australia of course, or whether it  be in the region is that processing must finish, the claims have to be determined,  pursuant to the refugee convention, and they are either settled in settlement  countries, or indeed they are rejected and therefore there needs to be a way for  them to go elsewhere of course.

MCGLUE: So theoretically, the majority could settle in Australia, or alternatively  the majority could be sent back from where they came?

O’CONNOR: As what happened under the Howard Government as you might  recall, there were people who were on regional transit centres, and most of  whom ended up settling in Australia.

MCGLUE: It’s 16 after four on Drive. My guest is Brendan O’Connor the Labor  frontbencher here in Western Australia. He’s going to Barrow Island, checking  out the Wheatstone as well in his capacity as the Opposition Employment  spokesperson, but he’s involved in many parts of the upper echelons of the  Labor Party. Another issue, just one more I want to canvass with you Brendan  O’Connor, you talk about job creation and we talk about the mobility of capital.  The Buffett tax proposal that was tabled at the weekend - minimum tax rate of 35

per cent for people earning over $300,000 regardless of their legal and legitimate  deductions as they now stand. How do you do that and why do you do that?

O’CONNOR:  It’s been an amendment moved to the Chapter, it’s something  therefore for us to consider. I even heard Joe Hockey say he’d consider it in  terms of his tax review, but let’s be clear here -

MCGLUE: I’m just asking why you think -

O’CONNOR: I think any examination of tax arrangement for multinational  companies or high wealth individuals is important, because they should pay their  fair share. That’s why, for example, Labor has put forward increasing the tax on  some multinationals who do not pay their share.

MCGLUE: No this isn’t - Brendan let’s park the multinationals, it’s a different  argument.

O’CONNOR: Well, it’s both -

MCGLUE: I’d like to focus on individual tax arrangements. Income tax  arrangements where for individuals where anybody earning over $300,000 a year  there will be a fixed minimum rate of taxation of 35 per cent, regardless of things  like childhood deductions, regardless of business expenses,  people might have  negatively geared property they’d be able to deduct interest or perhaps dividend  imputation. What’s going to happen to dividend imputation?

O’CONNOR: Again, this is not policy of the Party, this is a resolution in the  Chapter. But it is an indicator that the Labor Party believes in people paying their  fair share.  I think the leader has made clear, and I think Chris Bowen would have  made clear, we will be developing our policies. We’ve already announced a  number in the area of taxation. Two areas, one was multinationals which was in  keeping with this principle - the Buffet principle -

MCGLUE: Now Australian is going to have a problem with you trying to get  multinationals to pay their fair share.

O’CONNOR: I think not. And the other one is in relation to making sure the very  significant concessions for the highest superannuants would be paired back so  that we’re not paying so much of taxpayers money for those concessions.

MCGLUE: So what happens with dividend imputation? Is there a chance that will  be changed or will it be gotten rid of completely under a future Labor  Government?

O’CONNOR: That’s something you might want to put to the Shadow Treasurer.  But this rule, the Buffett rule is not examining in any detail our policy. But I think

it’s putting down a marker about what we believe in so far as tax, that we want to  see a progressive taxation system, one where people pay their fair share. As for  the areas of change, we will be very clear, I promise you that John, and precise  before we actually get to the election.

MCGLUE: It’s good to see you, thanks very much for coming in.

O’CONNOR: Thanks John.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: ERIN SMITH 0458 950 010

