

16 March 2015



PM DODGES QUESTIONS ON SENDING KIDS IN DETENTION BACK TO NAURU



The Independent Member for Denison, Andrew Wilkie, has condemned the Prime Minister  for  refusing  to  explain  why  more  than  half  of  all  asylum  seeker  children  in  detention  in   Australia  will  be  sent  back  to  Nauru,  rather  than  freed  into  the  community in  Australia  as   previously suggested by the Government.

Mr Wilkie asked Tony Abbott in Question Time today:           ``Prime Minister, the Government claims asylum seeker children in detention in Australia are  being freed.  But  in fact  more than  half  of these  children are  being sent  to the Republic of   Nauru which is just 21 square kilometres, has a population less than 10,000 people and a 90  per cent unemployment rate.  Prime Minister, why does the Government think that some kids  are less precious than others?’’

Mr Abbott refused to answer the question and referred to the kids as ``illegal maritime arrival  children’’.

``Many of these children who are to be sent to Nauru are currently in Australia because they  are  suffering  mental  health  problems  due  to  their  treatment  at  the  hands  of  the  Australian   Government, and all the Prime Minister can do is label them criminals,’’ Mr Wilkie said.

Mr  Wilkie  said  that  last  month  126  children  were  locked  up  in  immigration  detention  in   Australia and 116 on Nauru.    But half of the 126 children in Australian detention centres -  many receiving treatment for mental health problems - are due to be returned to Nauru rather  than be released in Australia.

``In  a  cruel  sleight  of  hand,  the  Government  would  have  the  public  believe  that  asylum   seeker children in detention in Australia are being released into the community,’’ Mr Wilkie  said.

``But  the  truth  is  more  than  half  of  these  children  will  never  be  free  in  Australia  and  will   instead be sent back to the misery of Nauru.’’

Mr  Wilkie  has  requested  the  International  Criminal  Court  investigate,  in  accordance  with   Article  15(1)  of  the  Rome  Statute,  the  Prime  Minister  and  his  Cabinet  for  crimes  against   humanity in relation to asylum seekers.

Actions  such  as  forced  transfers  to  other  countries,  detention  without  trial,  detention  of   children and conditions of detention clearly constitute breaches of Article 7 of the Statute.

The  Government’s  policies  are  in  violation  of  fundamental  principles  of  international  law   including, inter alia, those contained in the Refugee Convention, the International Covenant  on  Civil  and  Political  Rights,  the  Convention  against  Torture  and  the  Convention  on  the   Rights of the Child. These are breaches in their own right, and also form  a foundation for  several contraventions of Article 7.



For more information: Philippa Duncan 0428 528 673

