

THE HON RICHARD MARLES MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER  PROTECTION   MEMBER FOR CORIO



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  INSIDERS   SUNDAY, 14 JUNE 2015

SUBJECT/S: Asylum seekers; Tony Abbott’s royal commission.

BARRIE CASSIDY: Richard Marles, welcome.

RICHARD MARLES, SHADOW IMMIGRATION MINISTER: Good morning, Barrie.  How are you?

CASSIDY: Do you think we'll ever know the answer to that question as to whether  people smugglers were paid by the Government?

MARLES: Well, I think we should be given the answer to that question. I mean, one  of the real problems about all of this - and the incidents over the last few days have  highlighted it - is that all of this is happening under a shroud of secrecy.



It's not really for any national security reason. It's effectively a media strategy and it  denies the Australian people the ability to apply scrutiny to a matter which is very  much in the public interest. So we should certainly be hearing from the Prime  Minister as soon as possible: what actually happened?

CASSIDY: The crew are in custody. They're being questioned by Indonesian police.  Presumably they will have answers. Do you think that, once they have those  answers, they'll make them public?



MARLES: Well, let's see what the Indonesians do in terms of their investigations and  what the crew ultimately say - and what position the Indonesians ultimately take.  And it's no small matter here that this is clearly now having an impact on our  relationship with Indonesia. That the foreign minister of Indonesia has raised this  with our ambassador to Indonesia just highlights the fact that it's on their mind.

But we shouldn't be waiting for the Indonesians to do this investigation. We should  be living in a country where there is transparent government. And we should be  hearing from our own Government about what exactly happened.



And I think I'd make this point, Barry: that what we saw on Friday was not just a sort  of slip on the part of the Prime Minister. Two interviews on the same day. If there  was a mistake at the beginning, there was an opportunity to fix it up later on in the  day. But repeatedly, the Prime Minister invited us to believe that this did happen.  And if that is the case, then he is at odds with his Immigration Minister who made it  very clear -

CASSIDY: But maybe as Prime Minister he was just taking a different approach to  this. He's saying that you can't talk about operational matters and he was sticking to  the letter of that?



MARLES: Well, it is a - well, if he was doing that, his Immigration Minister and his  Foreign Minister certainly were not doing that. I would have thought it was a clear  matter to deny the proposition; that we would not be paying people smugglers, we  would not be creating that pull factor. We would not be turning Navy vessels into  floating ATMs and handing over wads of cash to people smugglers. I would have  thought that's an easy thing for the Prime Minister to deny, if it never happened. But  he didn't do that.



But the point I'd make is that the Immigration Minister did. And if, in fact, it turns out  that this is what has occurred and the Immigration Minister denied it up-front, well,  then the Immigration Minister has a serious problem: not just in terms of policy but  personally, as the Minister, he has a serious problem and we need to get to the  bottom of this.

CASSIDY: But how serious? Would that be a matter for resignation?

MARLES: Well, I've not made it a practice to make those kind of calls. If the Prime  Minister has an injured player on the field, it's for him as to whether or not he wants  to pull that injured player off. But I would make this point: if he has denied this up-front and it turns out to be true, then Peter Dutton is seriously injured.



CASSIDY: Why, though, would they pay these people? It appears as if - and the  prime minister of New Zealand has confirmed this from officials - that this boat was  on its way to New Zealand in any case?

MARLES: Well, a good question. And I think this is precisely the kind of question  that we need an answer to.

And why on earth you would be trying to create a pull factor of this kind, giving  people smugglers the sense that if they turn up next to an Australian Navy vessel,  there is half a chance they're going to be given some Australian taxpayer-funded  money: this is ridiculous if that's what's ultimately occurred.

And what is utterly amazing here is that the Prime Minister repeatedly - repeatedly  on Friday - has invited us to believe that that's exactly what occurred.



CASSIDY: In the run-up to the next election, how will your asylum seekers policy be  different from that of the Government?

MARLES: Well, we will. Firstly we are not about to do anything which reopens the  journey between Java and Christmas Island. We do not want to see people dying at  sea in the way that has occurred in the past. So people should be under no illusions  about that.



But I'd also say that whereas for the Government, I think, that this has been the  central piece of an architecture which is about putting a big wall around Australia and  turning our back on the world's problems: that's not our view. I mean, our view is that  the world is going through the largest humanitarian crisis that it has since the Second  World War and that a compassionate, modern, civilised Australia should play a role  in that. And we would look at developing policies which enabled us to do that.

CASSIDY: But apart from being more transparent, how would it be different?

MARLES: Oh, well, I think there's lots of ways in which we can be different: in terms  of taking a role within the region; around building a regional framework.

Of course, I'd point out that when we were in government we had an immigration - a  humanitarian program intake at 20,000. That was cut almost immediately down to  13,750. That's something that we would like to change.



And then there is a whole lot of issues onshore, Barrie. I mean, we have seen, in  relation to the cohort of the 25,000 to 30,000 people who are here, policies which will  put in place a pretty lacklustre fast-tracking process in terms of assessing them  without any reference to the Refugee Convention. We don't approve of that.

And temporary protection visas, which put people in a permanent state of limbo:  people, I might add, who will spend their lives in Australia. That makes no sense at  all and actually costs the Government money, ultimately. So there is a range of  areas where we would be seeking to do things differently.

CASSIDY: On these new anti-terrorism laws - and Labor have supported the  principle of stripping citizenship from terror suspects who are dual nationals. But the  question beyond that: is it, in your view, OK to leave that discretion in the hands of a  minister?



MARLES: Well, let me just clarify what we have said, Barrie. There is a position in  our law right now, which is that if you take up arms against Australia, you lose your  citizenship. That's actually automatic. There is no process.



Now, that is constructed in the context of a traditional State-on-State conflict. We  think there is a case to say that that needs to be updated to take into account a  phenomenon such as Islamic State - doing so in a way which doesn't render anyone  stateless. That's the principle that we have supported. We want to have a sensible  conversation with the Government about how that would actually work.

And the question you ask there as to what role the Minister would have, what role  there would be in terms of judicial oversight: good questions. And we want to see the  detail of that and have a sensible discussion about it.

CASSIDY: But haven't you got an "in principle" view on whether or not a decision  like that can be taken by a minister alone?

MARLES: Well, again we want to actually see the writing in front of us. I mean, what  role the courts have -

CASSIDY: But this is not, it's not about what the detail of it is; it's just a simple  proposition. Is it OK for a minister to have the discretion to strip somebody of their  citizenship?



MARLES: Well, I suppose what I would say in answer to that is: Bret Walker, who  gave the, authored the report which is the basis upon which these recommendations  are meant to come, makes the point that he always thought that this should not  happen unless there was actually a conviction recorded. Now, that implies a full

court process. I've got to say, to me that's what makes sense.

But I'm reluctant to dive into this until we actually see the words on the paper,  because the words are what make the difference here. And we're not getting them  from the Government. All we are seeing is a Government which is divided in its  Cabinet, in its party room, legislation which it would now appear may be  unconstitutional. And the author of the report, Bret Walker, which gave rise to this, is  now saying that he thinks the Government has completely misunderstood him.

This, Barrie, is a dog's breakfast. And what we are seeing is the Government really  squabbling over what is such an important and profound piece of legislation for our  country like kids in a schoolyard. They actually need to grow up. We convene  tomorrow in Parliament. They need to grow up and have a sensible and mature  conversation with us, so that we can progress what we do think is an important  matter.

CASSIDY: All right. Bill Shorten has now agreed to appear before the Royal  Commission into the trade unions. Are you nervous about that?

MARLES: I'm not nervous about that at all. And can I say: nor is Bill. Look, this from  the outset - and let's be really clear about it - has been an $80 million attempt to  smear the Labor Party and, in particular, the Leader of the Opposition. That's what  this is about and you only need to look at the terms of reference of the royal  commission to get a sense of that.



Now, where this has ultimately landed - and the height of the allegations we see from  the Prime Minister on Friday - is that a deal which would have gone to the members  and been supported by them, which would have gone to the Industrial Relations  Commission and passed the no disadvantage test, was in the opinion of the Prime  Minister not a particularly good deal. Like, that is the height of the allegation.



CASSIDY: Well, it goes a bit beyond that. It goes to this idea that employers can be  asked to pay the union fees of members?

MARLES: Well, what particular elements you have in an agreement ultimately are a  matter at the workplace between the employers and the workers but I -

CASSIDY: Is that acceptable: that sort of practice?

MARLES: Well, I'm not going to go into particular elements of every deal but the  point I'd make is -

CASSIDY: But why wouldn't you have a view about whether or not that's  acceptable?

MARLES: Well, the point I would make is that this is an agreement which was voted  upon and supported by the members in the workplace and was passed by the  Industrial Relations Commission as passing the no disadvantage test, meaning that  the agreement was in their interest.



Now, if what we are going to see is the outcome of an $80 million attempt to smear  the Labor Party is to put Bill Shorten's union career on trial: well, I've got to say, we  absolutely welcome that.  And coming from the author of Work Choices: I mean, Tony Abbott has made it his  life's work to undermine the conditions of working people. If this is going to be about  who has done more to improve the lot of workers: this is great ground for us, Barrie.  This is great ground.

And I am sure that Bill is looking forward to the opportunity to talk about what he did  as a union official and what we will find from that is really one of the great union  careers of recent times.

CASSIDY: We will see. Thanks for your time this morning.

MARLES: Thanks, Barrie.

ENDS

