1

www.minister.border.gov.au

The Hon Peter Dutton MP  Minister for Immigration and Border Protection

MEDIA RELEASE

22 September 2016



MIGRATION PROGRAMME MEETS NATION’S NEEDS

Australia’s permanent migration programme in 2015-16 has delivered outcomes to meet the  nation’s skills and economic needs and to facilitate family reunions.

The Minister for Immigration and Border Protection Peter Dutton said the permanent  migration programme helped to boost Australia’s economy.

“Australia is a migrant nation and our orderly and well managed migration programmes deliver  economic, social and cultural benefits to our society,” he said.

In the year to end of June, 190,000 places were available for permanent migration and just  under that number were filled by newcomers.

The majority of new immigrants were in the Skilled stream (128,550) which equates to 68 per  cent of the programme.

Most of the skilled visas went to Employer Sponsored, State and Territory Government  Sponsored and the Regional Skilled category to help fill critical skills needs.

Mr Dutton said professionals accounted for 65 per cent of the places to the primary applicants  in the Skilled stream and these professionals would help build Australia’s future.

“The addition of these skilled workers to Australia’s workforce complements rather than  competes with domestic workers.

“Our first priority will always be jobs for Australians, but where genuine skills shortages exist  we fill the gaps with these skilled migrants.

“Our immigration programmes are flexible and responsive to the needs of our economy and  labour market,” Mr Dutton said.

The family migration programme prioritises reunion of partners and children and 60,912 visas  were granted in 2015-16.

In 2015-16 Australia offered refuge to more than 17,000 people under the Refugee and Special  Humanitarian programme - which included the largest offshore humanitarian intake in 30  years.

2

www.minister.border.gov.au



For further information: Minister’s Office - 02 6277 7860













































