1

www.minister.border.gov.au



The Hon Peter Dutton MP  Minister for Immigration and Border Protection

TRANSCRIPT

Interview with Ray Hadley, Radio 4BC/2GB

21 January 2016





Subjects: Text exchange with Samantha Maiden; Clive Palmer; Queensland  Nickel; Syrian refugees; Abu Haleema; Mohammad Qais Niazy; anti-bikie laws.

E&EO…………………………………………………………………………………………..

JOURNALIST: The Immigration Minister is on the line from Brisbane. Minister, good  morning.

PETER DUTTON: Good morning Ray. How are you?

JOURNALIST: Good thank you. I had a yarn to Scott Morrison about you on  Monday and….

PETER DUTTON:…say nice things?

JOURNALIST: Well, it was about your texting Minister…

PETER DUTTON: Right….

JOURNALIST: And I then received an email from Samantha Maiden who listens to  the programme in Canberra who said that perhaps it was one of her funniest  moments when you sent a text inadvertently to her, intended for someone else.

Now, given that the person who should have been offended, Samantha, thinks it’s  very funny, I can’t take offence on her behalf. So I will ask you a simple question;  have you enrolled in a TAFE course about texting?

PETER DUTTON: No, but I’ve stopped giving my children lectures about the use of  bad language. My mother wasn’t too happy, which is understandable…

JOURNALIST: Oh so Mrs Dutton took you to task did she?

PETER DUTTON: Yes, so forget everybody else, if Mum is not happy, it’s not a good  day Ray. So my lesson has been learnt. It was a silly mistake and hopefully children  can learn from their example as well as maybe take a bit more care when they’re  sending text messages to their mates.

2

www.minister.border.gov.au



JOURNALIST: Well I’ve got a couple of notorious cases that they’ve been explained  to me by various people whom I can’t reveal, who sent a text to their current partner  and unfortunately sent it to their former partner….

PETER DUTTON: Right….

JOURNALIST:….being their ex-husband and to say that it caused a brouhaha, a  fracas and a contretemps would be understating matters.

PETER DUTTON: Yes, well, mine wasn’t as salacious as that but…

JOURNALIST:….How do you know it was salacious, are you just assuming it was  salacious are you? Well you would be right by the way….

PETER DUTTON: I’m thinking of a couple of mates that it may have been and  maybe they’ve got a bit of form in this area, maybe they don’t Ray, but anyway I  made a mistake and fessed up to it and Samantha was good enough to accept the  apology quickly.

JOURNALIST: Well, she’s a classy young woman and like I say she thought it was  very, very funny, in fact that’s the word she used; funniest thing that’s happened to  me. So good luck to her.

Now, let’s move to more serious matters and Clive Palmer, a fellow Queensland MP.  I’ve been contacted by various listeners today to confirm not only is Queensland  Nickel in the hands of receivers or administrators, but so too is Palmer Aviation, with  the same administrators that were appointed to Queensland Nickel and one of the  planes has already been taken back by the bank.

I mean he’s now apologised to the 237 Townsville workers he punted after  guaranteeing them; firstly months ago they’d have a job, secondly on the Friday that  he punted them that they get all their money, only for them to be told by the AWU  last Monday that there’s not enough money to pay their entitlements and their super  - not just the super that’s mandatory paid in by the company on their behalf, but the  super that they voluntarily pay in hasn’t been paid either since November - what do  you do with a bloke like this?

PETER DUTTON: Ray, I think Ewen Jones the Member up in Townsville, who is a  great bloke, put it well yesterday when he said that the people that have been put in  charge, now the administrators, need to forensically look at where money has gone,  whether or not all of the entitlements have been properly provisioned for and whether  or not money has been allocated in a way that it shouldn’t have been - either to  political parties or elsewhere - but in the end the directors of companies have  responsibilities to the employees and if they haven’t met those obligations then there  are pretty serious charges to be laid under law by ASIC.

Now, I think it’s a great tragedy for those families, particularly people that are  working hard and have probably come off the back of Christmas now to be without a  job, is pretty bad and I think Mr Palmer, one day says that he’s in control of this

3

www.minister.border.gov.au

company, the next day he’s not, that he’s retired, I think we need to sort of cut  through the shenanigans and do what’s right by the employees of this company and  also by Townsville, because this company has a big positive impact, or has done, in  the Townsville economy and we need to really make sure that the right decisions are  being made so that the company can continue, hopefully in a profitable way, and that  way the employees and the local economy can benefit.

JOURNALIST: Should he resign?

PETER DUTTON: This is my personal sense Ray; I don’t think Clive will contest the  next election in the Lower House…

JOURNALIST: What about the Senate?

PETER DUTTON: Well he could do because he might think he could be the centre  of attention there and get the balance of power in the Senate, maybe, which is what  he was seeking to do in the Lower House, but I think it’s unlikely that he would run in  Fairfax.

We’ve got a great candidate up  there in Ted O’Brien who has been working hard for  about the last five years, just missed out in the last election and hopefully he gets up  because I think he’d be a much better local member. But presumably Clive will make  that announcement at some stage which I hope to be the case and let him get back  to concentrating on business.

JOURNALIST: Or buggering up business. I mean is Ted O’Brien the local mayor up  there or been the local mayor, I think I met him….

PETER DUTTON: No he’s not but he’s a local small business bloke and he’s been  involved in charities and has a young family and a salt of the earth sort of bloke, so I  think he’s a worthy candidate actually.

JOURNALIST: Ok. This is very representative of many emails [inaudible] coming  back from leave on Monday and it’s about the 12,000 Syrian refugees. This emailer  says under Tony Abbott this amount would mainly be persecuted minorities,  including Christians, now I hear that the United Nations HCR is responsible for  choosing who comes so far. Now, is that right? Are we choosing or are we being  directed by United Nations on who comes?

PETER DUTTON: Well Ray, I saw a bit or reporting on this yesterday and I’ve got to  say it’s false. Here is the setup: under Tony Abbott when he was Prime Minister we  made a decision to bring 12,000 people out. We said that we would concentrate on  persecuted minorities - which did include Christians - and we’ve said in particular for  people who don’t have a chance to return to their home because it has been  destroyed or their village has been overtaken by ISIL, whatever it might be, that they  would be the people in addition to families, not single males, that we would prioritise  under the programme.

We’re going to do security checks to make sure that they’re not on US data bases or  they’re not known terrorists. There’s a lot of work that’s being done, probably more

4

www.minister.border.gov.au

work than we do even with tourists that come to our country, indeed much more work  in verifying identities, making sure that we know who these people are so that they  don’t pose a threat because one of the things that I stand for very strongly is that we  cannot allow a situation that we’ve seen in Cologne or in other parts of Europe where  people have lost control of their borders, allowed people in that they don’t know -  and that’s why stopping the boats has been so important - and now the work that we  continue in running an orderly migration programme.

So that’s my real priority for this year.

JOURNALIST: But the bottom line is that the UN is not choosing who comes here,  we are?

PETER DUTTON: The UN can make referrals to us. We’ve also done a lot of work  with some of the Syrian Christian leaders and leaders within the Syrian community  here in Australia, as well, to identify family members, people within their own  communities that have been persecuted and we can take those people under the  special humanitarian programme. But in the end, Australia will decide who we accept  because the UN can make referrals, and if we’re not happy if that person, that that  referral satisfies our criteria, they won’t be settled in our country.

The Prime Minister has been as adamant about that being the case as Prime  Minister Abbott was and I’ve had that conservation with Malcolm Turnbull as recently  as last week when he reinforced that exact message.

I think there will be a lot of Christians who come under the programme, but ultimately  we want to make sure that we’re bringing the right people - people who can  integrate into our community, that can get a job, can speak English, can give their  kids the opportunity to go to school, that don’t treat women appallingly - that’s what  we want from people that come under these programmes and I’m going to make  sure that that’s what we achieve.

JOURNALIST: It is fitting you should mention the Prime Minister because in the  United States of America this week he’s spoken about the role of the internet and  Fairfax newspapers today are talking about a British extremist who has had his  passport revoked in Great Britain, Abu Haleema, had his passport cancelled,  arrested on terror charges last year.

His recent videos attacking moderate Sydney sheikhs are getting a following in  Australia. How hard, given what the Prime Minister said in the United States of  America, is it to police social media, the internet, when this sort of lunacy arrives on  our doorstep?

PETER DUTTON: Ray we have put a heap of effort, obviously as you would expect,  into this area. Michael Keenan our Justice Minister and George Brandis are running  significant programmes already with some of our agencies to try and disrupt some of  this messaging online and it’s crucial work because as all of us know with young kids  or grandkids, it’s impossible to watch them every moment of the day to see what it is  they’re looking at on their iPhone or their smart device and they can be getting any  information.

5

www.minister.border.gov.au



As we know from the intelligence agencies they say it can take two to three weeks,  as little as that, to radicalise young minds, impressionable young minds online and  so these guys don’t have to travel here, they can video screen and if people have  something in their mind or they’re disaffected otherwise, it means that this guy can  tap into their thought process and influence what it is that they’re thinking and  ultimately what they act out; well it’s a significant threat.

So I think it is one of the big areas where Australia can work with the US and the UK  and elsewhere because of the intelligence that we have, because of the way in  which we’ve got an expertise in online disruption for example of paedophiles, and all  of that work that goes on with the Australian Crime Commission and the AFP, I think  we’ve got a great skillset actually to be able to work with those international partners  to try and close some of these people down online. One of the great successes of  ISIS of course is that they’re recruited young people who are experts in this area and  they’re putting a lot of propaganda out online.

JOURNALIST: So it’s hard to stop. Look, just to another matter, you’ve cancelled  the permanent residency of a notorious crime gang member, a bloke called  Mohammad Qais Niazy, who will be sent back to Afghanistan when his legal matters  are finalised. He’s awaiting trial on firearm charges. He’s been on social media  taunting police. Is anyone able to appeal the decision once he’s been dealt with by  the courts? Once you’ve made your decision?

PETER DUTTON: Once he’s finalised - again without sort of talking about an  individual case - but once matters are finalised before the court and I’ve made my  decision, then that will likely be the end of it.

So there was a High Court case recently with a bikie and we were successful in that  case and we’ve been successful in a couple of other cases which has created a bit  of a precedent in this area. So I need to properly consider each of the cases on the  advice that I’ve given and in these cases where I cancel, generally speaking, it will  follow pretty quickly that that person will be deported.

JOURNALIST: A couple of matters relating to your time as an MP in Brisbane - and  I deal with it every day now that the Queensland Mayor is concerned, the Gold Coast  Mayor I should say in Queensland is concerned about the VLAD laws being repealed  and I spoke to John-Paul Langbroek about the same matter, the Opposition Leader  earlier this week. I mean what’s the feedback from your constituents in Brisbane  about the green light, the green card, the gold VIP card that may pass to bikies if  Palaszczuk’s Government repeals the VLAD laws?

PETER DUTTON: I’ve got to say Ray - and I’ve been stopped by a few people on  this issue because I have taken a pretty hard stance against the illegal bikies -  people don’t understand why Anna Palaszczuk would want to water these laws down  because they know the outlaw motorcycle gang members - and this is a fact, that  they are the biggest distributors of ice and drugs in our country - and the fact that  they now seem to be involved with the CFMEU and the union movement doing the  enforcement there, that somehow that would be justification for Labor to water these

6

www.minister.border.gov.au

laws down, just doesn’t make sense to people - and particularly on the Gold Coast  in Queensland where a lot of these bikies have lived in the past.

They were treating the police with contempt, they were going into police stations  demanding that some of the bikies be released from custody, they were fighting in  restaurants in front of families and older patrons who are out just to enjoy a night out  with their loved ones, and you know, for all of Campbell Newman’s faults, he did  some great things as the Premier and one of the things was to come down hard on  these bikies.

I just don’t think people understand why Anna Palaszczuk thinks that giving these  bikies a free ticket because somehow that’s a payback to the unions is going to wash  with the public. I just don’t think people will accept that as being a sensible approach.

JOURNALIST: I mean someone sent me a piece yesterday by a local motoring or  bikie magazine saying Ray Hadley’s not on the pace, these VLAD laws are targeting  people who just ride their motorbikes for leisure. I mean there’s not one case  anywhere in Queensland of some person being prosecuted who is out with his 62  year old wife having a run around on their motorbike.

PETER DUTTON: Of course there’s not and you know those people should enjoy,  you know, if they want to buy an old car or a motorbike, whatever, I mean good luck  to them, but the laws are targeted at these illegal criminals.

They don’t have legitimate jobs, half of them spend their mornings half the day at the  gym selling steroids and pumping iron and then going out extorting money from  small business people, buying and selling drugs and look, we’ve worked with the  Queensland Police, with all of the police forces around the country in trying to cancel  the visas, particularly of New Zealand bikie members who are here as non-citizens,  and we’ve been very successful at doing that.

I’ve got to say the police say to us that it’s one of the things, along with these laws,  that’s had the biggest impact of clamping down on bikie crime and why the  Palaszczuk Government would go against the advice of the police and against the  advice of people that know this space very well, is beyond me, because in the end  people will get hurt Ray.

I mean these are vicious criminals. They are involved in serous assaults, murders,  you’ve seen some of the domestic violence instances where one bikie pursued his  wife and rammed into the car and you know there are terrible circumstances that you  can point to and why you would try and justify and legitimise the existence of these  people is beyond me.

I think there’s been a formula that the Newman Government came up with, it’s been  through the courts, as you say people haven’t been inadvertently captured by it who  are doing the right thing. This has been squarely targeted at criminals who do harm  in the community.

JOURNALIST: Thanks for your time, we’ll talk next week.

7

www.minister.border.gov.au

PETER DUTTON: Thanks Ray. Take care.

[ends]

