

CHRIS BOWEN MP  SHADOW TREASUER  MEMBER FOR MCMAHON

E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP  SYDNEY  SATURDAY, 16 JANUARY 2016

SUBJECT/S: Liberal plan to increase GST; NSW ALP; Nauru; Clive Palmer

CHRIS BOWEN, SHADOW TREASURER: Well thanks for coming out everybody.

It seems that every day you open the newspapers these days, there’s another  thought bubble from Malcolm Turnbull and Scott Morrison on tax. We see the latest  today on the front page of today’s papers. It tells us a few things: firstly, a GST  increase, applying the GST to fresh food, health and education, is firmly on Malcolm  Turnbull’s table. It’s off the table for the Labor Party. It’s on the table for Malcolm  Turnbull. Now our position has been clear and consistent about the GST; it’s time for  Mr Turnbull and Mr Morrison to come clean on their plans. We’re happy to have a tax  debate in Australia but to have a proper tax debate, both sides have to be honest  about their plans. The Labor Party has been outlining its plans. The Liberal Party, we  know, wants to increase the GST, but won’t be upfront about it.

So, Mr Turnbull and Mr Morrison can put this to bed if they don’t want to increase the  GST then say so, but we know they want to increase the GST.

Two other matters in relation to tax. We read today, again, about the Government  planning to increase tax on superannuation. The Labor Party has led this debate. We  announced our superannuation tax policy last April. Scott Morrison led the charge on  behalf of the Government, as then Social Security minister. He huffed and puffed  and said it was an attack on superannuation. Now we know, as Treasurer, he is  contemplating increasing tax on superannuation. Mr Morrison should come clean  with his plans. I am happy to debate superannuation tax with Mr Morrison. We have  a plan on the table. I am happy to debate it with him, any time anywhere. But to do  that, he will need to announce his plans. He is the Government's hypocrite in chief.  Having railed against superannuation tax changes and now progressing  superannuation tax changes.

Finally, negative gearing. Again, I have said as Shadow Treasurer that careful,  carefully balanced moderate changes to negative gearing need to be considered as  part of our policy development. We have read today the Government is  contemplating changes to negative gearing today. The Government has railed

against changes to negative gearing, they have called it - launched scare campaigns  against changes to negative gearing and now we read, in leaked comments that they  are contemplating doing that.

It just goes to show, frankly, that Mr Morrison, as Treasurer has no framework, no  considered way forward, no detailed plans, just thought bubbles and he is simply not  up to the job.

Again, I am more than happy to debate Mr Morrison on tax any time anywhere.

We have led the debate, whether it be tax, superannuation, multinational tax,  whether it be tobacco tax, we are prepared to put detailed plans out there, have  them analysed and scrutinised and debate them. Mr Morrison runs away from this at  every opportunity.

Happy to take questions.

JOURNALIST: The Australian is reporting there is two options on the table for the  Government, one includes the GST increase. Do you think the one that doesn't is  something you could support?

BOWEN: Well the one that doesn't involves increasing superannuation tax and  changes negative gearing. To have that discussion to make that decision we would  need to see the plan. We have a very carefully designed, detailed plan on  superannuation on the table. We announced it, Bill Shorten and I at a press  conference last April announced it. It has been there for all to see. Scott Morrison  railed against it. Now, he is contemplating changes to superannuation tax. There is  changes to superannuation tax which Mr Morrison could adopt and implement and  that is by accepting and adopting Labor's policy and plans with our approval and  support.

JOURNALIST: Ah Kaila Murnain has a big job. What do you make of her?

BOWEN: Kaila Murnain is one of the most experienced and talented political  professionals that I have had the pleasure to work with. She has my strong support  to become General Secretary of the NSW branch of the Labor Party. One because  of hurt talent and ability and experience. Secondly, it is high time that a woman of  talent was given the opportunity to run one of the largest political operations in  Australia which is the NSW branch of the Labor Party.

My understanding is that neither the Labor Party or the Liberal Party have ever had a  female at such a senior level as the director or secretary of such a large part of their  operations. It is a big step forward for Kaila and a big step forward for women who  are political professionals in Australia. She will do an outstanding job and she will my  full support as he does so.

JOURNALIST: Are you hoping this will bring an end to this saga?

BOWEN: In short, yes. It would be disingenuous to say this hasn't been a serious  problem in the NSW branch of the Labor Party. Everybody knows that. I won't  pretend otherwise. The matter has been dealt with. Jamie Clements in resigning has  acted in the best interests of the Labor Party and also his family. The best interests

of the Labor Party, in that he knew this matter could not be put behind us. He  accordingly resigned, we can now move on, fully supporting Kaila Murnain as  General Secretary in a very big year. A Federal election in NSW local Government  elections will be timetabled. A big year for the Labor Party. One in which we intend to  fight Mr Turnbull in a very, very competitive election.

JOURNALIST: With regards to Nauru, are you the minister responsible for  reopening the facility. Given the difficulties there now, do you regret the move back  to offshore processing?

BOWEN: What we have seen is the release last night or late yesterday afternoon, I  understand, of a report by the Government. When the Government wants to release  a report on Friday afternoon it is usually a report they don't want you to read.

It is a report which goes to former Minister Morrison's comments and actions in  relation to Save The Children staff.

Mr Dutton is in hiding about this matter. He needs to come clean, to explain to the  Australian people why the Government has taken this action and what they will be  doing about this report.

I understand the report recommends an apology and compensation to the Save The  Children staff that were removed from Nauru.

Offshore processing is always controversial. Offshore processing plays an important  part in Australia's immigration policy. It is a matter of how it is done. It can be done  with the best interests of all asylum seekers at heart. It doesn’t need to be a punitive  operation. It is always difficult, it is always difficult but where you have policies in  place and actions and implementing mechanisms in place which are seeing people  like Save The Children kicked off the island and reports which are now -  Government's own reports - recommending an apology and compensation, is a  serious situation which Mr Dutton needs to be accountable for.

JOURNALIST: Do you think the Government should give compensation?

BOWEN: The Government needs to outline its plans. It is their own report  recommending compensation. They need to respond to their own reports. I am sure  Richard Marles will respond accordingly.

JOURNALIST: Another topic, is Clive Palmer fit to remain in parliament gin his  dealings and financial planning?

BOWEN: There is a whole range of complex legal proceedings underway with Mr  Palmer's financial interests. I don\'t profess to be an expert on those. I read what I  read in the papers. I haven't followed it more closely than that. Mr Palmer's a dually  elected member of parliament.

There are mechanisms if somebody has breached the requirements for being a  member of parliament.

That is a matter for those legal proceedings to continue.

Thanks very much.

ENDS

