



SENATOR THE HON PENNY WONG  LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION IN THE SENATE  SHADOW MINISTER FOR TRADE AND INVESTMENT  LABOR SENATOR FOR SOUTH AUSTRALIA



E&OE TRANSCRIPT   RADIO INTERVIEW  ABC RADIO NATIONAL BREAKFAST

MONDAY, 2 MAY 2016

SUBJECT/S: Kidman & Co; foreign investment; Budget 2016; asylum seekers.

FRAN KELLY: Penny Wong is the Shadow Trade Minister and Opposition Leader in  the Senate. She says it’s an extraordinary intervention by the Treasurer, that will send  all the wrong messages to global investors. Senator Wong is in our Parliament House  studios. Penny Wong, welcome back to Breakfast.



SENATOR PENNY WONG, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION IN THE SENATE: Good  morning Fran, good to be with you.

KELLY: So, you heard Barnaby Joyce there, he says this doesn’t send the wrong  signals at all and of course the Government has the right to say no to any investment.  That’s true, isn’t it?

WONG: I did hear Barnaby Joyce and on a whole range of things, including Labor’s  policy, he was about as accurate as he was when he told everybody that action on  climate change would lead to $100 lamb roasts. But on to foreign investment, this is an  incoherent decision and the reality is that the Government has sent mixed messages, it  has sent inconsistent messages, to foreign investors. Now, let’s cut straight to the  chase, I understand Barnaby wants to run a campaign that says people will come here  and take our land. We are supportive of foreign investment because it creates  Australian jobs. Labor is focussed on creating Australian jobs. Now that doesn’t mean  all foreign investment should be agreed to, we support a proper and robust system for  foreign investment review, a consistent system. But what we have is a Treasurer who  said nine days ago ‘I need 90 days to consider this’, he then rushes out a decision  ahead of the election. And we’ve got Barnaby Joyce out there defending it, not the  Treasurer, not my counterpart Mr Ciobo, the Minister for Trade and Investment, who

has been strangely silent on this, but Barnaby Joyce, whose views on Chinese  investment are well known.

KELLY:  So is your concern with the timing of this announcement by the Treasurer,  coming as it does just before the Government moves into caretaker mode, in other  words sending this decision out into the electorate during an election? Is that your  concern, rather than the decision itself? Do you have a problem with the decision?

WONG: My concern is first with the process which says to foreign investors ‘our  process for deciding these things is politicised, is incoherent and is chaotic’.

KELLY: What is incoherent about it, because Barnaby Joyce made the point to me  when I was talking to him, he asked me what other foreign investment in land have we  blocked, and I couldn’t give him one.

WONG: We remember Joe Hockey, again because the National Party demanded it,  blocking the Graincorp acquisition.

KELLY: That’s not a land sale.

WONG: But the point here is we have a Treasurer nine days ago saying ‘this’ll take me  90 days’ and then we have nine days later this decision, this preliminary decision. Can  we just take a step back for a moment and remember why it is we need foreign  investment in agriculture? We need foreign investment because we have not previously,  nor will we be in the future, be able to fund all of our investment needs with domestic  capital. We know that we can grow our agriculture and agricultural product sector by  four fold by 2050, we need about a trillion dollars of investment to do that and it is  inconceivable that we will be able to fund that entirely from domestic savings. So what  we want is to make sure we have a clear and consistent position when it comes to  foreign investment, so we can ensure we have the maximum number of Australian jobs  funded by foreign investment.

KELLY: So I understand we need a clear and consistent position, but what should that  position be? Because talking about consistency, just last week Labor Leader Bill  Shorten said he was “uneasy” about the sale of Kidman to overseas buyers, he said he  had a general reservation about putting such a vast land holding on the international  market, which is basically where Scott Morrison’s come down, isn’t it?

WONG: Well, no, it isn’t where Scott Morrison’s come down. Scott Morrison has come  down with a preliminary decision as Treasurer. There are always issues that you should  look at in investments of this size, in terms of the totality of the national interest.

KELLY: Do you share Bill Shorten’s unease?

WONG: I don’t sit behind Scott Morrison’s desk to look at all the facts. What I can look  at though is what has been said publicly and what has been said publicly is ‘I need 90  days’ and then nine days later ‘I’m going to make a preliminary decision’, after, let’s be  honest,  there’s been a political campaign run against this. I think the message to  investors - it might be a perfect process inside government, I doubt it, but let’s give

them the benefit of the doubt - what is the message to investors? The message to  investors is this is about politics. Now let’s remember, last year foreign investment in  Australia actually fell, it fell by $30 billion, a drop of 44 per cent. Now if Barnaby Joyce  and Scott Morrison think that is a good thing for Australian jobs, well they’re wrong.

KELLY: Do you think there’s sort of a race element to this decision? Do you think the  Government is sensitive to voter unease over Chinese investment, that if this  consortium bidding for S Kidman was American or Canadian or British, the same  decision would have been made?

WONG: Certainly the Government’s Members and Senators talk a lot more about  Chinese investment than about any other type of investment. Barnaby himself has  raised concerns about selling the farm, we’ve had comments about China from National  Party Senators, you also see, frankly, a discriminatory policy in respect to our Asian free  trade partners, who have much more onerous foreign investment scrutiny than do the  United States. Now that demonstrably is discriminatory and different.

But my concern is this: I understand - and Barnaby was trying to do it on your program  - I understand it’s pretty easy to whip up concern about foreign investment. I believe  foreign investment should be in the national interest and I think the focus should be on  Australian jobs, not on the nationality of the investor.

KELLY: Okay, so just one final question on this. Do you think, the company has I think  until tomorrow to revise its bid, there is some speculation it’ll walk away. But if it comes  back with another bid, are you calling on the Treasurer to hold off making a decision on  that until after the election, because we are so close to caretaker mode now? Or what’s  Labor’s position?

WONG: Let’s see what the company does, but I think what Scott Morrison should have  done and should always do is make these decisions based on the national interest and  not focussed on the politics, not influenced by the politics. And I think the fact that it has  been influenced really was demonstrated by the interview you’ve just conducted with Mr  Joyce.

KELLY: The Budget tomorrow night, Finance Minister Mathias Cormann has all but  confirmed yesterday that the Budget will contain a tax cut starting 1 July for people  earning more than $80,000. 1 July, of course, is the day before we expect to be going to  the polls. I know Labor hasn’t seen the details yet, but it would be folly for Labor to block  this tax cut, which would start the day before the election. You won’t do that, will you?

WONG: We haven’t seen the Budget, but what we have seen is three years of this  Government making life more difficult for working people in this country. We have seen  three years of a Government that promised before the last election not to cut health and  education. We have seen $80 billion worth of cuts to people’s schools and hospitals.  So, I think Australians will look at this Budget knowing very clearly that whatever they  say in the lead up, in these last days before an election, this is a Liberal Party and a  National Party that doesn’t put people first.

KELLY: But just my question, the Government will put in money for schools, it will put in  money for hospitals, it will be there in the Budget, as will this tax cut. Will Labor support  this tax cut, or block this tax cut on the basis that an election’s coming?

WONG: I did answer your question, because obviously we will wait to see the detail of  the Budget and we’ll look at what is proposed. I’m not going to, as Chris Bowen made  the point, we’re not going to respond to every thought bubble the Government puts out.  We’ve seen increases to GST, changes to negative gearing, changes to  superannuation, for and against a tobacco tax, these are just some of the ideas the  Government has floated. We will look at what’s in the Budget, but I will pick up your  point that this Budget will contain funding for schools. What this Budget will confirm is  that of the $30 billion this Government took out of Australia’s schools, it will restore just  over $1 billion of that. Now that really demonstrates what we’re talking about.

KELLY: Can I just ask you finally on offshore processing, the situation on Nauru seems  to be getting worse by the day, there was the Iranian asylum seeker, Omid, who set  himself alight and I think has tragically died as a result of that. The Saturday Paper’s  reported another seven people attempted suicide or serious self-harm on Friday alone.  Some in Labor’s left have spoken out against offshore processing, you so far haven’t,  as I understand it anyway. Considering the events of the past few days, are you still  comfortable with Labor’s unity ticket with the Government on offshore processing in  Nauru and Manus.

WONG: I don’t think there’s anybody in this country, or around the world, who is  comfortable about the position that we all face in relation to asylum seekers and people  movement. We have 60 million displaced around the world, not just in our region, but  around the world, both internally and obviously externally. Now that is an enormous  humanitarian challenge and an enormous public policy challenge. We do support  offshore processing, that does not mean we support the way in which this Government  has run it. We have seen this system turn into a system of punitive and indefinite  detention and that is going to lead to the sort of tragedies that you describe. The  Government really does need to resolve some third country settlement options. It does  need to resolve what has occurred in Manus. It does need to resolve with the PNG  Government the future of that centre.

KELLY: Senator Wong, thank you very much for joining us on Breakfast.

WONG: Thank you.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: ANNIE WILLIAMS 0428 040 522

