

CHRIS BOWEN MP  SHADOW TREASUER  MEMBER FOR MCMAHON



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP  CANBERRA

TUESDAY, 23 FEBRUARY 2016

SUBJECT/S: Capital gains tax changes  back on the Government’s table; Scott  Morrison in witness protection; Labor’s plan to fund health & education - and   balance the Budget; polls; Senate voting reform.

CH



RIS BOWEN, SHADOW TREASURER: So his whole scare campaign was a  complete furphy. But it gets much worse. When asked if he would rule out changes to  capital gains tax he went even further than rulling them out. He said it wasn't even part  of his thinking. That the Government wouldn't even contemplate such things, so  offensive did he find the notion. Only now do we find out that in fact the Government is  contemplating such things. And it gets even worse. Labor’s proposed changes to capital  gains tax completely exempts superannuation funds. We said when formulating our  policy that the nest egg of Australians, people who are building for the future we would  not reduce the capital gains tax discount within superannuation.

Now we know from senior sources within the Government that in fact this Government  is going down that road, to halve the capital gains tax discount within superannuation.  Now is there nothing this Government won’t do to attack the retirement incomes of  working a Australians? Last week was the thought bubble about exempting low income  earners. We have seen the Government rip away the tax concession for low incomes in  superannuation. We have seen the Government freeze the superannuation guarantee  at 9.5 per cent. And now this miserable excuse for a Government is contemplating  reducing the capital gains tax discount for superannuation by half.

Now this goes to character as well as competence. If the Prime Minister can stand there  at Question Time and deny even thinking about reducing capital gains tax discount and  yet his ministers and his offices, briefing out talking to journalists that afternoon saying  that in fact what he really meant was we would reduce the capital gains tax discount

within superannuation, this goes to the Prime Ministers character. He cannot be trusted  on tax. If he can't be trusted on something he said at Question Time at 2 o'clock how  can his commitments about the GST be taken seriously? How can his commitments  about any other matter of tax be taken seriously? This is a Government all at sea when  it comes to tax but it goes to the very core not only of competence but of character.

Malcolm Turnbull feeling the pressure has decided to launch a miserable, dishonest,  misleading, shrill and desperate scare campaign on negative gearing with absolutely not  one shred of evidence to support his outlandish claims. But now we see him launching a  scare campaign on capital gains tax which doesn't hold fast just because he has got his  facts wrong but falls flat because he is actually contemplating exactly the same thing  only when it comes to the retirement income of Australians, the nest eggs of  Australians. Liberals have lectured us about superannuation tax, saying it is their  money, you should never tax superannuation, never touch superannuation tax. Well this  Government has been shown to have not only no agenda, no coherent agenda when it  comes to tax reform, no plans, no policies but to have no consistent set of values,  consistent set of beliefs or any belief that they should be honest with the Australian  people about their plans.

Happy to take some questions.

JOURNALIST: Is this making your job easy as Opposition that the Government doesn't  have detailed plans?

BOWEN: Well as Shadow Treasurer I want to have a debate with the Treasurer about  our detailed plans, his and mine. I’d turn up to that debate with policies in my briefcase,  with costed plans, with details. He could turn up with nothing, with absolutely nothing. I  mean no wonder the Treasurer is in the witness protection program, no wonder the  Treasurer is not even turning up for his regular Monday morning discussion with his  radio friend Ray Hadley.

I mean when the Treasurer can't appear on Ray Hadley, we know we've got a problem,  that he is in the witness protection program to that degree. The Treasurer of Australia  not only has a responsibility to the Government to be out there explaining their policies,  which is pretty hard when you don't have any, but also has an obligation to the nation to  be talking about the state of the nation, the economic challenges and risks and be  providing reassurance when it comes to economic confidence. And when we have a  Treasurer so devoid of a framework, so not up to the job, of course the Australian  people have every right to be very very concerned.

JOURNALIST: Mr. Bowen you say that Malcolm Turnbull can't be trusted on tax but he  came across more than Bill Shorten on education, Medicare, asylum-seekers, a whole  raft of policies most of which are on your turf.

BOWEN: Well there is no doubt that Malcolm Turnbull has talked a good talk. On  climate change he said he wouldn't lead a party which wasn't committed to action on  climate change as he is, and he is leading a party with Tony Abbott's policies. On

education he leads a party with Tony Abbott's policies of billions of dollars’ worth of cuts  to education and opposing Labor’s “Your child, Our Future” plan to invest in every single  Australian child. On tax he said he would never engage in a scare campaign and he has  engaged in a not particularly scary pathetic scare campaign since Friday, in a sign of  desperation when he realized sometime on Friday afternoon that his Treasurer was  completely and hopelessly losing control of the debate.

So a bit to go between now and polling day, whenever that may be, but I am completely  confident that as Malcolm Turnbull continues to waffle and continues to mislead, then  we will be able to prosecute the case that he is simply not up to the job and can't be  trusted on the some of these key issues.

JOURNALIST: But does this Newspoll show that you are not prosecuting the case  probably considering Malcolm Turnbull is still ahead in all of those different areas?

BOWEN: Look, generally speaking I don't comment on the details of polls but you know  there has been various polls out that this week and I think that when you look at them in  their totality they show that this will be a real contest.

JOURNALIST: On the Senate voting reform, Labor’s opinion seems to be a bit divided.  Can you just clarify exactly where your Party stands?

BOWEN: Well in fairness this reform was announced yesterday, I use the term ‘reform’  lightly. These proposed Greens/Liberal deal was proposed yesterday. We have a very  careful methodical process where the Shadow Cabinet then makes a recommendation  to the Caucus. Under our normal process the Caucus meets today. Yesterday the  Government brought forward their caucus in some form of panicked management but  our Caucus meets on Tuesday to consider these matters. We will consider the matter in  Caucus this morning but when the Liberals and the Greens do a deal to improve Liberal  and Green representation in the Senate presumably so they can do more deals on  things like multinational tax or watering down disclosure, part pensions etc then the  Labor Party has every right as do the Australian people to be very concerned.

JOURNALIST: So what about you? Do you personally think that it should go ahead?

BOWEN: Well when I look at a deal between the Liberals and the Greens my alarm  bells ring, my alarm bells ring.

JOURNALIST: There does seem to be division there between Labor as well. I mean  are you worried about that side of things?

BOWEN: No look, we have a process where people put their view in Shadow Cabinet  and the Caucus. People will put their view in the Caucus today and when the Caucus  makes its final determination it will be one which obviously is then the position of the  Labor Party and that is a couple of hours away. But if the Government's main priority  with their economic policy completely all at sea is to sit down and do a deal with the

Greens on improving their respective representation in the Senate, that is a matter for  them.

JOURNALIST: Do you see some merit though in reforming the Senate voting system  so people won't get elected on -

BOWEN



: Look, we have always said we are up for a sensible discussion about  improvements to the Senate but when you've got as I said the Liberals and the Greens  sitting in a closed room doing a deal then we will scrutinise that very very closely  indeed. We might leave it there.

Thanks very much.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: JAMES CULLEN 0409 719 879





