





THE HON JOEL FITZGIBBON MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE, FISHERIES AND FORESTRY  SHADOW MINISTER FOR RURAL AFFAIRS  SPOKESPERSON FOR COUNTRY CAUCUS  MEMBER FOR HUNTER



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  ABC NEWS 24  TUESDAY, 10 MAY 2016

SUBJECT/S: Murray Goulburn crisis, Labor’s refugee policy

GREG JENNETT, HOST: Joel Fitzgibbon there is an emerging problem with the Murray Goulburn co-op and  dairy farmers who are part of that in Victoria. We’re hearing from the Government that Barnaby Joyce the Deputy  Prime Minister is planning a trip to the region. What is it that Labor says could or should be done by  Government?

JOEL FITZGIBBON, SHADOW MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE, FISHERIES AND FORESTRY, SHADOW   MINISTER FOR RURAL AFFAIRS: It’s much more than an emerging problem. We have a current crisis which  began almost two weeks ago when Murray Goulburn suddenly informed dairy producers that they would not only  not be getting that price any longer but they would be going back retrospectively and taking back the money that  they’d been paying them since that $5.60 price was put in place. Now up until yesterday when I sought a briefing  from the Department under the caretaker conventions, Barnaby Joyce had said nothing about this crisis. He is  very quick to claim credit for commodity prices when they rise - and it’s never true that he has any credit to take -  but when commodity prices are falling or we’ve got a crisis like we have in the dairy industry, he goes missing.  His silence on this issue has been deafening.

JOURNALIST: Alright, well you’re calling it a crisis but what in your view needs to be done if anything or is it  solely corporate and doesn’t involve government at all?

FITZGIBBON: Well there were some very big questions about the behavior of Murray Goulburn in this case and  Ministers don’t direct ASIC -  the regulator -  but certainly if I were the Minister I would be urging ASIC to take a  look at what’s been happening down there and that in itself would immediately give dairy farmers some hope  because if ASIC finds that the company has been effectively fraudulent in its offerings, attempts in the lead-up to  that capital raising then that would help the dairy producers in any action they might want to take.

JENNETT: So just to explain this for people who aren’t familiar, is there an allegation or a suggestion that the co-op had perhaps inflated prices for a period of time now they’ve come to a more realistic pricing level which is  causing pain and they are trying to claw back the difference over the past year or so?

FITZGIBBON: I’ll do my best to explain it simply. To raise capital outside the cooperative Murray Goulburn had to  have the consent of the members of the co-operative; in other words the dairy producers. To do that and to be  able to demonstrate the yield they might provide to the lender of the money they set these very high prices. Now,  of course the dairy producers said, “wow”, if we are going to get $5.60 a litre then we’re all in for this capital  raising venture. Now the allegation is that the capacity to secure the price on international markets to make that  deal work was never a realistic one and if the board and the senior management didn’t know that they at least  should have known that. Now already both the CEO and the Chief Financial Officer have resigned over this but  more questions need to be asked. ASIC needs to be in there asking those questions and whatever the outcome  of those inquiries, it might very well be helpful to producers.

JENNETT: Alright, we are in caretaker mode it would be fully open to you to send a letter of referral or any sort of  letter to ASIC. Have you done that will you do that?

FITZGIBBON: Well I’ve also been relatively quiet for 12 days now hoping not to politicise, hoping Barnaby Joyce  would finally move but of course the issue has been building and building and building and by yesterday I’d just

had enough. So I have asked the Department for a briefing, I want to take the responsible path; my objective is to  help the farmers not to make political capital out of this issue. Barnaby Joyce has been too slow. I now on your  program urge ASIC to look at this very serious issue.

JENNETT: Alright. Look just a couple of other things on the campaign trail. Looseness it seems on the part of  some candidates on the boat turnbacks. Is Labor united on this or is this going to be a headache right through the  campaign - even today where Bill Shorten is there is a candidate who has photographs previously in recent  weeks supporting refugees staying in Australia.

FITZGIBBON: Well Labor is very united. We had this debate as recently as our National Conference last year  and it was wide ranging and quite a robust debate. We reaffirmed the position we’ve held for many years now  across a range of governments and now in opposition and that is that we won’t open again the opportunity for  people smugglers to put people on leaky boats - including children -  leaky boats that may or may not make it to  the other end.

JENNETT: And then you would turn them around if they were intercepted while Labor -

FITZGIBBON: We have consistently said if turning a boat back is the best way of protecting people’s lives, we’ll  keep that option alive, yes.

JENNETT: Do you tolerate dissent from that view within the party?

FITZGIBBON: Well look this is a very emotional issue. We are all in the same cart here; I almost said boat, that  would have been a terrible pun. We all want to ensure people smugglers don’t have the opportunity to put people  on the high seas at great risk. People have different views about the best way of making sure that doesn’t  happen. The party collectively has decided the best way to ensure that that doesn’t happen is to put the people  smugglers out of business.

JENNETT: But not everyone is getting that message.

FITZGGIBON: Well people are emotional about the issue of course. I am, everyone is. I’ve seen this issue bring  people to tears but the Party collectively has determined the best way to ensure we put the people smugglers out  business is to keep all of those options alive.

JENNETT: Alright, Joel Fitzgibbon thank you.

FITZGIBBON: A great pleasure.

ENDS





