ABC AM, Interview with Michael Brissenden  Transcript, E&OE

1 November 2016







JOURNALIST: For more I’m joined now by the Foreign Minister Julie Bishop. Julie Bishop, good morning.

JULIE BISHOP: Good morning  Michael.

JOURNALIST: Firstly, can you clear it up? Is there any intention to use this to cancel bridging visas of people who are in the  country now?



JULIE BISHOP: My understanding is that this legislation applies to those in offshore processing centres. including those who  may have sought, for example, medical treatment in Australia at some time, but are part of the cohort  whose claim for asylum     is being processed in a regional offshore processing centre.  And my understanding is also that claims for asylum  that have      been processed in Australia, as was done under Labor, are not affected so their TPV, their Temporary Protection Visa,or their  Bridging Visa, will continue to operate.



JOURNALIST: Right so those who have concerns here about the future of their visas don’t need to worry?



JULIE BISHOP: That is my understanding, that this applies to those in offshore processing centres,  the cohort  whose claims   for asylum are being processed in a regional offshore processing centre, but those who have already had their claims for      asylum  processed in Australia under the previous Labor government  are not   affected.



JOURNALIST: Ok one of the suggestions for the reason for doing this is that obviously you’re looking at other countries to    move these people to and you don’t want them to have a signal that that would allow them to get into Australia. Now you’ve  seen that some countries like New Zealand wouldn’t be too happy having two classes of citizens, as John Key said yesterday.  Would other countries be more  compliant?



JULIE BISHOP: Well in fact Michael, the reason for this legislation is to send a message to the criminal people smuggling  syndicates that they cannot market  an illegal pathway to Australia. So the purpose of the legislation is to amend the Migration   Act to prevent  those who paid these criminals and are then taken to a regional processing country from obtaining a visa to      come to Australia. We must never allow these criminal syndicates to be reinvigorated as they were under Labor because of     course we recall that there were 1200 deaths at sea, that we know of, because of these criminal syndicates, 50,000 people    seeking to come to Australia, and under Labor 8000 children were in detention and 2000 children in detention when we came      into office. So we must never allow criminal people smuggling syndicates to get back into business.  That's what the legislation      is aimed to prevent. So what that means is that if you are resettled in a regional resettlement country then you cannot  obtain a   visa to come to Australia.



JOURNALIST: And it seems that some of those countries, like New Zealand in particular, are not particularly happy with the  idea of having two classes of citizens,  as John Key said   yesterday.



JULIE BISHOP: Well that’s on the assumption that they are resettled in New Zealand, we have been…

JOURNALIST: Sure but do other countries have those concerns as   well?

JULIE BISHOP: …we have been working with around 50 countries in the Bali Process. This is a framework agreement that 50  countries have joined up to - it’s co-hosted by Australia and Indonesia - and it deals with a whole range of regional issues  including the question of what to do with those who are subject to human trafficking or people smuggling. And we are working    with countries for resettlement options, particularly for those who are currently on Manus Island or in Nauru, because we want  those processing centres to be closed as well. We have closed 17 of the detention centres that were opened under Labor and

there are now two to go - one on Manus and one on Nauru. And those who are there, if they are found to be refugees they     can resettle in Papua New Guinea if they are on Manus, if they are on Nauru they can be resettled on Nauru or in Cambodia.  Those who are not found to be owed protection, who are not refugees, should depart for home and then there are others who    we will seek to resettle in one of a number of countries that we are currently negotiating with.



JOURNALIST: And how many of those 50 countries would accept  the conditions, these   conditions?



JULIE BISHOP: Well we are in the process of negotiating with countries and we have made it clear that this is legislation that  we’ll be seeking to get through our parliament in the next    sitting.



JOURNALIST: And some of them have indicated to you that they would accept this?

JULIE BISHOP: We are continuing with our   negotiations.

JOURNALIST: Pauline Hanson, as we heard yesterday,  welcomed it and said it shows that refugees are not welcome here.  Is  this designed to appeal to her in any way? Are there domestic political considerations in this?



JULIE BISHOP: Not at all. This is the last piece of the work that we have had to do to clean up the chaos after Labor’s failed  border protection policies, which I suggest would be one of the worst policy failures in living memory. When there were 1200  deaths at sea, 50,000 people coming on 800 boats we had to act. So we introduced Temporary Protection Visas, we turned    back boats where it was safe to do so, we supported offshore processing for applications, and now as we are working towards  resettling some in other countries,  this final piece of legislation is necessary to send this vital message to people smugglers      that they cannot  get back into business under a Coalition   Government.



JOURNALIST: Sure but a permanent entry ban, as you’re proposing, is an unprecedented step isn’t it? UNHCR says it is  deeply concern about  this. Does that trouble  you?



JULIE BISHOP: There are already provisions in the Migration Act for bans. Consistent with other bans in the Migration Actthat  prevent a person from being able to apply for a visa, there will also be a provision that relates to those who have paid people  smugglers to attempt to come to  Australia.



JOURNALIST: So have you had any contact with UNHCR? Are you engaging in a discussion with them or not?



JULIE BISHOP: The Government  is constantly in contact. I’m not the Immigration Minister, I’m the Minister for Foreign Affairs    so personally this is not in my area of responsibility,  but I know that our Immigration Department and our Immigration Minister      are constantly in contact  with international  agencies.



JOURNALIST: Alright. Directly in your portfolio, Indonesia today says it is, according to some reports, it has proposed joint  patrols with Australia in the South China Sea. Have you agreed to this and what would a so-called ‘peace patrol’ like this  achieve?



JULIE BISHOP: We certainly were asked this last week in Indonesia. It was raised by the Indonesian Defence Minister during   our annual Foreign and Defence Ministers’ meeting with Indonesia, and we are currently deeply engaged with Indonesia on a  whole range of maritime issues including our respective navies carrying out joint exercises, training exchanges, their personnel   train in our colleges and ours train in theirs. So there is already a much perhaps deeper level of engagement than many would  appreciate. And Defence Minister Ryacudu talked about increasing our maritime exercises and both Senator Payne and I  said   that we would certainly take that on board. And of course the Chief of the Defence Mark Binskin was present at that meeting  and…



JOURNALIST: And does that  include the South China   Sea?



JULIE  BISHOP:  Yes it would. We have agreed to explore options to increase maritime cooperation and  of  course that would  include coordinated activities in the South China Sea and the Sulu Sea, and this is all consistent  with our policy of exercising   our right of freedom of navigation. And that’s in accordance with international law and our support for peace and stability and  security in the  region.

JOURNALIST: And how would this be viewed by China,  do you   think?



JULIE BISHOP: We currently carry out exercises.  We would of course notify others in the region,  we carry out joint exercises   with the United States, with India, we’ve carried out joint exercises with China. So this is a regular part of what  our Navy does   and it is also part of our engagement in the region. But of course this is in accordance with Australia’s right to freedom of  navigation, including through the South China  Sea.



JOURNALIST: Ok Julie Bishop, we’ll leave it there. Thanks very much for joining us.

JULIE  BISHOP: My pleasure.

JOURNALIST: That’s the Foreign Minister and Deputy Liberal Leader Julie   Bishop.



- Ends -





Media enquiries



Minister's office: (02) 6277  7500

DFAT  Media Liaison:  (02) 6261 1555

