

THE HON. BILL SHORTEN MP  LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  SHADOW MINISTER FOR INDIGENOUS AFFAIRS   AND ABORIGINAL AND TORRES STRAIT ISLANDERS

MEMBER FOR MARIBYRNONG



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP INTERVIEW  ADELAIDE  WEDNESDAY, 21 SEPTEMBER 2016

SUBJECTS: Australian steel manufacturing jobs; Malcolm Turnbull $200  million plebiscite; Prime Minister’s reheat of Tony Abbott’s policies

PENNY WONG, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION IN THE SENATE: Good morning  everybody, it's great to be here at OneSteel. Can I first thank Tom and all of his staff  for hosting us here today. Welcome Bill again to South Australia and back to  OneSteel.

One of the things we talked about a lot in the last election was the importance of  local jobs. We spoke about the importance of Arrium, we spoke about the  importance of the steel industry to local jobs here in South Australia, and we put  forward a very clear policy which demonstrated Labor's support for good jobs,  Labor's support for local jobs, decent jobs that enabled people to support their  families and make a life for themselves here in South Australia.

Well, unfortunately, since the election, we've seen Malcolm Turnbull still hasn't  stepped up to the plate to protect and look after South Australian jobs and South  Australian families. We are not going to give up the fight, we are going to keep  pressing to support the workers like those we saw today.

So I am very grateful to Bill for coming again to South Australia, for coming again to  Adelaide and for stepping up again to demonstrate his support for local jobs here in  South Australia. Over to you, Bill.

BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Thanks Penny. Great to be here  in Adelaide with Senator Penny Wong, the Leader of the Opposition in the Senate  and a fierce champion of standing up for South Australian jobs. I am here today

because I am asking Mr Turnbull, please don't spend $200 million on a wasteful  plebiscite, spend $50 million saving thousands of  jobs.

Arrium and OneSteel are a major company who have got themselves into financial  difficulties, not through the fault of the workforce. The steel industry in Australia is  highly strategic to keep cost pressure on building and infrastructure, and of course  it's very important for our economic independence. There are 7,000 people who are  directly employed by Arrium right across Australia but in particular, in Whyalla and  South Australia. Labor is committed to a proposal which would see this company  given a $50 million one-off grant funding to help update their technology. The steel  business doesn't stand still for anyone and what it needs is a little bit of extra  investment to help make it a more attractive proposition for the whole Australian  business of Arrium to be sold as a going concern. The leaders of this company, the  workforce, their union representatives have explained to me and my team that for a  little bit of grant funding this business has a got a very bright future.

Our steelmakers are amongst the best in the world but what they need is a  government who is willing to back them up. It isn't good enough, that whilst Mr  Turnbull struts the world stage, whilst he talks about spending $200 million on a  wasteful plebiscite on marriage equality, he can't guarantee $50 million to help save  local jobs.

For Labor, the equation is clear. You can either spend $200 million on a wasteful  marriage plebiscite or you can spend $50 million saving local jobs. I think the answer  is clear to that. And I say to Mr Turnbull, let's back jobs, jobs, jobs; jobs in South  Australia, jobs in steel, jobs right across Australia.

We are happy to take any questions that people might have.

JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten, on the plebiscite, there was an event to occur in Sydney  yesterday. The Accor Hotel - but it had to be called off because of pro-same-sex  marriage campaigners making it very difficult for the ‘no’ campaigners to meet. Why  have you not condemned the behaviour of these people?

SHORTEN: First of all, you are the first person to put this matter to me. Let me just  state, I don't know all of the facts of this matter but I am sick of intolerance wherever  we find it. If people want to gather to talk about an idea, they shouldn't be stopped  from gathering. I've got a 30 year track record of supporting freedom of association  and the ability of people to come together.

But let's also call it for what it is. This marriage equality plebiscite is a shocking waste  of money. It'll be north of $200 million just to hold an opinion poll which won't bind  Government MPs. I do not believe that emotional torment for young people is a price  worth paying just so Mr Turnbull can keep his puppet masters in the hard right of the  Liberal Party happy. I think Mr Turnbull needs to realise that the last election in some  ways was a verdict about courage and leadership. I recognise that nearly a third of

Australian voters picked a party other than Liberal or Labor. I've got the message  loud and clear. This country wants strong leadership. Mr Turnbull is not leading the  Liberal Party, he is following the Liberal Party. Every Australian knows that if Mr  Turnbull was really in charge of his party, he'd be having a vote in Parliament.

Labor's compromise for Mr Turnbull on marriage equality is perfectly simple: just let  all the Members of Parliament have a free vote in Parliament when we next  assemble. That'll save us $200 million, some money which could go towards saving  the jobs at Arrium, and we could avoid a lot of these other acrimonious debates  which of course was at the core of your question to me.

JOURNALIST:  Does Labor support the Government’s announcement to maintain  (inaudible)?

SHORTEN: This is just a hoax. Malcolm Turnbull has flown to New York to re-announce Tony Abbott's policies. We said in 2014 that we supported this proposition,  we still support it. But is this really the best that Malcolm Turnbull can do on the  world stage? Reheat the leftovers of Tony Abbott's policy two years later in New  York? Let's call it for what it is: this is just a hoax. Malcolm Turnbull has flown to New  York to re-announce Tony Abbott's policies and they haven't dealt with the elephant  in the room and we all know what that is, don't we? The fact is that we have nearly  2,000 people trapped in almost indefinite detention on Manus and Nauru. When will  the Turnbull Government actually negotiate a regional resettlement arrangement with  another nation so that we're not keeping people in indefinite detention?

Labor supports beating the people smugglers. We will work with the Government but  what we don't believe is that to defeat the people smugglers you have to keep nearly  2,000 people in indefinite detention. Mr Turnbull needs to do more than just re-announce Tony Abbott's policies. He needs to come up with a deal for another  country.

JOURNALIST: What other countries do you think might be appropriate or not  appropriate for resettlement?

SHORTEN: First of all, Mr Turnbull needs to perhaps spell out 'has he had any  discussions with the United States about the Costa Rica solution? I notice that one of  his ministers has already galloped out this morning and said that's not on. But of  course, I don't know what to make of this because frequently one Government  Minister in Mr Turnbull's Cabinet doesn't know what the other one is doing. But Mr  Turnbull needs to spell out is he having negotiations with Canada? Is he having  discussions with New Zealand? Is he having discussions with the United States? Is  he talking to leaders in our region? Has he sent his minister to talk to the United  Nations’ High Commissioner for refugees. This Government stands indicted because  on one hand it talks about stopping the people smugglers and we support that, but  on the other hand, all he can do is fly to New York, re-announce poor old Tony

Abbott's policies and pretend that somehow he's solved the problem and meanwhile  there's 1,800 people stuck in indefinite detention.

JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten, you pledged $100 million to Arrium previously. What's  changed that you only want $50 million now?

SHORTEN: There's $50 million we said should be used as a loan facility and I  understand the Government is doing that too. The debate is about the remaining $50  million - that's how we get to $100 million. The Government’s happy to provide  support to attract new bidders but it's remarkably vague about the detail. Now, we  have sat down with the leaders of this company. Unlike Mr Turnbull, I have spent a  lot of time visiting OneSteel, Arrium and the various steel operations. The message  is coming to me loud and clear: 'Bill this is a business we can save' is a going  concern. I don't want to see this business salami sliced between mining, between  Whyalla and the downstream products. We need an integrated steel producer in  Australia; Arrium and OneSteel have a great history of building the infrastructure this  country needs. Right now, in the factory beside me, we've got a skilled Australian  workforce, highly productive, delivering value for money steel to major infrastructure  projects in South Australia.

I don't want to lose these jobs, I don't want to lose the ability of Australians and  Australian governments to have some say over the prices of the steel which  taxpayers pay for. The problem is, if you just follow the Liberal Government's hands  off, leave to it the market approach, don't worry about the jobs, everyone can  become a barista approach of Mr Turnbull or dotcom start-up. The problem is that if  Australia does make steel here anymore, we lose pricing control. The day we close  the last steel manufacturing facility in Australia, the day we will start to see our prices  that we buy from imported steelmakers edge up and up and up. The fact is that we  do good work in Australian manufacturing and I want to see a country which keeps  making steel. Any serious economy in the world has a steel manufacturing industry,  that is where we stand.

JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten, do you think that the workforce here at Arrium  (inaudible)

SHORTEN: This is a very efficient company. It may surprise you to learn that in a  site of this size, with the massive tonnes of steel they're supplying, there's only 62  fulltime employees. This is a very efficient workforce. They don't understand, though,  why Mr Turnbull will spend $200 million of their taxpayer money on a non-binding  opinion poll on marriage equality and they just say to me 'why won't Mr Turnbull just  get off the fence, commit $50 million in grant funding' so this company can improve  the technology, it can improve the productivity, it can lower the input costs, it can  have cheaper costing energy because of the changes this company makes. The  steel workforce of OneSteel and Arrium are very efficient operators and they  compare favourably in work practices to the best in the world.

JOURNALIST: Just on another issue what’s your view on the plan to cut welfare for  parents whose children don’t go to school?

SHORTEN: We're always interested in investing in the welfare of our Australians.  Parents now have an obligation to send their children to school. Whilst we will look at  the Government's proposals carefully and constructively, I have got to remind the  Government it's already compulsory to send kids to school. And I do think that if we  want to invest in getting people off welfare we shouldn't be increasing the price of  medicine, we shouldn't be making bulk-billing less affordable or less common, we  should be properly funding our hospitals, we should have needs-based funding in  our schools, we should be helping parents be able to access better child care.

So we're up for a discussion about how you break the cycle of poverty, but some of  the ways in which you break the cycle of poverty don't involve going after the poorest  in our community and cutting their funding already.

Perhaps I will take one last question.

JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)

SHORTEN: I say let's not blame a whole group of people for the criminal actions of a  few people. We're an immigrant country, other than our First Australians we all came  from somewhere else. We have got to make sure that people who come to our  country respect our laws, respect our values, that we encourage them to integrate in  language and all of that. But what I don't want to do is see this country scapegoating  minorities for the challenges of the bigger issues.

I believe that most Australians, all Australians, want to make sure their kids get a  good quality education, that they can afford to go and see the doctor when they need  to, not when they can afford to, that they have fulltime jobs such as the ones we're  fighting for so hard to defend here. The future of this country is by working together.

Daesh and the very worst of terrorists want to run an argument which says that you  can't have Muslims actually support Western liberal democracy, that there's a  different between Western liberal democracy and our system and being a Muslim.  That is what the crazy fundamentalists of Islamic extremism say. We would be  playing into the hands of the crazies, of the fundamentalists, of those who hate the  Australian way of life, by somehow saying that that religion, Islam, is in compatible  with Western liberal democracy. There are millions of Muslims right across the world  who live in western societies, who contribute to our quality and standard of living,  and you give in to the crazies and the fundamentalists if all you do is accept their  arguments and repeat them ourselves.

Thanks everybody.

ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: LEADER’S OFFICE MEDIA UNIT - 02 6277 4053

