



THE HON TANYA PLIBERSEK MP  DEPUTY LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  SHADOW MINISTER FOR EDUCATION  SHADOW MINISTER FOR WOMEN



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW   ABC NEWCASTLE  WEDNESDAY, 2 NOVEMBER 2016

SUBJECTS:  Schools funding; Higher Education; Senator Bob Day resignation;  Asylum Seekers

PAUL TURTON, ABC RADIO NEWCASTLE:  Visiting the Hunter today is the Shadow  Minister for Education and Women, Tanya Plibersek, who is actually en route to the  Wollotuka Institute at the University of Newcastle for an announcement.  Ms Plibersek  has been good enough to join us this morning.  Tanya Plibersek thanks for doing that by  the way.

TANYA PLIBERSEK, DEPUTY LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION:  Good morning Paul  it’s always a pleasure to talk to you.

TURTON:  Can you just tell us what the announcement is, it’s not boycotted till 11 is it,  or embargoed rather?

PLIBERSEK:  There is no special announcement. I am going there to learn from them  about the fantastic work they do as one of the leading institutes for indigenous  education around the world.  I’m visiting the University of Newcastle also to meet with  some other academics you’ve got who are some of the global leaders in teacher  education internationally too, and then after that I’m off to Mayfield East Public  School.  It’s important to get around to some of the schools locally because of course  over the next two years the difference between the Gonski funding that Labor promised  and what Newcastle schools will get is about $33 million over the next couple of years.  So I’m learning about all the investments that the extra needs-based funding has made  possible and hearing directly from students, parents and teachers about what they have  benefitted from, what they want to keep and what happens if they don’t get the extra  needs-based funding over the next couple years.

TURTON:  The issue of tertiary education of course has been a hot one in the political  sphere in recent years; we know of course that there has been consideration not only to

funding but regulation of the universities and of course fee determinations.  Where do  you stand on that?

PLIBERSEK:  Look you’re absolutely right there has been quite a bit of controversy in  recent years and we have in fact in the last three years we have had about twenty-five  different reviews and studies and reports written.  My position is pretty simple - if you  work hard and you want to go to university and you are prepared to put the hours in and  study hard you should be able to go there without worrying that you can’t afford it, that  you will be loaded up with a lifetime of debt.  That’s Labor’s position. We don’t believe in  $100,000 university degrees.  We also continue to support a demand-driven system. By  uncapping the number of students in university we’ve seen an extra 190,000 attending  university and a lot of those are the first in their family to go to uni, they’re the first  generation.  We’ve got about a third increase in the number of regional students  attending university; we’ve got about a quarter increase in the number of indigenous  students attending university, so we’re really seeing university becoming much more  democratic, I suppose you could say, much more available to students who in the past  would have worried about whether they could afford to go there.

TURTON:  Tanya Plibersek with a very tight parliament at the moment numbers-wise,  you’ve got the Liberal Party of course with its coalition partner the Nationals in office at  the moment by a very slim majority in both houses, now this story of Bob Day and his  resignation from the Senate is dominating news around the country.  You would be  focussing a fair bit on administrative matters rather than policy issues in Canberra at the  moment wouldn’t you?

PLIBERSEK:  Well I think this question is a really, really serious one.  We don’t know  what will happen now - we don’t know whether Bob Day’s vacancy will be filled as a  casual vacancy, which means that the South Australian Parliament chooses, and  usually, as you know, chooses someone from the same party or whether we will have to  do a re-count of the Senate vote from the last election, and if that’s the case we also  don’t know who would pick up that last spot. There is speculation about whether it will  be Labor or One Nation. We just don’t know because the preference votes are so very  complex, particularly in South Australia with the Xenophon factor.  So it’s all up in the  air. But the bigger question is how long has the government known that Senator Day’s  or former Senator Day’s vote should not have been accepted because he was not  validly elected?  There is this story now that a building that he owned was receiving  rental payments for his office from the Commonwealth Government and that might  constitute a very serious conflict of interest that would have made him ineligible to stand  for the Senate.  If that’s the case and the Government knew about it, as it seems, for  several weeks now, that is deeply, deeply serious. That means that Senator Day was  voting when he wasn’t eligible, really, to be a Senator and that the Government knew  and accepted his vote anyway. If that is the case that is a scandal.

TURTON:  What also is significant is what is going to happen in the next few months,  one vote that the Government could have relied on in Bob Day, the Family First  Senator. What will happen to legislation such as the ABCC, the building, the  construction incorporation that the Labor Party is staunchly opposed to and Malcolm  Turnbull wants to re-introduce.  Is there likely to be any sort of sympathy vote from the  Xenophons and the other cross bench Senators do you think?

PLIBERSEK:  Well again, all up in the air - it would really depend on who replaces  Senator Day, what happens with this legislation.  The two very controversial pieces of  legislation that the former Senator Day said he was sticking around for was, as you say,  the Australian Building and Construction Commission legislation which of course will  affect about a million construction workers and their families and give them fewer rights  to silence and access to a lawyer, than if you are accused of a drug deal - and the other  piece of legislation is the plebiscite on marriage equality which- of course the former  Senator was very much opposed to marriage equality and he would have voted for the  plebiscite as a way of blocking that.  If a Labor Senator is elected obviously that  strengthens our position but we don’t know that that would be the case. It could be One  Nation - it’s anybody’s guess.  I mean I’m sorry Paul that I can’t give you a clearer  answer but this a period of enormous uncertainty over the next few days and weeks  because we don’t even know how the Senator will be replaced.

TURTON:  Tanya Plibersek could I just ask you about your position on asylum seekers  given Kevin Rudd has had a spray slamming Malcolm Turnbull’s decision to give  lifetime bans to those seeking asylum in Australia and arriving by boat.  Clearly the  Labor Party has been criticised for having a policy that’s too closely aligned to the  Liberal Party.  Could we see the Labor Party relaxing its border protection policies to be  more sympathetic to refugees?

PLIBERSEK:  Well I take issue with the first thing you said, our policy is quite different  to the Government’s. We for example would double the humanitarian intake over  coming years, we would work with the UNHCR including by providing $450 million in our  region to properly resettle people, to bring more people here but bring them safely; we  would have more independent oversight and more transparency in off-shore processing  and we say again and again that Peter Dutton has completely dropped the ball - the fact  that there are still people on Manus Island and Nauru three years down the track is  completely unacceptable and Peter Dutton should find a third country resettlement  option for them immediately.  On this most recent piece of legislation, look we haven’t  even seen the legislation yet, this is an absolutely typical debacle from the Government  where they announce something on the front page of the newspaper and they say to  Labor ‘Well what is your position?’  We’re not going to start giving positions in response  to leaked newspaper stories, we want to see legislation.  The last time they introduced a  Treasury bill it had a $107 million black hole in it, so you will forgive us for being a little  bit cautious when we’re called on to give an instant response to something that not even  Government Ministers understand. We have had the Immigration Minister, the Health  Minister and the Foreign Affairs Minister all give different answers about what this  legislation that they’re foreshadowing does, so we will wait and see.  But truly if the  boats have stopped as Peter Dutton says then this legislation is unnecessary and to me  it looks more like a Peter Dutton job application for the leadership than anything else.

TURTON:  Tanya Plibersek, welcome to the Hunter Valley and we hope you enjoy your  day today; you’re heading to the Central Coast I think you’re calling into Dobell on the  way home?

PLIBERSEK:  Afterwards yes, I’m actually at the University of Newcastle now, I’m  sitting here on the lawns waiting to go in, it’s such a beautiful, beautiful day and then  later in the day as I said I’m going down to Mayfield East Public School and then down  to Noraville after that to St Mary’s Catholic Primary School on the way home.

TURTON:  Good to talk to you this morning, thank you.

PLIBERSEK:  Thank you Paul.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: DAN DORAN 0427 464 350



