THE HON TANYA PLIBERSEK MP  DEPUTY LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  SHADOW MINISTER FOR EDUCATION  SHADOW MINISTER FOR WOMEN

E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TV INTERVIEW  ABC NEWS 24  TUESDAY, 8 NOVEMBER 2016

SUBJECTS: Government’s proposed changes to the Migration Act; Marriage  equality

GREG JENNETT, PRESENTER: Tanya Plibersek, Caucus has moved swiftly to say  "no" to any visa ban. But can you imagine any circumstance where a ban of some  duration might be appropriate in order to get people off Nauru and Manus?

TANYA PLIBERSEK, DEPUTY LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: We think this whole  exercise has been an exercise in nonsense. If Peter Dutton is right in saying that he's  stopped the boats as he was saying before the election, then this legislation is  completely unnecessary. Our Caucus was unanimous in its determination today not to  back this legislation and engaging in all these kinds of hypotheticals I think is a bit  pointless; really what we should be focused on now - what the Immigration Minister  should be focused on - is finding third country resettlement for the people who are stuck  on Manus and Nauru.

JENNETT: If you can imagine that he made progress on that, and he was ready to sign  a deal, from the Australian Government's point of view - not the third countries' can you  imagine a circumstance where they wouldn't necessarily want to see people coming,  even as tourists, two or three days later after receipt of their passport from this country?

PLIBERSEK: Look, I just think these are really fantastic hypotheticals. We hoped that  this proposed legislation had something to do with resettlement in third countries, it  doesn't. I mean the Government has made it clear that this is not in response to some  arrangement with another country, stopping people coming from third countries once  they've been resettled -  this is just a stunt. This is just playing to the right wing of the  Liberal Party, to One Nation - One Nation is claiming credit for this legislation. I think all  these conversations about "what if these were the circumstances" are being very  generous to the Government.

JENNETT: I think that's probably true, because you do feel you're only getting half the  story with this round of the legislation. But Bill Shorten acknowledged that Labor is not  going to stand in the way of the Government making a deal to get people off the Islands,  so I guess what I'm saying - although it's hypothetical and the Government is not telling  us - if this became material to that, would Labor be in a position where it couldn't stand  in the way?

PLIBERSEK: Well if that was the scenario, we would love it if the Government was  talking to us about options for third country resettlement. From what we can tell there is  nothing in prospect. This is not a priority for the Government. Peter Dutton has -

JENNETT: You've asked that question directly in briefings?

PLIBERSEK: Of course we have, absolutely. And Peter Dutton has proved himself to  be - he was voted by doctors as the worst Health Minister in living memory, he's now  proving to be the most incompetent Immigration Minister. He has had three years to find  a place for the people on Manus Island and Nauru to be permanently resettled. This is  dragging on to the detriment of all of those involved. Really his focus should be on this  issue of resettlement, not setting the hares running with proposed legislation that the  Government can't tell us about the reason for, and in fact, different Government  ministers can't even answer questions about who would be affected by this legislation.

JENNETT: Do you remain fully committed to all aspects of Kevin Rudd's July 2013  statement?

PLIBERSEK: We remain committed to the policy that we took to our last national  conference that was negotiated in very difficult circumstances - this is a tough thing for  the Labor Party because we want more asylum seekers to be permanently resettled -  we've got 60 million people around the world who have been displaced from their  homes - we believe Australia should be more generous. We believe Australia could take  27,000 humanitarian entrants each year but that those people need to come to Australia  safely. We need to be able to prioritise those who are most in need, people who are in  desperate circumstances around the world.

JENNETT: Alright. Let's change topic to same-sex marriage. The plebiscite met a  predictable end in the Senate last night. The Government is not speaking of any Plan B,  no one expects it to. What's yours?

PLIBERSEK: Well Plan B is to have this decided by the Parliament. It always should  have been decided by the Parliament. The High Court has said this should be decided  by the Parliament and the plebiscite -

JENNETT:  But when?  It's not going to happen in this Parliament, is it?

PLIBERSEK: Why not? I mean, you had Malcolm Turnbull a few months ago saying  that there was no need to tinker with Section 18C of the Race Discrimination Act; he's  completely reneged on that. Now apparently this is more important than the fact that the  deficit has octupled under his watch, it's more important than the fact we've lost 100,000  full time jobs since the beginning of the year. Apparently 18C is the big deal, now I think  if he can change his mind on 18C, he should change his mind on marriage equality,  given that that's what the real Malcolm really believes.

JENNETT: There just doesn’t seem to be as many agitating within his own Party for a  conscience vote on same-sex marriage as there were on this 18C issue. Do they  equate?

PLIBERSEK: I think there are absolutely people within the Liberal Party who feel very  strongly that marriage equality is a reform whose time has come, they know that the  right place to do this is in the Parliament, they are doing it very "softly, softly" because

they don't want to undermine Malcolm Turnbull, but I think there is a critical push within  the Liberal Party, and it's important that those voices get the support they need from the  broader community to make their impact felt. This is something that the Parliament  could determine in the next two weeks. The legislation is already there. It's a very  simple change to the Marriage Act. We could get it done before Christmas.

JENNETT: Alright, we may or may not, but we'll wait and see. Tanya Plibersek, thank  you.

PLIBERSEK: Thank you.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: DAN DORAN 0427 464 350

