





THE HON ANTHONY ALBANESE MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR INFRASTRUCTURE, TRANSPORT, CITIES AND  REGIONAL DEVELOPMENT  SHADOW MINISTER FOR TOURISM

MEMBER FOR GRAYNDLER

E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  SKY NEWS - ON THE POINT WITH KRISTINA KENEALLY AND PETER VAN  ONSELEN  THURSDAY, 3 NOVEMBER 2016

SUBJECT/S: Asylum seekers, Hazelwood, Malcolm Turnbull’s Senate Chaos

KENEALLY: Anthony Albanese thanks for joining us.

VAN ONSELEN: Thanks for your company.

ALBANESE: Good to be with you. I'm glad to interrupt your little tiff there.

VAN ONSELEN: Alright let's move into some serious policy issues. It sounds like it's  highly unlikely that the Labor Party are going to support the Government's refugee  legislation that Peter Dutton has talked about during the week. I know you haven't  seen the legislation yet and you'll want to. I know that you'll want to have the relevant  meetings to work out a formal party position. But, can I assume correctly that your  predisposition is one of absolutely not wanting to support legislation that looks like  that?

ALBANESE: I think if the Government was serious about getting this legislation  through, they would have shown not just us, but shown the Australian people.  Instead what we've had is a rather bizarre press conference being held, and then  Peter Dutton changing his mind; Sussan Ley having a different position from Peter  Dutton about whether it applied to people who are here in Australia right now, and;  no explanation given of the logic of, if someone has been found to be a refugee, they  settle and become a citizen in another country, what the point is of saying you can't  come to Australia in forty years’ time? Beyond just appearing to be harsh against  refugees, what is the point of that legislation?

VAN ONSELEN: Just on that, can I ask a follow up question on that? Look, don't get  me wrong, I for the life of me can't work it out either, but the Government there, there  seems to be this suggestion that it's somehow connected to a looming third country  arrangement or, with a group of third countries that they could therefore get people  out of detention on Nauru and Manus, or out of at least being confined to Nauru,

even if they're not actually in detention specifically.

There does seem to be that suggestion, Anthony Albanese, that it's somehow linked  to that. As I say, I can't see quite how, but is Labor open to it if you can be  persuaded that doing this hand in glove with finding third party arrangements to  ensure people get off Nauru - is Labor then open to it?

ALBANESE: Well this seems to be an after-the-fact excuse without any substance  to it. It is certainly the case that we need to get people off Manus and Nauru.

Indefinite detention causes mental anguish for those people involved. If you've been  found to be a genuine refugee and you’re subject to this ongoing mental torture  about where you will go, what will happen to your life, then that is unacceptable and  the Government needs to find third countries of settlement. But John Key, the New  Zealand Prime Minister, seemed to blow that argument out of the water when he  said that such a provision would rule out New Zealand, for example, of accepting  asylum seekers, even though in the past they have offered to accept genuine  refugees; a number each year from Manus and Nauru, because he wouldn't want to  create dual citizens' rights, if you like, second class citizens, as New Zealanders. So  that appears to put that argument to bed.

But the Government needs to put forward an explanation. What is its plan to get  people off Manus and Nauru? What is the purpose of this legislation? We went  through an election campaign where they said it was all fixed, that they'd solved all  the problems, they had the policy settings right, and now just a couple of months  later they say; well actually we don't have the policy settings right, we need this  major change, without any explanation of why.

KENEALLY: Right Anthony Albanese, we'll wait to see that legislation. I want to turn  to Hazelwood, the power station there; you're the Shadow Minister for Regional  Development. The Government has, in response to this news today, that the power  station will close in March 2017, they've announced a $43 million package and to  pledge to work in partnership with the Victorian Government. I realise this has just  been announced, but do you have any initial reactions to the package? Does it go far  enough? What else would you like to see done to support the people of the Latrobe  Valley?

ALBANESE: Well it's a pity that they cut back on the funding that had been made  available by the former Labor Government about economic diversification that was  required in the Latrobe Valley. It's been no secret that Hazelwood would reach a  point whereby it would be closed at some time. And what we did in Government was  put in place transition measures to provide support to those workers and their  families and my thoughts are with those workers today, many of whom have worked  at that plant for decades, and who the economic restructuring that is occurring is  certainly at no fault of them, or their families.

The Government needs to work with the Victorian State Government to make sure  that those workers and their families have a future. That the Latrobe Valley also has  a future. I wouldn't want to see depopulation occur from the towns around the  Hazelwood plant and we will be constructive about that. But it is a pity that part of the

cuts that occurred in 2014 were for the very measures that make more sense to put  in place early than to wait for the closure announcement in order to put those  measures in place.

KENEALLY: So for example, the $20 million they're committing for regional jobs and  investment package, or the $20 million they're committing for local infrastructure,  you're saying that's less than what was previously on offer?

ALBANESE: Well I'm saying that the cut was in the order of $9.6 million that they cut  in 2014. I'm saying the problem is that the sooner you invest to create that  diversification the better it would have been. They left some of the measures in  place, in terms of road upgrades and other measures that were there, but we need a  comprehensive plan to make sure that these workers and their families are looked  after.  If people are just made unemployed it is of course bad for the individuals, but it's also  bad for the economy. And that's why the Government needs to be strategic about it.  We will be constructive in our approach because our thoughts are with these  families.

KENEALLY: Let me turn to the Senate, should Senator Bob Day and Senator Rod  Culleton refrain from voting on any legislation next week?

ALBANESE: Well Bob Day is…

KENEALLY: Sorry Bob Day has resigned my apologies (inaudible).

ALBANESE: Very much a case in point. Well, it’s not surprising you’re confused  Kristina because he went, he came back, and he went again.

KENEALLY: I know my apologies.

ALBANESE: So it’s no wonder. I think the Australian public are confused, and  they’re also I think pretty angry, that it’s come out that the details about his  Electorate Office were known to the Government way back in 2014.

The Government has to come clean about what they knew. I find it unbelievable  frankly, that a Senator or a Member of the House of Representatives for that matter,  would set up an office in a building that they had an interest in. And the fact that the  Government knew that, that there is an email trail that has been released today by  Senator Don Farrell, is quite beyond belief really.

VAN ONSELEN: Anthony Albanese, do we know that the Government did know  that? Because yesterday the report seemed to be that they specifically requested  that he divest that interest, and the Government is claiming that they were unaware  of the way that it had been done.

ALBANESE: But they knew that it was there from the beginning. I mean, how on  earth do you say, oh well you’ve got this building that you’re moving into, not moving  into an office that was purpose built, that Don Farrell was using, or the  Commonwealth Parliamentary Offices that are there in Adelaide, perfectly good

facilities. You say, can you just maybe divest your interest? And it’s pretty clear that  that was done in a rather extraordinary way. And at the same time this is a bloke  who is consistently voting with the Government.

And now we have a One Nation Senator, who clearly should not be voting because  there is an absolute cloud over his eligibility as well. This is a guy who did plead  guilty to a charge that would make his position I think, quite untenable. It’s a decision  of course for the High Court at the end of the day to determine that.

But this comes after on the last sitting day; we had essentially a cage match between  Tony Abbott and Malcolm Turnbull on the floor of the House of Representatives. We  have absolute chaos when it comes to the normal functioning of a Government, and  they kept telling us that it was a majority Government that would be able to function  smoothly. Well it’s anything but that. It is chaos and disorder across the House of  Representatives and in the Senate.

KENEALLY: You say that Rod Culleton shouldn’t vote next week on any legislation,  should the Government delay its Plebiscite Legislation? Should it delay the ABCC  Legislation? And if so what should the Senate do next week?

ALBANESE: Well I’ll tell you what, it wouldn’t be the first time that the Senate had  nothing to do. We’ve already seen it shut down once this term, because it literally ran  out of business. And having nothing to do and shutting down was better, than the  performances of Bridget McKenzie and others to try and filibuster, who were  incapable of giving a speech without forgetting their own candidates’ names. I find  this dysfunction quite extraordinary.

You have Tony Abbott this week placing an ad through Cate McGregor on the front  page of The Daily Telegraph, to be Aboriginal Affairs Minister. This is quite  dysfunctional. Malcolm Turnbull is not in charge of his Government or his party, and  indeed the Government in my portfolio seems to be all over the shop as well. Things  not being rolled out, you have a $3 billion dollar underspend in infrastructure at a  time where the Government said infrastructure was going to be its big priority. Well,  the money is in the budget they’re not actually doing anything with it.

And you find I think right across the issues of Medicare, you have ongoing issues  with health and privatisation by stealth effectively; a refusal to deal with the issue of  the freezing of Medicare rebates.  On education, it’s unclear what’s happening with school education funding in the  forward years. Right across the board this is a Government that, two months in, has  completely fallen apart.

VAN ONSELEN: Speaking of dysfunction though, what’s going on in the Labor Left  Anthony Albanese? Your colleague Terri Butler she described Victorian Labor  Member of Parliament Gavin Marshall, as quote, “a little known Senator”.

You slapped him down yourself for suggesting that he would work to unseat Andrew  Giles, possibly even Catherine King. What’s going on? What are the shenanigans at  play?

ALBANESE: Look, from time to time people will be upset with processes and they  will make comments. Gavin Marshall did that about Catherine King, Jenny Macklin  and Andrew Giles. I think that those comments have been treated justifiably across  the spectrum of the Labor Party as not being worthy of a Senator.

Terri Butler is performing extremely well. She will be a future Senior Minister in a  Labor Government, and one of the things I am very enthused about is the new  generation. Terri Butler, Andrew Giles amongst them, as well as people like Tim  Watts, Claire O’Neil, there are so many people who have come into the Parliament  and are outstanding. People like Jim Chalmers, he is in his second term; he is  already Shadow Finance Minister.

VAN ONSELEN: Well another one, Anthony Albanese, would you put down in the  same category as a young person on the rise, what about Kimberley Kitching taking  over from Stephen Conroy?

ALBANESE: Well I don’t know Kimberley Kitching. People have some strong views  about her and I’ve said that was a matter for the Victorian Branch.

The people I do know, particularly in the House of Representatives who’ve come in,  it was the best set of first speeches that I’ve seen.

VAN ONSELEN: Okay but Mr Albanese let me take you back though to Kimberley  Kitching, because we were talking earlier about tainted votes and whether or not the  One Nation Senator out of Western Australia, should be voting or not. And we talked  about Bob Day before that. What about the fact that Kimberley Kitching has had  matters from the Royal Commission referred to police for investigation? Does that  taint her vote?

ALBANESE: Well I’m sure that the Victorian Branch considered all those factors  when they determined to put her forward for the Senate. She will be taking up her  spot.

Where I am in the House of Representatives, I’m quite excited by the people who  have come in. Including from Victoria, but from right across the country, the new  team from Western Australia, where we have, essentially every single one of them is  new, five newbies, they are absolutely outstanding. Tim Hammond has already  found himself on the front bench. But people like Josh Wilson and Anne Aly and the  whole team are very very good.

KENEALLY: All right Anthony Albanese we’re going to leave it there thanks so much  for joining us on To the Point.

ALBANESE: Good to be with you.

[ENDS]

THURSDAY, 3 NOVEMBER, 2016  MEDIA CONTACT: MATTHEW FRANKLIN  0411 659 868

