





THE HON ANTHONY ALBANESE MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR INFRASTRUCTURE, TRANSPORT, CITIES AND  REGIONAL DEVELOPMENT  SHADOW MINISTER FOR TOURISM

MEMBER FOR GRAYNDLER



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  NINE NETWORK - TODAY SHOW

FRIDAY, 4 NOVEMBER, 2016

Subjects: Asylum seekers, Tony Abbott and Malcolm Turnbull, US election.

LISA WILKINSON: We're joined now by Defence Industry Minister, Christopher Pyne,  in Adelaide, and Shadow Transport and Infrastructure Minister, Anthony Albanese, here  in the studio. Good morning to you gentlemen.

ALBANESE: Good morning.

PYNE: Good morning Lisa.

WILKINSON: Christopher, I'll start with you. You'd have to admit that the policy is very  hard line.

PYNE: Well the policy confirms what has been the practice for a long time and, in fact,  was the stated policy of Kevin Rudd and the Labor Party before the 2013 election. So  what Kevin Rudd has done this week is expose the fact that Labor never really believed  in strong border protection, which is what they did in Government of course. They let  50,000 unauthorised arrivals into the country on 800 boats and Kevin Rudd,  unfortunately, confirmed what many of us suspected; that what they were saying in 2013  they didn't really mean.

The policy that we are taking to the people, to the Parliament, is that we want to ensure  that those people, who have tried to get to Australia in an unauthorised way, will never  be able to get a visa through a backdoor method.

WILKINSON: You'd have to say, Anthony, there is a touch of the pot calling the kettle  black on this one.

ALBANESE: Well this is all about politics as Christopher just exposed then. The fact is  that this will make it more difficult according to John Key, the New Zealand Prime  Minister, to settle the people from Manus and Nauru because countries like New

Zealand, for example, will say they won't create two tiers of citizenship. Now the key task  for the Government is to do something to settle those people who are on Manus and  Nauru in third countries. They haven't been capable of doing that and now this will make  it even worse and we've just been through an election campaign where they said they'd  solved the issue. They said they had the policy right. It appears now, what's changed - just another pathetic attempt at playing politics. It's about time that this mob actually  governed the country rather than just played politics.

WILKINSON: Where does Labor sit on this issue? Have you worked out what your  policy is going to be on this yet?

ALBANESE: Well we haven't even seen the legislation and there's no sense of  purpose.

WILKINSON: But you must have an idea where you stand on it?

ALBANESE: Well what we won't do, Lisa, is just play politics with it. The Government  have not put forward any reason for, any rationale for, this policy. The idea that if  someone is a citizen of the United States for example, for 40 years, and they're not  allowed to visit Australia, is quite bizarre.

WILKINSON: Christopher this policy does have all the hallmarks of manipulating a  highly charged issue for political gain by the PM.

PYNE: Well Lisa, Labor is slip-sliding around over this issue because obviously they  don't have a strong border protection policy, which is why they're not fit to be back in  Government. What we've found with the people who are in Nauru and Manus Island is  that Labor and their fellow travellers are holding out hope for them that they will get to  come to Australia if they wait out the Government. What we want to make very clear to  them is there are very generous repatriation packages for them, there are third party  resettlement options...

ALBANESE: Where?

PYNE: That the Government is prepared to fund and they should take...

WILKINSON: Where will they go Christopher?

PYNE: Well there's options for them to stay in Papua New Guinea, to go to Cambodia,  to return to the countries from where they've come now that they are safe again and they  are refusing to do so because Labor and their fellow travellers are telling them, nudge  nudge, wink wink, you don't have to take those packages, you don't have to return home  because we will find a way for you to come into the country. Now what unfortunately  Anthony has proven this morning is that they're continuing to have those soft border  protection policies from the Labor Party that got us into this position in the first place  where there were 50,000 unauthorised arrivals on 800 vessels.

WILKINSON: Well when you do have a policy Anthony we'll have to continue on that  topic...

ALBANESE: Well, when they have some legislation. We've got to actually see the  legislation. Why is it, if this isn't just about playing politics, they haven't released the

legislation for all to see? Parliament is sitting next week.

PYNE: Labor is divided on the issue obviously.

ALBANESE: We're not at all.

WILKINSON: When will we see that legislation Christopher?

PYNE: As soon as it's ready to be introduced, which is pretty straightforward.

ALBANESE: So you haven't got it ready yet?

WILKINSON: How long will that take?

PYNE: Well Peter Dutton can tell you exactly.

ALBANESE: You haven't got it ready.

PYNE: Peter Dutton can tell you when the legislation will be introduced but it's pretty  straightforward.

ALBANESE: So what we've had confirmed today is they don't even have this legislation  ready.

PYNE: It simply takes away the opportunity for people to come to Australia in any means  into the future. It's not a very hard piece of legislation for Anthony to get his head  around.

WILKINSON: So we should see it very shortly. Let's move on. Former Prime Minister  Tony Abbott let it be known this week he was up for a Cabinet position via one of his  long-time confidantes, Catherine McGregor, who wrote a column urging the PM to give  him the Indigenous Affairs portfolio. Christopher, this was an ultimatum. If the PM wants  peace, he needs to bring Tony Abbott in from the cold.

PYNE: Well Nigel Scullion is the Minister for Indigenous Affairs and he's been doing that  job for three years and he's doing a very good job and the Cabinet does not have a  vacancy in it. Malcolm Turnbull took this Cabinet to the election; it was endorsed by the  Australian people. We are all getting on with the job, we're not jockeying for other  people's positions and we are just doing the thing that the Australian public expect us to  do.

WILKINSON: But Tony Abbott is clearly jockeying and it's clear if the Prime Minister  wants peace he needs Tony Abbott on that front bench otherwise this is just going to  continue.

PYNE: Well, what the Prime Minister and the Cabinet and the rest of the Parliament  want is for the Australian Government to have the opportunity to implement their policies  and to get on with creating jobs and investment in our economy and that's exactly what  we are doing.

ALBANESE: Well, this is not the Cabinet that Malcolm Turnbull took to the election. On  the last sitting day of Parliament we saw a cage fight on the floor of the House of

Representatives between Malcolm Turnbull and Tony Abbott and now a week later he's  applying for a job on the front bench. What we see is that Malcolm Turnbull and Tony  Abbott are locked in a downward spiral and they're taking the Government with them.

WILKINSON: Ok, we’re going to have to leave it there gentlemen. Five days to go until  the big Presidential race comes to a close - Trump or Clinton?

ALBANESE: Clinton.

WILKINSON: Trump or Clinton, Christopher?

PYNE: I think Clinton will win easily.

WILKINSON: All right, ok, we will wait and see.

ALBANESE: A unity ticket on something.

WILKINSON: Yes that's a nice change. Christopher and Anthony, good to see you.

ALBANESE: Good to be with you.

PYNE: Thank you.

[ENDS]  FRIDAY, 4 NOVEMBER, 2016   MEDIA CONTACT: MATTHEW FRANKLIN 0411 659 868   a

