



THE HON SHAYNE NEUMANN  SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER  PROTECTION  FEDERAL MEMBER FOR BLAIR

E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW  ABC NEWS RADIO BREAKFAST  MONDAY, 19 SEPTEMBER 2016

SUBJECT/S: Offshore detention; Peter Dutton’s record in immigration; refugees.

SHAYNE NEUMANN, SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER  PROTECTION: What I do agree with is Australia’s been a successful multicultural  country. We’ve taken seven and a half million people into this country since World War  II.  We have to be strong on border protection and Labor’s position is such, but we’ve  also got to be deeply compassionate and the Government has failed in terms of  management of this portfolio; and there is a lot of dysfunction as the recent reports from  the Auditor General’s office and the RAND Corporation commissioned by the  Government reveals.

MARIUS BENSON:  But Labor has this awkward positon where you criticise the  management of Government policy, but the policy itself, offshore detention, you’re right  in line with the Government.

NEUMANN: Well Labor does believe that we have a duty to look after people in  offshore detention with greater transparency and we can’t keep those facilities secret  anymore and that’s why Labor has initiated a Senate Inquiry.  But it’s true, we do  support offshore processing, we do support regional resettlement and we do support  turn backs when it’s safe to do so.

BENSON:  You were supporting regional resettlement through the last term of the  Labor Government, but you never achieved it.

NEUMANN: Well if former Prime Minister Tony Abbott had done the right thing in terms  of Malaysia, as he now says he should have done, who knows what might have  happened.  That was…

BENSON:  Well the High Court knows, they knocked it back, they said it’s not legal.

NEUMANN: Ah that’s right, but subsequent to that, we tried a legislative change to  make it legal, to make sure that it was done properly, and the Coalition capriciously and  arbitrarily stopped it for no reason other than political and that’s what Tony Abbott says  himself.

BENSON:  Penny Wong, the Shadow Foreign Minister says Australia can do more in  terms of settling refuges, what more should we be doing?

NEUMANN: Well we need to engage with the UNHCR, and Labor took a position at the  last election to provide significant extra money, but also to take our humanitarian intake  up from 13,750 to 27,000 by the middle of the next decade.  There are 65 million  displaced persons around the world and we’ve got to do so much better and so much  more.

BENSON:  But 65 million is such an overwhelming number, what can Australia do to  have any impact on a number like that?

NEUMANN: We’ve got to take leadership, and Australia is one of the powerhouses  along with Canada and the United States in terms of resettlement.  The challenge is  immense around the world and we need to get back in the game with the UNHCR and  this Government doesn’t seem to do so.  As I have criticised the Government repeatedly  in terms of dysfunctionality, they certainly undertaking a cost blow out in the  mismanagement of offshore detention centres and that’s what recent reports show.

BENSON:  So what’s Labor proposing as an alternative? Apart from managing things  well and being more humane, which are a little hard to define, if you get back into office  at the next election are you going to revive the Malaysia Solution, is that the idea?

NEUMANN: What we’ve said is that we will engage with the region and provide  additional financial support to the UNHCR and direct much of that money to the region  to engage in the region. The Government doesn’t seem to be undertaking much in  terms of durable third party options.  If the Government is undertaking any discussions  with other third country’s to get people off Manus and Nauru, they’re not telling the  Australian public and they certainly aren’t telling the opposition.  We would engage  immediately; Bill Shorten has said that he would immediately send me on a plane to  Geneva to engage with the UNHCR and we would be looking to procure third party  durable options in relation to Manus. But in the interim can I say that we need to treat  people with decency and respect.  The Nauru files clearly show that the Government  has failed and the Minister seems to have a blame-the-victim mentality when in fact he  should be looking at how the department responded.  A department that has clearly  failed and the best you can say about this Minister’s attention to detail, as recent reports  have said, is careless, and at that worst he’s negligent and inattentive to his  responsibilities.

BENSON:  The world will be talking about refugees in New York over the next few days,  do you think Australia will, or indeed should, face criticism or praise?

NEUMANN: I think the Government should face significant criticism in terms of its  secrecy and lack of openness in terms of its management of Manus and Nauru.  If the  Minister and the Prime Minister don’t come back with the durable third party option they  would have failed and if they don’t come back with an additional commitment to take  more people they would have failed.  This is a Government which more than 12 months  ago said they would take 12,000 Syrian and Iraqi refugees and we’ve still waiting for  that to be undertaken.  They’ve grossly underestimated the resources necessary to  deliver on those commitments and recently the Minister has revealed that only three  and a half thousand people have been resettled in Australia.  If they can’t do that, they  really need to make a better effort in terms of refugee policy.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: MELISSA HOCKEY 0418 511 529

