

THE HON. BILL SHORTEN  LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  MEMBER FOR MARIBYRNONG



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP  CANBERRA  THURSDAY, 4 FEBRUARY 2016

SUBJECT/S: Labor’s ‘Your child. Our future’ plan for Australian education;  Malcolm Turnbull’s Liberals’ 15 per cent GST on everything; High Court decision  on Offshore processing; UN

GAI BRODTMANN, FEDERAL MEMBER FOR CANBERRA: Well thank you everyone  for coming to the Narrabundah Early Childhood School, and I want to thank particularly  Bernadette and Shannon and her team for welcoming us here today, we’ve had a lovely  warm welcome, and this is a really exceptional school. It’s one of five here in the ACT  that has adopted an integrated model of childcare as well as education. It’s integrated  with health services, with community services, with counselling services, with a range of  services to provide services to the wider community. This school has 28 per cent  Indigenous students and they’ve got a special Koori class which is an exceptional model  and I congratulate Bernadette and Shannon and her team for educating Canberra’s  future. Now, as you know, Labor takes education very seriously. Labor understands that  you need to invest in education for Australia’s future - for the success of our future -  and it also understands that education transforms lives, which is why we’ve come up  with our Your Child.  Our Future policy which is why we have made a significant  investment in education in future years, particularly reducing cuts or reversing the cuts  that the Government has made in education and I particularly welcome the fact that this  policy has invested $30 million in the ACT in 2018-19, so I just want to hand over to Bill  to take you through a few other issues.

BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Thanks Gai, and it’s lovely to be  here at this early childhood teaching facility. I congratulate the staff and the parents. I  visit a lot of schools, and this place has a wonderful atmosphere and it has got a very  large number of students too. But I’m also very concerned that we are falling behind in

the global education race because we’re not adequately investing in our children and  schools so they can compete for the jobs of the future. There is nothing more important  than m

aking sure our kids get the best start in life. My wife Chloe and I want the best for  our three kids, but what Labor wants is not just the best for our own children, but for  everyone’s children. I say as one parent to all the parents of Australia: Labor wants to  make sure that your child gets the best chance of their schooling experience by properly  resourcing their school.

Our policies which we’ve announced will address the problems that Australia’s slipping  behind the rest of the world. Did you know that in the last 15 years Australia has gone  down the educational rankings in the basics - maths and science and reading. Under  our policy, Your Child. Our Future, our educational plan for every child in every school  to get every opportunity means that by 2020, we will see 95 per cent of students  completing year 12. We’ll see that by 2025, Australia again will be in the top 5 countries  in the world. And that’s what people expect from us. Our education plan is actually an  economic plan. The best thing we can do in life is making sure our kids finishing their  school lives resilient, with a core set of skills, which means that they can compete for  the jobs in the future. What I’d like to do now is hand over to Kate Ellis, but in closing I’d  like to make a very simple point for Australians: if you want to see the best investment in  your children’s education in the school where you send your children, and in the future  of your children, vote Labor at the next election. If you want devastating cuts to  education, vote for Mr.Turnbull and the Liberals.

KATE ELLIS, SHADOW MINISTER FOR EDUCATION: Well thank you very much, Bill  and thank you, Gai for having us here and can I also acknowledge Bernadette Hayes  and the amazing team for the great work they are doing at this wonderful school. Bill  has just outlined the importance of the Your Child. Our Future policy to every school, to  every child and to Australia's future. We have learnt this week that the Government are  just not destructive when it comes to education policy but they are also deceitful. In  recent days, we have seen senior cabinet ministers from the Turnbull Government  coming out with totally contradictory policies, trying to fool the Australian public about  the impact that their cuts will have.

In recent days, we've seen the Education Minister, and we've learnt from their leaked  talking points, that he is going around trying to calm down stakeholders and trying to tell  them  that the $30 billion in cuts in the Budget, it's only indicative and it is something  they will look at. But of course that position has been completely shown up to be a  falsehood by their own Financial Minister who has made clear that they have no plans  to reduce their $30 billion in cuts. And yesterday in Question Time, the Prime Minister  was unable to say which one of his  Ministers is telling the truth. The Australian public  deserve a great education policy. Australian children deserve to have every opportunity  to succeed in life. But at the very least, Australians deserve some degree of honesty out  of this Prime Minister who has taken a two-faced approach to the future of school  funding. This is yet another example of this Prime Minister trying to be all things to all  people but you can not have it both ways. Malcolm Turnbull needs to clarify today, does  he seriously believe that Australia can have the skills for the jobs of the future whilst

also having his $30 billion worth of cuts - or is that why the Education Minister, himself,  is conceding that it's just not sustainable.

JOURNALIST: Just on childcare, a report by PricewaterhouseCoopers today suggests  that the Government's proposed subsides (inaudible). Does this change Labor’s stance  on the issue?

ELLIS: Certainly Labor has always and will always support positive reform to child care  and real initiative to boost workforce participation. It is interesting that this report today  says that there will be 29,000 families who will reenter the workforce full time by 2050.  That stands in pretty stark contrast to the Government's own claims that there would be  240,000 families who would be boosted in workforce participation as a result of the  package. That is some degree of error. Almost 10 times the estimates the Government  are making which do not line up with this report. But I would say a couple of other things  about the importance of child care to our future economic growth. What we do know is  modelling clearly shows that the greatest economic benefits from early childhood  education actually come from giving vulnerable and disadvantage children the best  early childhood education possible. What I would like to see is the economic modelling  on what the impact to Australia's future will be of this Government driving thousands of  vulnerable people children out of the child care sector. There are serious unanswered  questions when it comes to the Government's childcare package but what we do know  is that all the modelling suggest that 1 in 4 Australian families will be worse off as a  result of this package and there are serious questions about what the long term  economic impact of that will be.

JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten, Paul Keating this morning again has talked about his  proposal for the GST, he's saying a 1 per cent increase to 11 per cent, with the $7  billion dollars going directly to hospitals. Is this something Labor would consider in terms  of the rising cost of health care?

SHORTEN: There's no question that there is a health funding crisis in Australia  triggered by the Liberal Government. We belled the cat back in 2014 when Malcolm  Turnbull and Scott Morrison were then part of the Tony Abbott cheer squad, where we  identified $50 billion of cuts to States and Territories. In 2014, I predicted, and in my  Budget Reply speech, that this was a cowardly Federal Liberal government. What  they were doing was essentially black mailing the States by massive cuts to schools  and hospitals and I predicted then that it was just a stalking horse to justify increasing  the GST. So, I agree with my friend Paul Keating that there is a health funding crisis,  and indeed we need to pay more attention to it as Australia grows older. But what I do  not agree is that ordinary families, ordinary people, working-cla ss people, middle-class  people, have to pay an increased tax on everything because the Liberal Government  has the wrong priorities. Labor has broken the mould in Opposition, we've identified

over $70 billion of extra revenue and savings which in many cases obviate the need for  a 15 per cent GST.

You know, really, the nonsense has got to stop, Malcolm Turnbull. The nonsense has  got to stop, Scott Morrison. It is about time that the Treasurer and the Prime Minister  were straight with the Australian people. Are they going to increase the GST to 15 per  cent or not? It's a yes or no answer. Remember on the day that Malcolm Turnbull  rolled Tony Abbott, he said there must be new and mature economic leadership. Well,  it's now been 142 days. Everything's on the table. This is an indecisive government.  They can't seem to take anything off the table because the only plan they have, the only  plan they have is for a 15 per cent GST. Labor will not reward the Liberal Government  by supporting a 15 per cent GST on everything. That's not the way that we're going  to get this country going, putting a new tax on everything.

JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten, in that same interview, Paul Keating also said that when  he was the Treasurer, he went through the Budget, him and Mr Hawke went through the  budget line by line and identified spending cuts. Would this be something that the  Government and maybe Labor should consider going through the Budget papers line by  line and considering where further cuts can be made?

SHORTEN: Let's tell it as it is. Joe Hockey was a lazy Treasurer and now we have a P- plate driver as the Treasurer - that’s the problem. Of course they should be looking  at where they saving in spending. And again, Labor has been positive and constructive,  we've offered Mr Turnbull our ideas - he can take 'em. You know, if you want to  do something about increasing tobacco excise, we said you should. We said if you want  to be fair dinkum about taxing multinationals you most definitely should. They  should tackle the superannuation tax concessions at the very high end. They should  drop this plebiscite. Remember the plebiscite for $160 million that these guys want  to do? We know that's not about marriage equality. It's certainly not about taxpayer  money being saved. It's just Malcolm Turnbull implementing Tony Abbott's agenda to  kick that issue down the track, there's a lazy $160 million Malcolm Turnbull could  save straightaway. You've got that deal they've done with the Nationals where they sort  of invented this baby bonus, which no-one's been asking for, and it's going to cost a lot  of money. So this is a Government who can make clear choices but what are they  thinking of? They've just thought 15 per cent GST on everything, and now we see  that Malcolm Turnbull and Scott Morrison want to mess around and interfere with  the superannuation contributions of nine and a half million Australians. What is it about  this Government? They just sit there as you've got big companies gaming the system.  We saw the story of McDonald's yesterday, you know, where they were able to  minimise their tax and put their receipts through Singapore. Malcolm Turnbull doesn't  have a plan for that, but he's got a plan for putting up the price of every Maccas  customer who goes into McDonald's.

JOURNALIST: Liberal Senator Cory Bernadi has written to the Foreign Minister Julie  Bishop urging her not to support Kevin Rudd in his bid to become the UN Chief, saying  that his own colleagues, his own Labor colleagues describe him as dysfunctional,  vengeful, unstable, megalomaniac. In that case is it sensible for Labor to support this  bid for Kevin Rudd to become UN Chief?

SHORTEN: What's Cory Bernadi said about Malcolm Turnbull this week, I mean I'll  come and address your question directly. But I understand that Senator Bernadi is  going to join with Labor and fight the increase of GST, so I do agree with Cory Bernadi  on that, and I say to Cory Bernadi if you want to vote against increasing taxes  unnecessarily which hurt ordinary people, take the Labor argument because we are on  the right side, we're on the side of working people. In terms of the United Nations bid,  Mr Rudd hasn't made any formal declaration of his own intent, he's a distinguished  Australian. My default position is always to back Australians, and that's what I think we  should do. That's been a bipartisan approach over a long time, you know we cheer for  the Aussie.

But in terms of Senator Bernardi, let me return to what he's done about the GST. There  are more fault lines here in the Liberal Party than you can; you know shake a stick at  frankly. You've got the backbenchers, they're panicking. The Liberal backbenchers have  seen through the Malcolm Turnbull rhetoric and they'd said oh my goodness, we've  got

Morrison and Turnbull driving us towards a cliff with a tax that no-one  wants.  They know that increasing the GST is electoral poison because increasing the GST is  bad for the country and Senator Bernardi's just saying what a lot of other divided  Liberals are saying. I mean, 142 days on, what have we got? A divided Liberal  gove

rnment; they said the rationale for the change from Abbott was  economic leadership - we're no clearer to knowing their intentions and we just now see  these outbreaks of

division.

JOURN



ALIST: Do you have any sympathy with Melissa Parke's view on  offshore processing; she had some comments after the High Court decision yesterday?

SHORTEN: I haven't seen Melissa's comments. What I do know is that we need to  stop people smugglers. There is nothing humane about people drowning at sea, and  offshore regional processing is an important part of defeating the crime gangs. But it is  also the case that it is long overdue time for compassion. It is a disgrace that the  processi

ng times for these people has blown out to 445 days. I want Malcolm Turnbull  to turn some of his self-described agility and nimbleness to getting this inordinate, unfair  and

inhumane waiting time down. Now, if we won't or can't do it, if and when Labor is  elected at the next election, we will. We'll put in independent oversight. Australia has a  responsibility for the safety of people in our care.

JOURNALIST: Do you accept that there is anger within the ALP about this, Melissa  Parke who's just one voice who's called out against this. Is it time for Labor to  reconsider its policy given what we've seen with the High Court challenge?

SHORTEN: I don't think I could've been any clearer in what I said in my previous  answer, but what I will again make absolutely clear: we support regional processing. But  there is legitimate anger and it's not just within parts of the Labor Party, I am very, very  distressed and frustrated that Malcolm Turnbull's sitting on his hands. Under  his leadership, the time it takes to process people is now at 445 days. That is a  disgrace. Australia does have a responsibility to ensure the safety of people in our  care.



JOURNALIST: What do you make of the churches who've come out and said they'd be  prepared to offer sanctuary to these 267 asylum seekers?

SHORTEN: I'm not running for Bishop, I'm not running for Pope. What the churches do  is a matter for them. But what I again say is I'd refer you to my earlier answers. What we  also need in this country is we need to make sure that we've got a Government who  actually gets on and does business, gets things done.  And you know, we all  acknowledge, the media's been very good, they're acknowledging the extreme delays  and that is unacceptable, moving away from that point, just to wrap up, we've got a  Government led by Malcolm Turnbull, he and Mor rison promised, they promised that  they would have a new economic leadership. Remember the day of the rolling of Tony  Abbott, the case to roll Tony Abbott was there'd be new economic leadership. Well, it's  been 142 days now. I think the Australian people have been generous in their reactions,  that sigh of collective relief that Mr Abbott was gone. But Australians are now asking  this question: why are we talking about a 15 per cent GST on everything? Australians  don't want it. Labor won't allow it. Even some of the Liberal backbenchers are putting  their own self-interest ahead of group think and saying, hey, we better stop here. Today  we see reports in The Australian of nine and a half million people who  are receiving superannuation, the Government's thinking about doing something to  diminish their savings. This Government needs to make some decisions, but in the  meantime, front up to the multinationals, front up to the ridiculously unsustainable  superannuation tax concessions. Do something on tobacco excise. And while you're at  it, properly fund our schools, don't have a 15 per cent GST on everything, and  for goodness' sakes, don't muck around with people's super.

Thanks everyone. See you in Parliament.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: LEADER’S OFFICE MEDIA UNIT - 02 6277 4053

_____________________________________________________________________



