









JENNY MACKLIN MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR FAMILIES & PAYMENTS  SHADOW MINISTER FOR DISABILITY REFORM  MEMBER FOR JAGAJAGA

E&OE TRANSCRIPT  INTERVIEW  774 ABC MELBOURNE

MONDAY 16 MAY, 2016

SUBJECTS: Medicare; Housing Affordability; Duncan Storrar; Austudy; Turnbull Government’s cuts to  the Age Pension.

JON FAINE, HOST: It seems that this is an increasingly presidential election campaign. Instead of it being about  policies and parties it’s about leaders?

JENNY MACKLIN, SHADOW MINISTER FOR FAMILIES AND PAYMENTS, SHADOWN MINISTER FOR  DISABILITY REFORM: I don’t think so actually. I think the Leaders are important and as we saw at the first  debate on Friday night, which I’m sure we’ll speak about today, but I think the interesting thing is there are some  big issues. If you look at the debate one of the big issues that came up was really how people are struggling with  the cost of living, the cost of childcare, the Royal Commission and I think the difference between the leaders  really came out. Mr Turnbull said, ‘I gave the bank’s a very big talking to’ and I think the audience just thought  that was a joke and were very impressed with Bill Shorten saying there should be and under Labor there will be,  a Royal Commission into the banks.

GREG HUNT, MINISTER FOR THE ENVIRONMENT: I happen to disagree with Jenny on the substance of some  of the points. I do agree that it is not a presidential campaign this time. There’s obviously a focus on who will run  the country and clearly my view and our view is that Malcolm Turnbull is better equipped than anybody to do that  with his history and his understanding of how to create jobs and the prospect of developing business. More than  that, it’s also about two very distinct plans. One is about massively increased debt, a $65 billion hole in that, plus  another $100 billion of taxes. So an increase of $165 billion of expenditure all up under the Labor Party, versus,  an approach which has incentives for business to create jobs which for the audience, for the listeners, is all about  something very close to their hearts. Do they have a better chance of getting a job, keeping a job or improving a  job? I think that is the fundamental element at the heart of this campaign. It’s job security and the future of the  economy.

FAINE: Part of my evidence that it’s increasingly presidential is that the only debates we really have these days  are, by and large, leader’s debates. If you go back three elections ago there would be a whole host of policy  debates, with head to head debates. Between, I don’t know, the Environment Minister and the Shadow Minister.

HUNT: Well, I hate to disappoint you but on Wednesday, Mark Butler and I are debating at the National Press  Club on the environment.

FAINE: I’m delighted about that, I didn’t know. I’m delighted that it is happening because one of the issues in this  marathon campaign is how do you get people to keep engaging? Because a lot of people are just turning off and  going ‘agh’. If you’re going to talk about politics every morning and I’m getting texts now - ‘I’m going off to listen to  music and I’ll come back later in the morning’.

MACKLIN: I think there’s an element of truth to that. I do agree. As somebody just said to me, we’re three weeks  off the halfway mark yet, so it is a very long campaign and I think one of the things we all know is that a lot of  people don’t concentrate until the end. They don’t concentrate until they have to think about, well, which way am I  going to vote? I’m finding on the street.

FAINE: Well, this will come as a shock to both of you, most people don’t actually like politics.  MACKLIN: But many people want to engage on issues that are important to them. So having been out and about  and I’m sure Greg was too during the week, issues that have been raised with me around people having to pay

more to go to the doctor, one of the things they’re very upset about with this government. Our school’s policy,  pensions, so people certainly are raising these issues, but it’s also true that there’s lots of people who are just  saying ‘leave me alone for a few weeks.’

HUNT: People will dip in and out of a campaign and gradually build a view of the alternatives with regards to  government. For me, I’ve been spending time on the streets in my own patch on the Mornington Peninsula and I’ll  be in the Western Port area in the coming days and weeks.

FAINE: You were over in the West, killing off the Labor Party’s candidate in Fremantle?

HUNT: I was, in Western Australia and three hours after I left the seat of Fremantle the Labor Party sacked their  candidate. It might be stretching it to say there is causation. It was a very interesting example of an MUA  candidate who had been handpicked by the State Executive turned out to be not what they thought. Some of the  things that have been raised with me, the unity and the quality of the ALP team, and then secondly, Jenny raises  cost of living. Electricity, electricity, electricity. That is raised wherever we go. With small businesses, with  families, with pensioners, with self-funded retirees, with people from all walks of life. They raise electricity prices  and the concerns that this cost will go up under the Labor plan, which of course, they will.

MACKLIN: Well, that’s just not right.

HUNT: Well, it is.

MACKLIN: Well, it’s not. The evidence for that is people who normally support your side of things and the  Australian electricity industry itself expects that Labor’s changes to carbon pollution reduction in fact won’t have  the impact on electricity prices. I have to say that is not the cost of living issue that gets raised with me. I spend a  lot of time particularly with pensioners and family groups, and the biggest issue is how much people have to pay  to go to the doctor. That is the number one issue that people are raising with me.  FAINE: I’ve noticed that some of the Labor Party’s campaign material is now featuring Medicare, ‘we’re the only  party that will,’ blah blah. So that’s something that you’ve identified - health as one of the Government’s greatest  weak spots?

MACKLIN: That’s correct.

FAINE: So that’s now the doctors also campaigning against you?

HUNT: The Labor Party’s guilty of taking $500 million out of pathology services and $664 million out of  generalised Medicare last time.

FAINE: Your Government’s just put the squeeze on pathology too?

HUNT: Well, in fact, we’ve just struck an agreement with pathology that guarantees bulk billing will continue for  pathology and bulk billing rates which is the ultimate test of how much people are paying on average, have gone  up from 79% under Labor to 85% on average under us. In other words, a higher rate of bulk billing, which has a  huge impact on people’s ability to cover their medical costs, as opposed to a guaranteed increase in electricity  prices which will follow surely as night follows day.  FAINE: You’ve got the AMA and the Specialists now actively campaigning against the Turnbull Government. It’s  an astonishing state of affairs. They’re your friends, they’re your supporters. Many of them are your members.  HUNT: I’ll allow Professor Owler to justify his own position, that is a matter for him. But what is absolutely clear is  we’ve struck an agreement on pathology that guarantees bulk billing for that and that bulk billing rates under  Medicare are up from 79% to 85%, which is the thing that most affects the ability of people to pay for their  medical services. It’s a dramatic change.

FAINE: Lots of callers. A quick reply, Jenny Macklin?

MACKLIN: The truth is that the cut to bulk billing incentives by the Liberal Government is still in the Budget. This  is just a deal to get them past the election and we will see and we are already seeing people having to pay more  to go to the GP because of the freeze on Medicare benefits schedule rebates.

FAINE: Lots of texts but let’s get to callers first. Jenny in Burwood, good morning.

CALLER (JENNY): Good morning, I feel a bit nervous, this is the first time I’ve called.

FAINE: Doubly welcome Jenny, don’t be nervous.

CALLER (JENNY): Thank you. Look, I’m calling because I’m concerned about my son and young people who  are trying to buy houses. I’ve been to several auctions with my son who is a young man, he’s 30. He earns a  reasonable wage, nothing startling, I certainly don’t have money to help him buy a house. I never had any

inheritance, I mean, I’ve worked all my life. Every time we go to an auction he is outbid by what I believe are  people buying investment properties. They’re older people and I’ve even spoken to some of them who have  acknowledged that. I mean, what are we doing? How are these poor kids ever, ever going to buy a home? In my  day it was so much easier.

FAINE: Jenny, it’s undoubtedly one of the flash points in this campaign. Greg Hunt?

HUNT: It’s extremely important to give young people these opportunities and there’s probably two points here.  The first is that for those in the rental market the ALP plan -

FAINE: We’re not talking about rental affordability here; the question was quite specific.

HUNT: The rental market, the ALP housing tax is going to drive up the price for renters, the ALP tax is going to  have a huge impact on their most important asset and for those who want to get into the market, the central point  in this double dissolution -

FAINE: We had this discussion last week. I asked Malcolm Turnbull and he said I should buy my kids a house if  they cannot afford to get into the market themselves. That is not a policy.

HUNT: The central point to this double dissolution election policy is to reduce construction costs by up to 30 per  cent and that is through the Australian Building and Construction Commission.

FAINE: 30 per cent?

HUNT: Yes, and I brought in the press release, because you asked about it last week, which details that. So let’s  be clear. This is about an election with not just the opportunity for people to get the jobs but also the opportunity  to bring down the cost of construction which flows through to every element of housing affordability.

FAINE: Jenny Macklin?

MACKLIN: I agree with you Jenny. I was just with a young couple myself the weekend before last. Luckily, they  had just bought their new home, after they had been bidding on many, many homes. They know so many young  couples who just can’t get into the market. That’s why Labor wants to change our negative gearing policy. We do  think that it’s only fair that people wanting to get into the housing market, young people in particular should get  more support than those people who are buying their 5

th , 6 th  or 7

th  house.

FAINE: Sure. But there’s a school of thought that says your policies will actually force prices up, not down.  Economists that have modelled it and say that it will have unintended consequences.

MACKLIN: And the vast majority of economists who have looked at this Jon, as you know, have actually said  that there will be no changes to house prices - and Greg, no changes to rents. So I think that scare campaign  should be -

FAINE: Well, that doesn’t make sense?

MACKLIN: Hang on, that scare campaign should be seen for what it is. We’ve got some very big vested interests  running a scare campaign. But I’m with Jenny and her son and other young people trying to get into the housing  market.

FAINE: Okay, let’s get into some other issues. Shaun in Chelsea.

CALLER (SHAUN): I’ve got a question, I’m a bit nervous too. My nervousness comes from the fact that by  asking a question I might be investigated by the owner of the Liberal Party, Rupert Murdoch. My question is, what  does Greg think of the treatment by the media of Duncan Storrar by his boss, Rupert Murdoch and the APA,  about Duncan Storrar asking a question that he never got an answer to? All he got an answer to was - $6,000  toasters from Q&A last week.

HUNT: So obviously we didn’t put this gentleman on the program and we didn’t make these comments about  him. My view is this - I think the gentleman’s son is the real hero here, the gentleman’s son, Aztec, is his name.  Who came out and said that he had gone to live with his father and been brought into a drug addiction and had  the strength of character and the will to bring himself off the drug addiction is someone who has a heroic quality  to him and I think we need to be very careful before we try and make people national heroes. And I don’t know if  Jenny and Jon agree that this person was a national hero, but when his son says, ‘I was brought into a situation  of drug addiction,’ we need to be extremely careful of elevating people, but I think the son is someone of heroic  quality.  MACKLIN: I think we need to be very careful, in general. This man is a private citizen. I think we should let him  be and let him lead his private life.

FAINE: Shaun, I had my two bobs worth of it last Friday with the editor of the newspaper.

ALLER (SHAUN): I know that Jon, but I’m just saying, this is an average person off the street who asked a  question. He asked a political question which has nothing to do with his back life or his personal life.

FAINE: Right, well you’ve made your point and you’ve made it well. Rosalie in Jindabick.

CALLER (ROSALIE): Good morning Jon. I have a statement as well as a question. The form that we filled in for  the ABC, sorry, I can’t remember what you called it.

FAINE: Vote Compass?

CALLER (ROSALIE): Well, there was no mention of people on pensions. What’s either Party going to do with  people who are on a part pension? My husband is on a part pension. He has a very small part pension from the  government, but if we didn’t have it life would probably be not as enjoyable as it is now.

FAINE: Okay and Vote Compass got you down a little bit Rosalie?

CALLER (ROSALIE): It should have been a question on the bottom of the page at least.

FAINE: I’m happy to pass that on Rosalie to the people who designed it, though it might be too late to do  anything about it. Though it might have an impact in the future. What did you think of the rest of it? Because the  trustworthiness index was just released overnight and Malcolm Turnbull is the most trustworthy and competent  according to Vote Compass people.

CALLER (ROSALIE): Yeah, well I voted for him as being the most reliable.

FAINE: Followed by the Greens Leader, Richard Di Natale and last was the Labor Leader, Bill Shorten.

CALLER (ROSALIE): I tell you what, I didn’t know who Di Natale was, I’m ashamed to say, because I wrote the  Greens off because I do not want what is happening in Europe - a massive influx of boat people arriving in  Australia. We have a lot of people who don’t have homes and houses now and there’s not enough funding for  them, so how are we going to support all these people? I’d love to have all these refugees, but I’m not allowed to  divide my miserable half acre block, which is in the country as you know, into a half acre.

FAINE: Well, thank you Rosalie for having your say. Would either of you like to comment?

HUNT: Not on Vote Compass.

MACKLIN: I’ll leave that one to you. Just on the issue of pensions. Rosalie, would just remember that before the  last election the Liberal’s actually said there would be ‘no changes to pensions’, ‘no cuts to pensions’ and then  every single member of the Liberal National Government voted to cut pension indexation and they also all voted  to cut part pensions. So Rosalie would know that it was the Liberal Government that decided to cut the pension,  not Labor.  HUNT: I would hazard a guess that Rosalie and virtually every senior that is listening is concerned with electricity  prices. I have a fundamental disagreement with Jenny. Their plan is designed to drive up electricity prices. It  hurts the least well off. It’s regressive. It hurts the cost of living. We took away the impact on electricity prices and  saw an average drop in what would have been the bill by about 9 per cent. So that’s a massive reduction and that  rise in electricity prices will come straight back and hit the pensioners hardest.

MACKLIN: At the same time, you tried to cut the pension?

HUNT: Actually we kept the compensation for the carbon tax.

MACKLIN: And cut the pension?

FAINE: I have a text here from a dairy farmer saying that, I’ll be bankrupt before the election if something isn’t  done. What are the politicians going to do? Buying a dairy farm is like buying four houses at the same time  without negative gearing.  Andrew in Greensborough says that question on Q&A was never about Duncan himself. He was speaking on  behalf of hundreds of thousands of Australians that are in the same position and struggling and he asked it very  well. Which is what several other texters have come through to say, too. Why attack the man rather than deal  with the issues he raised? It shows a poverty of argument according to Mordy Nick. And, politicians have no idea  about poverty, hang your heads in shame, says Marie in Altona. I didn’t think my opinion of you could sink any  lower, but after that comment about heroism Greg Hunt, not impressed, says Marie in Altona.

And shooting the messenger instead of answering his question is a pox on those who are doing it says Mary in  North Fitzroy. So on and on the questions go, still Duncan Storrar is causing people a lot of anxiety this week as  well.  Vicki in Wyndham Vale, morning to you Vicki. We’re running out of time with our politicians.

CALLER (VICKI): Very briefly, I have a 26-year-old son who has yet again been confronted with the need to drop  out of university, because he just can’t live on the money. He’s already been waiting 15 weeks to be granted his  Austudy only to be finally told he is not eligible, so he’s had no money throughout all this time.

FAINE: Why is he suddenly not eligible if he was before?

CALLER (VICKI): He doesn’t know. Because Centrelink keep saying that we don’t know why, it’s about  studentship so you need to talk to them, but they of course, he can’t get through to.

HUNT: If I can just take this up, I make this offer. And not knowing of the circumstances directly of Vicki’s son, if  you can give your details to the producer, I’ll call you personally and I’ll work with my office to find out. No false  promises on the outcome, but we will do our best to see if we can get an outcome. Again, no false promises, if  the circumstances are just not within the rules, but let’s give it a go.

FAINE: Jenny Macklin, what’s going on with Austudy?

MACKLIN: Well, it’s not just Austudy, it’s Austudy and Youth Allowance. The Government has made a complete  mess of getting these payments out. People have been waiting months and months and months to get their  Youth Allowance payments and Austudy because they just don’t have enough staff to process the payments. It  has left a lot of young people in very serious financial difficulty.

FAINE: Well, I’d hate to see your son give up on his studies Vicki just because of the cash flow pressures,  especially if it’s just a short-term thing.

CALLER (VICKI): Okay, Jon. I’m feeding him, his father, I believe, is helping him to get his rent paid. It’s getting  ridiculous. I’m on a pension myself.

FAINE: Well, it shouldn’t come to that. I’ll put you back to my producers because Greg Hunt made an offer to  you. We’ve had a message from the people involved in organising Vote Compass. They are the academic  partner to the Vote Compass, Nick Reece, former political adviser to the Labor Party has been involved in the  formation of Vote Compass, through the University of Melbourne. He says, ‘we did not include a question on the  pension because we couldn’t find a major policy difference between the parties on that issue at the election. We  look for policies that can distinguish rather than point where they are not particularly different.’

MACKLIN: I’ll get on to him!

HUNT: So will I if he’s talking about electricity prices!

MACKLIN: I think we’re on a unity ticket that he got that wrong.

FAINE: That’s interesting that you both agree on anything these days. Jill in Narooma says that electricity prices  are dropping and someone else says well, electricity prices are a tiny proportion of our household expenditure  and changes are often promised and never delivered.

HUNT: Well, actually, we have delivered the largest drop in electricity prices on record, in Australia. By contract  what we will face is a potential 78 per cent increase in electricity prices on the modelling on Labor’s own policy  range on Labor’s own time in government, from Treasury.

MACKLIN: That is just not true.

HUNT: Well, it is Treasury modelling that was published while you were in government.

MACKLIN: Not true.

HUNT: Electricity prices, up.

FAINE: Let’s pick up on these issues when we reconvene next week. Thank you both very much. Greg Hunt the  Liberal Member for Flinders and Minister for the Environment in the Turnbull Government and I think you’re now  in caretaker mode as of today, are you not?  HUNT: Yes, I think it is today. Though we were officially in caretaker mode from the moment that the Prime  Minister said the election would be called, so we’ve officially been in caretaker mode since Monday.

FAINE: Okay, but the writs are issued as of today, so formally the election campaign begins today and thank you  Jenny Macklin, Shadow Minister for Families and Payments and Disability Reform and formally a Minister in the  previous Labor Governments, thank you both very much.

ENDS





