1







The Hon. Scott Morrison MP  Treasurer



TRANSCRIPT  2GB RAY HADLEY  MONDAY 8 FEBRUARY 2016



E&OE

Subjects: Taxation, Labor’s reckless tax and spend approach to the Budget, immigration portfolio,  Stuart Robert, Vale Michael Tynan

RAY HADLEY: Treasurer, good morning.

TREASURER: G’day Ray.

HADLEY: Well, it’s going to be the bulk of the interview today after what the Prime Minister said on  Friday and said over the course of the weekend about the GST. We have been talking about the GST,  and I know you haven’t defined what you are going to do, but it has been in the mixing pot. It looks  like it is out of the pot.

TREASURER: I believe the Prime Minister set it out very well on the weekend. We have always  known that this was a difficult issue to work through and certainly the Government doesn’t make  any  apologies  for  wanting  to  do  things  that  could  reduce  people’s  personal  income  tax.  In an  environment where you have got no surplus bequeathed to you from the previous government, so  you can’t fund tax cuts that way, and in the global environment we have at the moment where  world growth has been subdued, the only way those sorts of things are really possible is with the  sort of measures that are under consideration. They don’t come without problems either, Ray, and I  suppose, with something as difficult as this, the Red Sea is not going to part every time for you on  these things and that is just the reality of life. We will continue to work that through with Cabinet as  the Prime Minister said because that is where these things are properly ultimately dealt with. What I  think I’d like your listeners to understand, if I can, is the reason we have even been having this  discussion is that we won’t leave a stone unturned when it comes to trying to reduce the income tax  burden for people who go out there and work every day.

HADLEY: [inaudible] you said this morning and I agree with you, you have got three choices. You  either increase the GST, you have a massive tax cut, or you do nothing and it looks to me like we are  going to do nothing. I am going to take you back when Mr Turnbull offered himself as an alternate  Prime Minister and have listen to what he said.

PRIME MINISTER: It is clear enough that the Government is not successful in providing the economic  leadership that we need. It has not [inaudible] with individual ministers ultimately the Prime Minister  has not been capable of providing the economic leadership that our nation needs. He has not been  capable  of  providing  the  economic  confidence  that  business  need  and  we  need  a  different  style of  leadership. We need a style of leadership that explains those challenges and opportunities. Explains  the challenges and how to [inaudible]. A style leadership that respects the people’s intelligence. That  explains these complex issues and then sets out the course of action that we believe we should take.

HADLEY: And the course of action, Treasurer, is to do nothing.

2

TREASURER: I don’t believe that at all, Ray.

HADLEY: Well, that is where we are up to, mate.

TREASURER: Well, no, Ray, with respect where we are at right now is we are coming to a conclusion  of this process. This was one element of many issues that are under consideration by the  Government. We have got a Budget coming up in three months which the Prime Minister made clear  on Friday. which is obvious and of course there will be measures we will be able to take forward. But  what the Prime Minister, and I for that matter have been saying, is that we’ve got to work through  these issues problem. The reason we have kept everything on the table is because  we  wanted to  give everything the fair go of being - if we can give personal income tax cuts at a higher level that is  what has been driving us. Now, the states wanted us to increase GST to give them more money so  that they can spend more. We were never going to do that. That was not something we were  interested in. We were never interested in raising the GST just to pour money back into the Budget.  The  way  to  fix  the  Budget  is  to  get  expenditure  under  control  but  if  we  could  try  and  get  cuts to  personal income tax through this method which is still very difficult and there are still real problems  and that is what the Prime Minister was explaining, then if that is not possible through that method  then we are just going to have to go the long road on this.

HADLEY: Ok, well you have now declared that the GST, from what you have just said to me, is off the  table.

TREASURER: No, I haven’t said that Ray.

HADLEY:  Yes, you have.

TREASURER: No, I’m sorry I am not going to play word games over it Ray. The Cabinet makes that  decision - not me.

HADLEY: Well, someone has made the decision because you have just basically said we are not going  to increase the GST and give it to the states. The states won’t agree to…

TREASURER: We never were going to do that.

HADLEY: Unless they have a say on how the money is distributed because when it was originally  signed  you  had  to  have  agreement  from  states  and  territories  to  increase  it  in  any  way,  shape or  form. So the answer, and you are the Treasurer, at the end of the day you are the one charged with  doing this Budget. If we are not going to increase the GST and one political writer today says how  [inaudible] you increase [inaudible].

TREASURER: I saw that.

HADLEY: So he says he is sane because he is not increasing it in the Fairfax newspapers today. Mr  Keating said maybe 11 or 12 per cent, you’d cop that because you can offset your spending but at  the end of the day you are going to have to be rather ruthless if you want to be responsible as you  say you wanted to be, all the way since you took this position in order to get the Budget, you know,  back into surplus at some stage in the next 50 years.

TREASURER: The GST was never the answer to the Budget issue. I never said that nor did the Prime  Minister. The only reason we were looking at issues, and continue to investigate those, is because it  gives the only opportunity there really is for very big income tax cuts. Now if for the reason that  other issues prevent that i.e. the compensation bill is too big, if the states only want an increase in

3

the GST so they can spend more money - then they are big problems and those problems do work  against the objective. So, that’s where we are at. We have been pretty plain with people about it.

HADLEY: I’m not disputing the fact that you have been open about it and I am happy enough to  accommodate the fact that it is off the table because it hasn’t been well received by the  electorate.  It  wouldn’t  matter  if  you  introduced  it  and  you  bumped  it  up  to  17.5  per  cent  it  still wouldn’t  [inaudible] but at the end of the day [inaudible] make decision as a Government just not [inaudible]  parliament. How then, as a responsible Government, and we heard the Prime Minister say that he  came to power on the basis of economic responsibility, how do we get things, our house in order, if  we don’t increase revenue, we obviously have to decrease spending and we have to do it really  quickly and we have to be really tough.

TREASURER: In the mid-year statement I released just before December there was $9 billion in  further savings. Not tax increases - $9 billion in further savings and that came on top of the almost  $85 billion, I think it is in other savings that we would serve to take through the Parliament in the  last two years. So, we have continued on that track or reducing, seeking to reduce Government  expenditure.

HADLEY: You attempted to take it through Parliament but you haven’t been successful.

TREASURER: Well, no, 85 per cent of all the measures we have put to this Parliament on these  Budget issues have been passed. I think there is a popular perception out there that is very different  to that. Well that is the fact. We have been able to pass the overwhelming majority of our saving  measures through the Budget. Now, over the last few years there have been other things that have  gone and hit the public purse. Things like increased spending on infrastructure, increased spending  on security and increased spending on refugees of the 12,000 - I mean they were all decisions taken  and you have got to pay for those and what we are saying is and what we have been able to do is  where  there  have  been  new  commitments  we  have  funded  them  through  savings.  Now, our  opponents want to fund things by raising taxes. There was never any suggestion on our part in this  discussion that we wanted to raise taxes to support higher spending. That is not what we do.

HADLEY: But you did want to raise the GST?

TREASURER: Not to raise spending. To deliver tax cuts - that is why.

HADLEY: You wanted to offset tax cuts by getting more income from the GST.

TREASURER: Because that is the only way, that at that scale, it can be done.

HADLEY: I just want to go back to your claim that the states and territories wanted you to increase it  but  only  if  they  got  everything  out  of  the  pie.  I  mean  was  there  any  possibility  that  would get  something in the pie out of the 10 per cent?

TREASURER: Well, it violates the key principle. If you do that then you can’t deliver the income tax  cuts and it defeats the whole point of why you would even consider it in the first place. I mean there  is a fundamental difference of outlook here and when what you are trying to do with tax. Some  people want to increase taxes because they just want the Government to spend more. Paul Keating  made that point and he was really right about that. We were never suggesting and have never been  really contemplating the idea of increasing taxes for spending.

HADLEY:  You  want  [inaudible]  spend  so  to  offer  tax  cuts  to  middle  and  high  income earners.

TREASURER:  That’s  right.  They  are  out  there  working  every  day.  They  are  out  there     running  businesses every day and my objective in this role will be to wherever I can reduce the tax burden on

4

people who are working hard and running business and do that wherever I can. Now, on every  occasion circumstances may not allow it. So, you can’t part the Red Sea on everything - but where I  can, people should know that is my focus.

HADLEY: I never thought you would hear me say this but I agree with independent Senator David  Leyonhjelm. I am starting to examine myself even by saying that. But it is because we have got these  overseas workers on 457s coming here to work on rural properties, cattle, sheep, grain farms, right.  And then you read the Courier Mail and they went up to where a lot of where the 457 work is done  north of Brisbane and they interviewed a group of teenagers, ‘why don’t you go?’ ‘oh the money is  not good enough.’ ‘What do you do?’ ‘I am on Centrelink’ ‘What about you?’ ‘Oh I went out there for  a week and crikey it’s hard picking mangoes. No I don’t want that’. He said, well, yes, ok, we’ll get  these 457 people here but what about the people who are saying no I won’t pick mangoes. I live at  Nambour and I am not going to pick mangoes inland because it is too hard so I will stay on Centrelink  payments. How does an 18, 19 or 20 year old who has the opportunity to earn money, which doesn’t  satisfy their aspirations and needs so therefore we have to import labour that is prepared to pick the  mangoes. How does that work when you are trying to rein in spending?

TREASURER: Sure, here is a good idea, how about we not give people who are at that age access to  the dole for four weeks and prevent them for doing that so they take up positions like this. We  actually have a piece of legislation before the Parliament that I introduced, that this Parliament, in  particular the Labor Party refused to pass. So, we agree and we have the clear plans to go and do  this  and  at  this  next  election  there  will  be  the  opportunity.  That  is  what  we  have  put  to the  Parliament. The Parliament has said no so we are putting that directly to the Australian people. That  and the other measures that we have got which is $10 billion, $12 billion more - $13 billion more in  savings that have been knocked back well the Australian people can decide if they want to give us  the opportunity to get on and do that. We have a very strong savings agenda. We are reducing  expenditure as a share of the economy from 25.9 per cent to 25.3 and we don’t want to go down a  tax and spend binge like the Labor Party wants to do. They are not funding anything other than by  higher taxes.

HADLEY: Just on your time as immigration minister and we go back a fair way here but 457 visas, I  highlighted  down  towards  your  electorate  on  Friday  two  drivers,  international  457  visa holders,  driving for Scott’s Mount Gambier who for the second time in a week tried to go through the airport  tunnel.

TREASURER: Yeah I saw that.

HADLEY: And  then  couldn’t  back  the  truck  up  because  they  can’t  back  trucks  up.  Now,  I have  information which I will be working on tomorrow with Duncan Gay in New South Wales. I am sure it  is  happening  in  other  states  and  territories  as  well,  where  these  blokes  are  given  their licenses  basically out of a cornflakes packet and then start driving long haul and we had irrefutable evidence  of the most disgusting work practices in relation to using toilet facilities from the back of the truck as  opposed to pulling up and actually going to the toilet. All these sorts of things will be dealt with. In  general terms how many people do we have in this country at the moment on 457 and legitimately  and I mentioned in Roma I met an Irish man who was here on a 457 as a jeweller because the bloke  in Roma who ran the jewellery store couldn’t get anyone to go out there and work. And I applaud  that but how many do we have legitimately doing that sort of thing as opposed to just usurping the  labour market?

TREASURER: Well, it has been a while since I have looked at those numbers Ray but I don’t think they  have changed. It is around about 100,000 people - less than that I suspect now who are in Australia  on a 457 visa. That is the smallest fraction of our workforce. There are more than 11 million people  in our workforce. This is a very, very small percentage of those who are out there in jobs in 457s. The  regulation of truck drivers and what they should be doing, as you have just said, that is absolutely a

5

matter for the states to ensure that their regulations are being enforced and people’s safety is being  protected and you are following that up and I am sure Duncan will get on to it.

HADLEY: Just one final thing. Stuart Robert, the Human Services Minister, I mean I read through the  story this morning, it’s on the front page of the Courier Mail, he went to China with a friend who is  known as a Liberal Party donor, a businessman, who was finalising a mining deal there and met with  people from the Communist Party. Well, I expect if you are going to meet with people in  Government in China you are going to meet communists. Then I got to the bottom, I mean hello, you  are not likely to meet a fascist but I got to the bottom of the story, it said he paid his own way.

TREASURER: He paid his own way.

HADLEY: So what is the drama?

TREASURER: They are all getting upset. I mean what happened was he was there at his own expense,  paid his own way, he was actually on leave and he gave the bloke a pin because he was given one.  So, he took the pin off his own lapel - which was something he paid for. So, it was his own property  and he gave it to him. This is a ridiculous beat-up.

HADLEY: Having dealt with Chinese people myself in recent times if you go to their home it is almost  customary and obligatory that they give you a small gift.

TREASURER:  Yeah,  I  mean  what  do  you  want  to  do,  just  not  reciprocate?  There  was  no taxpayer  expense involved.

HADLEY: The bottom line is there was no tax payer dollars involved and he has never portrayed it  any other way.

TREASURER: Absolutely.

HADLEY:  Now,  if  I  could  just  say  one  final  thing  on  a  more  jovial  matter.  I  drove  down   last  Wednesday to Parliament from Sydney and I know that you quite often drive that particular route, it  is a magnificent drive and I stopped at the Paragon at Goulburn on the way home. May I suggest to  many of your colleagues that if you are in Sydney, not necessarily in Western Australia or in Brisbane  or other points north, but it is a really nice drive up the highway now and other people should try it.

TREASURER: Well, it is and I do travel a lot. I don’t usually stop because I am trying to get home to  the kids as quickly as I can and to get back to my Shire. And just on that particular note I know today  at 10.30 the Shire will be gathering in Miranda to remember a great Australian in Michael Tynan  OAM. He was a real legend and pioneer of the Shire. He was a great businessman, served on the  NRMA, but the best thing about Mike was he was such a loving family man. He was married to  Annette 57 years - that is an extraordinary achievement. We are going to miss him terribly. I will just  tell you one story about him. When he started his business life he was a jeweller and he had a store  in Kogarah…

HADLEY: Is that right? Before he had a car dealer?

TREASURER: That’s right and that was before the Sharks, my beloved Sharks, were in existence.

HADLEY: Before ‘67.

TREASURER: And he used to award the weekly man of the match award and give them a watch for  the Dragons. He supported local sport, he supported great causes, he was a great friend of mine, he  was a great mentor of mine and many others in The Shire and to Annette and Madeline, Kieran   and

6

the whole crew, I am sorry I can’t be there with you today but my heart will be with you and I will  always remember Mike as just a tremendous, loving, graceful man.

HADLEY: Lovely man. Thanks very much and thanks for talking to us again today.

TREASURER: Thanks a lot, Ray.

(ENDS)

Further information: Julian Leembruggen 0400 813 253

