MEDIA RELEASE  3 July 2016

Greens NSW vote increases

There was a swing to the Greens at a national and NSW level.

In the House of Representatives the Greens nationally gained 9.96 per cent of the vote  which is a 1.31 per cent increase on the 2013 result.

In the House of Representatives the Greens in NSW gained 8.61 per cent of the vote which  is a 0.66 per cent increase on the 2013 result.

For the first time the Greens in NSW retained a Senate seat. The seat was won by Senator  Lee Rhiannon in 2010.

Greens NSW Senator Lee Rhiannon at a packed election night party congratulated all  Greens candidates, their campaign teams, members and supporters for solid results and  extensive work on the party's election platform.

Senator Rhiannon said, "Our campaign teams have done a great job promoting our key  election messages - climate action, refugee rights, reduce inequality, and political donation  reform. This work has helped to strengthen the community campaigns on these issues.

"It is great to see the swing in Adam Bandt's vote consolidating Melbourne as a Greens seat.

"We have held a Senate seat in each state and the early stages of counting have the Greens  just in front to hold a second seat in Western Australia, Victoria and Tasmania.

"It looks like we have not held the second South Australian seat of Rob Simms. Rob was a  talented and valued parliamentary colleague.

"I know Rob's great community work particularly with the LGBTI sector will continue. He has  a bright future and I hope that one day he is able to continue his parliamentary work.

"Labor has had a good campaign experiencing swings to it across the state.

"However, Labor's scare campaign to frighten voters to win back votes from the Greens with  the repeated false claim of a Greens-Liberal preference deal had an impact on us.

"Labor's mud-slinging ran for weeks. When the Greens concluded a preference agreement   in which we recommended preferences to Labor ahead of the Coalition in every marginal  seat across the nation, it was evident that Labor had been running a vicious scare campaign.





Media contact: 0411 669 022

