SHAYNE NEUMANN MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER  PROTECTION  FEDERAL MEMBER FOR BLAIR

E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TV INTERVIEW  SKY NEWS WITH PATRICIA KARVELAS  SUNDAY, 13 NOVEMBER 2016

SUBJECT/S: US refugee resettlement plans, lifetime visa ban legislation,  President-Elect Donald Trump

PATRICIA KARVELAS: I’m joined by Immigration spokesperson and well of course  people have been wondering how Labor might respond to today’s deal. Shayne  Neumann joins me now. Welcome.

SHAYNE NEUMANN, SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER  PROTECTION: It’s good to be with you Patricia.

KARVELAS: Prime Minister Malcolm Turnbull today announced this deal with the  United States to resettle hundreds of refugees and there are I understand talks with  other nation including Malaysia. It seems like a good deal doesn’t it, does Labor have  its full weight behind this deal?

NEUMANN: We applaud in principle these arrangements.  The United States is a  worthy country and a country which has had long experience in resettlements; it’s one  of the powerhouses in terms of resettlement in terms of refugees in the world. We do  note the Government has taken three years to do this and we call on the Government to  do it much quicker. We await a briefing from the Government and the Department of  Immigration and Border Protection and then we’ll know a lot more about these  arrangements.

KARVELAS: Peter Dutton said any future arrivals of people seeking asylum by sea to  Australia, will only be offered 20 years visas on Nauru. Do you support that part of the  announcement today?

NEUMANN: We note that Peter Dutton was talking about it and he was still in the  process of negotiating with the Nauruan Government.  We presume it will be Nauru as  an independent country which would offer these visas. We don’t know any details about  it. We haven’t formed a position in relation to it, and when we’re briefed by the  Government about where the negotiations are up to we’ll look at it further. I call on the  Government to provide that briefing. I understand they are going to provide a briefing to  us this week and we welcome that as well.

KARVELAS: But on principle what do you make of it? Because it’s obviously trying to  maintain a pretty hard line so that there isn’t people smuggling businesses that reopen  and start their business again as a result of this announcement about the United States  resettlement; because that’s the risk here isn’t it?

NEUMANN: Well I think the Government has made the point repeatedly and we’ve  offered bipartisan that offshore processing, regional resettlement and turn backs when  it's safe to do so, has resulted in, according to the Government, 840 days since a  successful people smuggling venture has hit Australia. I think the Government has  shown a pretty hard line and we offered bipartisan support in relation to that. As for the  Nauruan 20 year visa issue the Government’s negotiating that.  It would be difficult for  us to make any more comment. It’s prudent and sensible and I think reasonable for the  opposition to get a briefing from the Government and find out where they are up to  before we make a decision.

KARVELAS: On this other issue, which is, which really is very much linked on a lifetime  ban on refugees on our offshore processing facilities.  Now Labor has said no, you  won’t vote for it, but isn’t that a problematic position given now this US deal clearly  needs to be very strong, very robust so that people smugglers don’t reopen their

business. Don’t you need to support those laws to ensure that this US deal doesn’t  become vulnerable to people smugglers?

NEUMANN: Well we’re not supporting this legislation because it’s unnecessary and  ludicrous. I mean, the New Zealand Prime Minister said he wouldn’t take refugees as  second class New Zealand citizens and residents, when the Department briefed us they  said that these sort of lifetime ban on people coming here as tourists, to visit their family  or indeed for business purposes was not necessary and no country had asked for these  type of lifetime ban. I note the United States Government today has made the point that  they aren’t asking for this lifetime ban either, so its that’s the case we think it’s  unnecessary and we think it’s ridiculous.

KARVELAS: The Government’s saying yes, they’re not making it a precursor or a  condition but it certainly could make this resettlement deal more robust, more safe, less  vulnerable.  Surely there is a sort of logical argument there, isn’t there?

NEUMANN: I think it’s illogical to argue that. I don’t think it’s right. I mean, we’ve had  briefings from the Department, we’ve seen what the New Zealand Prime Minister has  said and we’ve seen what the American Government has said. The Government can’t  get a consistent, cogent and credible case for this legislation. I mean it is stupid  legislation. We won’t support it. We’ve taken it through our processes, when we spoke  to the Department about it, the Governments’ has not insisted on it; no other country  has insisted on it, the Government has insisted on it. I call on the Government to  withdraw this legislation, we don’t think its good legislation, its bad public policy. In  those circumstances we won’t be supporting it and if anything, if you believe the New  Zealand Prime Minister it militates against resettlement, not facilitates resettlement.

KARVELAS: 54% of Labor voters support this legislation according to the Essential Poll  though.  Your own voters think it’s a good idea.

NEUMANN: I think Australians generally take a pretty tough line when it comes to the  people smugglers and Labor supports that.  But I also think Australians are a decent  and compassionate people and they’ll applaud this particular announcement today as  we do. I think Australians are a pretty decent honourable people and I think while  people have been in Australian funded facilities such as Manus and Nauru they want  people to be treated with dignity and with compassion. I do think Australians believe, as  the Prime Minister has said, and we agree with that, that the integrity of our migration  system is very much depended on having a strong, robust approach in terms of people  smugglers and we support that and offer bipartisan support. But as for that legislation,  we won’t support that.

KARVELAS: On this issue of the Administration, obviously it’s the Obama  Administration that has signed off on this, we’re about to have a Trump Administration in  January. Are you confident that the deal will stick despite the fact we’re about to  effectively see a change of Government in the United States?

NEUMANN: Well we would have liked to have seen this particular deal done before the  American election, the Presidential election. We applaud the Obama Administration; we  hope President-Elect Trump will honour the agreement. I hope the Minister can actually  negotiate better than he’s dealt with asylum seekers in the last three years. I noticed  today by the way Patricia, the Prime Minister saying the Minister Dutton was being  badly treated and unfairly criticised. Well this is a Minister I might add, who has called  refugees illiterate, innumerate, he claimed they were dole bludgers and taking away  Australian healthcare.  I mean honestly, I say to Peter Dutton who is a Queenslander  and knows rugby leave well, if you’re an NRL player you don’t complain when you’re  tackled; if you’re in politics you don’t complain when you’re criticised.

KARVELAS: Ok but by the same token, you might say that about him but he appears to  bet he only Immigration Minister that’s managed to find a deal, a pretty good deal, with  a first class, first economy in the world, so it wasn’t Labor who found a deal like this.

NEUMANN: Don’t forget of course that Manus and Nauru were established in the  twilight of the last Labor Government, we applaud the Departmental officials who have  been involved in this process. I thank the Government for the fact they are going to give  us a briefing this week in relation to it. We support the process in principle in terms of  the resettlement. It’s a good day for refugees on Manus and Nauru and I don’t want to  derogate against that. We want these people, these families, these individuals, the  children off Manus, off Nauru rather and the individuals in Manus as well. We want  these families resettled. We want these individuals resettled and we thank the  Americans.

KARVELAS: Just before I let you go on President-Elect Trump, your leader Bill Shorten  has stuck by his views, doesn’t that make Australia potentially vulnerable with the

alliance. I mean if we see Prime Minister Bill Shorten, how exactly is that relationship  going to go given he’s not walked back his very, very, very stinging criticism of Donald  Trump.

NEUMANN: Well Australia’s relationship with America has been solid since John Curtin  directed Australia’s gaze to the United States in the height, the dark days of World War  II. Whether its been I think Robert Menzies I think, a Liberal Prime Minister with  President Johnston a democrat in the 60s or whether it’s been Bob Hawke in the 80s  with Ronald Reagan a Republican President. Australia’s relationship with America has  always been solid and it wasn’t just Bill Shorten who said words such as that.  I mean  we had Josh Frydenberg calling him a dropkick, I mean we had Christopher Pyne  saying that the prospect of a Trump Presidency was terrifying. Even Malcolm Turnbull  has made some comments about loathsome attitudes and I think even to be fair even  Julie Bishop was hoping and praying for a Hillary Clinton Administration as well. So I  think we call it as we see it in Labor and the Labor Leader Bill Shorten will also do that  same and we don’t resolve from our commitment when people make bad comments in  relation to people with disability, women, on racial or religious grounds, Labor will call it  out. And the Labor Leader will do that. Bill Shorten won’t resile from the fact he’ll call it  like he sees it in terms of that and we’ll stand up for people who are discriminated  against and we’ll stand up for people who are reviled and I think the now President  Trump made some errors in relation to those comments during the campaign. We hope  President-Elect Trump when he becomes President will adopt a different approach and I  applaud the fact we’ve see a different tone since the election in relation to some of his  comments.  That gives us some comfort.

KARVELAS: Shayne Neumann, thank you so much for your time.

NEUMANN: It’s good to be with you Patricia.

MEDIA CONTACT: MELISSA HOCKEY 0418 511 529

