

CHRIS BOWEN MP

SHADOW TREASURER

MEMBER FOR MCMAHON

E&OE TRANSCRIPT

TELEVISION INTERVIEW

ABC 730 - WITH LEIGH SALES

TUESDAY, 10 MAY 2016

SUBJECT/S: Election 2016; Labor will do no deals to form government; Scandinavian model;

preserving the triple-A credit ratings.

LEIGH SALES, PRESENTER: The Shadow Treasurer, Chris Bowen, sat down with me in Sydney earlier.



Chris Bowen, thank you for coming in.

CHRIS BOWEN, SHADOW TREASURER: Pleasure, Leigh.



SALES: I understand that Labor is aiming to win the election in its own right. But if you don't have the

numbers outright, are you really saying that you wouldn't form a government with the help of the Greens?



BOWEN: Well, there's no deals with the Greens: no coalition agreement with the Greens - or with anybody

else, for that matter.



The Labor Party's view is: we govern alone. That is the case. That's what Bill has articulated today, very

clearly. If you want a progressive government, vote Labor.



SALES: But then, if it's the choice between governing alone or not governing at all, are you saying you'd

choose not governing at all?



BOWEN: Well, the Labor Party's position is clear: no concessions, no deals, no arrangements with the

Greens or any other political party. Can't be clearer.



SALES: So that means you could forego government if you don't win enough seats in your own right?



BOWEN: Well, we intend to win as many seats as we can and to form government in our own right, if we

can.



SALES: But that may not happen?



BOWEN: No, sure. And that's up to the people. But what we're saying is: there will be no arrangements with

the Greens. Now, the Greens are...



SALES: But, sorry, what I'm trying to get to is: so, are you saying that it would be better for Australia to have

a Turnbull government than a minority Labor government that can form government with the help of the

Greens?



BOWEN: Well, what we're saying, Leigh, is the best thing for Australia is a Labor government.



SALES: I know that. I understand that. Let's put it aside.



BOWEN: But, if you let me finish...



SALES: If the numbers aren't there - if the numbers aren't there, are you saying it's better to have a Turnbull

government than a Labor-Green government?



BOWEN: Labor governs alone or not at all. Labor governs alone or not at all. Now, who people choose to

vote for in a confidence motion in that case is a matter for them.



We're getting a bit ahead of ourselves. We could go through all sorts of hypotheticals. It's week one of the

world's longest election campaign. There will be plenty of ups and downs over that time. But what we're

saying very clearly is that there will not be agreements, arrangements, coalition deals with the Greens.



SALES: Over the years, Labor has lost a chunk of its left wing to the Greens, people who now vote for the

Greens. Wouldn't some of those people be happy to see you work more closely with the Greens? You might

win some of those people back?



BOWEN: Well, the Greens work with the Liberals as much as with anybody else. I mean, look at what's

happening now. Where are the Greens putting their political energy? They're putting their political energy into

defeating Labor MPs and candidates.



How does that progress the progressive cause in Australia? I mean, how do they think it's a good thing for

progressive Australia if they manage to defeat Anthony Albanese or Tanya Plibersek, for example? Or David

Feeney? Or take the seat of Wills off the Labor Party: how does that help people who are interested in a

more progressive Australia?



The Greens are doing a deal with the Liberals, with Michael Kroger, in order to inflict maximum damage on

the Australian Labor Party. Now, that's their right as a political party - but they're just a political party. That's

what they are. And they are not the Labor Party. There are many things we disagree on. There's some areas

of agreement, just as there are between the Liberals and the Greens.

But there are many things that we fundamentally disagree with the Greens on and we won't be entering into

arrangements with them.



SALES: I'll come to economic matters in a second, but just one final question relating to this.



Asylum seeker policy is something that's caused some people in the Labor Party to be dissatisfied and to

vote Green. We have seen some Labor candidates already hold views differing to the party's leadership. How

do you intend to address the concerns of people in the Labor Party's left wing about the asylum seeker

policy?



BOWEN: Leigh, we're a party of people wanting to do the right thing by our fellow human beings. And there

will be some differences of view about that.



But our policy is very clear. Our moral compass as a party points us very firmly to the view that we can and

should increase the refugee intake, we can and should make a greater contribution to the UNHCR.



But we must not see the people-smuggling trade restart. There is a cost to the people-smuggling trade and it

comes not in dollars, but in lives. And we can't let that happen and that's where our moral compass points us.



SALES: To switch to the Treasury portfolio: I'm wondering if we can cast a little bit further forwards. Is the

sort of country that the ALP sees Australia becoming in, say, 20-25 years like the Scandinavian model: high

taxes, extensive social welfare net, socially progressive? Is that the sort of model that you're looking

towards?



BOWEN: Well, the model that we're looking towards is the Labor way of proper investments in schools,

proper investments in infrastructure and funding of hospitals.



Not a sort of target, as we discussed last week, of having: "We must spend this much of the economy on

government spending." What we've got to do is make sure our schools and hospitals and infrastructure is

properly funded. And they're not currently. They're not.



SALES: But if you want to do that, what I'm getting at is: is the broader picture going to look something like,

you know, that Nordic model...



BOWEN: No. No.



SALES: ...where you have got government spending at 50 per cent of GDP and you've got taxes that are 55

per cent GDP?



BOWEN: "No" is the short answer to that. But what we have done is go through our system and identified

loopholes, concessions which are no longer justified, or are simply just not sustainable. Whether it is high-income superannuation, negative gearing, Capital Gains Tax, we have been doing the hard yards, making

sure that we have a tax system which is fit for purpose and is capable of funding the services we need as a

nation.



SALES: But don't you need to be going further than that, though? Because that's one thing. But also, the

Budget is in deficit and the deficit has been growing. And so you can't be coming up with things to cover your

spending measures; you've got to be going further?



BOWEN: Yeah, and I talked about this at the National Press Club today about our twin objectives of

protecting the AAA credit rating through Budget repair; and also investing in schools and hospitals. And that

does require tough decisions of the sorts we're talking about, to make room to do that.



I believe the AAA credit rating is under real pressure. I believe that will be the case, regardless of who wins

the election. I believe the incoming Treasurer will need to deal with that.



And that means dealing with things and recognising that yes, Australia does have a revenue problem. We do.

And somebody has to call it out. Bill Shorten, I, and Labor are calling it out.



SALES: Just before you go: it's a very long election campaign, as you said earlier. How do both parties stop

voters just from becoming bored? And if they do become bored, doesn't it give the incumbent an advantage?



BOWEN: Well, Malcolm's of course decided that the answer to every problem is more Malcolm. And what he

wants to do is give the Australian people plenty of Malcolm over the next two months. Well, we'll see how that

turns out.



We'll just do what we've been doing, Leigh, which is leading the debate, putting the policies out there. And I

think you've seen that and you've seen that most particularly last Tuesday, with a Liberal Treasurer getting

up and announcing Labor policy after Labor policy. And then the policies of his own are going terribly wrong,

whether it comes to retrospective taxation of superannuation or other things that he's implemented.



It's Labor which has led the debate and we've seen that reflected in what is now a very competitive election.



SALES: Chris Bowen, thank you very much.



BOWEN: And happy birthday to you, Leigh, on behalf of all your viewers.



SALES: Look, you've shaved your beard off as a gift to me. That's so lovely. (Laughs)



BOWEN: Well, you didn't lobby me over the beard, but I think your viewers deserve to know it's your birthday

and a happy birthday. Have a great one.



SALES: Thank you very much.

ENDS



