







SENATOR THE HON PENNY WONG  ACTING LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  SHADOW MINISTER FOR TRADE AND INVESTMENT  LABOR SENATOR FOR SOUTH AUSTRALIA





E&EO TRANSCRIPT   TELEVISION INTERVIEW  SKY NEWS PVO NEWSDAY  THURSDAY, 7 JANUARY 2016

SUBJECT/S: North Korea; Barnaby Joyce’s campaign for National Party  leadership; trade unions.

LAURA JAYES: The Acting Opposition Leader Penny Wong joins me out of  Adelaide this afternoon. Senator Wong, thanks so much for your time this afternoon.

SENATOR PENNY WONG, ACTING LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Good to be  with you.

JAYES: We’ve heard from Julie Bishop earlier in the day, saying that China really  needs to lead the charge here, in terms of ramifications that North Korea will face  following this nuclear testing. Do you agree?

WONG: I think the international community should speak as one, and it is. We join  with the UN Secretary-General in his condemnation of this incident. Of course, as  yet, we don’t have confirmation of the precise nature of the incident, but obviously  the nuclear program of North Korea is a threat to global security and to regional  stability.

In terms of China, I welcome the comments of the Chinese Foreign Ministry earlier  today, which are reported, opposing the test and calling on North Korea to  denuclearise, as it has previously committed to. So I think China and all international  actors need to speak as one about a threat to global security, which is the nuclear  program in North Korea.

JAYES: When we speak of sanctions against North Korea, this is already a very  highly sanctioned nation. What is left to be thrown at them?

WONG: Look, I think this is an area where the international community, and  particularly the Security Council, needs to and I’m sure will look very closely and  carefully about how international pressure can be applied to the regime. This is a  very concerning set of events that we’re seeing reported and I agree with Julie  Bishop, this is a threat to global security. So the key thing here is to make sure all  international actors are able to work together to apply as much pressure to the  regime as is possible.

JAYES: Do you appreciate the situation that China is in? Obviously it has been  described as a relationship with North Korea that at times has been close as lips and  teeth, in recent times it has been really frustrated with North Korea, but China is also  quite concerned that if the regime does collapse there would be hundreds of  thousands of asylum seekers and refugees making their way across the border into  China. So, do you appreciate that delicate balance?

WONG: Look, I think China thinks very deeply about the ramifications of what is  occurring in North Korea and obviously it’s far closer to the regime geographically  and so sometimes the issues you raise obviously are front of mind for the Chinese.  But I again refer back to the very unequivocal statement that the Foreign Ministry  released today and I think that made very clear the Chinese position - that North  Korea should denuclearise, should abandon its program as its previously indicated it  would, or that it should, and also that China is completely opposed to the test. So  that’s a very welcome statement and one I think that the whole international  community needs to join in, as the Secretary-General has made clear.

JAYES: On a completely unrelated and separate matter, in the last half an hour or  so we’ve seen shares on the Chinese stock market plunge about seven percent.  Analysts are voicing concerns over China’s aggressive devaluation of its currency.  Are you concerned that this is manipulating and effectively hurts the Australian  businesses that are trading with China?

WONG: We have seen a fair bit of volatility on global equities markets. We’ve also  seen some volatility and some purported instability in terms of the Chinese stock  market. China’s going through an economic rebalance and that obviously has its own  set of challenges for the Chinese. I’m not going to make negative comment about  particular decisions because I think what is in our interest long term is a Chinese  economy that does appropriately rebalance and continues to contribute to global  growth in the way that China has over the last decade. That’s obviously been very  important for Australia’s economic stability and for global economic growth.

JAYES: Returning home now, looking at more domestic issues, there is widespread  speculation that Warren Truss may make his intentions clear about his future in  politics over the next couple of months. Barnaby Joyce at the moment is looking as  the likely successor as Leader of the Nationals. How does Labor feel about that?

WONG: I think Barnaby’s campaigning, isn’t that what he’s doing? There’s no other  way, I don’t think, to read his public comments and some of the media that he’s been  getting in the last 24 hours. Look, Barnaby’s entertaining, but I think he’s pretty  erratic and I think he doesn’t present in the way that most Australians would expect  senior politicians to present. But more importantly, I don’t know that he’s taken the

sort of sober, sensible and responsible approach to public policy Australians do  expect. If Barnaby Joyce becomes Leader of the National Party, he becomes the  Deputy Prime Minister of Australia. That is a very senior position. And I think even  Barnaby’s own colleagues are expressing some concern about that prospect.

JAYES: I think it would be fair to say though that he does speak to his constituents,  those that are on Barnaby’s side certainly like to see his brand of politics. Not that  Labor does get a say in who’s the next Leader of the Nationals, but would you have  a preferred candidate?

WONG: Look, that’s a matter for the National Party, and as I said, Barnaby’s  entertaining and he’s certainly interesting to listen to. He was very interesting when  he was Shadow Finance Minister and gave, I think, you and a whole range of other  people in the Press Gallery a lot of interesting footage. But do you really want the  bloke as Deputy Prime Minister?

JAYES: One final question and reports today that the CFMEU and MUA is looking at  merging. Do you have any concerns about that?

WONG: Look, that’s a matter for them. And I’d make the point that union  amalgamations have been a feature of the industrial landscape for a very long time,  so ultimately that’s a matter for them.

JAYES: Bob Hawke, in recent days, has said that Labor should distance itself from  the CFMEU though. Do you think that warning will be heeded?

WONG: We should always condemn inappropriate behaviour where ever it occurs  and we do. And in terms of industrial regulation we improved the regime in  government, we made the regime more robust. And we’ve also proposed to Malcolm  Turnbull additional improvements and safeguards in the regulation of industrial  organisations, employer and employee, but ultimately I think what we have seen  from the Government is a very blatant political attack on the trade union movement.  This from a Government who of course wants hack into penalty rates and a whole  range of other entitlements that Australians have.

JAYES: I’m sure we’ll be talking about that much more in this election year, 2016.  Acting Opposition Leader, Senator Penny Wong, as always thanks for your time.

WONG: Good to be with you.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT:   ANNIE WILLIAMS 0428 040 522



