The Hon. Scott Morrison MP  Treasurer

1



TRANSCRIPT  FIVEAA LEON BYNER  WEDNESDAY 23 NOVEMBER 2016



E&OE

Subjects: Working holiday maker tax arrangements; Labor’s tax break for foreign workers;  Deloitte Access Economics Budget Monitor; Mid-Year Economic and Fiscal Outlook; stronger  borders; making superannuation more sustainable; Labor’s failure to support budget savings;  Labor’s proposed higher budget deficit; proposed tax on sugary drinks

LEON BYNER: Good morning Treasurer.

TREASURER: G’day Leon.

BYNER: Now, the business of the backpacker tax is controversial and very important for SA. As you  know the agriculturalists here in the harvest trail rely on backpacker labour. If you can’t get it  through the Senate today that means there won’t be a backpacker tax, does it not?

TREASURER: There will be the opportunity for the Senate if they take that view to reconsider that  next week as well. I have got to particularly pay tribute to Tony Pasin who has done an excellent job  in driving the compromise package that we put to the Parliament. We have said that instead of 32.5  cents it should be 19 cents. We have had a package to attract more backpackers to Australia and to  get this thing sorted out by the end of the year. Derryn Hinch is happy to support that and we have  had good discussions with Nick Xenophon as well but at the moment, the Labor Party together with  the Greens and One Nation seem pretty keen on giving foreign workers a tax cut which I don’t really  understand. I think what we have to try and do is two things - we have got to have to have a fair rate  of tax that backpackers pay that means they are competitive with other countries and what we have  got means that backpackers would have the same amount of money in their pockets and able to  spend in Australia than they would if they went to Canada or New Zealand of the United Kingdom.  So it is completely comparative. On top of that I think the other thing we have got to do is we have  got to find more ways to get Australians to actually go and work in these jobs. Twenty years ago  there were only 30,000, 40,000-odd backpackers who came to Australia and Australians picked the  fruit. Over that period of time we have had less and less Australians taking on those jobs and we  have had the employers taking on backpackers, foreign workers to do those jobs. We have also had  some unsavoury things happen with illegal workers and producers using illegal workers which is the  subject of Fair Work and other investigations. So we have got a good package, we think it can get  support but at the moment Labor, One Nation and the Greens are saying no and they want to send  us off to Christmas without this thing being resolved.

BYNER: Alright. I want to ask you about this business of some Australians not wishing to do jobs.  Close to SA, here of course at the Tatiara meatworks and they say, and they are not the only ones by  any stretch, they haven’t been able to get much local labour and some of those jobs are pretty well  paid. So, therefore they rely on people on various visas. Are you planning any kind of coercion or  policy change to encourage Australians to take these jobs they don’t want?

2



TREASURER: Well, we are and we have been trying to do this for several years. We have had a  measure which we introduced when I was Social Services Minister which says that you have to wait  four weeks before you can get the dole. Now, sadly, the Xenophon Team has been opposing that -  as has Labor and as have the Greens. The One Nation Party support that policy so maybe we can get  some sort of agreement between the Xenophon Team and the One Nation Team if we could get  them all to agree, to pass that legislation that says you have to wait four weeks if you are a young  person before you can get access to the dole and there are the sensible exemptions which show if  you are in a position of hardship and unable to go home because of domestic violence issues or  things like that, then those exemptions have already been made. Now, that is the stick approach. At  the same time we have been looking at options working with the Xenophon Team about how we can  provide some incentives for people who go and do this seasonal work and not have that effect on  their level of support payments. Now I am open to that. I am open to the carrot and the stick. What I  need is Senators who are prepared to agree with each other and work with the Government to  achieve that end. So, we have got the Hanson team who agrees with me on the stick and I have the  Xenophon Team who agrees with me on the carrot but I can’t get them to agree with each other to  support the package.

BYNER: So, you are convinced that a four week cessation of benefits would then coerce or  encourage people who otherwise would say I don’t want that job to go and take it.

TREASURER: I think that would have an impact, yes. If there is a job there and it is available to you  and the alternative is no other income, well, that is an obvious incentive to get out there and take  that job. As I said, 20 years ago Leon Australians were taking those jobs for those reasons.

BYNER: I want to ask you about another important issue. For example coal exports, they are not the  only ones, have gone up in terms of value by about 17 per cent. Has that helped the Budget bottom  line much?

TREASURER: The Deloitte Access report which came out this week, which is their update where they  think revenues are at for the Government I think was very telling. What that said was the  Government’s revenues are more dependent on how much people earn and how much companies  earn in profits. Their estimate shows that Government revenue has been hit by the slower growth  and wages and the lower levels of company profits. That is a very true point to make. Now, there is  some mitigation of that which has resulted from the better commodity prices that we have seen  since the Budget but it doesn’t offset that. You can’t rely on these commodity prices to be a salve to  fix the Budget. You have got to get expenditure under control and that is what we are doing. We  have cut the growth in expenditure which under the Labor Government was running at 4.4 per cent  real, we have got that down from our first Budget to 1.5 per cent real. So we have had a pretty  dramatic reduction of spending in this country and that is what we have to do and commodity prices  are going up, well that is welcome but that is not an excuse to deal with expenditure. What the  ratings agencies have said is that they need the Parliament to pass the Government’s Budget savings  and if they don’t then the Parliament is putting Australia’s triple A credit rating at risk. The  Government has a plan to get the Budget projected back into balance in 20-21, but that requires the  Parliament and the Labor Party to live up to their economic responsibilities and pass these measures  which include the one I mentioned before, having young people having to wait four weeks, just four  weeks, if they’re not in one of those hardship categories, before they can just go straight from their  school door to the Centrelink front door, and start picking up the dole cheque.

BYNER: Alright, as a former immigration minister, is it embarrassing to you that a government-dominated committee has recommended the proposed legislation to impose a lifetime ban on some  refugees as too severe and discriminatory? Does this suggest the legislation is doomed?

TREASURER: No it doesn’t. That’s not the first time this committee has made observations and I  don’t know if I would agree with the characterisation as the chair was keen to correct the record on

3



that yesterday, of that committee. That committee made recommendations against bills that I  introduced and successfully took through the parliament when I was immigration minister. This is an  important further change, it further strengthens our border protection arrangements and the  integrity of our immigration system and what is most interesting about this, is it has demonstrated  once again that Labor sometimes talks the talk on this, but they never walks the walk.

BYNER: What’s the biggest drain on the Budget? Is it that our welfare bill is too high? Is that or is it  something else?

TREASURER: Well the welfare bill is the biggest part of the Budget, $150 billion a year. That’s  followed by the health budget and then you’ve got defence and education. That’s just the quantums  of the Budget. But the areas where you have strong growth is where you have a dependency, and a  growing dependency on transfer payments, welfare payments, and that’s what we’ve been working  really hard to get on top of. We’ve already got through this parliament over $6 billion in savings  passed through the parliament. We welcome that. But there’s a lot more to come. $15 billion is a  further amount that we’re trying to take through the parliament which is being rejected by the Labor  Party. They’re actually saying now that they want to have small businesses continue to pay a high  rate of tax, they’re going to abolish all of that which we’re proposing to do, they want to take even  more tax out of superannuation, and then they still end up with a deficit that just over four years, is  almost $17 billion worse off. Now how they think that’s going to protect the credit rating is beyond  me. It’s complete hocus pocus budgeting.

BYNER: Just for the record, you’re changing super as well, what will happen after next year if you get  this through?

TREASURER: On the first of July the three biggest changes are that there is a transfer balance cap,  and that means that for those who have a balance in their superannuation, which is just one per  cent of superannuants, of more than $1.6 million, then the tax you pay on the earnings on the  amount over $1.6 million, will be at 15 per cent, not at zero. Now, 15 per cent is still a concessional  rate as you know. That’s a big change, and that is effectively means testing access to tax concessions  for superannuation. Now, the other changes that we’ve made, is that we’re limited the amount of  non-concessional contributions that you can make, so they’re the contributions you can make after  you’ve paid your tax, and that’s limited to $100,000 a year, and there aren’t too many people who  can do that, so that’s a reasonable limit that we’ve placed on that. We didn’t go ahead with that  lifetime non-concessional cap of $500,000. We listened on that and we changed it. The other change  is that the amount of concessional contributions you could make each year is $25,000. And that can  be done each year and there is a carry forward that you can have on that if you have a balance less  than half a million. For those people who find themselves out of the workforce or having kids, or  have caring responsibilities, or they might have variable incomes because of businesses incomes or  farmers or things like that, they will have an opportunity to catch up. Interestingly the Labor Party  wants to block that measure in particular, like they want to block the measure that if you have a  non-wage income, let’s say you run a business as well as having a wage job, well currently you can’t  get concessional contributions to your superannuation from your business income in those  circumstances which we think is terribly unfair. So we’re going to allow that. The Labor Party is  opposing that as well.

BYNER: Just quickly, sugar tax, would you ever embrace one?

TREASURER: Well I think the best way for people, I heard you on your program earlier saying would a  sugar tax make people lose weight, well drinking less sugary drinks will make you lose weight,  there’s no doubt about that. That’s certainly something Jenny and I seek to practise with our own  kids and we all know a bit too much sugary drinks, you know what the kids are like in the afternoon.  You try and avoid that wherever possible. I think a lot of parents are trying to take this into their own  hands. But look, everyone has lots of ideas for new taxes Leon. What I don’t get distracted by, is I

4



don’t see any of those suggestions as an excuse to not deal with the expenditure problem. What  people are often saying is, look you don’t have to get expenditure under control, you don’t have to  make sure the welfare system is sustainable, you don’t have to do all these important things, we’ll  just bung on a tax here and bung on a tax there.

BYNER: So you won’t do it?

TREASURER: What I’m saying is that I’m focused on getting expenditure under control and I’m not  being distracted by all of these other, I’m sure well intentioned suggestions. The Government is  focused on what we put in our Budget and I’m seeking to pass that through the parliament and the  ratings agencies are saying; if the parliament doesn’t pass those Budget savings, then the parliament  is putting our triple-A credit rating at risk, and the people most responsible for that is Bill Shorten  and Chris Bowen.

BYNER: Scott Morrison, thank you for joining us today.

[ENDS]

Further information: Julian Leembruggen 0400 813 253, Kate Williams 0429 584 675

