

SENATOR THE HON PENNY WONG  OPPOSITION LEADER IN THE SENATE  SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS  SENATOR FOR SOUTH AUSTRALIA





E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW  ABC RN   WEDNESDAY, 16 NOVEMBER 2016

SUBJECT/S: US Presidential Election; Asylum Seeker Legislation.

FRAN KELLY: The election of Donald Trump is forcing a recalibration in some quarters  of Australia’s relationship with our most important ally. Shadow Foreign Minister Penny  Wong has written an op ed this morning in Fairfax Media in which she argues a Trump  White House will mean “a substantive shift in US Foreign policy”. With the world at a  critical juncture, Australia should respond by working more closely with Asia nations -  that’s her premise. This is being interpreted by some as a significant break in Australia’s  long held bipartisan approach to the alliance. Senator Wong joins us now, welcome  back to breakfast.

SENATOR PENNY WONG, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION IN THE SENATE: Good  to be with you Fran.

KELLY: So you’ve written in this op ed that the world is at a change point. You are  arguing for a more independent foreign policy, one that includes a better road map in  Asia. Does that mean under a Labor Government we’d see a watering down of the US  Alliance?

WONG: Not at all, and I’d encourage people to read the op ed, if they’re interested in  what we are actually saying as opposed to how some people want it interpreted. We’ve  said very clearly we remain committed to the alliance. The US alliance is a critical  aspect of Australia’s foreign and security policy. It continues to have bipartisan support.

You in your introduction talked about the change point, and I think there is a change  point and that is a new Administration that has been elected and will take office next  year. President-elect Trump obviously said things in the campaign in terms of foreign  policy which differ significantly from his predecessor. He questioned America’s  alliances, he raised the prospect of a trade war with China, he has a very different  position on climate change. And I think it’s a sensible thing to have a discussion about  how we respond to that and how we deal with that within the context of the alliance.

We have to remember we have always, as Australians, over the six plus decades of the  alliance, recognised that we need an independent foreign policy, an Australian foreign  policy within the alliance context, and that remains true today.

KELLY: Is that lacking? I mean you talked about for instance Donald Trump’s signals  on climate change. This would be a point of difference you would think between the  Australian Government and many governments around the world and the Trump  Government. Is that lacking in our relationship these days? Is, as Paul Keating said just  this week, is there too much religious reverence when it comes to the US Alliance, and  too much reticence on the part of Australia to stand up to America?

WONG: They’re Paul’s words, not mine.

KELLY: But do you agree with that?

WONG: No, they’re Paul’s words not mine. But what I do think we need to think  through, and I think Australians would expect this of us, is how do we continue to assert  the things that are in Australia’s interests in the context of the alliance when we have an  administration which may take a very different position on this.

This is not an entirely new position or issue, both sides of politics at times have  disagreed with US policy within the context of the alliance. Obviously Labor disagreed  with America when it came to Vietnam and Iraq. John Howard had disputes with the  Clinton Administration over lamb tariffs. Tony Abbott disagreed with President Obama  on climate change. So it’s not new to disagree with administrations about the direction  foreign policy should take.

KELLY: Okay, so what’s new here then that you see looming?

WONG: I think what is potentially different is that the substantive policy positions  President-elect Trump articulated during the election campaign obviously differ  significantly when it comes to foreign policy and trade from the past administration and  one might argue to the American approach for some time.

It remains to be seen if he chooses to give the full effect to what he said during the  campaign. I simply think it’s important for us to have a sensible and adult conversation  here about how we continue to assert Australian interests in the context of an alliance  framework. And I think part of that is ensuring we work harder in our region, both in a  bilateral and plurilateral sense. But also because we want to collectively seek to  influence the new administration as far as we can. We want continued constructive  engagement in Asia from America.

KELLY: So you do say Australia needs to step up our engagement with Asia on  economic and development priorities. Do you see this, a closer and stronger  engagement with Asia, and a focus in Asia, to build that coalition to have a louder,  stronger voice when we present things to the US, or a counter to the US, or, because  we’re going to have to move away perhaps from the US and get more bang for our buck  by working more intensely in Asia?

WONG: I’m not sure it’s a sort of zero sum game in terms of how you presented it. You  don’t walk away from your relationship with the United States. We are where we are in

the world. This is the region in which we are. We know that it’s important to continue to  work with our neighbours in this region. What we do need to do now is to work even  harder at deepening and broadening our relationship with our region. That is an  important step, not only where we are in terms of the US election, but also more broadly  in terms of where the global politics are going.

KELLY: You say for Labor the fact our US alliance is central to Australia’s foreign and  security policy has never meant we trade away our values, such as respect and equality  for women, racial and religious tolerance, and economic and social openness. So, do  you expect that with Donald Trump, and what we have heard during the campaign, we  will be at odds on those values? And how do you see that affecting the relationship on  day to day negotiating or deal making progress?

WONG: I’m restating here the approach that Bill Shorten has taken which is strong  support for the alliance, but reaffirming that has never meant, for Labor, that you trade  away your values. Bill gave a very good speech last week in the Parliament which  restated that. I think many Australians do want to hear that and I think Australians do  support the US alliance. We recognise how important it is. It’s part of our history and  part of our future. But I think Australians do want to understand how we continue to  project our values and I don’t think reflexive agreement with any administration should  be the Australian way and generally hasn’t been the Australian way.

KELLY: You say we face a very different world and a very different America. What  exactly do you mean by that? Are you suggesting the world could be less safe in a  Trump White House?

WONG: No, I really was referencing what I said at the outset. Self-evidently Mr Trump is  a man who has articulated - leaving aside domestic policy which is obviously ultimately  a matter for the United States - certainly on foreign policy and trade and the  international economy he’s articulated a set of views which are different from his  predecessor and different from any previous administration.

We should treat Australians with respect and we should have a conversation that  recognises what I think many Australians are thinking about, which is how do we  respond to the election of a president who has articulated some quite different views.

KELLY: Penny Wong, on another issue, there is some uncertainty now given the  change of presidency, and that is the Australian Government’s deal with the US in terms  of resettling the refugees from Manus and Nauru. The Prime Minister will meet Barack  Obama on the sidelines to try to get guarantees that even under a change of presidency  this deal will be honoured.

Separate to that deal but alongside it is the government’s change of law it sees as  essential to stopping the boats and that’s the lifetime ban on any of these refugees ever  visiting Australia again. Peter Dutton said yesterday, if we have divided message  coming from Australian political leaders, the people smugglers will trade on those  messages. In other words he says the resettlement is one message but the lifetime ban  has to go alongside it to prove we are still going to be tough. Do you accept that  argument by the government that divided messages are death when it comes to people  smugglers?

WONG: We’ve offered bipartisanship on a whole range of, frankly, some difficult  policies for some Australians to accept when it comes to border protection. We’ve done  so because we understand the importance of stopping people smuggling and what that  means not only for the individuals concerned but for the broader policy framework.

The government has not articulated why this deal, this ban on future tourists is so  critical to maintaining a sensible border policy. I think anybody who looks carefully at  what Mr Dutton has said and the different arguments that ministers used over the last  weeks would see this for what it is. It is an attempt to use this for political purposes.

Now we have welcomed in principle the US resettlement arrangement and Bill and  Shayne have made comments about that. But the lifetime ban, the ban on people  coming here as tourists in 20 or 30 years’ time is demonstrably the government seeking  to engage in a political stunt.

KELLY: Penny Wong, thank you very much for joining us.

WONG: Good to be with you.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: STEPHEN SPENCER 0423 596 573



