

SENATOR THE HON KIM CARR

SHADOW MINISTER FOR HIGHER EDUCATION, RESEARCH, INNOVATION  AND INDUSTRY  SENATOR FOR VICTORIA



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  INTERVIEW   ABC TV NEWS BREAKFAST  MONDAY, 16 MAY 2016

SUBJECT/S: Auto manufacturing; Marriage equality; Vote compass.

MICHAEL ROWLAND, HOST: This involves a pot of money for those workers  displaced by the closure of the car companies. What are you trying to do here?

SENATOR KIM CARR, SHADOW MINISTER FOR HIGHER EDUCATION,  RESEARCH, INNOVATION AND INDUSTRY: We are trying to ensure that there's  ongoing employment. Not just a question of training, but of ongoing jobs, high quality  jobs and the automotive industry has provided that for a very long time. We want to  provide money for companies that want to stay in the automotive industry and to be  able to make sure that they're able to adapt to new contracts,  particularly international contracts. We also want to provide assistance to attract new  investment in advanced manufacturing. We're about providing opportunities for jobs  in manufacturing.

ROWALND: How much money and how will it be paid out if Labor wins the election?

CARR: There's $59 million and it is working with the state governments in Victoria  and in South Australia. We will be able to build on existing programs, field  tested programs, programs we know that work, but we also want to work  with individual companies to ensure that they are able to attract new investment, new  products, new contracts and be able to develop new opportunities.

ROWLAND: You have seen a lot of these manufacturing industries hit hard and  close over the years. How hard, how challenging is it for workers often mature age  workers, to be skilled up to move into other sections of the economy?

CARR:  Well, some people are able to move to other firms quite quickly, but about a  third of people never work again and another third are on much less employment in  terms of shorter hours and lower money. This is hard for many tens of thousands of  people facing great economic insecurity whose families are facing acute economic  pressures. We are finding that we have got a government in Canberra that really is  about exporting jobs, not about developing economic opportunities for blue collar  workers.

ROWLAND: Where do you see the future of the manufacturing sector in Australia,  are you pessimistic or do you see there is some hope?

CARR: I'm an optimist. I think made in Australia is a really important  opportunity. We've got nearly a million people still employed in manufacturing. Yes,  it's declined but there are huge opportunities here, it provides a huge avenue for  research and development, huge opportunities for exports, huge opportunities  for high-skilled, high-wage jobs which of course ensures we have prosperity  spread across the country. But it's up to governments to put their shoulder to the  wheel, to work with companies, work with unions and work with workers to be able to  develop those opportunities.

ROWLAND: A couple of other issues while you are here, Australian Catholic bishops  have weighed into the campaign strongly this morning. In a statement, they say  political decisions in the future may undermine the dignity of marriage as a lifelong  union between a man and a woman. They are very clearly signaling that they don’t  want the Labor Party or the Coalition to legalise same sex marriage. What do you  think of the church weighing in like this?

CARR: First of all, the Catholic Church has a long standing position on these issues.  I personally support legalising same sex marriage. We have a conscious vote in the  Labor Party and I have no doubt there will be changes to marriage laws as we have  seen throughout the world. But the Catholic bishops have made a number of  statements, not just about this issue. They're following what the Pope said in regard  to changes within our economic conditions around the world. Points that I welcome,  particularly in regard to what they call a “throwaway society”. I think the questions  arise about how we treat one another are quite important and this election campaign  they will be part of an ongoing discussion.

The Catholic bishops have indicated concern that they're voiceless, that the weak,  the vulnerable, won't get a proper hearing. I will be concerned to ensure they do and  I want to be able to see that the Catholic bishops' statements - that go to many other  issues from refugees, to human rights and economic security to employment - these  are the type of questions we're entitled to discuss in our society. I trust this  election will provide the opportunity to have a discussion about where this country is

going, what sort of society we want to be. How is the Government working to meet  the challenges of the 21st century?

ROWLAND: Just staying on same sex marriage, do you believe the church is  swimming against the tide when opinion poll after opinion poll show overwhelming  majority support for legalising same sex marriage?

CARR: I think the Catholic Church has a right to put its view. I personally take a  different view on this particular matter, but I think in the context of what they're saying  about a throwaway society, they're entitled to put a view. We'll make a judgement,  the Parliament will invariably have to make a judgement, as we've seen the people of  Ireland, throughout Europe, as we've seen throughout the US, these questions are  now being addressed.

ROWLAND: Just finally the ABC’s very popular Vote Compass has come out this  morning with a survey showing voters rate Malcolm Turnbull better than Bill  Shorten on the issues of trust and competence.

CARR: Well, I find it difficult to take it serious quite frankly.

ROWLAND: 150,000 people took part in this.

CARR:  It’s a phone-in poll, automatically you have to ask yourself how valid is the  sampling arrangement. Let's think about Malcolm Turnbull. He's a very, very wealthy  man, very wealthy man that lives an entirely different world from the way in which  most Australians live. Completely out of touch and of course Point Piper is a  very different place from what most people experience throughout Australia. So the  idea that somehow or another he is superior in term of his capacities to lead  the country will be a matter that the people of this country will test. Bill Shorten is out  there talking to people every day. I'm absolutely confident the Labor Party will be  very competitive in this election and we'll be able to provide the people of this country  real choices on health, education, on the future of manufacturing, on climate  change. These are the substantive issues that really matter.

ROWLAND: You mention a word like Point Piper, is that something that we can  expect to see more from the Labor Party?

CARR: There has been some conversation about whether or not this is an election  about the hard hats versus the top hats and I think there's an element of truth to that.  There's no doubt we're going to have a conversation about who's in touch, who's  going to represent the aspirations of the Australian people, what sort of policies there  are to assist ordinary families, ordinary workers to be able to meet the challenges  of this particular time in the 21st century.

ENDS



