

THE HON TANYA PLIBERSEK MP  DEPUTY LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS  AND INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT

MEMBER FOR SYDNEY

E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW  ABC RADIO NATIONAL BREAKFAST   TUESDAY, 10 MAY 2016

SUBJECTS:  Dirty deals between the Greens and Liberals, Labor’s refugee policy,  Labor’s Gonski education funding plan, negative gearing

FRAN KELLY, RADIO NATIONAL BREAKFAST: Tanya Plibersek is the Deputy  Opposition Leader and she joins me in the Breakfast studio. Tanya Plibersek welcome  back to Breakfast.

TANYA PLIBERSEK, DEPUTY LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Thanks Fran.

KELLY: You're trying to focus on schools and schools' funding but Adam Bandt has  really put this centre stage - this notion of a hung parliament, offering to form an alliance  with Labor if that's the result. Do you welcome that offer?

PLIBERSEK: Well I think Australians would be horrified by the idea of another hung  parliament. We did get through a lot, he's quite right. We legislated well when we had a  hung parliament but it was extraordinarily difficult. And you’re quite right, some of the  compromises that we made I think cost us quite dearly during that time in government.

KELLY: Why? Doing that, signing that agreement with the Greens... what was the  problem with that?

PLIBERSEK: Well, I mean one very clear example is we always wanted a floating  carbon price and instead we had a fixed carbon price and I think that that was the wrong  policy. It didn't serve us well, it didn’t serve the country well. But let's just take a step  back... why does Michael Kroger want to do a deal with the Greens?

KELLY: I'm going to come to that, I just want to talk about this hung parliament notion  first because Chris Bowen has said in the past and many others have too, Labor must  govern alone or not at all. If it was a hung parliament, would you stage into that  position? Would you be… a lot of pressure on you to do a deal.

PLIBERSEK: Well, we are playing to win. We are not playing to be part of a coalition  government. We are playing to win. We are in a position where we can win at the  moment, of course we are still the underdogs but we will be fighting for every seat and  every seat that we lose to the Greens is a seat that makes it more likely that Malcolm

Turnbull will be Prime Minister rather than Bill Shorten. So we're fighting, not just to take  seats off the Liberals, we're fighting to keep seats that the Greens want to take away  from Labor.

KELLY: And you do have a fight on your hands, we spoke with Anthony Albanese  yesterday, his seat of Grayndler is under pressure, certainly if a deal is done with the  Liberals to give the Greens their preferences. Your seat of Sydney too would  be vulnerable wouldn't it?

PLIBERSEK: Yeah, absolutely, and I think...

KELLY: Has a deal been done do you know?

PLIBERSEK: Absolutely it has. Certainly in Victoria we are hearing all the time from  our negotiators that the Victorian seats are off the table. So Melbourne, Batman, Wills  there is a deal done. And you have to ask yourself, why Michael Kroger would want  the Greens to pick up those seats. He wants the Greens to pick up those seats because  it makes another Liberal government more likely. And I frankly think Greens voters would  be very disappointed that their leadership has entered into this sort of agreement that  makes it more likely that we have another Liberal government with the same cuts to  health, same cuts to education, same policies across the board that Greens voters  reject.

KELLY: But why shouldn't the Greens do deals with the Liberals for Liberal preferences  in the same way Labor has in the past?

PLIBERSEK: Fine, but then they can’t pretend that they're not a political party like any  other political party. They want the purity of not being considered a political party and, of  course, they’re putting their own interests first. They’re going after seats like Sydney and  Grayndler. They're telling their members that they should focus on Sydney, they’re  campaigning very hard in my seat and in Grayndler. Well, that's fine, they’ve got every  right to do that as a political party but it is absolutely cynical, it is absolutely political.  They did a Senate voting deal with the Liberals that advantaged the Greens and the  Liberals and Labor, against Labor's wishes. They’ve made all sorts of deals in this  parliament including the change to the pension assets test that means 330,000  pensioners miss out on pensions down the track. They can’t pretend that they are not  making pragmatic deals that hurt people.

KELLY: You are listening to RN Breakfast, it is 12 minutes to 8. Our guest is the Deputy  Labor Leader, Tanya Plibersek also the member for the Sydney seat of Sydney...seat of  Sydney.

PLIBERSEK: We know what you mean Fran [laugh].

KELLY: That seat is more vulnerable isn't it? The harder the Greens and the  Government push you from both sides on the issue of asylum seekers…and this  campaign has kicked out day one with some Labor candidates disagreeing publicly with  your party's position on asylum seekers. How difficult is that for you? You are a leading  member of the left.

PLIBERSEK: Well I think it is difficult always to explain a complex policy that tries to  meet the needs across the board and that’s what we’ve got. We say we want to bring

more asylum seekers to Australia, we want to double our intake to 27,000 but we want  them to come here safely. We don't want them drowning at sea. That's a more difficult  position to sell than what the Liberals say, which is a three word slogan, or what the  Greens say which is a different three word slogan. We want to restore the UN  convention into our domestic legislation, we want to get rid of temporary protection visas,  we want independent oversight of offshore processing, we want an independent  children's monitor, an advocate for children. We want mandatory reporting of suspected  child abuse...

KELLY: But you support your government's policy to go with turnbacks, to stick with  turnbacks and offshore detention?

PLIBERSEK: It's something we hope we'll never have to do, but we have to have it in  our policy in case it's necessary. We had this debate very fiercely at our National  Conference which by the way anybody can attend; anybody can watch - not like the  secret conferences that the Greens have....

KELLY: But just picking you up there, you probably will have to do it. I mean, the  Government's has just had to do it this last week in their view and their policy had to pick  up that boat from the Cocos Islands and under their policy turn it around and send it  back to Sri Lanka. The boats are still coming.

PLIBERSEK: And we won't let the boats start again. Can I take you back a little bit in  history as well, Fran? What we wanted to do when we were last in Government is have  an arrangement with Malaysia where people would have been returned to Malaysia. We  would have taken more asylum seekers from Malaysia and people who went to Malaysia  would have been able to work, they would have lived in the community, their kids would  have got an education and they would have had health care. The Greens and the  Liberals in another one of their dirty deals actually combined to prevent that. So, we  have a policy that is both compassionate and tough enough to prevent the boats starting  up again. We need to send a very strong message to people smugglers, who are  criminals, who don't care whether people actually make it alive to Australia, that they will  not be able to profit from human misery any longer. But we need to be a better  international citizen too. We need to take more people and we need to take them safely.

KELLY: How damaging is a front page like this one in the Daily Telegraph for you in  Sydney, 'Labor all at sea on boats?'

PLIBERSEK: Well, I think the Telegraph will be campaigning very hard for their chosen  government every day of the election campaign. I'm sure there'll be another story  tomorrow.

KELLY: You're meanwhile trying to get the discussion onto schools and school funding  and Labor has released a list of all the electorates and how much money they would get  to their schools extra if they had a Labor government implementing the Gonski plan.  Every child in every school will be better off under Labor, that's what your release boldly  states.

PLIBERSEK: And it’s absolutely true....

KELLY: How can you guarantee that? I mean we've seen millions more poured into  schools and we're going backwards.



PLIBERSEK: Fran, this drives me crazy this argument, this Simon Birmingham  argument that more money isn't the answer. More money on its own is not the answer...

KELLY: That's right...

PLIBERSEK: That's why we have attached so many targets to this extra funding  including 95% Year 12 completion rates. We've said that we want to return Australia to  the top five countries in reading, maths and science. We want all students to study  maths and science to Year 12 with a teacher that actually has a relevant tertiary  qualification: a science, technology, engineering or maths qualification. We want all our  schools to have a relationship with a school in Asia. We have attached goals to this  extra funding. And the other thing I'd say is if you have a look at the report that came out  on the weekend about twenty schools and what they have done with their extra Gonski  funding already you would see the sort of difference this is making in our schools. This is  very early on in the extra funding and what are schools doing with it? They’re hiring  speech pathologists so kids who've been too shy to speak before can participate  properly in class. Extra literacy, extra numeracy, languages, either English as a second  language or languages other than English....

KELLY: Can I just ask you finally Labor's position on negative gearing? The  Government is going hard against it and we heard the Treasurer today defending their  position saying housing prices would be smashed in a city like Sydney under your policy.  This is right in the heart of your electorate this issue, this whole... house prices, you  know what everybody talks about and thinks about, people can’t afford to get in but nor  do they want to see their housing prices collapse. How difficult is this issue for you?

PLIBERSEK: It's not at all difficult for me. I absolutely believe that the billions of dollars  every year that we're spending on negative gearing and capital gains tax can be trimmed  slightly and that means that new home buyers, first home buyers have a chance of  getting into the housing market.

KELLY: Because house prices do come down a bit.

PLIBERSEK: No, they don't come down; they grow slightly less madly than they’ve  been growing in recent years. I'm a home owner; I want to see my house continue to  grow modestly in price. I'm also a mother of three kids and I want them one day to have  a chance of owning a home of their own. And if house prices keep going up by 10 per  cent, 15 per cent then they'll never be able to afford a home of their own and sadly I'm  not in the position that Malcom Turnbull has suggested to other parents that they might  go out and buy a home for each of their children...

KELLY: There's nothing wrong with parents wanting to do that though, having that aim...

PLIBERSEK: Of course they want to do it...

KELLY: Everyone wants to help their kids...

PLIBERSEK: I want to help my kids too, but do I think I'm going to be able to afford 3  houses in the Sydney housing market for my 3 children? I don't think so Fran. This is a  policy that means that anybody whose entered into an arrangement already keeps all of  the benefits of negative gearing and if you want to get negative gearing benefits in the

future you have to buy a new house, a new apartment that adds to housing stock that  actually means you take a bit of pressure of the rental market too, because we're adding  to stock.

KELLY: Tanya Plibersek, thank you very much for joining us.

PLIBERSEK: Thank you Fran.



ENDS

