

THE HON KATE ELLIS MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR EDUCATION  SHADOW MINISTER FOR EARLY CHILDHOOD   MEMBER FOR ADELAIDE



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP INTERVIEW  CANBERRA  MONDAY, 2 MAY 2016

SUBJECT/S: States rejecting Malcolm Turnbull’s school cuts; the Liberals’  election promise to provide $3.5 billion less funding for schools by 2020  compared to Labor; submarines; Manus Island

KATE ELLIS, SHADOW MINISTER FOR EDUCATION: Today we have students,  parents and teachers returning to schools, only to have been insulted by the Turnbull  Government's so-called education policy. The Coalition Government do not have an  education policy, all they have is an excuse to get them through the next election. We  know that not only are they proposing ripping $3.5 billion out of our schools compared to  Labor's plan that is fully-costed and fully-funded, but we also know that they seek to  undo all of the reform, all of the progress that has been made in consultation with states  and territories, with teachers and principals and education stakeholders.

Already today we see their plan in disarray, with states pushing back, saying that it will  not work, saying they will not implement it. And that is because this is something that  has just been hatched up by the Turnbull Government to try and get them through the  next election, when we know that just a couple of weeks ago, Malcolm Turnbull didn't  believe that the Federal Government shouldn't have any role in our public schools at all.  Now the choice at the next election will be incredibly clear - Labor has a plan to ensure  than every student in every school gets the attention and support that they need. Our  plan means that they can invest in additional literacy and numeracy support, that we  can make sure that students with disability and special needs have all the attention that  they need. So that we can make sure that we're lifting the quality of teaching, and so  that we can make sure that we have all of the additional supports in place to lift  Australia's educational attainment.

This is important because we know that the gap between high performing and low  performing schools in Australia is greater than the OECD average and is continuing to  grow. But it's also important because the reality is, if we are going to have the skills for  the jobs of the future, then we need to adopt Labor's Your Child. Our Future education  policy.

JOURNALIST: Kate what about the part of the policy that would see children in years  one and above evaluated for their literacy and numeracy skills, do you think that is a  good idea?

ELLIS: I think the question for the Turnbull Government is, what is the point of them  testing and evaluating literacy levels if they don't provide the funding to actually do  something about the problems that are uncovered? What we want to see is that there  are resources so that early intervention means that we can have additional support for  those students who are falling behind. What the Turnbull Government are proposing, is  that we do a whole lot of testing across the country, but then that they do not provide  the resources so that we can help those students who are at risk of falling behind, or  give additional support to those students who are excelling. This is a thought bubble,  but it is worse than that. It is an insult. This education plan is an insult to every student,  to every teacher, and to every parent, that knows that Australian schools deserve  proper policy.

JOURNALIST: There are reports this morning that low and middle income earners,  including women that have  to have kids will have their superannuation  boosted, curbing concessions to high income earners. Is that a good idea?

ELLIS: We've seen the Liberal Party's record when it comes to superannuation, every  single time they have tried to cut superannuation, every single time they have stood in  the way of progress. It is really important that Labor put in place measures to protect  low income earners when it came to superannuation, and it is only because we stood up  in the Parliament and fought against the Coalition's attacks on them that they remain in  place. Australians have seen time and time again that you cannot trust the Liberal Party  when it comes to superannuation.

JOURNALIST: But  curbing concessions to high income earners and putting  it into low-income earners, that's something you would agree to right?

ELLIS: Well certainly we are really proud of our track record when it comes to low  income earners and their superannuation, but also that we have a very clear policy  when it comes to superannuation co-contributions. We stand by Labor's plan which has  been out there. We know that this is just Malcolm Turnbull being tricky once again, you  only need to look at the record of the Government in this Parliament, let alone in the

parliaments leading up to this one, to see that they just can't be trusted on  superannuation.

JOURNALIST: The decision to build submarines in South Australia - what impact will  that have on the Federal election result in that state?

ELLIS: Well obviously, I'll leave it up to the commentators to talk about the politics, but  what I will say is that we do welcome the fact that this is a significant investment in  South Australia and Australian jobs. We know that this is incredibly important, and we  also know that the Government had to be dragged kicking and screaming to actually  deliver upon what was a very clear election commitment. The submarines  announcement was only made possible because Labor and the State Government, and  most importantly the people of South Australia stood up and called-out the Liberal  Government and told them that there would be very clear consequences otherwise.

JOURNALIST: Do you think it will be enough though for the Government to retain seats  there?

ELLIS: A few weeks and that will be clear. What I do know is that this is clearly a  Government which is now being driven by politics at every stage. This is a Government  that is being driven, whether it's in superannuation or education, by a plan to get them  through the next election, not a plan for the future of the country. And obviously, it will  be just a few weeks’ time before you see how the Australian public respond to that. But I  do stand here as a very proud South Australian welcoming the submarine  announcement and being very proud that we stood up and fought so hard for it.

JOURNALIST: What do you think should happen to the 900 asylum seekers  languishing in the Manus Island detention centre?

ELLIS: Obviously, we need to make sure that we have important an urgent discussions  with the Government over there and we need to engage more broadly in the region. We  know that we need a regional solution in these areas, something we have been pushing  for for a long time, and those discussions are obviously now more urgent than ever.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: JOANNE CLEARY 0428 816 751



