

THE HON RICHARD MARLES MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER  PROTECTION   MEMBER FOR CORIO

E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  SKY NEWS AM AGENDA  WEDNESDAY, 9 MARCH 2016

SUBJECT/S:  Election timing, Budget, Greens and Liberal-Greens preference  deal, Asylum seekers

KIERAN GILBERT: With me now the Shadow Immigration Minister Richard Marles, first  of all, let’s get to the prospect of an early, well it’s not really early, a month earlier than  scheduled, a double dissolution on July 2, would Labor support the expedited passage  of supply bills, you won’t be seeking to filibuster? Labor will back supply bills, can you  give an unequivocal answer to that?

RICHARD MARLES, SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER  PROTECTION: Well Kieran, we are the Labor Party, we are going to have an obviously  sensible approach to supply bills, and we are not about to block supply, so no one is  putting that on the table, but I think what is clear on this is that you have got a  Government which is in chaos. They’ve got no idea what they are doing, Malcolm  Turnbull came to the Prime Ministership promising economic leadership, intelligent  discussion, and end to the slogans - the adults were in charge now. And what we have  seen since is anything but. An economic debate where the Government has been sitting  on the fence, almost constant election speculation, they can’t even guarantee they are  going to hold the Budget on the day on which it is due.

GILBERT: You said you wouldn’t block the supply, but you didn’t say you wouldn’t  delay the passage of it through filibustering and so on, is that a prospect? Could you  seek to delay and stymie the Government’s election timing?

MARLES: I don’t think the issue here is any actions that Labor is about to take, and we  are going to be co-operative in terms of issues around supply, I am sure that’s how this  will play out. But, what you have got here is the Government’s actions which need to be

scrutinized and that is a Government which is in complete chaos Kieran, because they  don’t have an agenda. They have run away from the economic debate, they don’t know  what it is they are doing, or what they should be saying. Malcolm Turnbull really  imagined that all he needed to do was sit on the throne and glow and that somehow all  of Australia would fall in love with him as a result and to his surprise, Australians are  expecting their Prime Minister to govern, to make some decisions, to actually try and  run Australia and yet that is the last thing they are seeing from him. It is a Government  in chaos.

GILBERT: If it is a longer campaign called on, say May 11 - that is the day after the  Budget is scheduled through to July 2, that would be a seven and a half week  campaign, longer than most recent campaigns, although we should remember Julia  Gillard called the election early back in 2010, in terms of a longer campaign that  provides scrutiny on both sides, you accept that in terms of the scrutiny of Opposition  Leader Shorten?

MARLES: Of course, we are happy to go into a short campaign, a long campaign on  whatever date the Government chooses, I mean one of the things that we have been  dealing with from opposition is the prospect of an election right now, we are ready to go  whenever the Government is ready to go, and to be honest we are really looking  forward to this because Kieran at the end of the day, we have got an agenda. We are  out there going through the policy, we have something to say around the issue of  budget repair for example with our policy in respect of negative gearing and we are  confident that if we show up to the Australian people with a set of plans for Australia’s  future, that measured against what the Government is proposing which is absolutely  nothing, nothing other than Malcolm Turnbull’s assumed popularity, that’s what this is  about, the scrutiny is absolutely going to work in our favour. We are up for a long  campaign if that is what the Government’s wants, we welcome every day of it.

GILBERT: A number of seats in Melbourne, Sydney potentially as well, but Melbourne  is the focus in terms of a possible Liberal Party / Greens preference arrangement in the  lower house that would put the likes of Batman, Wills and like if the Liberals preference  the Greens over Labor?

MARLE



S: Well Kieran the dirtiest room in the Australian Parliament is the one in which  the Liberals and the Greens get together to smoke cigars and do deals, and what we  have seen in the last 24 hours is the outcome of one of those. The idea that the Liberals  are going to preference the Greens in the seats that you have just mentioned in places  like Batman and Wills, Sydney, Grayndler and in return for which the Greens will have  an open ticket in Liberal held marginals, seats like Corangamite and Deakin. That is an  astonishingly cynical deal, that is, the Liberals and the Greens in bed together.

GILBERT: Tony Nutt, the Liberal director said there is no such deal relating to those  Sydney seats.

MARLES: Well let’s see what happens, let’s see what happens election day, but I  reckon that deal is being struck right now Kieran, and this is the Liberals saying they  prefer the extreme economic policies of the Greens, and the Greens saying they prefer  the Liberals policy in relation to climate change, and so what they are showing to those  wh

o vote for them is that their political representatives don’t give a stuff about what their  voters think of them, all they are interested in is their own self interest, it is an absolute  demonstration on both the Greens and the Liberals part of their rank cynicism and that  is the way these parties go about their business. We welcome that being scrutinised in  an election campaign as well, because we do speak for Labor voters, we speak for  middle Australia and we speak for plans for Australia’s future.

GILBERT: Three of the four refugees resettled from Nauru to Cambodia have decided  to head home to Iran, do you accept the Government’s position that this was still a  worthwhile investment as part of the deterrence as part of their border protection  policies?

MARLES: Well if Peter Dutton as the Immigration Minister thinks that this has been a  good spend of public money, he is living on another planet.  The idea that $55 million  being spent on trying to build some kind of resettlement capacity in Cambodia for what  has turned out to be a single person represents value for the public spend is absolutely  ridiculous. It has been an expensive joke, and it was that from the day it was first  mooted and the thing here Kieran is that it has really stood as the emblem of the  Government’s failure to come up with any credible third country resettlement option and  that is the issue that needs to be focussed on now, because we have got the better part  of 2000 people on Nauru and Manus who are being left there to languish, and they are  being left there to languish because this Government has been unable to come up with  a sensible resettlement option, instead it has been wasting time and money on places  like Cambodia.

GILBERT: There is a chance of a repatriation deal with Iran, Andrew Probyn and  Andrew Tillett in the West Australian newspaper, this morning reporting that this deal  could come as early as next week when the foreign minister visits. That would make a  huge impact wouldn’t it?

MARLES: It is important to get resettlement or return arrangements I should say, with  countries where there are those in Australia who are found to be non-genuine refugees,  the pathway towards having people returned to Iran actually began under a Labor  Government, we were the first to have people voluntarily returned to Iran. Iran has  historically been difficult, so of course you want an arrangement like that in place.

GILBERT: It would be a game changer wouldn’t it? If you could secure repatriation to  Iran?

MARLES: A lot of ifs here Kieran. This Government has been big on its talk, it has been  small on its delivery. Let’s see what actually occurs here and let’s see what the price is  that is put on the table next week, but there is another point here Kieran. This is not a

resettlement option, Iran doesn’t change the game in terms of those on Manus and  Nauru, this Government still needs to find a credible third country resettlement option,  that is not what Iran will ever be, and in that the Government has been an abject failure.

GILBERT: Thank you Richard Marles, appreciate your time.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: LIDIJA IVANOVSKI 0427 051 563



