

THE HON TANYA PLIBERSEK MP  DEPUTY LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  SHADOW MINISTER FOR EDUCATION  SHADOW MINISTER FOR WOMEN

MEMBER FOR SYDNEY



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TV INTERVIEW  ABC NEWS 24 BREAKFAST

FRIDAY, 16 DECEMBER 2016

SUBJECTS: Schools’ funding; Syria; health.



MICHAEL ROWLAND, PRESENTER:  Education Ministers from around the country  meet today to discuss the future of school funding. Joining us now from Sydney is the  Deputy Opposition Leader, Tanya Plibersek. Tanya Plibersek, good morning to you.  Thanks for joining us. We’ll get to education in a moment, but as the Deputy leader of  the Labor Party, I want to ask you about Syria. There have been claims that this  represents a massive failure of Western leadership in that country. How do you respond  to those sort of claims?  TANYA PLIBERSEK, DEPUTY LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Well, I think it's a  global failure. I mean, Syria - this conflict - has been going on now for six years. I think,  as John Kerry said, it won't be solved militarily. This will require the Assad Government  to sit down with the population that they have so brutally oppressed and work out a  transition to a unified country. I don't see how it can happen until forces like Russia, like  Iran, Turkey, Saudi Arabia and others, stop using this as a proxy power struggle in the  Middle East. It's absolutely the critical that, in the short term, the international  community insists on safe passage out of Aleppo for the hundreds of thousands of  people who are still trapped there. The international community must insist on proper  humanitarian aid, not just into Aleppo, but into other besieged cities. And there needs to  be a thorough recognition that efforts to bring the parties to the table for a negotiation on  a more permanent and more broad-spread ceasefire happen as soon as possible. Our  aid, not just to Syria, but to countries like Jordan, Lebanon, Turkey  - that each have a  million refugees - has actually really come under pressure, particularly as we go into  winter. It's important to make sure that those neighbouring countries are able to properly  look after the people who fled their homes.  ROWLAND: OK now coming back home. As the Shadow Education Minister, what are  you to hoping to emerge from this meeting to discuss education funding today?   PLIBERSEK: Well, today is really D-day for the Federal Government. They promised  that they would fund the full six years of the Gonski needs-based funding rollout. The

final two years - calendar year 2018 and 2019 - are where the bulk of the extra money  flows. We've now got a Federal Government that's trying to get out of funding those last  two years, despite their promises to the states and territories and - more importantly -  their promise to children and their parents. It's up to the Federal Government today to  walk into this meeting and say they will keep their promise to Australian schoolchildren:  to properly fund our schools; to make sure that every child can get the make individual  attention they need; to make sure that teachers can continue to upgrade their  professional skills throughout their working lives; to make sure that we have extra  services like speech pathology, occupational therapy; to make sure that every school is  a great school. Today is the day that Simon Birmingham needs to keep his promise.  ROWLAND: Is there enough focus, in your view, on teacher excellence in our schools?  PLIBERSEK: Look, I think everybody agrees that the best way we can improve our  results is to make sure that every teacher has the opportunity to do what they want to  do, which is to continue to hone their professional skills throughout their working lives. If  you walk into a great classroom with an enthusiastic teacher, you see it straightaway,  you feel it straightaway, and the kids feel it straightaway. But to give every teacher the  opportunity to have that kind of confidence, you need to do things like make sure that  initial teacher training is the best it can be, that we’re attracting the best and brightest by  improving the status of the profession. We need to make sure that, throughout teachers'  careers, they have opportunities of working with other highly accomplished teachers,  that they have the opportunity to mentor the young ones as they're coming through and  to be mentored themselves. And you need to make sure that some of the issues that  teachers are dealing with in the classroom, like kids who are starting school without  basic fine motor skills, without the ability to speak in sentences - that we're taking care  of those additional needs as well, so teachers can really focus on maths, science,  reading, writing - all those basics. But we've got the support for social children to make  sure that their social and emotional wellbeing is taken care of too.  ROWLAND: The Education Minister, Simon Birmingham, as you know concedes some  wealthy independent schools are, in his words, "over-funded". Isn’t there an argument  there for - as we look at the funding discussion here - to redistribute some of that  money from the wealthier schools to those schools in need around the country?   PLIBERSEK: Well, the extra funding that he's talking about wouldn't even touch the  sides of what this Government has cut: this the Government has cut $30 billion over the  next decade. So every school in every state will actually have a funding cut of an  average of $3 million across the decade. What he's talking about in terms of over-funded schools is a fraction of that - a tiny fraction of that. But if he's actually got a  proposal, is he should tell us what that proposal is instead of just floating it six months  ago to distract -   ROWLAND: In principle, do you support the concept of taking money off over-funded  private schools and giving it to the schools in need?  PLIBERSEK: If the Education Minister has got a proposal, he should show it. Until then,  what stands is our policy of funding the neediest schools the most: of increasing funding  to those schools who need the most help quickly so that they get to the our Schooling  Resource Standard. Under our proposal, the majority of  schools in the states that  signed up early would have reached that Schooling Resource Standard that the Gonski  panel identified. They would have reached that by 2019. Under this Government, we  never know when schools will be adequately funded. We don't know when any school  would reach the Schooling Resource Standard under this Government. So, what  matters is funding the neediest schools the most, and doing it quickly. Making sure that  kids who come with extra needs - with a disability, with English as a second language,  studying in a small or remote school, Indigenous kids - that these children have extra

resources to make sure that they get on track quickly. We know what makes a  difference in the classroom. We know what makes a difference in schools. The Liberals  have previously promised to fund schools to make that difference. Today, they should  tell the states and territories that they're going to keep the promise to Australian  children.  ROWLAND: We're just about out of time but as a former health minister, Tanya  Plibersek, the ABC has obtained a report into the mental health service, Headspace -  speaking about government funding, it receives quite a bit of it - saying that this report  finds that it only provides a small benefit to clients. Is that good enough for a service  that receives so much in the way of taxpayer dollars?  PLIBERSEK: Well, it's not good enough that any service doesn't meet the full  expectations of that service. But I haven't seen the details of the report, so what I'd say  is: it matters that every dollar counts; that we spend every dollar wisely. It matters that  we young take care of the mental health of many young people - we know there are too  many young Australians who are suffering alone with very severe mental health issues,  in some cases. And I'd make an additional point, Michael - we've got another report  today from the Federal Government saying they're going to cut the kids' dental scheme  and they’re going to cut public dental for adults as well. I mean, we have a health  system where the Government's only response is to cut services for the neediest  people: teenagers with mental health conditions, kids who need dental care, adults who  need dental care. We have a health system with a minister in charge who has no clear  priority or understanding of what Australians need to protect their health.  ROWLAND: Tanya Plibersek, as 2016 draws to a close - thankfully, in the eyes of many  - we wish you and your family a Happy Christmas. Thanks for joining us.   PLIBERSEK: And to you and yours too, Michael.  ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: DAN DORAN 0427 464 350

