

THE HON. BILL SHORTEN MP  LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  MEMBER FOR MARIBYRNONG

E&OE TRANSCRIPT

DOORSTOP

ADELAIDE  THURSDAY, 16 JUNE 2016

SUBJECT/S: Labor’s plan to protect jobs in steel industry; Parakeelia; Temporary  Protection Visas; Tony Abbott; Tools for Your Trade; CFA.

JAY WEATHERILL, PREMIER OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA: Welcome to South Australia. It's great

to welcome Bill Shorten and also Nick Champion, and Penny Wong, with whom we've been

working very closely over the last few months to grapple with the challenge of the potential closure

of the steel works at Arrium. We know that the steel works are not only central to Whyalla, it's also

central to the nation. We have to be a nation that has the capacity to build structural steel for the

defence of our nation, for its economic development, but most importantly, for the people of  Whyalla.

We know that what is at stake there is about 3,500 jobs, but more than, courtesy of the Deloitte

Access economic study, we know that Whyalla's economy, 70 per cent of which, $1.07 billion per

annum, smaller by 2030 than it would otherwise be if we see the closure of these steel works.

Whyalla’s its population would fall from 22,000 to approximately 8,500 to 11,000 people by 2030.

And of course, the extensive infrastructure in Whyalla, which would no longer be capable of being

supported, would impoverish the whole of the region in Whyalla and the northern areas of our  state,

So, this is a massive issue for Whyalla, a massive issue for our state but also a critical national

issue. We had the opportunity just a few moments ago to brief Bill Shorten and his team on the

work of our steel taskforce. We've been working very closely with the administrator to come up

with a plan which allows for the future investment and long-term security of these steelworks. It

requires, though, the support of both levels of government. That's why we've reached out to both

Federal Labor and also the current Federal Government to try and settle a bipartisan position. I'm

very pleased to say today that Federal Labor, with Bill Shorten, has responded positively to our

call. So I'd invite now Bill Shorten to say a few words about the proposition that he has put to the  South Australian Government.

BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Thanks very much Jay and good morning

everybody. It's great to be in South Australia announcing Federal Labor's package to save the

steel industry. I'm accompanied today by my Senate leader, Senator Penny Wong, and my

assistant minister for manufacturing, Nick Champion. And I must also pay tribute to the work of

Jay Weatherill and Tom Koutsantonis, who have worked night and day to make sure that there is  a steel making future for Whyalla and indeed Australia.

Today I announce that a Labor Government, if elected, would support the South Australian

proposition of saving Arrium. Specifically, we would provide $50 million in grant funding and

another $50 million in loan facilities, to line up with South Australia's offer of $50 million, and use

that as the basis for the administrator to be able to ensure there is capital expenditure to secure

ongoing steel production at Whyalla and the related steel operations. We do this because we

believe in Labor, that Australia must be a steel-making nation. I had the privilege before coming

into parliament of working in and around the steel industry for 14 years. I know the quality of steel

production in Australia. I've seen it made first hand. I've been to our steel-making facilities around

Australia and I believe that Australia should still be a nation that makes steel and still be a nation  that manufactures products and steel is at the heart of our infrastructure investment.

Specifically, there's an interesting statistic which I think tells the story of the importance of steel

manufacturing in Australia. In the last five years, the administrator advises me that just about

every house in NSW has been built with Arrium steel in it. Steel is a vital commodity. We use it in

our road and our rail and our construction. And if we don't fight for our Aussie steel jobs, if we do

not fight for our Whyalla steel jobs, what will happen is that in the future if we don't have a

domestic steel industry, is that we will become price takers on the international stage. Our

economy will be more vulnerable to price hikes because we can't provide domestic competition.

Steel, of course, is vital to our defence industries. Malcolm Turnbull says that he wants there to be

Australian steel in Australian submarines, we agree. But you can't put Australian steel into  Australian submarines if there is no Australian steel industry.

So in that tenor, I extend the invitation to Mr Turnbull to make the rescue of Australian steel a

bipartisan proposition. There are 3,500 jobs in South Australia, there's another 2,500, 2,800

Arrium steel making jobs, steel distribution jobs in NSW, another 930 in Victoria, another 900 in

Queensland. The steel industry deserves being saved. It deserves a government who will fight for

it. Labor can be trusted to fight for steelworkers' jobs, for the small business jobs, for the small

business operations who rely upon our steel industry. Mr Turnbull should move the issue of steel

and steel jobs and manufacturing out of the zone of uncertainty, out of the zone of partisanship.

Let's work together with the South Australian Government to save Whyalla, to save Arrium, to

save steel-making jobs, to save our manufacturing industry and to save Australia's economic  independence in such a vital commodity.

Today is good news and I'm looking forward to travelling to Whyalla to talking further, not only with  Premier Jay Weatherill, but the workforce and the community of Whyalla. Thank you very much.

SHORTEN: Are there any questions?

JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten, just on the Parakeelia issue, your party pays a company called

Electrac for the same sort of software. Can you guarantee that money hasn't gone straight into the  ALP?

SHORTEN: We use a company called Magenta Linas, they're not owned by the Labor Party. I

think the Liberal Party has got more questions to answer here. And we haven't heard a word out of

the Prime Minister himself. Mr Turnbull thinks he can hide for the rest of the election. He thinks

that he doesn't have to take responsibility, although he is the leader of the Liberal Party. He does  have questions to answer but instead, he's sent out a party official to do his dirty work for him.

It's not enough to be the leader of the Liberal Party and go missing with the tough questions have

to be asked. And even more specifically, Mr Turnbull needs to answer this question as well: has

he used any of his own taxpayer allowance to be paid into this Liberal-owned company for the  services which improve the bottom line of the Liberal Party?

JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten, there's a story in the Daily Telegraph today claiming that you're

putting out the welcome mat for asylum seekers by scrapping temporary protection visas. I realise

this was a policy agreed upon at Labor's federal conference last year and it's not new, but I'm

interested in the implications. Does it mean the legacy caseload of about 30,000 asylum seekers

who came during the Rudd/Gillard years will get to stay? What does it mean for people currently

on Manus Island and Nauru, and what do you say to critics who say you're giving people  smugglers a product to sell and it will encourage people to jump on boats?

SHORTEN: Thanks for those four questions. I think the magic of your questions was in the

opening introduction to it. Nothing new. You realise that this has actually been out in the public

domain since last July. I think even the person who wrote the story today has written the same  story before -

JOURNALIST: Nonetheless, what are the implications -

SHORTEN: I'm going to answer them but I'm just going to make the point that there is nothing

new in this story and you all know this. This is the same old Liberal Party trying to reheat their

same old lies and fear campaign. Labor, on July 3rd, will have the same policy about stopping the

boats. We will not put the people smugglers back into business. We will maintain offshore

processing. But when the Liberals like to keep fanning this debate, and talk about these people

who are already here. Well there's a couple of simple observations to be made. Taxpayers are

already paying for the care of these people here. This use of the word temporary is a fiction.

They've been here under these Liberal arrangements for years and years. Labor's got a clear

policy to deal with this matter and we don't want to see taxpayers carrying the burden of this

situation on indefinitely. In terms of Manus and Nauru, I make the same points that I've made in

the first couple of weeks of this campaign. People smugglers should know that on July 3rd,  whoever wins this election, you are not back in business, full stop.

JOURNALIST: Hypothetical, say the Coalition wins on July 2, should Malcolm Turnbull reach out

to -

SHORTEN: So harsh.

JOURNALIST:  I'm sorry, it's a hypothetical. If Malcolm does win should he reach out some of the

conservatives in the Liberal Party like Tony Abbott and reshuffle his frontbench and give him a  position?

SHORTEN: A vote for Malcolm Turnbull would be a vote for the return of Tony Abbott. Who on

earth wants Tony Abbott to be the Minister for Education, more cuts. The pensioners don't want

Tony Abbott back in Social Services. Who wants Tony Abbott as Minister for Health? More cuts to

hospitals, more cuts to Medicare. And I don't think anyone in workplace relations want him back  as workplace relations minister.

The truth of the matter is that Malcolm Turnbull leads a divided party and if he is re-elected on July

3rd, what will happen is that Tony Abbott will be back because Malcolm Turnbull has to appease

the right-wing of his party, and we all know what Tony Abbott in the leadership position means,  more cuts to health, more cuts to education, more cuts to the safety net of workplace relations.

JOURNALIST:  This morning Chris Bowen said that Labor would govern alone or not at all. Can

you rule out forming any kind of coalition with Greens, independents, the minor parties, and if so,  what will you do in the event of a hung parliament?

SHORTEN: Well first of all, the election hasn't been counted, the votes haven't been issued. 16

million Australians haven't voted. Let me be very, very clear. Labor's got fantastic policies for this

country. A vote for Labor will be a vote to save our steel industry, the heart of our manufacturing

industry. A vote for Labor will be a vote to make sure we have more apprenticeships, that we have

genuine manufacturing opportunities for renewable energy. Labor is the party of manufacturing,

advanced manufacturing and Australian jobs. We haven't given up the chase of winning the

election. I'm not chasing people's second preferences, I'm not worried about the Greens or

whatever those people care to try to dial themselves in, in relevance. They have none in this

debate. Labor will form a government and one thing is for sure, we're not going back into any form  of coalition with the minor parties or the Greens, full stop.

JOURNALIST:  Aren't you being completely disingenuous about Parakeelia? Wasn't the ALP,

your software provider in 2014, did that operation make a profit and how much?

SHORTEN: Well, let us be clear. The Liberal Party pay Parakeelia. The Liberal Party own

Parakeelia. The Liberal Party pay Parakeelia, a company they own, with taxpayer funds. It is not

sufficient or acceptable that Mr Turnbull pretends he's not a Liberal when there's trouble, but the

rest of the time says he's the leader of the Liberal Party. You cannot be a part-time leader,

Malcolm Turnbull. You either lead your party or you don't. Hang on, Sarah, sorry, Anna. The other

point here is that we pay Magenta Linas. We use our money, we pay Magenta Linas, we don't

own the business. We're not recycling, like a Liberal Party washing machine, taxpayer funds into  the bottom line of the profits of the Liberal Party.

JOURNALIST:  But until two years ago, weren't you doing the same thing?

SHORTEN: We've never used Parakeelia, to the best of my knowledge.

JOURNALIST:  It's National TAFE Day today.

SHORTEN: Thanks for reminding everyone Alice.

JOURNALIST:  And you announced you're going to bring back the tools for trade bonus. I wanted

to find out first of all why it's less than it used to be, it used to be $5,500 and now it's $3,000, and

also the TAFEs want to know if you will guarantee a 70 per cent funding balance for VET  courses?

SHORTEN: First of all, the tools for trade program is a much better proposition than asking

apprentices on low pay to go into debt. If you want to look at this election and the clear differences

between Liberal and Labor, the apprenticeship system of Australia highlights the difference in our

values completely. The Liberal Party proposition for young people doing trades is they won't fund

schools properly, they will take major cuts to vocational education. And what they want to do  instead is say to apprentices, you can borrow money and get into debt.

This Liberal Party led by Mr Turnbull is shamefully out of touch with the real lives of apprentices. A

first year construction apprentice earns barely $420 before tax. What he needs, or she needs as

an apprentice, they don't need to be offered a snake oil debt proposition from the Liberal Party,

but they do need tools. What we have announced today is $3,000 tools for your trade to be paid to

an apprentice, but what we will do is payments would occur in milestones. In other words, as you

successfully complete your course, you receive a portion of the payment. And I've met hundreds

of apprentices, and they like that proposition. Would it be nice to give them more money? Sure.

But the Liberals have made such a dreadful hash of this economy in the last three years that the  money isn't simply there to do anything more than the responsible measures we do.

But when we talk about the merits of our TAFE proposition, I've never been stuck in a traffic jam

behind a Government white limo going to a TAFE offering a better deal for apprentices. When we

talk about what goes on in vocational education more generally, we've taken the sensible decision

to reign in unsustainable Government funding by capping the amount of vocational education

loans so that dodgy private providers can stop banking ill-gotten profits and not delivering good

outcomes to apprentices. In terms of our commitment and vocational education funding, whilst we

haven't fastened on a final percentage of what we want to spend of our vocational education dollar

on TAFE, there's no doubt in my mind that a Government I lead will spend the vast bulk of our

vocational education spending back in TAFE, the known brand, which has delivered for  generations and generations.

JOURNALIST:  Can you rule out that Magenta Linas has donated to the Labor Party or any

members or candidates? And also can you explain what the Labor Party's concerns are with Nick  Xenophon’s financial arm? There's been a report today that Labor's asked the AEC to investigate.

SHORTEN: The Labor Party has no financial interest in the ownership of Magenta Linas. Let me

answer your question fully because this is about Parakeelia and Malcolm Turnbull's lack of

leadership. The Labor Party has no ownership structures at all of Magenta Linus. I don't know

every transaction they've had at the state level but what I do know is that the clear difference here

is that the Liberal Party, they love a dollar these Liberals. What they've done is they used the

taxpayer allowance to buy software and to train, but what they've managed to do is create their  own business so they use the taxpayer allowance and they pay themselves.

You've got to love these Liberals. They're making a profit out of a system and what we think is that

they need, the Auditor-General needs to investigate this. But what I also think is Mr Turnbull can't

go around saying vote for me as Liberal Prime Minister but then send a party official out to do his

dirty work and not take any responsibility. Mr Turnbull needs to answer the question, is it

improper? He needs to answer the question, will he continue the practice? He needs to answer

the question, has he paid his own taxpayer allowances into this company owned by the Liberal

Party contributing to the bottom line of the Liberal Party? In terms of Senator Xenophon, I haven't  followed the reports you're talking about and happy to get back in touch with you.

JOURNALIST:  You mentioned submarines as a reason to keep the steel industry alive for

strategic reasons. I understand the amount of steel required for the 12 submarines would be less

than a day's production for a steelworks plant. Is it really a credible argument to argue that one

reason among others to keep it going is to prop up the steel industry is for something that requires  such little work?

SHORTEN: What I was doing, you're right, the proportion of the steel required in submarines

made in Australia is a relatively small proportion, you're completely right. But the point I make

there is it's Malcolm Turnbull, you know, who rushed around and said we'll make sure that there's

Australian steel in Australian submarines. The reason why he used that as the sort of example,

the metaphor, is that Malcolm Turnbull loves to talk big, very fond of talking, making big

generalised promises. He now has an opportunity today to be genuinely bipartisan, to genuinely

stand up for the steel industry. The truth of the matter is that at Arrium, and I know this because

I've been in and out of their steel works over many years all around the country, most of it is used

in the domestic construction industry, some of it can be used in rail and certainly others can be  used in national infrastructure projects.

If you want to vote for the steel industry, vote for Labor. If you want to vote for manufacturing, vote

for Labor. If you want to vote to keep jobs in Whyalla, keep the population there, vote for Labor. I

sincerely hope that Mr Turnbull doesn't, in a fit of pique, say because we've taken some

leadership on the issue, working with Jay Weatherill that he doesn't take his bat and ball and go

home. It would be a very healthy sign for Australian democracy if Mr Turnbull says do you know

what, Labor's called it right here and I'm a big enough fellow to admit that Labor's called it right  and I'm happy to follow Labor's lead.

JOURNALIST:  Premier, can I ask you what you're still asking for from Mr Shorten? What are you

still looking for from a potential Labor Government?

WEATHERILL: I think that we've seen some very fantastic announcements, renewable energy

policy. We have a national energy market that is in need of reform that takes into account of what

is a bipartisan position on renewable energy targets. That's a great proposition that's been put

forward by Mark Butler and Bill Shorten. We've seen a fantastic announcement just in the last few

days about health funding, doubling the proposition that was put on the table by the  Commonwealth, that's a good step forward.

JOURNALIST:  Have you got everything you wanted?

WEATHERILL: No, there's more to go, I'll go through the list. There's 11 things we've put to both

major parties. $500 million in response to our proposition of investing in public transport which is a

superior proposition that was put by the Federal Liberal Party. We have a range of other

infrastructure projects that we've put forward, both in the irrigation sector, Strzelecki track

upgrades, health funding. They're all propositions that we put forward and we're looking forward to

positive responses. So far I've been delighted with the response that we've had from Federal

Labor in this campaign. We've had some wins from the Federal Liberal Party but at the moment

the balance is very much in favour of Federal Labor. My job at the end of the day, of course I want

to see Bill succeed and my party succeed, but my job at the end of the day is to promote South

Australia's interests. So we've put both of these sets of propositions to both major parties and

that's my job. We tried to broker a bipartisan agreement on steel. Bill stepped up to the plate and  we do invite the PM to join him.

JOURNALIST: Premier, briefly on a separate story from New South Wales. Mike Baird is going to

Broken Hill and he will make an announcement that they will build a $400 million pipeline from

Wentworth which would involve taking 10 gigalitres a year out of the Murray River. How does

South Australia feel about that? And can this be done, in your view, without negotiation with South  Australia?

WEATHERILL: Well, provided it's within the sustainable limits of take from the River Murray, then

there's no issue with it. But if it involves depleting and degrading the resources of the river, then

obviously it will be a source of great concern to us. I mean we're always wary when we hear an

upstream Premier talking about the River Murray, because generally speaking they've spent most

of their career depleting and polluting it. So we'll have to understand exactly what's being put but

provided they operate within the limits that were established, I think by Minister Wong when she

was Minister for Water, in relation to the Murray-Darling Basin plan and others under the previous  government, then it's something that no doubt could be supported.

JOURNALIST: Premier you touched on energy in your previous question, obviously this week

we've seen power prices go up with our major retailer AGL yesterday foreshadowing a 12 percent

increase for retail consumers. Origin in the retail space have followed this morning. Is your  Government doing enough to address this issue for our state?

WEATHERILL: No, we need to do more. We need to be successful in building stronger

connections with the Eastern States. When the previous Liberal Government privatised our

electricity assets, they deliberately scotched the interconnector with New South Wales to drive up

the price they could sell ETSA for. That's had a damaging effect on South Australian consumers

because we don't have those connections to the other States. So we're pursuing those. An

important policy issue in this Federal Election campaign is reviewing the rules of the national

energy market so they can permit us to send out clean energy over the border and we can take

back base load energy to stabilise our system. Both major parties have a National Energy

Renewable Energy Target. South Australia's blessed with renewable energy resources, that's why

we've got so much wind resources and solar resources that we're playing into the system. But the

market at the moment is holding us back and we're the ones doing the heavy lifting in this National

Renewable Energy Target. It's a national objective but we don't have a truly national energy

market, and fortunately Federal Labor are promising to remedy that should they be elected and

once again, we call on the Federal Liberal Party to match that proposition because it's an

important bipartisan commitment for renewable energy. The future is not going to be in producing

dirty energy emission systems in our nation. We know what the future looks like. South Australia is

the future in terms of renewable energy and we just need a fit for purpose modern national  electricity market.

JOURNALIST: Some of your Victorian Labor colleagues have contacted Daniel Andrews' office

about the CFA dispute. I think Rob Mitchell even said volunteers are feeling torn apart and

discarded and volunteer fire brigades have confirmed they will campaign for the Coalition. Will you

travel to Victoria and meet with CFA volunteers who are concerned? Are you worried about  electoral chances in Victoria now?

SHORTEN: Well, not only will I travel to Victoria, I live in Victoria.

JOURNALIST: You haven't been there in a while.

SHORTEN: Well I've actually been there for the last 49 years, but anyway. Yeah, certainly I'll be

getting around our electorates. More than happy to talk to volunteers and career fire fighters. This

is a dispute with a beginning, a middle and an end. I've got no doubt that the parties involved in

this negotiation are capable of resolving this negotiation because one thing I know about our

volunteer brigades, our career fire fighters and the State Government is they're all committed to  the better safety of Victoria.

JOURNALIST: On Electrac, you personally pay $1,600 out of your electoral allowance for this

software provider. Can you rule out that money hasn't gone straight back into the ALP as a  donation?

SHORTEN: I don't believe it has, no.

JOURNALIST: Peter Dutton has conceded this morning that Mike Kelly has a chance of winning

Eden-Monaro. Being the bellwether seat, does that boost your confidence ahead of the Election?

SHORTEN: Well listen, well I think we all remember yesterday that Malcolm Turnbull declared

he'd won the Election, he said "we'll win". The truth of the matter is, this election will be decided by

16 million Australians. And I believe Labor can win this election. And we will work night and day

for the best interest of Australians and putting out our policies to Australia as Australians vote.

Mike Kelly is a candidate who will deliver better funding for schools, he will protect Medicare

against the privatisation of any parts of Medicare. He will stand up for rescuing the Australian steel

industry. He will make sure that we have proper world-class National Broadband Network. Mike

Kelly will make sure that we have a system where the banks are held accountable for a royal

commission into the banking sector. Mike Kelly will make sure that we take real action on

renewable energy and that first homebuyers have an opportunity to have a level playing field in a

reformed tax, taxation system. Mike Kelly and every candidate of the Labor Party know that this

election is about choices. We will not be choosing to offer Australians a $50 billion tax giveaway to

the largest companies in Australia, much of which will go overseas. But we will make sure that we  put people first.

Thank you, everybody.

ENDS



