



THE HON STEVEN CIOBO MP   Minister for Trade and Investment





TRANSCRIPT  ABC, THE BUSINESS  TUESDAY, 15 MARCH 2016

Subjects: Austrade office in Iran, Indonesia Trade Minister visit, Trans-Pacific Partnership

E&OE….

TICKY FULLERTON: Just a month into the job and Australia's new Trade Minister is  headline news today with the Government announcing it will re-open a trade office in Iran. It  comes just days after New Zealand announced a new trade deal with Iran which led to an  outcry from critics and particularly Israel after Iran reportedly test fired two missiles with the  phrase "Israel must be wiped out". Joining me to discuss Iran and all things trades is the  Minister Steve Ciobo. Minister, welcome.

STEVEN CIOBO: Thank you, Ticky.

TICKY FULLERTON: Now, what's stopped Australia going as far as a trade deal with Iran  like New Zealand? I see there are protests today. Is it the political sensitivity?

STEVEN CIOBO: No. I think first thing’s first. Bear in mind that it wasn't that long ago that  Iran secured agreement with the permanent five members of the Security Council plus  Germany in relation to a plan around cooperation. We're now seeking to look at what  opportunities exist in relation to trade. I made the announcement today that we would be  reopening an Austrade office in Tehran that will be part of the Australian post that we have in  Iran. There's clearly strong interest from Australian businesses to be able to move back into  the Iranian market.

TICKY FULLERTON: One of the mooted opportunities was also the possibility of  returning thousands of failed asylum seekers back to Iran from Australia. Now, there's no  announcement on that, obviously. Can you see more of this sort of thing happening, tagging  the return of some asylum seekers to trade agreements?

STEVEN CIOBO: No. They're quite separate issues. So I can't stress that enough. I mean,  they are separate issues. The resumption of trade and investment discussions with Iran is a  consequence of the normalisation of the relationship with Iran. It's not completely back to  normal, but it's certainly a big improvement from where it was. Discussions in relation to  asylum seekers though is a separate matter. We, of course, continue to have a long tail in  relation to the burden that Australian tax payers have had as a result of the Labor Party's  dismantling of our tough border protection laws. Of course, we saw the wave of boats and  asylum seekers come to Australia. The Coalition Government is still dealing with that process





and dealing with the overhang from that time when Labor was in Government, but the two  are unrelated.

TICKY FULLERTON: Now, tomorrow, you are hosting the Indonesian Trade Minister  here in Australia. Now, presumably that's a meeting very much about a repair job of our  relations because, from an Indonesian point of view, it was the threat to their protein chain of  course with that quite sudden halt of the live export industry, which must be still high in their  minds.

STEVEN CIOBO: I think you raise a valid point. Certainly, I know that the Indonesians  were very concerned that the former Labor Government of course had a complete kneejerk  reaction and shut down Australia's live cattle export industry to Indonesia. But I'm pleased to  say that the relationship with Indonesia has come a very long way since those dark days. We  are now back in the situation where we're actively engaging with Indonesia in terms of  opportunities to look at what we can do in relation to additional trade investment, discussions  between Australian based businesses, and business organisations as well as Indonesian based  businesses, and Indonesian based representative organisations, having discussions about what  their aspiration is for trade investment between Australia and Indonesia. Because frankly, for  two G20 nations, Ticky, the relationship is very underdone, and it could be a lot stronger than  it is.

TICKY FULLERTON: You're obviously working on trade deals on many fronts. The TPP,  the Trans-Pacific Partnership, is very much part of the Obama legacy. Now, on day one in the  job, I think, you criticised Hillary Clinton for opposing the TPP. Donald Trump describes the  TPP as being horrible. The TPP could be dead and buried by November, couldn't it?

STEVEN CIOBO: Well, look, I mean, I'm optimistic about the chances of the TPP being  ratified by the United States Congress. I met with Trade Ambassador Froman in Washington  several weeks ago. He was quietly optimistic about what could happen with the Congress. I  mean, let's not lose sight of the fact for all the rhetoric on all sides of the political debate in  the US as part of the build up to the presidential and congressional elections, Ticky, let's not  lose sight of the fact that there still exists a very strong Republican base and, to a lesser  extent, a Democrat base that seeks and supports freer trade because-

TICKY FULLERTON: But at the moment, you've got two of the leading candidates on  both sides which seem to be rather against the TPP.

STEVEN CIOBO: Well, look, certainly some of the rhetoric doesn't look encouraging. But I  don't get too worked up, being a practitioner of politics myself, too worked up about some of  the comments that are made by presidential hopefuls. What ultimately is going to matter is  the policy decision that's taken by the respective administration once we have a President.  Let's also not lose sight of the fact that there is that period between, I should say after the  presidential election and prior to the inauguration of the new President, what's so called the  lame duck session of the US Congress. A lot of people are saying that probably presents the  best opportunity for congressional ratification of the Trans-Pacific Partnership. I really hope  it happens because it's going to be great news for Australia.

TICKY FULLERTON: Alright. Now, I see the head of GE International in the Financial  Review today, he's worried about the rise of trade barriers. Donald Trump, again, this week  argued that the negative interest rates in Europe mean job losses in the US. Now he wants to  put up trade barriers. Are you concerned about this seeming rise of sort of protectionism,  nationalism around the world?





STEVEN CIOBO: Well, from my perspective, Ticky, what we really need to focus on is the  benefits that flow from more liberalised trade and from freer trade. If there's one clear  message that history can send us, one clear account that is evidence on the facts that we've  seen over the last 20, 30 or more years, it’s that increased trade around the globe has driven to  improved living standards. Australia has had 25 continuous years of economic growth and in  large part a lot of that has been a consequence of our ability to access new markets and to  drive trade.

TICKY FULLERTON: Minister, it can't be getting any easier for you though. Good luck  with it all this year. Thank you very much for joining us.

STEVEN CIOBO: Thank you.

ENDS.

