

THE HON TANYA PLIBERSEK MP  DEPUTY LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS  AND INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT

MEMBER FOR SYDNEY

E&OE TRANSCRIPT   RADIO INTERVIEW  ABC NEWSRADIO DRIVE  WEDNESDAY 23 MARCH 2016

SUBJECTS: Attacks in Brussels; national security

TANYA PLIBERSEK, DEPUTY LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Well I’ve spoken  to the Ambassador - the Belgian Ambassador to Australia, Jean-Luc Bodson -  today, to express to him our deepest sadness, sorrow and sympathy for the people  of Belgium and the residents of Brussels that have been affected by this terrible  attack. I’ll be speaking later today also to the EU Ambassador, Sem Fabrizi to  similarly pass on my thoughts. These attacks obviously took place in Brussels, but  it’s not just Belgians that have been affected, because of course Brussels is the  heart of Europe in many respects. So it really is an attack not just on Belgium, but on  the European idea and the European ideal.

SHON WALKER, PRESENTER: Malcolm Turnbull says that Europe has allowed the  security to slip, along with its open border policy for asylum seekers. Do you think  he’s right?

PLIBERSEK: Look, I certainly don’t think that’s a comment that Australians should  be making at this time. I think our focus needs to be on this terrible tragedy, dozens  of lives lost, it seems more than 200 people injured. That’s the matter - anything else  is matter at a later time for Belgians to decide.

WALKER: Now the Department of Foreign Affairs has updated its travel advisory for  Belgium, urging Australians to reconsider travel to the country. Is that appropriate?

PLIBERSEK: Well I think we should always take the best advice of our foreign  affairs and national security advisers in this respect. Australians should always check  DFAT travel advisories before they consider travelling to a country, and if something  like this happens, getting in touch as quickly as possible with the Department of  Foreign Affairs is very important as well, just to reassure Australia’s representatives  overseas that you’re safe, and to be able to make sure that your family and friends  know that you’re safe.

WALKER: Now back home and Australia’s terrorism alert remains unchanged at  ‘probable’. Do you see a need for that to be reviewed, in light of the Belgium attacks?

PLIBERSEK: No, I think it’s important that we take the best advice of our security  and intelligence agencies when making decisions about where to set the terror threat  advisory. I think it’s very important that Members of Parliament don’t freelance on  these issues, but rather that we take the best informed advice of the experts in the  area. Labor has always sought to work cooperatively and in a bipartisan way with the  Government to keep Australians safe.  It’s the most important duty of any  government to do so.

WALKER: The Attorney-General, George Brandis today has put forward a proposal  to strengthen the preventative detention laws for terrorism suspects. Now that would  allow police to question detainees before they’re charged with any offence. Do you  support that move?

PLIBERSEK: Well, we’ve heard from George Brandis through the media, but I  haven’t seen any proposed legislation. I don’t believe that Labor has received any  concrete proposals up until now. But we would work with the Government in the  same way that we have in the past, which is to closely examine any proposals that  the Government puts because we want our security and intelligence agencies to  have the powers and the resources to keep Australians safe. But I should point out  that in the past when we’ve examined legislation, we’ve made, from memory, 70  changes to legislation that’s come before the relevant committee - strengthening the  legislation, making sure that our agencies can keep people safe, but also making  sure that the rights and liberties that Australians value are also protected.

WALKER: Yes, but would you agree to go along with the Attorney-General on this  particular proposal, when it comes up?

PLIBERSEK: Well we don’t know what the proposal is. I think we need to see  legislation before we make decisions about whether we support legislation, or  whether we’d like to see changes to the legislation before we can support it.

WALKER: Is there anything more that Australia’s Government needs to do to protect  Australians from a terrorist attack?

PLIBERSEK: Well I think working closely with our security and intelligence  organisations is absolutely vital. Working closely with our partners internationally,  making sure that we’re sharing intelligence and security information - all of these are  very important and we are very insistent that we will work as closely as we can as an  Opposition to cooperate with the Government to give them any support that we need  to, to make sure we can keep Australians safe.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: DAN DORAN 0427 464 350

