1







The Hon. Scott Morrison MP  Treasurer





TRANSCRIPT

SKY NEWS - KIERAN GILBERT  WEDNESDAY 27 JULY 2016



E&OE

Subjects: Royal commission into allegations of abuse in Northern Territory juvenile detention centres;  Normandy attack; Labor’s debt and deficit legacy; Operation Sovereign Boarders

KIERAN GILBERT: Mr Morrison is the Government open to these ideas of broadening the inquiry  beyond just the Northern Territory?

TREASURER:  Well  the  Prime  Minister  has  acted  very  swiftly  on  this  matter  and  those  terms of  reference will be finalised over the period of time we have now. Cabinet will be meeting later this  week as we know, and of course we’re engaging with many stakeholders on this issue. So I think the  key focus here is Kieran, is to make sure we get this well targeted to ensure we work with those who  are obviously key to finding the solutions and to understanding what has occurred here, and to keep  it very focused on those issues and the Prime Minister I know if fully attentive to that.

GILBERT: And so will the issue of broadening it, do you think, be something that will be discussed by  your cabinet colleagues tomorrow?

TREASURER: Well the Prime Minister, as I’ve said, has moved very swiftly on this, with a great deal of  purpose and he’s very keen to ensure this focuses on the issues that need to be addressed. There  are of course more immediate issues that need to be flagged in working with the Chief Minister in  the Northern Territory. These would need to be addressed also, and these things need to happen in  parallel. Setting up the Royal Commission is not a small exercise and you can be sure the cabinet will  give due consideration to all the things that need to be included and what it needs to focus on  predominantly.

GILBERT: I want to talk about a few other issues, of course some economic matters, in just a moment  as well, I also want to get your reaction to this latest terrorist attack this time in Normandy in France,  a priest had his throat cut in morning mass, they really are using all sorts of approaches in terms of  their terror, we saw that in Nice and now morning mass, a priest killed.

TREASURER: It’s horrific, it’s barbaric, it’s intended to abhor and shock, that’s its purpose and the  response that the Government and, I think like-minded countries all around the world, is to continue  to show to stoicism that we have, continue to apply our resources and efforts in the areas that make  the biggest difference, and keep Australians and other citizens around the world safe. That means  continuing  to  have  the  very  strong  measures  that  we  put  in  place,  I  mean  this  Government   has  added  hundreds  of  millions  of  additional  resources  particularly  into  our  security intelligence  agencies. And to continue to work with our partners around the world, but also to ensure at home,  we’re taking all efforts to engage with the communities where we need to, to ensure we get the best  access to the information and ensure that we protect Australians and keep them safe. I mean that’s  what our focus is. This event is horrific, it’s barbaric, it’s shocking, and it disturbs us all. But it is

2

intended to try and distract us, and divide us, from the things that we know will be effective in  keeping Australians safe and that’s what the Government is focused on.

GILBERT: Let’s look to the economy now and a report today suggesting that Australia has been the  least  successful  in  the  advanced  G20  nations  in  terms  of  controlling  spending  since  the global  financial crisis. What’s your reaction to that? Is this a fair assessment?

TREASURER: Well the numbers speak for themselves, if there are deficits and they are sustained for  the period of time that they have, then obviously the debt goes up. That’s what’s occurred. And this  Government inherited that spending profile. Now we’ve slowed that rate of spending growth. But  this  is  why  I’ve  been  consistent  ever  since  coming  into  this  role,  the  issue  we  have  to  address is  spending. That is what’s undermining our ability to get the Budget back into balance and that is what  we’ve been focused on. Now that’s why I’ll be continuing to work with the crossbench in the senate,  in  this  new  senate,  to  develop  an  understanding  and  appreciation  of  the  real  objective  here in  getting the Budget back into balance and that is to get expenditures under control. Treasury’s advice  is very clear; and that is that Australia can not continue to provide the level of the cost of the  services we are providing I should say, and either not increase taxes or see the budget go into  further disrepair. Now we’re not a Government that believes higher taxes are good for the economy.  We think that actually retards growth and puts people’s jobs at risk. So that means we need to  continue to work to get spending under control and under the Budget I handed down in May, that  saw Government spending fall from 25.8 per cent down to 25.2. And that’s the trajectory we must  remain on.

GILBERT: Does is frustrate you as Treasurer, that, as this report suggests by a former figure from the  IMF  that  we  as  a  nation  have  had  comparatively  strong  economic  growth.  Is  this  a missed  opportunity since the global financial crisis when we should have been reining in spending as a  percentage of GDP?

TREASURER: Well I can’t change what the previous Government did. They did it.

GILBERT: Or your predecessor…

TREASURER: No, I’m not including my predecessor in that. You all remember the 2014/15 Budget,  we certainly do. And our efforts to try and rein that in and so it wasn’t bad enough that the Labor  party  when  they  were  in  Government  blew  up  the  Budget.  But  beyond  that  they  continued to  sabotage our efforts to fix the Budget, and we continue to remain focused on fixing the Budget, and  the question for the Labor party going into this term of Parliament; is will they continue to engage in  acts of sabotage on the Federal Budget or will they actually now start working with the Government  to ensure that we can get it back into balance now we have measures that we will continue to  pursue through the Parliament. We will work constructively with the cross bench, this Government  both  under  Prime  Minister  Abbott  and  Turnbull  and  under  Treasurers  Hockey  and   myself have  sought  to  rein  in  government  spending  from  day  one;  and  we  will  continue  on  that  task. The  question is: will the opposition engage constructively in the national interest…

GILBERT: And your colleagues in terms of the super changes, surely some of your own colleagues  need to heed this lesson as well in terms of wanting you to capitulate on some savings in super.

TREASURER: You’re right to say the changes we’ve made to superannuation in the Budget do a  number of things; they make the superannuation system more fair, they make it more sustainable,  and  they  make  a  significant  contribution  to  bringing  the  Budget  back  towards  balance.  Now that  obviously has positive implications for reassuring rating agencies; but that alone will not be sufficient  I think to address that concern. We need to go far beyond just that single measure, there are many  other measures that are in the Budget that go towards achieving that task; that is why we are  pursuing these changes. Not just in superannuation but the welfare system and more broadly across

3

Government expenditure, we need to ensure we continue to get this under control, otherwise the  deficits will be higher, debt will be higher or taxes will inevitably rise. Now that is not something the  Government has an interest in pursuing. We have an interest in keeping expenditure under control.  But for all that, despite that position that is set out in that report today Kieran, we still remain in the  G20, the country with one of the lowest debt to GDP ratios, we still remain the country that has one  of the highest rates of economic growth of all the G20 countries, and I was just there on the  weekend as you know. Frankly, sitting in the Australian seat was the best seat to be sitting in around  that table when it comes to the economy.

GILBERT: But you’ve got to move now and continue the efforts in terms of reining in the spending,  and you say it’s one element but just quickly, if you do capitulate on this this obviously it’s one  element, but obviously it sends a message more broadly doesn’t it, you’re willing to be pressured by  vested interests really is what it is here, in terms of some of your colleagues worried about the base.

TREASURER: It’s easy to put measures through a Budget that are designed to get expenditure under  control and designed to get the Budget back to balance. Budget repair is not a popular task. It never  has been and I don’t suspect it will continue to be in the future, but that’s my responsibility, that’s  our responsibility as a Government. We went to the last election and the election before that saying  we need to get this under control and we have received two mandates now to do that, and I would  be pointing that out to the opposition that the sabotage they’ve inflicted on the Budget over the  past three years, it’s time to stop that sort of negative approach and engage in the national interest  in getting the Budget back into the black.

GILBERT: Now it’s gone two years to the day since people smugglers have had a successful venture  to Australia, that an asylum seeker boat has arrived here, has had to be processed and so on. Can  you claim victory now for Operation Sovereign Boarders, as the person who put it in place?

TREASURER: There’s no doubt that Operation Sovereign Borders has been a success. Its first task was  to stop the boats, and people said that couldn’t be achieved. The measures we introduced when we  came  to  power  in  2013  under  Prime  Minister  Abbott  of  course,  and  I  was  the  Minister for  Immigration  at  the  time,  I  think  that’s  a  task  that  was  very  much  achieved.  But  keeping them  stopped, remains a daily task and I commend Minister Dutton, Peter Dutton, on the great job he has  done; and the Prime Minister working together. I mean this is something you need to continue to  win  everyday.  Our  Government’s  polices, the  structures  we  put  in  place  when  we  came to  Government,  which  was  the  fundamental  criteria  I  think  for  getting  success  in  this  area and  maintaining it, well that needs to be maintained, you can’t move an inch. You’ve got to maintain the  discipline,  and  the  focus  and  Peter  Dutton  has  done  that  and  he  has  done  it  very  well.  But I  particularly  commend  the  men  and  women  who  work  in  the  Australian  Border  Force,   those who  work  across  all  these  Operation  Sovereign  Border  Agencies,  the  people  in the  Department of  Immigration and Border Protection. They have done an outstanding job, and as we know they’ve  often done it under quite vitriolic criticism from people who commentate on these issues. We have  saved  thousands  of  lives  I  have  no  doubt.  That  has  not  been  an  easy  task,  not  at  all,  but the  outcomes here are things that we very much hope to achieve. That doesn’t mean it hasn’t come  without cost, and it hasn’t come without some very difficult issues to manage, but…

GILBERT: It doesn’t mean the boats have stopped coming does it, because they’re just being turned  back…

TREASURER: Well, there’s been some 28 or 29 occurrences where we’ve successfully implemented  that policy without incident in terms of loss of life. It’s been done safely. Because I remember when  we were advocating this policy we were in opposition Kieran, they said turn backs couldn’t be done,  and they couldn’t’ be done safely. Well all of those people who said that, were absolutely wrong.  And the reason we’re able to achieve it successfully is that we put the careful thought into how we  do this, and had the incredibly good work all of those agencies which I mentioned before to ensure it

4

could be done safely, and the fact it has been done safely I think is a real credit to their skill and their  bravery.

GILBERT: Treasurer thanks for your time.

TREASURER: Thanks a lot Kieran, good to be with you.

[ENDS]

Further information: Kate Williams 0429 584 675

