



THE HON CHRIS BOWEN MP  SHADOW TREASURER  MEMBER FOR McMAHON



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW  RN BREAKFAST WITH FRAN KELLY  WEDNESDAY, 18 MAY 2016

SUBJECT/S: Domestic gas national interest test; PEFO; Banks Royal Commission.

FRAN KELLY, HOST: And we have the Shadow Treasurer, Chris Bowen, joining us on the  line because Chris Bowen today is unveiling Labor’s new tax plan. Chris Bowen, thank you  very much for joining us.

CHRIS BOWEN, SHADOW TREASURER: Top of the morning, Fran.

KELLY: Chris Bowen, your new plan as I understand will reserve some of the gas  production for domestic use. Now Labor when it was in Government three years ago  rejected that notion. I remember doing the interview with Martin Ferguson at the time.  What’s changed your mind?

BOWEN: It’s not quite right, with respect Fran. What we’re talking about is a national  interest test as opposed to gas reservation. They’re different things, they’re dealing with the  same issue. We’ve been talking over the last few days about our plan for jobs and  manufacturing jobs in particular. We believe Australia has a manufacturing future. But if you  talk to manufacturers they will tell you one of the biggest problems they have is not just the  price of gas but even getting gas. Manufacturing relies heavily on gas. Of course this is an  issue for households as well but looking in particular at the future of manufacturing in  Australia - this is an issue. Now Australia is exporting a lot of LNG, that’s a very good thing  for our national income. That’s very welcome. We’re going to overtake Qatar as an exporter  of LNG. But the impact on the domestic gas market has been very substantial. And so, what  we would be doing as we actually resolved at our national conference - we’re putting out  more details about it today - is a national interest test to ensure that future export facilities,  and it’s all entirely prospective, future export facilities would meet the national interest in a  similar way that foreign investment national interest process at the moment works.

KELLY: What would be the element of that national interest test though?

BOWEN: Well what we would do is have a panel of experts who would advise the  Treasurer of the day similar to the Foreign Investment Review Board. It would look at  obviously the national income but also the impact on the domestic market, on  manufacturing, on households to make sure that we’re getting the balance right. And I think  this would be an opportunity for Government to work hand in hand with LNG providers. At

the end of the day, Fran, gas belongs to all Australians. We need to make sure it’s acting in  our national interests. It’s based on pretty closely the United States and Canadian models.

KELLY: In those countries they definitely do have a domestic quota, don’t they?

BOWEN: They have a national interest test - it’s similar. And they have new export facilities  coming online, and you know, America’s process has been working particularly dramatically  to increase their production. So look, not everybody would love this. Some people say we  should’ve gone further, some people say it goes too far. That’s always the way of these  things. But we’ve got the balance right. If you look closely at the Australian Industry Group’s  work here - AIG.

KELLY: I’m just trying to get clarified, Shadow Treasurer, this is not the same as a domestic  quota. You’re not mandating a quota. You’re saying it all comes under the terms of this  national interest test.

BOWEN: Correct Fran. I understand some people might leap to a conclusion but if you look  at the detail of our policy announcement - it’s a national interest test - similar to the Foreign  Investment Review Board. It gets the balance right. It’s appropriate regulation for Australia’s  future. As I’ve said, LNG is a national asset, we want to make sure it’s acting in our national  interest.

KELLY: Australia is currently the world’s second largest LNG exporter. It’s slated to  become the world’s largest LNG exporter by 2020, that’s with the gas fields online already.  Are you concerned, I’m sure there will be criticism that adding extra regulation will curb that.  Is that perhaps not a bad thing in your view?

BOWEN: Yeah well some people would say that, Fran. As I’ve said, but I think it gets the  balance right. As I’ve said, this is entirely prospective - we’re not into retrospective law  changes.

KELLY: So this won’t affect Gorgon or Gladstone?

BOWEN: No, not the proposals that are already under construction. This is about going  forward. This is the right way of doing things. We don’t change the laws retrospectively.

KELLY: Except there’s enough gas production already in production, as I’ve said, would  propel us to be number one gas exporter in the world.

BOWEN: Correct. And there’s nothing wrong with exporting gas, but there’s also nothing  wrong with Australian manufacturers actually getting a chance, actually getting a change, to  get the gas supplies they need. Manufacturers rely heavily on gas and if you go to a  manufacturer anywhere around Australia, this would be on their list of problems and it’s very  high on their list of problems.

KELLY: Yes but some also say that the problem of rising gas prices lies with the fact that  CSG projects, most of them are now off the table particularly in NSW. I noticed that the  Resources Minister, Josh Frydenberg, said recently that some CSG projects might be a part  of the answer for this. Do you want to see CSG back on the table as part of a strategy to  bring down domestic prices?

BOWEN: Well, I don’t suggest that our proposal here is the magic bullet that would solve all  problems. But CSG at the end of the day is primarily a state matter. And different states  would deal with it in different ways across the political spectrum. But what I deal with is

federal politics and issues I can address as the alternative Treasurer and I’m addressing  one today.

KELLY: You’re listening to RN Breakfast. It’s quarter past six. Chris Bowen is the Shadow  Treasurer. If I can go to some other issues now, Chris Bowen. Labor wants to almost  double the refugee intake from 13,750 to 27,000. The Greens would go even further.  They’re saying Australia should push it up to 50,000. Last night on Sky News, Peter Dutton  said these people would be largely illiterate and innumerate, they would take Australian  jobs. He warned of asylum seekers arriving in this country in the hundreds of thousands.  You’ve been an Immigration Minister for a number of years, is the Minister right when he  says that?

BOWEN: No, and Fran there are hundreds of thousands of refugees in Australia who’ve  worked hard, who’ve educated themselves and their children and they will be shaking their  heads at their Minister today in disgust frankly. And if Peter Dutton owes anybody an  apology, it’s not the Labor Party, it’s them. Hundreds of thousands of refugees who’ve made  Australia a better place. I mean Minister Dutton should come out to Cabramatta High  School and see the children of refugees topping the state in Maths. He should walk round  the small businesses that have been started by refugees and see the contribution they’ve  made to Australia. Now Australia takes refugees for the right reasons, because it’s our  humanitarian obligation. But we also have benefited over the years from the contribution of  refugees. We’re proud of the fact that we have a policy of increasing our refugee intake. I  know our refugee policy is controversial but one important part of it is to increase the intake  to 27,000. That’s appropriate, we’re proud of it. Peter Dutton can engage in all the scare  mongering he likes but I think most Australian’s values would tell them that he is just plain  wrong.

KELLY: Also what’s controversial is the number of Labor MPs and candidates who are  coming out and have taken some issue with some elements of Labor’s border protection  policy. Yesterday the Prime Minister said it adds up to 25 now and these are some people  who have an issue - they’re opposed to boat turn backs or they’re opposed to offshore  detention. Bill Shorten says the Government’s policy wouldn’t change in Government but  this is a lot of your candidates now who clearly are not completely at ease with Labor’s  policy.

BOWEN: Well Fran, our policy - look refugee policy and asylum seekers will always be  controversial issues. As I’ve said before, the Labor Party is a party of good people who want  to do the right thing. Shadow Cabinet which would form the incoming Cabinet is absolutely  resolute that we would implement the policy as taken to the National Conference. We’ve got  authority by the National Conference to implement that policy. It does involve turning around  boats where necessary, it does involve offshore processing as part of the solution. It also  involves increasing the refugee intake to 27,000. It also involves working with the UNHCR  for better solutions, increasing the contribution to the UNHCR. Some people Fran, will have  different views about it but it will be the policy implemented by an incoming Labor  Government and Malcolm Turnbull devoid of vision, devoid of policy, has been left with  nothing more or less than daily scare campaigns. The words may change from day to day  but at the end of the day, all he’s had two weeks into this election campaign are ridiculous  scare campaigns.

KELLY: Chris Bowen, a couple of quick questions on your portfolio itself. The PEFO, the  pre-election budget update comes out on Friday. Nowhere to hide after that for you or the  Government is it? In terms of your costings, you’ll have to be rock solid with your costings.

BOWEN: No problem with us Fran. We’ve been releasing our details to our funding plans  as we go. Now Scott Morrison and Mathias Cormann are engaged in a very funny little  game. They’re getting themselves in a lather demanding that we announce the full impact of  all our policies on the Budget bottom line in week two of the election campaign, before  we’ve announced them. I mean we’ve got polices we’ve yet to announce and of course the  Liberal/National Parties announced their equivalent costings on the Thursday before the  election three years ago.

KELLY: Will you do better than that?

BOWEN: Yes we will do better than that Fran but I’m not going to take lectures from Scott  Morrison as to timing. I mean this is a man who tried to hide the $50 billion centrepiece of  his Budget.

KELLY: I’m sure voters don’t want another election campaign that’s bogged down in; ‘when  are you going to release your costings Treasurer or Shadow Treasurer?’.

BOWEN: Correct, absolutely correct and what we’ve done in release our details as we go.  We will release the total impact of all our policies when they’re announced and we will do  better than the government and there will be no question about our policies Fran when we  announce the process that we’ve gone through and the rigor that we’ve applied.

KELLY: And just one final question. Fairfax papers this morning reporting details of ASIC’s  case against ANZ over allegations that their traders moved the bank bills swap rate in their  own favour manipulating internal interest rates basically. Doesn’t this demonstrate that the  existing regulation of the banks is working and that the Royal Commission that you’re called  for is actually unnecessary?

BOWEN: I don’t think you can put that construction on it Fran with great respect. I mean  these are very disturbing things that we are reading now in two different newspapers. This  is a very serious issue. Now ASIC will get on with its work but this is about very, very  serious allegations. Now whether it’s illegal or not, whether ASIC can establish the burden  of proof, what they need to establish or not, a Royal Commission would be an appropriate  mechanism to get to the bottom of this and the other scandals. I mean this is about, if what  we are reading is true, it’s about deliberate manipulation to rip off Australians and it’s very,  very serious. I can’t emphasis to you enough how serious what we’re reading about is here,  and a Royal Commission would be eminently justified into this sort of behaviour.

KELLY: Chris Bowen, thank you very much for joining us.

BOWEN: Always a pleasure Fran.

ENDS



LABOR CAMPAIGN MEDIA CONTACT  Email: media@chq.alp.org.au  Telephone: 03 8625 5111







