



RICHARD MARLES MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION  MEMBER FOR CORIO

E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  AM AGENDA, SKY NEWS  WEDNESDAY, 18 MAY 2016

SUBJECT/S: Peter Dutton’s comments on refugees and asylum seekers; Fire at Geelong Mosque.

JOURNALIST: This is AM Agenda, with me now the Shadow Immigration Minister, Richard Marles, let’s start with the  comments of Peter Dutton last night.  You’ve heard them, heard what he’s had to say, heard Julie Bishop’s response.  What’s your take on that, do they make a fair point?

RICHARD MARLES, SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION:  Look, the  comments that were made by Peter Dutton last night were very regrettable. They are offensive comments, and to be  honest it is a test now for Malcolm Turnbull, he now needs to come out and unequivocally reject these comments.  This goes well beyond the question of expense as Julie Bishop kept referring to. What Peter Dutton referred to last  night was, illiterate, innumerate refugees, he talked about refugees taking Australian jobs, now we all know what  Peter Dutton is trying to do with those sorts of comments.  Malcolm Turnbull has to come out this morning and  unequivocally reject those comments, he can’t squib it, he can’t squib it like Julie Bishop just did then, he has to  unequivocally come out and reject those comments, and if he doesn’t I think we all know that the transformation then  is complete.  Malcolm Turnbull is simply leading the Abbott Government. I mean these are deeply offensive  comments and they need to be rejected.

JOURNALIST: Ok, and well you heard Julie Bishop say in response to the reference for the jobs, that they want to  ensure that those who are received by Australia do have a pathway to employment and are able to make a  contribution.  Isn’t that also Labor’s approach here?

MARLES:  Of course, Kieran, that is perfectly reasonable what Julie Bishop said, it’s just that it’s completely the  opposite of what Peter Dutton said last night.  He talked about refugees taking Australian jobs.  And I think this is the  point that people need to remember, we are the country of Sydney Myer - a Russian, Jewish, refugee who came  here and built an empire which ended up employing hundreds of thousands of Australians.  His generosity was such  that a hundred thousand Australians went to his funeral.  We’re the country of Frank Lowy - a refugee from  Czechoslovakia - who has also been responsible for employing thousands upon thousands of Australians.  Refugees  have come to this country, have made their mark, have given their contribution, and in the process created thousands  upon thousands of Australian jobs, it is quite the opposite in terms of taking jobs away. That’s where Peter Dutton  went last night, and that’s precisely what Malcolm Turnbull must reject today. And if he doesn’t, he has absolutely  failed that test. And I think, you know, we ought to call this out for what it is. I mean if you’re watching this program  right now, you’re interested in politics. We all know what Peter Dutton was trying to do last night.  He was trying to fan  the flames of a debate, which he sees is one that helps gets people to vote for the Liberal Party.  Now this is very  ugly indeed, Malcolm Turnbull must reject it, and he must come out and in unequivocal terms, say that today.

JOURNALIST:  Well, they’ve been pointing out that, you say it’s been used for political purposes, it has been for  many years this issue, but they’re pointing out that within the Labor Party, you’ve got now, they’re referring to 29  members of the party, candidates or otherwise, who’ve expressed concerns about the turn back policy, of which you  led the charge for the Labor Party to secure at that very difficult conference last year.

MARLES:  Yeah, what we’ve got again is the Coalition desperately seeking to use this debate for political reasons. I  mean, you were there at our National Conference last year, Kieran, and anybody who was there couldn’t question the  seriousness with which we dealt with this issue and the significance of the decision that we ultimately took.  Everyone  who follows politics knows exactly what positon we are going to take if we’re elected on the second of July, and that  is, we are not about to reopen the journey between Java and Christmas Island, we are not going to put people  smugglers back into business, and we will do everything needed to be done in order to ensure that that occurs.  Now  that is clear and Peter Dutton knows it’s clear, as does Malcolm Turnbull.  There has to be a point, though, where

when you’re talking about people dying on our border, when you’re talking about the fate of the world’s misplaced,  when you’re talking about refugees who come to this country, that we actually look at this beyond politics. That we  start arguing this in terms of what is right, what is compassionate.  I mean, we see the Prime Minister having a go at  Tanya Plibersek for using the word generous - where have we got to?  I mean the reality is, we do want to see an  increase in our humanitarian intake, we’ve costed that, we’ve come up with a very sober proposition.  But of course  Australia should be a generous nation, what on earth is Malcolm Turnbull doing, when he suggests that the very use  of that word implies weakness?  This is rank politics; we all know -

JOURNALIST:  Let me ask you -

MARLES: What’s going on in relation to it, and it’s time we moved beyond it.

JOURNALIST:  This is your suggestion that that’s the motivation, I want to ask you though, if we look at the  language, look what was said by Mr Dutton last night, is there basis in fact to support the thing he said last night on  Sky News, that they won’t be numerate or literate in their own language let alone English? Is the cohort of people  seeking to come here largely innumerate, largely illiterate, is that your understanding of those seeking asylum, and of  those, of the cohort that are currently on, for example, on Manus or Nauru?

MARLES:  Well, Kieran, the cohort on Manus and Nauru are extremely varied.  There are people who are in that  cohort who are university educated, who have enormous skills and there are people who would not be literate.  And  so there is an entire breadth of experience across the refugee population, and it is right of course that there is  expense in bringing refugees here, as there should be, and we proudly have just about the best resettlement program  in the world, something that the Government itself would be proud of, and it is that because it costs money.  But to  talk in terms of a group which is largely of that characteristic, which somehow despite that characteristic is about to  take Australian jobs, makes no sense at all, and is absolutely said for political purposes. If we were approaching this  without politics, presumably the Government would want to send a message to people smugglers that there actually  was unity across the board, which there is, in terms of resolve to make sure they will be kept out of business, and that  this journey will not be reopened.  Every time you hear Peter Dutton or Malcolm Turnbull trying to fan the flames of  this debate, they are sending a very dangerous message to people smugglers indeed.

JOURNALIST:  Let’s finish off, only a minute left, but I want ask you about this sad development in Geelong  overnight, a 23 - well it’s a very old church, but for the last 23 years it’s been a Mosque; about 8,000 Muslim families I  think in your area, you’re the Member of Corio around that area, have you spoken to the local religious leaders this  morning in the wake of that fire?

MARLES:  I have Kieran, I spoke with Imam Mohammad this morning, we don’t want to jump to conclusions  obviously here, but it’s really very tragic.  I mean Imam Mohammad is somebody who is much loved in Geelong  beyond the Islamic community, he actually came out in the aftermath of the Paris attacks last year and spoke very  eloquently against Islamic extremism. He has been a symbol of harmony and unity in Geelong, as in fact that Mosque  has been. He’s got a teenage son like me, he’s a cricket nut like you and me, and the Islamic community in Geelong  makes a fantastic contribution to our communities. Some of my closest friends go to that Mosque and it is a very, very  tragic day.

JOURNALIST:  Richard Marles, we’re out of time, thank you for your time this morning, we’ll talk to you many times  throughout the campaign.

ENDS







