



THE HON SHAYNE NEUMANN MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION  MEMBER FOR BLAIR



E&EO TRANSCRIPT  TV INTERVIEW  ABC, LATELINE

WEDNESDAY, 10 AUGUST 2016

SUBJECTS: Nauru detention centre incident reports

EMMA ALBERICI: It's the largest cache of documents leaked from inside Australia's  offshore detention system. The disturbing data set published today by Guardian  Australia reveals a total of 2,000 incident reports. If true, the allegations made in the  document lay bare a harsh picture of what life is like for asylum seekers being held in  the Nauru processing centre. Throughout the 8,000-page document, a pattern of abuse,  self-harm, assaults, including sexual, is emerging with children overwhelmingly  overrepresented in the report. The publication of the data set has prompted the Greens  to renew their calls for a Royal Commission into offshore detention camps. Prime  Minister Malcolm Turnbull dismissed the idea but said the Government would begin an  investigation.

MALCOLM TURNBULL: The material that's been published will be examined. It's not  clear over what time period it relates, at least not in the report that I saw. It will be  carefully examined to see if there are any complaints there or issues there that were not  properly addressed.

ALBERICI: Human rights advocates are calling for more transparency into Australia's  offshore detention system.

Hugh de Kretser, Human Rights Law Centre: We desperately need to open up this  system to scrutinise it. That's a secondary issue to the humanitarian issue which is upon  us now which is acting now to bring them here to Australia. The immigration Border  Protection Department responded to the Guardian publication in a written statement and  it says: The documents published are evidence of the rigorous reporting procedures that  are in place in the regional processing centre - procedures under which any alleged  incident must be recorded, reported and where necessary investigated.

ALBERICI: Labor has renewed calls for an independent children's advocate. The  Shadow Minister for Immigration and Border Protection Shayne Neumann joins me  now. Welcome to the program.

SHAYNE NEUMANN, SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER  PROTECTION: It's good to be with you.

ALBERICI: It was Labor's decision to resume offshore processing when you were in  Government so how much responsibility do you accept for what has now been revealed  to be what appears to be a systemic abuse network over there?

NEUMANN: Well, we did support offshore processing, turn-backs when safe to do so  and regional resettlement because we wanted to save the lives of people who paid  people smugglers to take that risky journey from Java to Christmas Island. But we do  not accept that the Government has handled offshore processing in a way it should  have. Clearly, these reports today are deeply disturbing and the Government actually  must investigate properly these reports. But we renew our call for an independent  children's advocate for legislative mandatory reporting of child abuse and for looking at  third party independent oversight in terms of offshore processing and indeed processing  here in Australia which we would want the Commonwealth Ombudsman to pursue.

ALBERICI: When Four Corners broadcast the brutal treatment of youths in juvenile  detention in Northern Territory, the Prime Minister was quick to call a Royal  Commission. Would Labor support a Royal Commission into offshore processing, given  the numbers of children involved in self-harm, sexual abuse and other assaults?

NEUMANN: The numbers of children involved are very disturbing. The allegations of  self-harm are very disturbing and clearly there's mental health issues here. But we don't  need a Royal Commission to tell us that there are real problems here. We think it's  absolutely necessary to act on Labor's policies and we call the Government to adopt a  bipartisan approach here, an independent children's advocate, mandatory reporting and  the Bill that we actually had in the Parliament, a Private Member's Bill, which was when  Parliament was prorogued, needs to be reintroduced and we will do so and looking at  dealing with bilateral arrangement for independent oversight. If these are taken up we  think this will address much of the problems in relation to offshore processing.

ALBERICI: What can a children's advocate do to improve the situation for children on  Nauru right now? We have Megan Mitchell, who is the human rights children's  commissioner and besides which Nauru is a sovereign country. What could an  Australian children's advocate do to improve the situation there?

NEUMANN: Well, act in the best interests of children, report to the Parliament, report to  the Minister, take legal action. If there's children that need help they would seek that  help and advocate on their behalf. We have a long history in this country -

ALBERICI: Pardon the interruption, because I think a lot of people watching this would  say well we had a report two years ago from the Human Rights Commission which  almost exactly mirrors the kind of abuse claims we see now. I mean we've known about  what's been going on there for quite a long time and yet nothing seems to have  changed. Why would suddenly another advocate - we've had many advocates from  people from Save the Children and elsewhere, the Human Rights Commission, we've  got plenty of advocates, no-one seems to be able to achieve much in for terms of  improving the situation for these children.

NEUMANN: We need action now. An independent children's advocate would act on  each case individual case, dealing with each case as it does in any court we deal with  where there's an independent children's lawyer engaged. That independent advocate  would be able to deal with children, deal with those people engaged in mental health  assistance and also advocate and report to Parliament. This is all part of the  transparency process which we believe is necessary make but also to make sure we  take action right now. That's why Labor's called on the Government. We took this policy  to the last election, we call on the Government to adopt a bipartisan approach. We need  action now.



ALBERICI: Is it time for Labor to abandon offshore processing as a policy all together,  especially given most voters in the last Vote Compass survey thought it should be  abandoned?

NEUMANN: Our position is that the combination of all three offshore processing, turn-backs when safe to do so and regional processing has resulted in people not drowning  at sea. That's Labor's priority in that regard but we also believe that people should be  safely cared for in a humane way and clearly the disturbing allegations and the reports  today clearly show the Government has been woeful in their protection of children  particularly.



ALBERICI: But what would it take for Labor to say enough is enough? You talk about  not wanting to put people at risk on the high seas but clearly they're being are damaged,  if not more so, where they are right now?

NEUMANN: And that's why the Government needs to prioritise regional resettlement  and they haven't done so. It was never Labor's intention, never our intention for people  to languish indefinitely in detention centres. But the Government seems to be doing  nothing in relation to regional processing. They seem to be taking no steps and not  telling the opposition, nor telling the public. They engaged Cambodia for the cost of tens  of millions of dollars for one person to be relocated. They've raised issues in terms of  Malaysia and the Philippines but they're not telling us nor the public about what's  happening. So they need to get back in the game with the UNHCR. They need to  engage with third party arrangements and we need a human rights framework across  this particular area. The Government's doing none of that, Emma.



ALBERICI: The Prime Minister has today said that the Government provides support to  Nauru but ultimately it's the responsibility of the Nauruan Government to keep these  people safe. Do you accept that as an explanation?

NEUMANN: I don't think Australia should abdicate its responsibility. Today, I've talked  to journalists, issued a press release and spoken to a number of people. Where's the  Minister? Where's Peter Dutton in relation to this issue? He's been missing in action on  this space. And it's all very well for the Government to say oh, look, it's Nauru's problem,  we are paying taxpayers' money, we have indirect responsibility, we cannot abdicate a  responsibility for vulnerable people, women and children and men in these  circumstances. We must get back in the game and I've called on the Minister to take a  more proactive approach. It seems inaction and inertia is the regard Government's  approach in this regard and we should not find this acceptable and the Australian public  doesn't find it acceptable and the Opposition certainly does not.



ALBERICI: It's worth mentioning we did ask Peter Dutton to appear on the program and  he has refused. Shayne Neumann, thank you for your time.

NEUMANN: Good to be with you, Emma

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT:  MADONNA OLIVER 0416 199 808

