

THE HON ED HUSIC MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR THE DIGITAL ECONOMY  SHADOW MINISTER FOR EMPLOYMENT SERVICES, WORKFORCE  PARTICIPATION AND THE FUTURE OF WORK  MEMBER FOR CHIFLEY



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  SKY NEWS AM AGENDA  WEDNESDAY, 21 JUNE 2017

SUBJECT/S: Schools funding, citizenship proposals, Turnbull Government  energy failure.

KIEREN GILBERT, PRESENTER: This is AM Agenda. With me now, Assistant Minister  for Vocational Education and Skills, Karen Andrews, and Shadow Minister for  Employment Services, Workforce Participation and the Digital Economy, Ed Husic.  Good morning to you both. The Greens meeting as we speak, quite important when it  comes to the government's school reforms because, my understanding is that the  spokesperson, Sarah Hanson-Young and the leader Di Natale, are inclined to back the  deal but they've been quite divided on it. You're hoping they're coming out of this and  supporting your plan.

KAREN ANDREWS: Absolutely. I really do hope there is support for the proposal. It's  been put together by Minister Birmingham which is supported by the Coalition. I think it's  a good package, it clearly provides an enormous outcome for our schools - 18.6 billion  dollars in additional funding there. We've demonstrated in the past that we've got an  ability to deal with the senate. That's what Minister Birmingham is doing now. I remain  confident -

GILBERT: Are you comfortable doing deals with the Greens?

ANDREWS: I'm comfortable in putting forward our proposal to fix the mess that was left  to us by the Labor Government in schools. And that means we do need to work with the  Senate, we need to work with the whole of the Senate. Now clearly Labor's being  obstructionist in the Senate, so that means we do need to work with the crossbenchers  to get the legislation passed.

GILBERT: Is this just about Labor wanting to keep the issue alive until the next  election? Because I think the common sense test, most people, you'd say 18.3 billion  additional dollars - that's a plus for schools.

ED HUSIC: It's 22 billion denied -

GILBERT: Less than what you'd offer -

HUSIC: Denied to Australian students and schools. it would see 85% of public schools  not meet the proper funding level while every private school would be at, or above, that  fair funding level. It is something that is held near and dear to all Labor MPs to see  better funding directed to public schools

GILBERT: But the Federal Government can't do it all. As you know, the way that it's  split is the states take the lion share of the state schools, and the Commonwealth funds  20% so the states need to be required to ensure that level that you're talking about.

HUSIC: We went through this whole process of setting up, when we were in  government, the Gonski review itself, to find out the best way to fund schools, both  private and public. What we came up with was a way to sidestep all the complicated  discussion and argument about funding, and putting something that everyone could  agree to or understand. And what we've got right now is a denial of $22 billion dollars of  investment in future generations of Australians, and we're not going to sit by and watch  that happen. I mean, what we have is a Coalition that said they were on a unity ticket on  Gonski, and ever since they've come to office, they've been school funding frenemies.  They've said one thing, and denied funding in the next breath, and it is not right and  Labor is prepared to take this every step of the way to make sure we get the proper  level of investment.

GILBERT: But they've got the support of the Catholic schools as well. It's quite a  powerful lobby when you talk about one in four schools, and parents going in to pick up  their kids and seeing the messages on emails and so on.

ANDREWS: That's true but I must pick up one of the points that Ed made. When Labor  had the opportunity to implement Gonski, they actually didn't. What they came up with  was 27 different deals. Quite unique deals. And that's the mess that we're in now -  trying to sort through all of that. Now with regard to the Catholic education system, of  course we all support the Catholic education system. It is an important part of the whole  education system.

GILBERT: They got a special deal, you're saying?

ANDREWS: They did. They did.

HUSIC: What’s the deal?

ANDREWS: Well this is what we're trying to resolve.

HUSIC: You're going to do a deal. That's what you've got to do with the different  systems!

ANDREWS: No, we have been very very clear that what we are doing is we have  developed a system for education going forward in schools, that is very fair, that is  needs based and is sustainable into the future and it gets rid of a lot of the  inconsistencies in our school education system.



HUSIC: Well let's just deal with this whole thing about deals. There were a number of -

ANDREWS: Did you do 27 deals? You did actually. 27 deals -

HUSIC: There were a number of states that refused to sign on. I remember WA, NT,  and I think the former Coalition Government in Queensland refused to do a deal. And  what happened when the Coalition came in? They did deals with those governments.  And those governments - state governments - basically denied the proper level of  funding to their own students in their own state. But as I said, they had to go back the  Coalition, and do deals. That's the reality of this system, is that you have to come up  with arrangements that work.

GILBERT: On the citizenship discussion, Labor have indicated that you're probably  going to back the government's plan via Bill Shorten. He said that proficient English... he  indicated that it all made sense at the time of this being floated. But then now you've  come out saying that this is snobbery.

HUSIC: Well when you look at it, we've said all along that we'd look at the detail. We  looked at the detail and under what Peter Dutton's pushing, I wouldn't be here. That's  the reality. My old man did not have university equivalent English when he came here.  He went to night school and put himself through night school to learn English. My mum  never went to night school and picked it up on her own, and picked up conversational  English. What we want is people to have conversational English that allows them to  contribute, and fully be part of Australian society. But under what's being proposed by  the Coalition, there are things there that we simply go, you look at it, you scratch your  head and you go how could you possibly support that?

GILBERT: But they're not saying that they wouldn't accept people as migrants or  refugees, they're saying that as part of citizenship...

HUSIC: Citizens, right?

GILBERT: To take citizenship from permanent residency.

HUSIC: And let's give you a practical example of how that plays out: In another area of  policy they're saying that they won't extend commonwealth supported university places  to permanent residents. Only to citizens. What does that mean? In my electorate, I've  already had schools say to me that children of permanent residents would have to  stump up 90-100 thousand dollars to go to university. So there is a practical element to  what they are doing in denying citizenship. We want people to sign on to Australian  values, we want them to contribute to Australian society, and we don't want to have to  have them scramble over these artificial, harsh hurdles that are being put forward right  now by this government.

GILBERT: Karen Andrews, your thoughts on Ed's contribution on that this morning. The  other point that's been made in criticising the approach put forward by the government  is, in relation to the moving from permanent residents to citizenship, that a lot of people  just to get their permanent residency have to go through a number of years, many  hurdles, to get to that point. So then to add another four years, is that fair when you're

talking about upwards of a decade that people would have to go through to get, you  know, buy into the values that Ed's talking about?

ANDREWS: I think it's absolutely fair. I absolutely support what Minister Dutton has  proposed here. And I think quite frankly, the position of Labor is at odds with the  majority of the Australian people. If you want to become a citizen in this country then  you should be expected to be supportive, and adhere to our values. You should have a  reasonable, a very reasonable standard of English, and you should be prepared to  integrate and uphold our values. Now I think it's entirely reasonable what is -

GILBERT: Labor says this is requirement of university level English. Is that fair?

ANDREWS: Australian citizenship is something that should be valued. It shouldn't be  something that's handed out willy nilly. People should expect that they have to go over  significant hurdles to get Australian citizenship. It is something that should be valued  and I'm prepared to fight for it.

GILBERT: But do you need university level English to do it?

ANDREWS: I think you need a very high level of English if you want to integrate.

GILBERT: But there are a lot of Australians who wouldn't even be able to pass that.

ANDREWS: Well I would dispute that because I think that what we need to do is make  sure that the standard of English is appropriate and I think that they should be  significantly higher than just the basic level of English. You should be able to converse.  You should be able to integrate well into society. You should clearly have a very, very  strong level of English.

HUSIC: There'd be a lot of - I grew up in Western Sydney with a lot of kids from non-English speaking backgrounds who had grandparents who wouldn't have had university  level English. They love this country; they love the opportunity that's been opened up by  it. Setting that test in the way that it is, is deliberately exclusionary. And the other point  I'd make is I go to stacks of citizenship ceremonies. My parents were naturalised - or my  mum for example, was naturalised in Blacktown - one of the happiest days of her life,  and one of the happiest days of all the people who take the pledge to abide by our laws  and support our values in citizenship ceremonies across the country. They value that  greatly. And I think there'd be a lot of your viewers who've got parents who've come  from non-English speaking backgrounds who would scratch their heads and go, “why is  my grandparent who came here, worked really hard, gave us opportunity here, why is  their contribution less valued than anyone else?”

ANDREWS: But the issue clearly is, if you want to come to Australia, live in Australia,  be part of Australian society and become an Australian citizen, why would you not want  to learn the language well?

HUSIC: They do!

GILBERT: But the point, I guess, that Ed's making is that a lot of individuals, I mean  first, second generation of course they should and they would but if someone's older,  and they come here as a refugee as part of a family intake, how could you expect them

to learn English at that age? They might be very proud Australians but do they really  need to know high level English?

ANDREWS: Yes I think they do.

GILBERT: Alright, let's finish off on the energy discussion. It looks like the clean energy  target is on the back burner?

ANDREWS: Well the discussions that I've had with my colleagues have been on the  basis of ensuring that our energy supply is reliable, and that it is affordable. So they've  been the priorities for discussions. That's firmly where we are focused and that's what  the Australian people want us to be focused on. They want to know that when they flick  the switch in their home, they're going to get electricity coming through and they're not  going to be paying an exorbitant price for that electricity. Now having said that, it's not  just a federal government issue as well. The states need to be a part of the solution for  this as well.

GILBERT: Ed Husic?

HUSIC: Well just as an aside, I noticed your interview with Josh Frydenberg, he made a  - not a Freudian but a Frydenberg slip when he talked about price-setting needing to be  sensitive to political cost and then he corrected himself very quickly. But putting that  aside, how do you commission a clean energy review, accept 49 of the 50  recommendations, and the one recommendation that you don't accept is a clean energy  target? This makes no sense whatsoever. And at a time where people widely recognise  that one of the biggest reasons why we've got investor uncertainty at the moment is  because of a lack of policy-setting by this government, how is business supposed to  translate what is being done now by coalition, into something practical, when you don't  have a clean energy target?

GILBERT: That's the key though, isn't it? Because 49 out of 50 there have been agreed  to, but the one which would provide certainty, clear parameters here, still it's a work in  progress.

ANDREWS: Look there's clearly going to be more discussion. Cabinet will have many  discussions. We'll go back to the party room to talk about a range of issues in relation to  energy. But our focus is on affordability and reliability of supply.

HUSIC: You have a national target that agrees as part of Paris to 26-28% reduction on  2005 emission levels by 2030. That's all we got. How's business supposed to translate  that, in any meaningful sense, in their day to day operations? This is nuts.

GILBERT: One postscript, I just got a message from a member of the government, a  senior figure in government who said there's an exemption for over 60s for the English  test. So you wouldn't have to worry about it if you're over 60.

ANDREWS: I still think that people who are in this country should speak English  clearly.

GILBERT: Thank you both, Ed Husic, Karen Andrews, talk to you soon. A quick break,  back in just a moment.



MEDIA CONTACT: ELISHA PEARCE 0404 051 163

