

THE HON RICHARD MARLES MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR DEFENCE  MEMBER FOR CORIO

E&OE TRANSCRIPT   TV INTERVIEW  SKY NEWS - AM AGENDA  TUESDAY, 19 SEPTEMBER 2017

SUBJECTS: President Trump at the UN; North Korea; Australian navy exercises

HOST: Joining me now is the Shadow Defence Minister, Richard Marles, and let’s start  with the UN and President Trump criticised the UN for bloated bureaucracy; not the first  to do that, Mr Marles, but then says, he’s calling for bold reform so it can be a greater  force for world peace, so it was quite constructive as well, much more than candidate  Trump that’s for sure.

RICHARD MARLES, SHADOW MINISTER FOR DEFENCE:  Well, I profoundly  disagree with candidate Trump’s view of the UN, it is a force for good in the world and I  note that his language was significantly moderated so that’s a good thing.  And of  course the UN can be more efficient and less bureaucratic, and it’s important that it  continues to work in that way, but anyone who’s seen the operation of the UN around  the world knows the remarkable job it does.  And we do need to take a step back here  and think about this more in terms glass half full than glass half empty, the world’s  attempts to come up with entities which provide some kind of decision making at a  global basis have always been fraught with difficulty, I mean the League of Nations  didn’t work in anything like the way like the UN, and right now it does a remarkable job  and it’s getting better every year.

HOST: And as Julie Bishop pointed out there, if the UN didn’t exist you’d have to come  up with some other body, some other avenue to try and deal with those difficult,  international, complex international issues.

MARLES: And that’s right, and the task of trying to come up with a decision making  mechanism for global affairs is actually a really hard problem to solve. So, I mean, the  UN is easily the best attempt the world has had at this, and if you look at it and the  bodies that work with it or sit under its umbrella, like the World Food Program, the World  Health Organisation, the UNHCR, the International Labour Organisation, all of these  bodies are doing incredible work.  I mean, I’ve had the privilege, really, of seeking the

operation of refugee camps in the Middle East, in Africa, and the work of the UN and its  agencies there is truly remarkable and it’s saving lives each and every day.  The UN  has an incredibly important role to play and I’m much more in the camp of celebrating  that rather than criticising it.  Acknowledging that of course all of these entities can be  more efficient, they do need to be less bureaucratic, there’s an ongoing challenge in  relation to that, so yes, President Trump is right, but there should be more celebration of  what the UN does and it is good that his tone has been modulated to a large degree,  but I’d like to hear the celebration side of this answer.

HOST:  While there’s some doubt as to the true commitment of say China and Russia  when it comes to reining in Pyongyang, at least the UN Security Council has been of  one voice in recent weeks in terms of its condemnation of Pyongyang’s pursuit of a  greater nuclear capacity.  But nothing seems to be reining in that dictator right now,  more strong rhetoric out of Pyongyang overnight.  Rather than the sanctions working to  rein him in, it’s going to expedite their push for greater nuclear capacity.

MARLES: Well I think we’ve got to give the sanctions a little bit of time to work, I mean,  it’s only been a couple of weeks that they have actually been in effect and we’ve seen,  as you rightly say, two UN Security Council meetings which have put in place sanctions,  the last putting in place a greater set of sanctions than the first.  And so, it is good that  we are seeing concerted global effort which involves both China and Russia as a part of  it, and I think this is the path that we need to proceed down.  And I do think there’s a  long way to go in terms of peaceful means that can be pursued in terms of trying to  shape North Korea’s behaviour and if it’s done with willingness and commitment on the  part of all nations, but very much including China in this as well, then I still have hope  that we can shape North Korea’s actions in the way that we’d want to.

HOST:  How do you see this, the end game for Kim Jong-un, obviously a very hard  thing to predict, but what he’s trying to do here?  Is it all about leverage and trying to get  a better position when there is finally some sort of negotiation that is undertaken with  North Korea - is that what this is all about?  Because the increasingly provocative  behaviour just seems to be so risky right now.

MARLES:  I think we can tie ourselves in knots in terms of trying to understand the  exact motive of Kim Jong-un in all of this.  I suspect this is about trying to protect his  own regime principally, but at the end of the day he is acting against what are the  international, against international law, in trying to acquire nuclear weapons, and I think  the real point for the international community is this; that if it becomes an accepted fact  that North Korea has a nuclear capability, and particularly one that it can fit to  intercontinental ballistic missiles, that is a very dangerous moment for the world  because it puts intolerable pressure on other countries within the region in East Asia,  countries like Japan, South Korea or Vietnam, to move down a nuclear path.  And the  cause of non-proliferation, which really has been going well since the end of the Cold  War, is suddenly turned on its head, so it is important that we do everything we can to  stop it being an accepted fact that North Korea have this nuclear capability.  And it’s  why it is so important that we are acting as one as an international  community - and

when I say that - acting in concert with both China and Russia in trying to make sure  that this does not become an accepted fact, because much turns on it.

HOST: Now, finally, this naval exercise in the Indo-Pacific region, that The Daily  Telegraph reports on this morning, what do you make of this?  Do you welcome this  initiative by the Royal Australian Navy and just how close should they go to the  contested waters and territories of the South China Sea here?

MARLES: Well I don’t know, Kieran, the details of what is involved in this exercise.  I  know that the Navy engages in exercises frequently and it’s important that they do that  so that their skills are at the best level that they can be at.  And in relation to the South  China Sea, the answer to that question is that whatever they are intending to do they  should do within the full scope of what the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea allows  in the South China Sea.  We should be acting with the rights that we have under the UN  Convention on the Law of the Sea as China does.  And as, in fact, China did recently  when Australia was engaging with the US in Exercise Talisman Sabre and there was a  Chinese naval vessel not far from those exercises, which was within its rights to be  there.  So we need to be exercising our rights to the fullest extent as they exist within  the South China Sea and that’s - whatever this navy exercise is intended to do, it  should do with that in mind.

HOST: Mr Marles, I appreciate your time and we’re out of time this morning.  Talk to you  soon.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: TONY HODGES 0435 594 552



