THE HON. MALCOLM TURNBULL MP

PRIME MINISTER

TRANSCRIPT

Friday, 17 November 2017

Doorstop with the Hon. Niall Blair MLC, NSW Minister for Primary Industries, Minister for Regional

Water and Minister for Trade and Industry

Vitex Pharmaceuticals, Sydney

SUBJECTS: Jobs figures; Manus Island; Same-sex marriage; Cyber security.

E&OE...

PRIME MINISTER:

Well, what a great Australian family business story.

Congratulations Elie and Robine and what a great story. You know, 18 months ago, Aniss was telling Niall

and I that they had 40 employees in this business. Now they've got 140 and by the beginning of 2019,  they will have 440.

This investment here, is what is enabling that growth. That is, investments like this - not many much  bigger, I suspect, but a lot smaller investments in Australian businesses - is what is driving that great

growth in jobs.

Nearly 1,000 jobs created every day over the last year, 355,000. 85 per cent of them are full-time and  we have had the longest monthly run in jobs growth for 23 years. It is fantastic.

This is what it's all about. It's about opening up big markets for Australians to export to. It's about  ensuring that businesses can keep more of their after-tax profits to invest, because when they have that,  small and medium businesses and family businesses, as they invest, they grow and they employ. This is  what it is all about.

Jobs and growth, an election slogan last year. It's an outcome today. That's what we're seeing.

Of course, you couple that with affordable energy which will flow from the National Energy Guarantee  that is starting to set the scene for stronger and stronger growth in jobs. At the end of the day that is  what it is all about. Unemployment, 5.4%. We would like it to be lower, but it is the lowest it has been  since January 2013. That shows that the economic leadership we're providing, is delivering.

Now Aniss, tell us about the way in which you're growing the business into the big markets overseas and

how you're using the scale this plant gives you to really grow into those huge opportunities?

ANISS CHAMI:

Well firstly thank you very much Prime Minister coming and opening our beautiful facility. Today we felt  you reinforced that wonderful message you just gave. You definitely supported us just with your words

in what we're trying to achieve here.

Our business flourished because of a lot of international demand for Australian-made complimentary  medicine. The fact that the country has the knowledge, has the ability, but just needs the right investors,  the right type of people to have the guts to just do it.

We wanted to show that we're one of those families, we're one of those people. This facility will give  considerable power to Australia. It will allow it to manufacture close to 20 billion doses, tablets and  capsules, which should be able to supply a lot of international markets that have now become  dependent on Australian-made complementary medicines.

PRIME MINISTER:

Well that is fantastic and Niall, come here, Elie founded the company in 1989 - come up to the  microphone Elie and tell us - you founded this company. You have a vision for a great family business  and now your children are taking on the leadership and making it even bigger, fulfilling your vision. How

do you feel about that?

ELIE CHAMI:

Exactly. Well, as I mentioned to you earlier, we did start in '89 exporting product, buying and exporting

and the vision was to continue on into manufacturing.

PRIME MINISTER:

Yep and now you're doing that.

ELIE CHAMI:

We are doing it now and it gives me more pride that I've got the family involved. They know their way,  they are going to continue on for maybe the next generation. I can see it there and the good thing, we

achieved what I was dreaming for from day one when I first started.

PRIME MINISTER:

That's what we all hope for and what you've done with Robine and your children, extraordinary  determination. You know, we've got great commitment from the State Government. Niall is here, the  Minister for Trade and Industry. Niall, we were talking earlier about the Australia ASEAN summit that is  going to be held in Sydney in March next year.

Now I've just been at APEC in Vietnam and we signed a big new trade deal, a free trade deal with Peru.

Of course we're working on more trade deals, working on the TPP to keep that momentum underway.  Just huge interest in Australian exports, in everything Australian, whether it is in Vietnam, whether it's in  China, whether it's in the Philippines, Indonesia, Singapore.

Tell us how you see the State Government supporting Australian exporters - or New South Wales  exporters in your case - into Asia?

NSW MINISTER FOR TRADE AND INDUSTRY:

Well, we know that potential that ASEAN in particular presents to companies like Vitex here today. This

is an advanced manufacturing story in Western Sydney that is going to service the world from this

quality facility.

The investment in the new technology, the advanced manufacturing innovation that we see here, but

also the skills that come with that, is something that the Government is absolutely focused on here in

New South Wales. But also the transport and the logistics opportunities that we see in Western Sydney.

Obviously with Western Sydney Airport coming on board, it's going to allow more businesses like Vitex

to be able to take these quality, Australian products to the rest of the world.

That's what today is about, celebrating one of those companies that will continue to be a giant on the

global scheme, right here in Western Sydney.

PRIME MINISTER:

Yes, it's great, Niall and you're right, I mean the transport infrastructure that is being largely funded by

the Federal Government, built in partnership with the State Government here. That's why you're located

here, isn't it?

ELIE CHAMI:

Absolutely, absolutely.

PRIME MINISTER:

And the airport, we're getting underway with that.

PRIME MINISTER:

We are going to build the Western Sydney Airport and that will again, as Niall says, offer the

opportunities for more exports, for manufacturers like yourself in Western Sydney.

ANISS CHAMI:

Absolutely. Looking forward to that.

PRIME MINISTER:

Terrific. Well, this is a great Australian story of enterprise, investment and commitment. A great

Australian family business. Well done to the Chami's, good on you.

ANISS CHAMI:

Thank you very much.

PRIME MINISTER:

Robine, great job. Okay, do we have some questions?

JOURNALIST:

Prime Minister, on another issue?

PRIME MINISTER:

Just before you get started on another issue, I did say to Elie there could possibly be one question that is

actually related to the visit. Is there anything about Vitex you wanted to ask?

JOURNALIST:

I wouldn't mind asking Aniss a question.

PRIME MINISTER:

Yes, good, that's right. Come in, Aniss.

JOURNALIST:

Why did you pick Western Sydney? What does it offer that helps you?

ANISS CHAMI:

We chose Western Sydney because we were looking for a workforce that can be trained, that are not

already trained. We needed a workforce that is able to learn a completely new way of doing things.

Western Sydney also had the infrastructure. You couldn't build something of this magnitude, for

example, in Sydney CBD. It had to be Western Sydney and with the connection of the M4 and M7 being

at its intersection and the fact that the airport - as the Prime Minister and the Minister have reiterated -

will be built in our backyard, this is all conducive for our way of working.

JOURNALIST:

You said your policies have helped contribute close to 300,000 jobs into this area, what are you talking

about? Where are those jobs?

PRIME MINISTER:

Well, it is 355,000 jobs nationwide. It has been very strong jobs growth in New South Wales too, I might

say. The unemployment rate in New South Wales is very low relative to the rest of the country and

that's a tribute, look, it is a tribute to strong, economic policies that encourage investment and

employment.

Every policy of ours is designed to do that. It's also a tribute to the work of the State Government, but

above all, it is a tribute to the enterprise and the passion of families like the Chami's that are getting in,

backing their judgement, borrowing money, investing money and creating jobs.

JOURNALIST:

Prime Minister, the New Zealand Government now are dealing directly with Papua New Guinea on the

refugee offer. Is there anything Australia can do, I guess almost to intervene on that and could it

potentially damage relationships with New Zealand if they go around you?

PRIME MINISTER:

Look, I'm not going to speculate on what the New Zealand Government may or may not do. The position

is this; there has been an offer from New Zealand for many years. It was originally made by John Key to

Julia Gillard, to take 150 only, of the refugees that Kevin Rudd put on Manus and Nauru.

Now, as you know, Labor comprehensively failed on border protection. They undid John Howard's very

successful policy.

They were warned not to, but they did.

They thought they knew better than John Howard.

Kevin Rudd certainly thought he knew better than Howard and you had 50,000 unauthorised arrivals

and we had 1,200 - at least - deaths at sea.

Now, we have had well over 1,000 days of no boat arrivals, no successful people smuggling ventures.

The boats have been stopped. We're not complacent, the people smugglers are very determined and we

are going to do everything within our power to ensure that those boats stay stopped. Because we are a

very compassionate nation, we take in a large number of refugees, but we decide which refugees to

take.

We are not going to outsource - as Labor did and would do so again if they had the opportunity - we are  not going to outsource the protection of Australia's borders to people smugglers. These are the worst  criminals. We are not going to do that, so that's the fact.

Now, if the New Zealand offer - we thank them for making that offer, as I said at Kirribilli House when I  met with the new Prime Minister of New Zealand, Jacinda Ardern - we thanked them for the offer.  They've kept it outstanding. But our focus is on completing the resettlement arrangements with the  United States, which, of course, covers up to 1,250 refugees. So it's already under way. As you know, a  number of people have gone to the United States and more will follow. So we'll complete that and then

when that is complete, then we can reconsider the New Zealand proposal.

JOURNALIST:

Prime Minister, do religious freedoms need to incorporated into the Dean Smith Bill or amended in

separate legislation down the track? And if separate legislation, is there any guarantee that will -

PRIME MINISTER:

Well, look, I think the Bill that's being debated in the Senate - Senator Smith's Bill, does include

important protections for churches and for ministers of religion. It doesn't impose any restrictions on  religious practice or religious speech or preaching or anything of that kind.

Freedom of religion is a critically important right of all Australians, it is part of us. It is recognised in the  Constitution. So, the protection of freedom of civil rights and freedom of religion in particular is one that

is very important. But I have to say I do not see it as being threatened or impinged in any way by the  Smith Bill.

But having said that, it is a free vote, as you know. Members and senators can propose such  amendments as they wish and they will be debated on and voted on and some will be successful, others  won't be, but we will get this done.

We've got a very strong message from the Australian people. We've got the instructions; they want us  to get on with it and get it done.

JOURNALIST:

You want it done by Christmas, is it possible that you might try and get the marriage Bill side of it  through before then and then look at the religious freedoms debate after that?

PRIME MINISTER:

Well, it's important that the marriage Bill be dealt with as quickly as possible. I'm very confident it will be  dealt with before Christmas.

JOURNALIST:

Prime Minister, what do you make of reports Nationals senators are organising for a banking Royal  Commission to be co-sponsored by other parties?

PRIME MINISTER:

Well, look, I've seen those reports. As you know, we have made enormous reforms in the area of  banking and the financial services sector generally. We're seeing much greater accountability and you've  seen some examples of that very recently. We've given more money and more teeth to the regulators,  including ASIC and APRA and we're ensuring that people have a streamlined way of dealing with

complaints that they have with respect to their financial service provider, whether it's financial advisers

or banks.

So we're putting all of those steps in place. All of the recommendations that a royal commission would  be likely to make are being undertaken now. I'm focused on protecting Australians, customers of  Australian financial institutions right now.

So that is why we have not established a royal commission which, of course, would not compensate  anyone. It would simply be, a royal commission is an inquiry which would go on for quite some time and  would make some recommendations. But we're getting on with the job now, we're taking action now  and Australians can see the benefit of that right now.

JOURNALIST:

Mr Turnbull, do you still think there needs to be a serious investigation into the hacking of Christopher

Pyne's Twitter account?

PRIME MINISTER:

Well, the answer is no. I think it's pretty clear what's happened and it's not the first time that somebody

has used his password and I just say to everybody, it's a good reminder, change your password  frequently, make sure it's not your dog's name, you know, or your birthday.

The other thing, too - and this is very important - is always, where you can and for most of these  applications and services that's available, use dual authentication or dual verification, where you'll get,  to bring a new device on to use the application, you get sent a one-time code, typically to your mobile  phone or another app. That's a very important way to ensure that even if someone does guess or get

access to your password, they can't connect their device to your application.

So I will leave you all with that advice on using technology safely and encourage you all to be cyber-safe  at all times. Very important.

Thank you.

[ENDS]

