

THE HON RICHARD MARLES MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR DEFENCE  MEMBER FOR CORIO

E&OE TRANSCRIPT   TELEVISION INTERVIEW  AM AGENDA SKY NEWS  8 FEBUARY 2017

SUBJECT/S: China-US relations, Australia-US relations

KIERAN GILBERT: With me now, the Shadow Defence Minister Richard Marles. Richard  Marles, thanks very much for your time.

You heard Julie Bishop saying that the Chinese Foreign Minister is being constructive, wants  to deepen ties between Beijing and the United States. That follows some more calmer  language from General Matthis, the new Defence Secretary in the Trump administration.  That's all quite encouraging, given the start of Donald Trump, when he took the White  House, and some of those messages to China.

RICHARD MARLES, SHADOW MINISTER FOR DEFENCE: Of course. You know, our  interest in this part of the world is to have stability, a rules-based international order. It's on  the basis of that that we've been able to build our national prosperity, and so having matters  resolved through negotiation, discussion, calm, sober interaction, of course that is really  welcome.

You know I visited Pacific Command, PACOM, in Hawaii last year, and you get a real sense  when you go there about the degree of dialogue that there is between the U.S. and China,  and there is a lot of sophistication in that relationship and I do think both the comments of  General Mattis, Secretary Mattis, and also the comments of the Foreign Minister Wang are  very encouraging.

GILBERT: They are encouraging, but then you've also got, to counter that, the language  that Rex Tillerson, the incoming Secretary of State, used at his Senate confirmation about a  blockade and other criticisms of China that Donald Trump made, for example via Twitter, so  it's quite unpredictable right now how all of this plays out.

MARLES: And I think that is an important word, because what we want to see here is  predictability. We want reliability in the relationships that we engage with everyone -  obviously with our key alliance partner, the United States, but also in the dealings that we  have with China and other countries in the region predictability, reliability is the key, and  that's what we want to see now.

We all have our interests, and Australia does have interests in the South China Sea and  we've made those plain, and Labor has certainly made them plain, in relation to China. We  have so much of our trade that goes through the South China Sea. The UN Convention on  the law of the sea is very important because we need to have our trade being able to pass

through there, but it's important that those interests that all countries have are mediated,  worked through, by negotiation, and I think the comments that you've seen in the last few  days are encouraging in that respect.



GILBERT: Did it frustrate you as someone who is a strong supporter, has been for a long  time, of the alliance with the United States, those comments that Donald Trump made in  relation to allies and in the same breath as being critical of the refugee deal spoke of allies  taking advantage of the United States.

MARLES: Well,I mean America has interests as well and they can obviously-

GILBERT: -But you can hardly suggest Australia has taken advantage of the US?

MARLES: You are absolutely right about that.

I mean America has a right to talk through what it needs and wants in respect to its allies,  but you're right: we've been a very reliable ally of the United States. We do pull our weight  around the world, and it's important that we are making that point in the context of our  relationship with the United States.

I’ve said this a lot - it's important that we continue to advocate within the context of the  alliance what we need from the United States and that is actually a continued presence in  East Asia. The truth is that the United States could not have and does not have a more  reliable and dependable ally than Australia.

GILBERT: Finally, I want to ask you about Cory Bernardi, his quitting of the Liberal Party,  but the day-to day-reality in the Senate is that more than likely he will be voting with the  government on the lion's share of its most of its bills through the parliament.

MARLES: Look, coming back here, Kieran the thing that’s really struck me: how bad is this  government going? It is absolutely astonishing. The stench of death, of political death,  around Malcolm Turnbull and so many of his government MPs can be felt in every corridor in  this building.

GILBERT: Isn’t it premature to say that, given they’ve just won re-election?

MARLES: You talk to government MPs and what's on their lips at the moment is what  they're doing beyond this place. I mean they're focusing on a world outside of this building.  They're not thinking about the governing of this country and it's a real concern.

Absolutely, it's premature. We need this government to be focused on actually running the  country, but they themselves are walking around this building talking about their own doom. I  think they're focused on themselves. They're absolutely preoccupied by their internal  struggles.

Cory Bernardi, I think it's an act of ego and he'll be a forgotten man within a week, but really  at the end of the day he is a symptom of a malaise within the Coalition which is absolutely  detrimental to the way in which this country is being currently government.

GILBERT: Richard Marles, appreciate your time. Thanks.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: TONY HODGES 0435 594 552



