



SHAYNE NEUMANN MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION  FEDERAL MEMBER FOR BLAIR

PETER DUTTON - HOW MANY DAYS IS IT?

Peter Dutton needs to come clean over the details of how a boat carrying seven people  successfully landed on Australian territory and take swift action to ensure it doesn't  happen again.

Foreign Minister Julie Bishop has confirmed that a boat with six Chinese nationals and  one PNG national reached the Australian territory of Saibai Island in the Torres Strait on  20 August. Reports indicate that people-smuggling charges have been made against  two of the individuals.

This is despite Peter Dutton claiming otherwise on Monday.

“We've not had a successful boat now in well over 1,000 days.”  Peter Dutton  2SM, 28 August 2017



Why were the details of the 20 August arrival kept secret by Peter Dutton and how  many other boats have arrived and been kept secret by the Immigration Minister?

The Turnbull Government has left Australia's borders vulnerable by failing to deliver two  new Australian Border Force Fast Response Boats to Cairns - vessels specifically  designed to intercept smaller boats in the Torres Strait.

In December 2015, Peter Dutton promised that these vessels would be in the water by  September 2016 but have since been delayed time and time again.

In May 2017, the Turnbull Government confirmed the Fast Response Boats wouldn’t be  delivered to Cairns before the end of 2017 - more than a year late.

“They will probably be pushed out a bit further—probably towards the latter end  of this calendar year… the delivery into service, which was originally intended for  December 2016, has been delayed by our doing.”  Australian Border Force Commissioner Roman Quaedvlieg

Senate Estimates, 22 May 2017



Labor wants these Fast Response Boats to be delivered as soon as possible to target  people smuggling operations and other transnational crime in Far North Queensland.

Failure to deliver these boats as scheduled is yet another failure of Peter Dutton as  Immigration Minister, with his incompetence now impacting on the ability of our  agencies to patrol our borders effectively.

Labor’s policy is clear - we will never let the people smugglers back in business. Labor  believes in strong borders, offshore processing, regional resettlement and boat turn  backs when it’s safe to do so because we know it saves lives at sea.

Whether this latest boat arrival is a people smuggling operation or not, the Turnbull  Government needs to focus on ensuring our agencies, such as the Australian Border  Force, have the capabilities required to prevent breaches of our borders.

WEDNESDAY, 30 AUGUST 2017

MEDIA CONTACT: TIMOTHY DUNLOP 0428 043 110



