





SENATOR THE HON SIMON BIRMINGHAM  Minister for Education and Training   Senator for South Australia

TRANSCRIPT

E&OE TRANSCRIPT  Press Conference  02 January 2017

Topics: Child care availability, foreign affairs, South Australian power and  immigration.

Simon Birmingham: What we have seen today from Kate Ellis and the Labor Party is  another case of all scare but no solution when it comes to child care issues facing Australia.  In this case, Kate Ellis has been caught out misunderstanding and misreading what’s in the  budget papers. The budget papers, the Mid-Year Economic Update released just before  Christmas, indicate that we expect to fund an additional 300,000 Australian children in the  child care system over the next three years. These are places that we budget, that will be  created, that will exist, and that will be there with additional support under our child care  reforms for Australian children and their families. The only threat that exists to those places  and to better targeted support for hard-working Australian families is the failure of the Labor  Party to support the savings measures necessary to pass our child care reforms through  the Australian Parliament.

We have a comprehensive reform proposal, a reform proposal that will provide more  support to the hardest working Australian families, better targeted assistance, will remove  the current mid-year cliff that many families fall off in relation to their child care support,  ensuring they get year-round assistance for their child care bills, and will put pressure on  price growth, to keep a lid on that type of growth because of the type of fee constraint  mechanisms we have in our comprehensive child care reform package. So we have a  comprehensive proposal. The Labor Party went to the last election, less than a year ago,  simply proposing to increase elements of the current broken child care rebate  arrangements. That’s not good enough. We need the comprehensive changes the Turnbull  Government is proposing, and if the Labor Party is seriously concerned about helping  Australian families access affordable child care then they would support our solutions in the  Parliament as soon as possible.

Question: Will 1600 new day care centres be needed to accommodate these children by  2020?

Simon Birmingham: We’ve seen over the last two years growth in the number of places in  the child care system of 150,000 places under the Coalition Government. So we can be  confident that there is already strong growth, and what we expect is that with the better  child care subsidy arrangements we’re proposing under our reforms in place, that there will  be even stronger growth in child care places. That means new child care centres, new



facilities will be built, new facilities will be established, new places will be available, as long  as the Turnbull Government’s reforms pass through the Parliament, as long as Labor gets  out of the way, lets us put our child care reforms in place. That will give the certainty to the  child care sector to invest, to create new places, and to ease the affordability and  constraints that any Australian families are facing.

Question: You’re saying that her figures are incorrect. Well, one of the figures that she’s  provided is that 1600 new long day care centres will be needed by 2020. Is that an incorrect  figure? Do you dispute that, or is that accurate?

Simon Birmingham: I’m saying that Kate Ellis and the Labor Party are misinterpreting the  figures in the budget papers.

Question: So is that figure incorrect?

Simon Birmingham: It’s absolutely correct that around 300,000 additional places are  budgeted and forecast to be created, and that means new centres. Now, how many new  centres will depend on how big those centres are, and a range of other factors that go into  that. So I’m not going to predict how many new centres that will be, but we can be  absolutely confident, based on the fact that there have been many new centres in the last  two years - 150,000 additional places created - that if we can get our child care reforms  through the Parliament and provide the stability, the certainty and the additional support to  hard-working Australian families, then we can be confident there will be new centres built in  the future to fill those 300,000 spots we are budgeting for and we expect that there will be  places for.

Question: How many centres do you think are needed to keep up with demand?

Simon Birmingham: Well we’re budgeting for around 300,000 additional places, and that  will mean there are many new centres that are established for those places. And I am  absolutely confident that, with 150,000 places created in the last two years, we will see  continued strong growth in relation to the availability of child care. But more importantly, our  reforms will give certainty to invest, and give more support to the hardest working  Australians. We’re proposing to better target child care subsidies under a single new child  care subsidy arrangement that will ensure Australians in the future - the lowest-earning,  hardest working families - receive the most support under our reforms.

Question: What’s been your personal experience with child care availability and the  difficulty with getting children into child care?

Simon Birmingham: I have two children under six, and certainly when we first went to get  child care we lived across the road from a child care centre, and we couldn’t get into that  child care centre. We had to go to the adjoining suburb, but we found a place, and of  course many people shop around to find a place that suits them.

In the end, what we are trying to do is create the best possible environment to support  Australian families. That means hundreds of millions, billions of dollars of additional support  and investment going into our child care system over the next few years, axing the broken  child care benefit and child care rebate models for a new single child care subsidy that is  better targeted towards the most hard-working Australians, who are working the longest  hours, earning the least, will receive 85 per cent of their child care rebate paid to them in  future, compared with around 76 per cent at present. So we see more support for the



hardest working Australians under our reforms; I just urge the Labor Party to support those  reforms, to get them through the Parliament.

Question: Can I just jump to another topic quickly; should Australia start limiting its aid to  Palestine? Obviously the comments by the former Prime Minister this morning.

Simon Birmingham: Well the Australian Government has zero tolerance for any rorting or  misappropriation or misuse of our aid dollars, and our aid to Palestine is already under  review following the suspension of certain aid activities in relation to World Vision earlier  this year. And we will make sure that the highest standards are held to the use of Australian  aid, as the Australian people would expect.

Question: Do you think it’s appropriate for a backbencher to be making comments about  Australia’s foreign aid program?

Simon Birmingham: Well, it’s the Coalition parties; the backbench are absolutely free and  entitled to express their views, their opinions. But of course, the Government has already  been taking action in this regard.

Question: Tony Abbott has also asked for the conservatives to unite. Are you concerned  about what might happen to the Liberal vote in South Australia if Cory Bernardi breaks  away?

Simon Birmingham: I have absolutely every confidence the Liberal Party will provide a  strong alternative in South Australia at the next state election to the Weatherill Government,  which of course can’t keep the lights on, can’t keep our children safe, can’t create jobs to  sustain our economy here. There is a strong alternative in the Marshall Government, with a  plan laid out to 2036, and a Marshall Government can deliver the type of growth  opportunities that South Australia needs.

Question: On the power front, what would you like to see South Australia do? What sort of  steps would you recommend of them?

Simon Birmingham: Well clearly the biggest issue that we face are issues of affordability  and reliability, and Steven Marshall has been right in putting a focus around generation, and  base load generation in South Australia as a focus for how it is we can provide greater  certainty, particularly to those who might be considering where to invest their money in  Australia. And if we want them to invest in South Australia then we want to have more  affordable, more reliable energy, and that starts with how it’s generated.

Question: Just quickly to Manus Island, two men have allegedly been injured by police on  Manus Island. At what point does Australia need to start investigating these matters  ourselves?

Simon Birmingham: Well let’s get the facts on this one first. Those facts will no doubt  become available from the PNG police over the coming days, and of course we’ll have a  look at those facts from there.

Question: And there are reports though that they’re receiving medical attention. Should  they be?

Simon Birmingham: Well that of course depends very much on all of the circumstances.  So let’s get those facts on the table first. But in no way should these isolated incidents be



used as some way to suggest that our border protection policies should in any way be  unwound or rolled back. Because we actually have an incredibly successful regime of  stopping illegal arrives to Australia, which of course has meant that we have no children in  detention anymore, which has got us to circumstance where we can focus on resettling the  remaining individuals in Nauru or in Manus, and making sure that in the future ideally we  have no arrivals, and therefore nobody in detention - a far cry from the situation the  Coalition Government inherited.

Thanks everybody.



Minister Birmingham’s media contact: James Murphy 0478 333 974   Nick Creevey 0447 664 957

Department Media:    media@education.gov.au







