

THE HON ANTHONY ALBANESE MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR INFRASTRUCTURE, TRANSPORT, CITIES AND  REGIONAL DEVELOPMENT  SHADOW MINISTER FOR TOURISM

MEMBER FOR GRAYNDLER

E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  ABC LATELINE  FRIDAY, 10 NOVEMBER, 2017

Subjects; Manus island, citizenship, Greens.



MATT WORDSWORTH, PRESENTER: To discuss what can be done on Manus and  the continuing citizenship crisis, I was joined by Minister for Urban Infrastructure,  Paul Fletcher, and Labor frontbencher, Anthony Albanese, for the Late Debate.  Gentlemen, welcome to Lateline.

ANTHONY ALBANESE: Good to be here.

PAUL FLETCHER, URBAN INFRASTRUCTURE MINISTER: Thanks.

MATT WORDSWORTH: The situation on Manus Island, let's start there. There could  be a confrontation as early as tomorrow when the men who are there, refusing to  leave, they could be forcibly removed. Is this on both of your parties or is this the  men's decision? Minister, can I just start with you.

PAUL FLETCHER: Well, certainly it is the men on the island and the activists  including Greens Senator, Nick McKim, who are irresponsibly encouraging those  men to stay in the Manus Island Detention Centre which has now been closed for  some days following an order or a decision of the Papua New Guinea Supreme  Court. There is alternative accommodation available for those men and they certainly  should move to that. The East Lorengau, West Lorengau and Hillside House  facilities, they should certainly move to those. That is the safest course of action and  there they will have food, water, sanitation and so on.

MATT WORDSWORTH: Minister, I'll talk to Anthony Albanese about his view in a  second but just this morning GetUp! released those pictures because they went over  there, looked at the conditions and said the men are just too scared to go to this new  accommodation because they fear attacks from the locals. What do you say to  them?

PAUL FLETCHER: What I say is that there is alternative accommodation available  for them and unfortunately Australian political activists, for their own purposes,  including Nick McKim and the Greens, are deliberately inciting this behaviour, which  is very unhelpful. What is in the best interests of those men is to go to the alternative  accommodation and, of course, for those who have been found to be refugees, they  have the option, should they wish to go to Nauru or to be considered under the  arrangements that we have struck with the United States. This is a problem we  inherited when the Labor Government established this facility. We have been  working systematically to go through the number of people there, identify whether  they had a refugee claim or not, and it's very unfortunate that political activists, for  their own reasons, are choosing to inflame the situation. As a Government, we are  working calmly and methodically to resolve it.

MATT WORDSWORTH: Anthony Albanese, does Labor take any responsibility for  the being the ones that reopened Manus?

ANTHONY ALBANESE: Manus was reopened as a processing centre. The problem  is people haven't been processed. They've been left in indefinite detention now for  more than four years and people can't see a resolution to their predicament, even  though some of them, a majority, have been found to be refugees. The Government  can't continue to say, "This is the fault of something that happened in 2013." They  have had a responsibility to find a third country of settlement. There are offers on the  table that they've rejected for years, such as New Zealand's, that was reiterated by  Prime Minister Ardern just last weekend.

MATT WORDSWORTH: But do you think those men should move to the alternative  accommodation for their own safety, for their own hygienic security?

ANTHONY ALBANESE: Well, I am not there on the ground but certainly the men  need to look after their own interests with regard to if they're in an area that isn't  safe, that is unhygienic and there are facilities that will improve their living standards  today, then, of course, they should take up that option. But the longer-term issue has  been the failure to provide certainty for these people and that's created a climate of  mental anguish, a climate whereby it's understandable that these men are incredibly  frustrated and are acting in a way, perhaps Paul's correct, in terms of the actions of  some more concerned with scoring political points. I'm concerned about ...

MATT WORDSWORTH: So you blame the activists as well here?

ANTHONY ALBANESE: No. Well, I'm primarily concerned with not allocating blame.  I'm concerned with getting a solution in the interests of humanity rather than scoring  political points. My concern is that the Government has used these people  essentially as political footballs, as a political opportunity, have not done terribly  much to provide any solutions so that they can continue to point towards them and  say, "Look, when Labor was in office people came here as unauthorised arrivals  seeking asylum."

MATT WORDSWORTH: Paul Fletcher, can I get your response to Anthony  Albanese here saying it's your fault for not finding a third country resettlement option  for these guys.



PAUL FLETCHER: Let's be clear, when the Howard Government left office we did  not have a border protection problem in Australia. The Rudd-Gillard-Rudd  Government comprehensively mismanaged this issue, totally mismanaged border  security issues. As a result, some 50,000 people, unauthorised arrivals, came by  boat. At least 1200 that we know of died. And, of course, it takes a long time, it takes  time to re-establish order and to send a very clear message to the people smugglers  that they will not be able to reopen their trade. That's what we are determined to do.  Obviously we want these men to have safe alternatives available to them. There are  alternative facilities on Manus Island. East and West Lorengau, Hillside House -  these facilities are available. But what we are also determined to do is maintain the  strong border protection arrangements that we have put in place so that we do not  once again see people encouraged to make the dangerous trip to Australia by boat  which tragically under the Rudd-Gillard-Rudd Labor Government saw 50,000 people  arrive unauthorised and 1200 at least die at sea. But, of course, you can't trust Labor  on this because the left wing of the Labor Party, and the moment they got the  chance, you would see them seeking to remove the strong border protections that  we put in place.

ANTHONY ALBANESE: No-one wants to see, no-one wants to see the people  smugglers' trade start again. No-one wants to see that. But the same time we don't  have to give up our humanity in doing so and the fact that these people have been  left there for far too long, and the Government, when these issues are raised, they  just go back to blaming someone else other than themselves. They've been  responsible for this for a period of time. They're the people who voted against the  Malaysia solution when we were in Government and they're the people that had  Cambodia as a solution which has cost $50 million to place one person in Cambodia.

MATT WORDSWORTH: I want to move on before we run out of time. Citizenship  crisis sucking basically all the oxygen out of Canberra at the moment. John  Alexander reportedly close to quitting. Minister, that's your next-door neighbour  electorate, not just your colleague. You got any intel on whether John Alexander is  going to walk?

PAUL FLETCHER: Look, John Alexander is a great member of Parliament, he's a  great Australian. We all remember his triumphs on the tennis court and he's served  the people of Bennelong extremely well. He's in the course of taking advice. He'll, of  course, have more to say when he's done that, but he's a great Australian. He's  made a great contribution, and I'm ...

MATT WORDSWORTH: "He made" - past tense. You think it's all over?

PAUL FLETCHER: I'm very confident that he'll continue to make a strong  contribution.

ANTHONY ALBANESE: Sounds like a valedictory, Paul.

PAUL FLETCHER: What we need to make sure of is that we have a proper process  to establish certainty across the Parliament. That's what the Prime Minister  announced on Monday. We've then been working with the Opposition, seeking to

engage in good faith with the Opposition Leader who unfortunately seems to have  more of an interest in spinning this out rather than coming to a resolution. But we  have established a process, we have announced a process under which members of  the House or Senators would be asked to make a declaration, where appropriate  provide appropriate evidence. That would be on a register, publicly available, and  then it would be open to the House or the Senate to make referrals to the High Court  where there was a judgement that there was uncertainty about the status of a  particular individual.

MATT WORDSWORTH: Just on that topic, obviously we have already had five MPs  booted, more referrals are looking likely. Let's take a listen to Christopher Pyne  speaking to you, Anthony Albanese, this morning on Channel Nine.

CHRISTOPHER PYNE, DEFENCE INDUSTRY MINISTER: If there are Labor MPs  with citizenship issues that we have enough evidence to refer them to the High  Court, and Labor doesn't intend to cooperate, we will refer them without Labor's  support. And if Bill Shorten refuses to cooperate, that is a matter for him but we know  that he's not a statesman. He's no John Curtin or Bob Hawke. We tried to work with  him in a bipartisan way. He rejected that.

MATT WORDSWORTH: So Anthony Albanese, it looks like things are getting  political. Could there just be a tit-for-tat thing going on in Parliament now, referring  people to the High Court?

ANTHONY ALBANESE: Well, that's just tin pot dictatorship stuff saying you'll use a  majority to make decisions about who has a right to sit in Parliament and who will be  referred off to the High Court. What we need is a mature response here and a bit of  leadership and it has been Labor that has been showing leadership. We're the ones  who said there should be a full disclosure before the Parliament and now we're  saying let's do it while Parliament is actually sitting. There is no reason why, on  November 10, we can't say that people can document their backgrounds, of parents  and grandparents, by December 1. It is three weeks away from today that they have  and they've known about this for a long time. Get the documentation in and then  Parliament, the following week, in an orderly way, not with special sittings of  Parliament at cost to the taxpayer, can refer anyone who Parliament sees fit to, but  in an appropriate way, not as this tit-for-tat business, that the Government is  threatening to engage in.

MATT WORDSWORTH: Paul Fletcher, is this descending into just a partisan score  contest here?

PAUL FLETCHER: Absolutely not. This is an issue that we know affects all parties,  major parties, crossbenchers. Labor has been saying for months, "It doesn't affect  us, we've got better vetting processes." It's very clear it does affect the Labor Party  as well. So what we have said, as Christopher Pyne said this morning, as the Prime  Minister has said, is that if there are issues about members of Parliament where  there's a significant doubt about their eligibility to serve, that should be referred to the  High Court. Now what Mr Shorten has been trying to do is in some way carve out  from the process the consideration of the status of Labor members like Justine Keay  and a number of others. Well, that's simply not appropriate. We need to have a

process that looks objectively at every member and every senators' circumstances  and that's what we want to do. So far from being political, this is about having a  proper, objective process that looks at the facts and certainly doesn't give Mr  Shorten the kind of special carve out deal that he seems to want. We're of  Government, we're about delivering the best possible and most certain outcome  here, getting on with the job. Mr Shorten, of course, is doing what he's always doing,  which is trying to spread confusion.

ANTHONY ALBANESE: No-one is argue for anything other than uniformity. The  difference is we're saying let's get on with it and do it sooner rather than later  because I don't understand frankly why the Government doesn't seem to understand  that it can't get oxygen or traction on anything, that this crisis is damaging the  political fabric of our democracy. All sides are being damaged by this. Parliament  looks bad, the Australian democratic system looks bad as a result of this. So, let's  resolve it as soon as possible.

MATT WORDSWORTH: On that point...

PAUL FLETCHER: That's why we put forward a sensible process.

ANTHONY ALBANESE: You want to sit on December 18.

PAUL FLETCHER: Mr Shorten is to come to the party ...

ANTHONY ALBANESE: You want to sit just before Santa Claus arrives.

PAUL FLETCHER: ... and engage on a sensible process rather than playing delay  games for very transparent political reasons.

ANTHONY ALBANESE: Well, you're the ones trying to delay it though, Paul. You're  the ones who want to sit on December 18 just before Santa Claus arrives, have the  High Court sit in February next year.

PAUL FLETCHER: The Prime Minister has made it clear; the Prime Minister has  made it clear that we're proposing December the 7th.

ANTHONY ALBANESE: After Parliament rises.

PAUL FLETCHER: December the 7th ...

ANTHONY ALBANESE: After Parliament rises.

PAUL FLETCHER: ... as the time ...

ANTHONY ALBANESE: And when does Parliament rise, Paul?

PAUL FLETCHER: ... when we ask people to provide this evidence and we've got a  clear process to move forward.

ANTHONY ALBANESE: When does Parliament rise? December 7. That's an absurd  proposition.

MATT WORDSWORTH: Well, let's just hear another suggestion because the  Greens leader, Richard Di Natale looks like hitting the panic button on the entire  Parliament. He's revealed he's writing to the Governor-General. Let's take a listen.

RICHARD DI NATALE, GREENS LEADER: We know the Governor-General, when  it comes to a constitutional crisis, has played a role in the past and a very famous  example of that. We need to know what all the options are available to us in terms of  bringing this issue to an urgent resolution.

MATT WORDSWORTH: Anthony Albanese, that sounds like he wants the dismissal,  part 2.

ANTHONY ALBANESE: He stands condemned for that suggestion. Anyone who  was around on the 11th November, commemorated tomorrow 1975, and the damage  that did to our democracy. The idea that this bloke would call for the intervention of  the Governor-General to dismiss a Government, you know, I'm not a fan of this  Government, but I don't want to see ever again the Governor-General's powers,  reserved powers, be abused like they were in 1975. And that's precisely what  Senator Di Natale appears to be suggesting. It's opportunist and it's achieved its  objectives, which is it's got his head on the news tonight on Lateline.

MATT WORDSWORTH: Paul Fletcher, do you think he's serious, that he wants the  Governor-General to intervene here?

PAUL FLETCHER: I think Senator Di Natale's contribution on this is about as useful  as Senator McKim's contribution on Manus Island. It's not helpful. It doesn't advance  the position at all. It's just designed to be bit of a circus and a side show. The  Government, led by the Prime Minister, Malcolm Turnbull, has put forward a clear  considered way forward on this. We have reached out to Opposition Leader, Bill  Shorten, who's promised to be bipartisan. So far performance hasn't matched word,  but we have a clear way forward. We can get on with that. We don't need the help of  the Greens.

MATT WORDSWORTH: And Paul Fletcher, just before we go, I gotta mention  leadership, because you've got the commentariat saying Malcolm Turnbull is in  terminal decline. What do you say to those people out there who are reading stories?  There could even be a challenge to his leadership.

PAUL FLETCHER: I say it is absolutely ridiculous. Malcolm Turnbull is strongly  backed by the parliamentary party. He's doing a great job and he's getting on with  important things like working on trade outcomes for Australia to deliver jobs and  prosperity across area after area. We're working on delivering jobs growth, on rolling  out infrastructure - $75 billion we have committed to spend on infrastructure between  2016-2017 and 2026/27 across the country, across portfolios. We're working on  delivering outcomes for the Australian people.

ANTHONY ALBANESE: What's very clear is that Malcolm Turnbull had a plan to get  rid of Tony Abbott but he doesn't have a plan to govern. That's clear for everyone to  see.

MATT WORDSWORTH: All right. We're out of time but Anthony Albanese, Minister  Paul Fletcher, thank you so much for being on Lateline.

ANTHONY ALBANESE: Good to be with you.

PAUL FLETCHER: Thank you.



[ENDS]



SATURDAY, 11 NOVEMBER, 2017  MEDIA CONTACT: MATTHEW FRANKLIN 0411 659 868



















