

THE HON. BILL SHORTEN MP  LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  SHADOW MINISTER FOR INDIGENOUS AFFAIRS AND  ABORIGINAL AND TORRES STRAIT ISLANDERS

MEMBER FOR MARIBYRNONG

E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP  BRISBANE  TUESDAY, 6 JUNE 2017

SUBJECT/S: Melbourne terror attack; penalty rates; Four Corners; Labor’s  proposal to ban foreign donations.

BILLSHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Good afternoon everybody. First  of all I just want to, on behalf of the Labor Opposition, extend our condolences to the  family of the victim of this dreadful murder in Brighton yesterday.

It is horrific. I'm a Melbourne boy. I went to school in Brighton not very far away from  where this terrible event took place. It is a terrible event, it's a terrible act, and as the  police have said, an act of terror .   I want to make very clear that I congratulate the police involved. I understand that  three officers have been injured, but one can only wonder what could have  happened if the police hadn't acted in the way that they did when they did.

We are very fortunate in this country to have such brave and capable police. And  what we need to make clear in this country as well, is that there are no corners for  terrorists to hide in or those who, in the name of terror, would cause harm of the sort  we've seen tragically in the last 24 hours.

Extremism in any face is unacceptable on our streets and it is unacceptable on the  internet, which is being used as a means of distribution to spread evil, criminal and  terror messages, causing some of the harm we have seen right around the world.

It is time for everyone to join the fight against terrorism. It is time for Twitter,  Facebook and Google to join the fight against terrorism. We need to make it clear  that everyone can do their part to keep our country and our people safe, and it's time  for big internet to also join this fight. We need to make it clear that terrorists have  nowhere to hide on our streets, in their countries and also on the internet, and that's  why we need to see everything that can possibly be done to join this fight. It’s no  good being in a 21st Century fight if you're using 20th Century weapons.

Before I move on to questions on that, I'm up here to talk about jobs and this is a  fantastic TAFE. They're training literally hundreds and hundreds of young people and  older workers to be able to gain a construction trade. We need to see more  tradespeople in this country. Under the current Liberal Government, 130,000  apprenticeship and traineeship places have disappeared. These young people here  are the workforce of the future, we need to get behind them.

Talking about getting behind people and jobs, yesterday there was a decision to  phase in the penalty rates cuts from 1 July this year. Malcolm Turnbull surely should  realise the absurdity of on one hand providing tax cuts of $16,500 from 1 July to  people who earn a million dollars, yet we see people who work on a Sunday having  their penalty rates cut successively over the next two years. This is exactly the wrong  time for Australian workers to see their wages, their penalty wages being cut when  corporate profits are at a 40 per cent very recent high.

JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten last night on Four Corners we heard about ASIO's  serious concerns about Huang Xiangmo. We already know about Sam Dastyari  and Eric Roozendaal's close relationships with him now it appears another NSW  Labor Gen Sec Jamie Clements is connected to Huang. Are you concerned about  just how deeply your NSW branch of the party is connected to this purported  Chinese agent of influence?

SHORTEN: Well let’s go to the heart of the matter. I want direct and indirect  foreign influence out of our elections. It's now overdue for Malcolm Turnbull and the  Liberal party to join with Labor to ban foreign donations.

JOURNALIST: But Mr Shorten what about this connection with Jamie Clements who  is a very senior member of your party in NSW.

SHORTEN: I've made it very clear - he's no longer working for the NSW Labor Party  as you'd be well aware.

JOUNRALIST: No but he's established this relationship.

SHORTEN: I'm going to answer your first and your second question. First of all, I do  not want these two individuals who were named on Four Corners to be making  donations to the Labor Party, and I have made it clear, before last night that I don't  want our party accepting donations from these people.

But I'll also say, because it’s the answer I gave to your first question, fair is fair. How  is it fair that if the Labor Party, and I've just said it again today, we don't want these  individuals or their associates’ money, how is it far that the Liberal Party won't make  the same commitment? If you follow the logic of your question, you're asserting  these are agents of Chinese Government influence. I am sufficiently concerned that I  don't believe my political party should be taking money from these two people or  their associates. I want Malcolm Turnbull to make the same statement I just made.  No more dealing with these people.

And more generally, let’s go to the heart of the matter, the concern is, are there  people who are operating in the interests of foreign governments making donations

to Australian political parties? I am concerned about this problem. That is why Labor,  months and months ago, moved to have our foreign donations out of our political  bloodstream. It needs to be stopped. I am up for doing it. That is why today I will be  writing to Malcolm Turnbull to ask him to have the Parliamentary Joint Committee on  Intelligence and Security look at the role of direct and indirect foreign influence in our  elections. I want Mr Turnbull, on this Parliamentary Committee, to consider whether  or not we should introduce a version of the United States’ foreign agents recognition  laws, which stops exactly the sort of influence which your question is concerned  about.

And I also want to say very clearly, that we don't want these people to be making  donations to either side of politics. But I think it is fair that if the Labor Party, we are  happy to not wait until there is a law telling us what to do, we are happy to step  ahead and actually do something without waiting for the law. I want Mr Turnbull and  the Liberal Party to today also agree that they're not going to take any more money  from these two characters and I think that's only fair.

JOURNALIST: Why should Senator Dastyari continue to serve in Parliament when it  now appears he was willing to repudiate your party’s policy and Australia’s national  interest because he was worried a major donor was going to pull a $400,000  donation?

SHORTEN: I don't accept the assumption of your question. What I do know is at the  heart of this matter -

JOURNALIST: Well he gave a press conference where he went against your party’s  policy in support of a Chinese donor.

SHORTEN: To back to answer your previous question. The heart of this matter is the  perception, real or otherwise that somehow there are some people in this country  making donations to political parties of all political stripes who are seeking to act as  agents of foreign governments. Enough is enough. One, let’s just ban foreign  donations. Two, let’s get one of our strongest Parliamentary committees to  investigate other measure to protect Australian democracy from -

JOURNALIST: But Mr Shorten, I'm asking about your party -

SHORTEN: Listen mate, if you want to hear the answers, you can ask as many  questions -

JOURNALIST: But we've gone over this ground, what about Senator Dastyari, does  he have your support?

SHORTEN: You've asked six questions, I'm answering them. You're raising serious  issues, I'm going to treat that question as seriously as you think it should be taken.  We need to now ban foreign donations. Only Labor has a bill in the Parliament to  ban foreign donations. The Liberals can bring it on and deal with it.

Secondly, I say today to Malcolm Turnbull, I am willing to lead by example and stop  these two or their associates, stop having any donations they give to our political

party. The ball is now in the Liberal Party's court as of the last five minutes. We are  happy to do it, we will do it, but you've got to ask, what is fair? We will not take  donations from these people and I think that’s the right course of action. But why  would the Liberal Party keep taking the money from these people?

In terms of Senator Dastyari, do you know what I reckon is red hot? You had a Trade  Minster, a trade envoy, who signed an $880,000 contract with one of these  companies, even the day before he had left Parliament. This is red hot and this sort  of conduct where you move seamlessly from a senior position in government to  working for some of the people who you are actually making policy for the day  before, I don't think that is appropriate.

In terms of Senator Dastyari, he has been penalised for his indiscretion in the past,  but I know that he will vote to ban foreign donations, and I want to see Mr Turnbull  show the same leadership we are showing.

JOURNALIST: So was it -

SHORTEN: You've had six questions -

JOURNALIST: So was it -

SHORTEN: You've had six questions.

JOURNALIST: Going to the Melbourne attack, would you describe it as an act of  Islamic terror or Islamist terror?

SHORTEN: I'll rely on what the police tell me. The police have called it an act of  terror. And listen, let’s not pussyfoot around this. There are some people of Islamic  faith who are committing criminal acts of terror and we've got to call it for what it is.  But in dealing with it we've also got to work out how we prevent it. Extremism on the  streets, extremism on the internet is completely unacceptable.

Brighton - I'm a Melbourne boy, Brighton hasn't seen scenes like that before, but nor  has most of Australia. I can just imagine what was going through the minds of the  parents at school pickup time, their kids are at the local swimming pool doing their  swimming lessons, people on the way home in the twilight just getting their shopping,  and all of a sudden shots ring out. This is not the Australia that 99 per cent of us  know. That is why we have to be prepared to reconsider the way we fight these  matters and that is why I am saying it’s time for everyone to join the fight to keep our  communities safe. That's why it's time for Facebook and Google and Twitter to do  their bit too, to keep our community safe.

As a parent, as a citizen, as a legislator, I no longer accept the argument that some  problems are just too hard to deal with. You can't win a 21st Century fight using 20th  Century weapons.

JOURNALIST: Do you think parole laws need to be tightened up because this  terrorist was on parole?

SHORTEN: I guess I've got to give a perfectly - my reaction when I heard that is,  how on earth can someone be on parole and do these crimes? If we know the  person is a criminal, what are they doing out on the streets? Now I'm sure there will  be a back story, and the state government’s going to work through all of those  issues.

I called, after the Bourke Street driving massacre, where that terrible man went  down, mowed people down in Bourke Street, to review the bail laws, parole laws are  different. But I think many of us, most people, in fact all of us, probably everyone  here at this presser, everyone says, how can they be out on parole and then they do  this terrible thing? So I'm sure the Victorian Government is going to answer it.

JOURNALIST: Will you be raising that with the Victorian Government?

SHORTEN: Yes, and I'm sure the Victorian Government don't need me to raise it to  work out that they want to see what happened.

JOURNALIST: In the past you've steered clear of using phrases like Islamic terror or  Islamist terror -

SHORTEN: No I haven't.

JOURNALIST: You haven't steered clear?

SHORTEN: No, that's not right.

JOURNALIST: You have used those terms before?

SHORTEN: I'm happy to look at what I've said before, sure, but anyway what's your  question?

JOURNALIST: Do you have any problem with those terms? Islamist terror?

SHORTEN: No, I don't. In fact I think I used it earlier in an answer to a question.

JOURNALIST: The Adani coal mine has been given the go ahead, are you keen to  see it happen or is this just another PR stunt with this announcement today?

SHORTEN: Well it would appear that the project is happening, and it would appear  that there is going to be jobs and I'm happy when I see jobs created in Central  Queensland or anywhere else. But when it comes to using taxpayer money at the  national level, if the business deal is a good deal, it doesn't need taxpayer money,  does it? I mean, what other Australian business gets a $1 billion loan subsidised by  the taxpayer?

Welcome the jobs, but like all viable jobs, the business should stand on its own  without the Commonwealth taxpayer taking the risk.

JOURNALIST: The Fair Work Commission today delivered their minimum wage  decision, a rise of $22 an hour. Do you think it was enough and does it mitigate from  the loss of low paid workers for losing Sunday in penalty rates?

SHORTEN: Yeah, I don't think it's $22 an hour.

JOURNALIST: Sorry, $22 a week.

SHORTEN: I appreciate your point, the issue with the Fair Work Commission is that  there's been regular minimum wage increases every year, and that's as it should be  and that's good. But what I can't accept is that somehow people cutting their Sunday  pay is a good thing for this country.

Wages in the last 12 months have gone up, by one index, 0.9 per cent. Profits have  gone up by 40 per cent. Surely Malcolm Turnbull will realise how absurd it is to give  a $65 billion tax cut to large corporations at the same time as penalty rates are being  cut. What this country doesn’t need is wages going down, and wages growth being  as anaemic and stagnant as it is.

So we would ask the Turnbull Government, in light of yesterday's decision, to yet  again, reconsider their support for cutting the penalty rates in awards which cover  700,000 people.

Do you want to have a go?

JOURNALIST: Yeah, that would be great. Was it proper for Senator Dastyari and his  office to repeatedly, directly contact immigration to press for Mr Huang's citizenship?

SHORTEN: I've seen Malcolm Turnbull raise this issue. I would like Malcolm  Turnbull, if Malcolm Turnbull is serious, for him to report how many MPs take up  immigration matters and citizenship matters on behalf of their constituents. I think  you will find that for every MP in Australia, Liberal, Labor and every other type, that  they do regularly raise immigration and citizenship matters.

JOURNALIST: That's obviously the case but no concerns about Senator Dastyari  here?

SHORTEN: I think Senator Dastyari has raised constituency matters with  immigration for people from for example Brazil, Thailand -  JOURNALIST: Sure but we're talking about this one specific case.

SHORTEN: Well I expect all my MPs to be raising matters to do with immigration  and constituents without fear or favour.

The real point about all of this is about resolving foreign donations. We need to take  foreign influence out of the Australian democratic system. Today I make very clear to  Mr Turnbull, support our ban on foreign donations, agree with my suggestion that a  Parliamentary Joint Committee on Intelligence and Security review direct and indirect  foreign influence, and take up and follow Labor's lead that the two individuals who  were named last night, and their associates, there should be a general consensus

not to accept their political donations. I say to Malcolm, don't wait for the law to catch  up with what needs to be done, let's for once lead not follow.

And I just want to go to your point. I condemn terrorism whoever does it. I condemn  Islamic terrorism, I condemn extremism. I have in the past, I do now, and I will in the  future. I am shocked by the scenes I saw in Brighton. I'm shocked by what I saw at  Manchester, but what also I am shocked about is an Islamic 12 year old girl who  comes from my hometown, Thomastown, the northern part of the suburbs of  Melbourne. She was 12, she was the daughter of refugees, she went to Baghdad  with her family to visit her sick grandfather.

Terrorists don't distinguish between Christians and Muslims. What we need in this  community is for everyone to join the fight against extremism. That means that we  get more police out on the street. That means that we also challenge the terrorism  message through the internet. What we do at times like this is, we stick together and  we don't divide the community. And I also repeat my call that we need to get to  Facebook, Google, Twitter, big internet, to play their role in the fight against  terrorism. Nothing is more important.

Thank you everybody.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: LEADER’S OFFICE MEDIA UNIT - 02 6277 4053

