

SHAYNE NEUMANN MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION

FEDERAL MEMBER FOR BLAIR



E&EO TRANSCRIPT

TELEVISION INTERVIEW

KARVELAS ON SKY

SUNDAY, 17 SEPTEMBER 2017

SUBJECTS: Manus Island and Nauru; citizenship legislation; prohibited items in  immigration detention; asylum seeker welfare cuts; marriage equality.

PATRICIA KARVELAS: My next guest is Labor’s Immigration spokesman Shayne  Neumann; he joins me now from Brisbane. Welcome.

SHAYNE NEUMANN, SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER  PROTECTION: Good evening Patricia.

KARVELAS: Let’s get straight into your portfolio. The Federal Government has said the  men whose asylum claims have been rejected are likely to be sent to another detention  centre when the Manus Island facility closes. Now Immigration Minister Peter Dutton  has had discussions with the PNG Government about putting the men in a another  detention centre. Given they can’t be sent back to where they came from, is this  something that you’d support?

NEUMANN: Well I’d like the Immigration Minister to come clean about that. That’s the  first that he’s publicly said about that, last week. So we call on the Government - if  they’re having negotiations with the PNG Government - to actually tell the Australian  public what’s going on. What kind of accommodation, what kind of medical treatment,  what kind of financial support, will be given for those people who remain who may not  be picked up by the US refugee resettlement arrangements which Labor supports.

KARVELAS: On the substantive issue, I mean, if it has to close, and they can’t be sent  home, and Labor - in fact it was your policy says they can never be resettled in  Australia - what’s the alternative that the Government has?

NEUMANN: Well the Government has failed. What was regional processing  arrangements and facilities have become places of indefinite detention. The  Government, apart from the US refugee arrangement, have not found other third  country arrangements and we’d be urging the Government to pursue those. They  should be looking to other countries for resettlement.

KARVELAS: And of course the Government has been pursuing those but it’s clearly  easier said than done Shayne Neumann, so given that, would you provide bipartisan  support for a new facility to house these men?

NEUMANN: Well we want to see the Government brief us in relation to that. We want to  make sure that people are treated decently and properly. We want to make sure there is  appropriate accommodation, financial support and medical treatment. I wrote to the  Minister a couple of weeks ago in relation to the fact that I was concerned that medical  treatment wasn’t appropriate and there needed to be better provision of services -  particularly for women’s reproductive rights. As yet, I’ve received no response from the  Government in relation to that. The Government should advise the Opposition in detail  as to what is going on and tell the Australian public what they’re planning to do.

KARVELAS: And you would support another detention facility if they were to explain  exactly how it would work?

NEUMANN: The Supreme Court of PNG have ordered, in fact, the PNG Government to  close down that facility in Manus Island - the regional processing centre - and so some  people have made the transition, we understand, to the transit processing centre, some  people are in community. We don’t know what the Government’s proposing or what  negotiations the Government is undertaking with respect to PNG. I call on the  Government to tell the Australian public and tell the Opposition what they’re proposing  and then we’ll take it through our usual processes.

KARVELAS: Immigration Minister Peter Dutton has argued it is in the national interest  that he obtains a Ministerial veto to block citizenship for people found not to be of good  character, after a child rapist, drug dealers and a convicted killer won citizenship status  in the Administrative Appeals Tribunal. But obviously, you know, you’re blocking the  citizenship Bill as is the Greens as we saw this week, so Peter Dutton says you’re  blocking this effectively. Are you standing in the way of this measure?

NEUMANN: We’re opposing the citizenship Bill on a number of bases and we note the  Senate recommendation in terms of the Committee not to support this particular  legislation. There are a number of really big problems with it. One, it doesn’t come as a  result of the national security agencies advising if we should be doing this at all.  Secondly, if these people are a risk in any way at all, why are they still in Australia in the

first place? The Minister’s got extraordinary powers under Section 501 of the Migration  Act and the character test - if there’s an Adverse Security Assessment - to actually get  rid of these people from the country in the first place. But the problems in terms of this is  that they’re delaying people from people becoming citizens for another four years, who  have been living in Australia for four years including one year on permanent residence.  And finally, what sort of snobbery is it that were requiring, under Peter Dutton’s  Australia, for people to have university level English before they’re entitled to become  citizens. Now this citizenship legislation should go back to the drawing board; the  Government should come back to us in relation to this. The situation here, this comes  about - this citizenship legislation - as a result of a recommendation of a current Liberal  Senator and a former Liberal member of the House of Representatives; not for national  security reasons at all.

KARVELAS: Ok but on this specific measure where Peter Dutton wants the right to  have a veto power, does Labor support that?

NEUMANN: Well Peter Dutton wants to aggregate to himself extraordinary powers. For  example, he wants to tip the balance in terms of harmonisation of code in favour of his  discretion, give himself Trump-like powers with respect to visa revalidation, and give  himself capacity to make decisions in relation to lifetime bans on refugees. It would  seem he’s arguing in the media for further additional powers. There have been many  submitters in relation to that Senate Inquiry expressing their concern about this further  aggregation of power. If I had to put my faith, I’d put my faith in judicial process rather  than Peter Dutton.

KARVELAS: Ok so you back the Administrative Appeals Tribunal even though Peter  Dutton says it has made a number of decisions which he says are very questionable  and are unsatisfactory?

NEUMANN: Well he’s made a number of claims in relation to the Administrative  Appeals Tribunal; he’s had a war on the judiciary in relation to matters. I note that on  many occasions when he’s made claims in relation to these type of issues in the past -  particularly on immigration matters - he’s actually not appealed those decisions yet is  quite happy to go in the media and criticise the Administrative Appeals Tribunal. This  legislation he is talking about here doesn’t come about because the national security  agencies have advised it is necessary.

KARVELAS: Following a failed court battle to allow detention centre guards to  confiscate phones from detainees Peter Dutton has, as you know, introduced legislation  banning phones and other items he considers to pose a risk. Now that draft Bill was  introduced on Wednesday, do you support the Bill?

NEUMANN: We’ve referred it to a Senate Inquiry. We will take this through our usual  process. I call on all stakeholders who are interested in this to actually have a say and  put a submission to that Senate Inquiry. It’s really critical I think, in our detention  centres, that there is safely and security for detainees, for contractors, for workers in

those centres and we’ll make sure we’ll do that. It’s really important that happens. But I  call on the Government to make their case if they feel it is necessary, to make  submissions to that Senate Inquiry and then well look at this and take it through our  usual Caucus/Shadow Cabinet processes and we’ll make a decision a good time after  the Senate Inquiry’s report.

KARVELAS: I understand that you have a process and of course so does the  Government; everyone has a process. But we know what’s in the draft Bill - it would  allow the Immigration Minister to determine by legislative instrument what constitutes a  “prohibited thing” inside detention centres. That’s according to the explanatory  memorandum. What are your instincts here? You must have some instincts about if  that’s a fair way forward?

NEUMANN: I’ve read the explanatory memorandum as well. There are not many  examples given in relation to that. If the Government’s got evidence, they should be  producing it to the Senate Inquiry in relation to it. We’ll reserve our position in relation to  this matter. We want to see what the evidence comes out of the Senate Inquiry. Of  course, we don’t want to see prohibited items- we don’t want to see drugs or weapons  or anything of this nature in these detention centres. We don’t want to put people in any  form of risk or harm but the Government must make its case and make its submission to  the Senate Inquiry.

KARVELAS: There’s another issue too, and that’s one that Labor has been quite  outspoken about, the Government’s plan where welfare would eventually be cut to up to  400 asylum seekers who came to Australia for medical assistance. Now the move cuts  the $200 a fortnight welfare reception, how are you going to stop this? Do you plan to, I  mean the Greens want to do something very specific, are you going to join the Greens  on this?

NEUMANN: Well we’ve looked at this and unfortunately we can’t stop this arrangement  taking place. The trouble is that it’s not a disallowable instrument that we can attack in  the Senate to disallow this, putting people on this bridging visa E. Now these people are  in Australia here for medical treatment, as a result of being transferred on medical  advice from Manus and Nauru. We would call on the Government to listen to Labor’s  request and also the Senate recommendations to allow these people to avail  themselves of the opportunity to engage in the US resettlement arrangement. The  Government has prohibited them from doing so. Until that time, we believe it’s  appropriate they get the kind of medical treatment they need. You shouldn’t make  people destitute and homeless and I thank the Victorian Government and also those  not-for-profit organisations who have stepped in to make sure these people are treated  decently and humanely. I think that’s the Australian way. I can’t believe the  Government’s undertaking this. The Government’s should let these people avail  themselves the opportunity to go to America and in the interim get the kind of treatment  and help they need.

KARVELAS: Just a final question, I spoke to Michael Sukkar, he’s the Minster assisting  the Treasurer, about this same sex marriage issue, today obviously and last night big  days in the calendar for the yes and no campaigns. I asked him about protections  because John Howard and others, very prominent people, are saying we don’t know  what the protections will be for people in religious freedoms and speech. Michael  Sukkar said they should be very broad, the protections. Would Labor support very broad  protections, because he thinks they should be broader than what’s currently articulated  in the Dean Smith Bill.

NEUMANN: Well firstly I would support marriage equality. I urge everyone who wants to  vote for love and against discrimination to actually vote yes and go to those red  mailboxes- fill in your ballot papers and vote yes. Every time I listen to people like  Michael Sukkar talk about this, they complicate what is a very simple issue. You know  Patricia, one of the greatest days in my life was the day that I pledged my fidelity and  faithfulness, my love and loyalty, to my wife. It was one of the greatest days of my life. I  want to see people in the LGBTI community have the same opportunity. This is a simple  question. There are, of course, discrimination legislation - state and federal levels - to  protect freedom of speech and those people who are talking - like Michael Sukkar - are  exercising their freedom in speech in talking to you. I can’t believe people are trying to  muddy this issue where we want to make sure we have religious freedom in country,  and every time they do talk about this, I think they exercise their freedom of speech and  then argue the exact opposite to what they’re doing.

KARVELAS: Shayne Neumann many thanks for your time. We’ve run out of time  tonight but thanks for coming in.

NEUMANN: Thank you Patricia.

ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: TIMOTHY DUNLOP - 0428 043 110



