

CHRIS BOWEN MP  SHADOW TREASURER  MEMBER FOR MCMAHON

E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP  FINANCIAL SERVICES COUNCIL LEADERS SUMMIT, SYDNEY  TUESDAY, 25 JULY 2017

SUBJECTS: Royal Commission into the financial services sector; tax reform;  Slomo’s first home saver fail.

CHRIS BOWEN, SHADOW TREASURER: Thanks for coming ladies and gentlemen.  The Shorten Labor Opposition continues to set out our agenda for Government. As the  Liberals remain focused on themselves and the Greens implode we remain determined  to take to the Australian people a comprehensive agenda for the future. Today I've  outlined one of those plans, it's time for a prudent, carefully designed review of our  financial system architecture. In a speech I just made I outlined three reasons why this  is necessary; some of the ad hoc changes over the last 12 months, the increasing  household debt in Australia and the emergence of new forms of financial technology. All  reasons for a prudent review through our Banking Royal Commission of the architecture  of our financial and prudential regulation and that of course will be reflected in the policy  we take to the next election and the policy we implement after the next election.

Of course we continue to outline what we see are the great challenges in improving the  Budget bottom line and improving fairness at the same time. Bill Shorten and I have  been speaking about this over recent days and we will have more to say obviously in  coming days. The Government is reduced to a scare campaign, Barnaby Joyce barely  made sense yesterday and the Treasurer continues to run around making up false  allegations about Labor’s policies. Well we will be outlining our policies in full detail over  coming days and will be there for all to see and they are policies which will have been  very carefully designed and meet the challenges of Australia's future: improving the  Budget bottom line.

The Budget will not return to Budget balance by tinkering or by half measures. Labor  has shown we are up to the task of putting a comprehensive plan before the Australian  people and they will also deal with the issue of inequality which the Government  pretends doesn't exist. When the Government is full of climate deniers and they are full  of inequality deniers as well. What we see is the Government refusing to listen to the

Australian people and the Australian people's message to them that inequality is on the  rise and they refuse to do anything about it.

My final point before taking questions is that the Treasurer was out on the 1st of July  spruiking his plan to allow access to superannuation for first home buyers. Now today  the Tax Office has warned people that they need to be very careful in engaging, in  going down that road because the legislation has not yet passed the Parliament.

This is Government incompetence and frankly it’s Scott Morrison's incompetence. Now  Labor opposes that legislation and there is no guarantee that that legislation will pass  the Parliament or indeed that it won't be amended and the Treasurer out there to be  misleading young people, and spruiking the first homebuyers a half-baked bad idea  which she hasn't even bothered to legislate just shows that this Government is focused  on politics and on attacking the Labor Party and not focused on doing their job. If they  spent, and this Treasurer in particular, spent 30 per cent of the time that he spends  making up things about Labor policy and concentrating on getting his own policies right  then they should be better off. A first home so called ‘housing affordability package’ in  the Budget was a joke and the Government can’t even competently implement it.

Happy to take any questions.

JOURNALIST: Today you mentioned three reasons why you think there should be a  Royal Commission, one of them being household debt. Now do you think that that  would be better served by having its own inquiry rather than wrapping it up into a wider  inquiry?

BOWEN: Look I considered that, it’s a fair question. But I think having the Royal  Commission provides a clear vehicle. And the Royal Commissioners that we appoint will  be highly experienced, credentialed and qualified people who can look at the matter  holistically, avoiding future scandals and avoiding future instability. I think the right  balance, the right way forward is to provide the Royal Commission with this task.

JOURNALIST: Given that Royal Commissions are usually used to rule out  misbehaviour and criminal behaviour, do you think regulators will feel threatened?

BOWEN: Oh no, not at all. The regulators have our respect and support. I’ve made that  very clear. And I will make that clear to you. And Royal Commissions can be used for a  whole manner of purposes. I can’t really accept the premise of your question. Royal  Commissions look at all sorts of things. This is a prudent way for us as an incoming  Government to ensure that our financial systems architecture is up to international best  practice and is fit for purpose.

JOURNALIST: Tony Boyd today wrote about this in Chanticleer, he called your  justification flimsy…

BOWEN: I didn’t read it, with all due respect.



JOURNALIST: …and he did say that the three reasons you gave, fintech, household  debt and the other one was I believe the ad hoc nature of our regulatory system are  flimsy reasons, how would you respond to that?

BOWEN: Well obviously I disagree. I mean he’s entitled to his view. I think the case  we’ve made is strong and substantial and I’m happy to take it to the people.

JOURNALIST: Is APRA at the moment, are you suggesting that APRA has too much  work to do?

BOWEN: No, I’m suggesting that the lines of accountability have been somewhat  blurred. That APRA now has some responsibilities that you might have thought would  have gone to ASIC. And that indeed macro prudential regulation has macro implications  which traditionally has been the purview of the RBA. So you could have said before  these developments that the lines of accountability were pretty clear in Australian  financial regulation. I don’t think you can say that at the moment. And that is no  disrespect to the regulators, they are doing their jobs and doing their best. It’s  Government’s responsibility to outline the areas of responsibility, and what I’ve indicated  is I’ll be informed by a Royal Commission as I do so, as Treasurer.

JOURNALIST: On the topic of offshore detention, what do you make of the UNHCR’s  recent claims about Australia’s agreement with the US to resettle asylum seekers from  offshore detention centres in Manus Island?

BOWEN: Well it’s up to the Government to explain. The UNHCR says one thing, the  Government says another thing, and there is a clear disparity between those things.

JOURNALIST: You were once Immigration Minister, do backdoor deals I guess happen  regularly?

BOWEN:  Not in my experiences as Immigration Minister.

JOURNALIST: Just one more, can I just mention that you’re pretty strong obviously on  the Royal Commission, so is a vote for Labor a vote for a Royal Commission?

BOWEN: Yes.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: JAMES CULLEN 0409 719 879

