



THE HON RICHARD MARLES MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR DEFENCE  MEMBER FOR CORIO

E&OE TRANSCRIPT   TELEVISION INTERVIEW  ABC WEEKEND BREAKFAST  SUNDAY, 16 JULY 2017

SUBJECTS: Talisman Sabre; US refugee processing; cyber security; defence  industry exports; Australia’s role in the region; Islamic State

HOST: A massive defence exercise with Australian, Canadian and US forces called  Talisman Sabre is under way in Queensland until the end of this month. It comes at  a time of increased regional tensions, with continued missile testing by North Korea.  Shadow Defence Minister Richard Marles is in Queensland for the star of the war  games. He joins us now. Richard Marles, welcome to you.

RICHARD MARLES, SHADOW MINISTER FOR DEFENCE: Good morning,  Andrew. How are you?

HOST: Good, thanks. We'll get to Talisman Sabre in a moment. I did want to start,  though, with those reports concerning the United States and its refugee deal with  Australia, and in particular reports that US officials have halted screening of refugees  in Nauru and left the island. What's your understanding of that deal between  Australia and the United States? Is it still on?

MARLES: Look, what I've learnt in this space is we've got to be very careful when  we hear reports and information of this kind. I'm not exactly sure what that would  mean if it is even in fact confirmed to be the case that those officials have left early,  whether that was scheduled or what the significance of that is. The point I would note  is that the US Department of Homeland Security has made it clear that the deal  remains on foot.

I think the broader point is this: the resettlement arrangement in the US is absolutely  critical to getting people off Manus and Nauru. The Abbott-Turnbull Government has  been singularly hopeless in arranging third-party resettlement arrangements for  those who have been on Manus and Nauru and, indeed, all their eggs now are in the  US basket. They need to be looking at a whole lot of other options to make sure that  hope and a future can be found for those people who are in those facilities. That's  the real issue here.

I mean, there's a lot being staked on this deal. It's a very important deal. It needs to  go through. It's good that the Americans are saying it's going to continue to be  honoured, but this government has really dropped the ball over the last few years  about those facilities. They need to be more active.

HOST: Do you think the deal is also, perhaps, in jeopardy because the United States  has reached its annual intake of refugees of 50,000?

MARLES: Again, it's hard to know exactly what that means. I also note in the context  of those reports that the clock resets, as it were, in October. In the context of the wait  that people have in relation to their time in resettlement facilities, a couple of months  here or there isn't a huge amount of time. It's just hard to know exactly what the  snippets of information that we're getting here really add up to.

I think it is important to note that the Americans have come out with a statement  today saying the deal remains on, and that's a good thing, but the broader issue here  is the government, over the last few years, has dropped the ball when it comes to  third-country resettlement. All their eggs are in one basket at the moment. It's why,  whenever we hear a piece of information in relation to this deal we react, because it's  the only thing on the table right now. The government needs to be far more active,  because they do need to find resolution for those who are on Manus and Nauru.

HOST: Richard Marles, let's turn to Defence, and in particular cyber defence -  reports this morning that Australia has been warned by Washington to upgrade its  cyber defences. This comes in the wake of the theft of information from America's  National Security Agency. What risk does this pose to Australia, do you think?

MARLES: Well, I think we live in an age now where cyberattacks are very much a  part of the national security threat that we face, and we need to be investing heavily  in this space and making sure that we do everything we can both to protect  government installations but also to make sure that citizens - and in that, I include  companies - within our country are protected from cyberattacks as well.

We've seen what WannaCry, for example, as a ransomware attack, has done, and  this is going to be an ongoing feature of the world in which we live. It's absolutely  essential that we are investing properly and appropriately in this area of defence,  really. This goes to the very foundation of our national security.

HOST: Do you support the Turnbull Government's plans for legislation to access  encrypted messaging systems?

MARLES: Well, I'd like to know what the Turnbull Government's plans actually are.  We hear a lot of statements, a lot of smoke, when it comes to national security  utterances from the government. They like to make those.

Obviously, we seek to make national security a bipartisan space. When we are  presented with a concrete and firm proposal about how we should be going down  this path, we'll have a good look at it. It is true that our legal framework needs to  keep up to pace with technological change.

Right now, I actually haven't heard any substantive proposition coming from the  Prime Minister in relation to this. I've heard a lot of commentary, a lot of requests that  are going to be made of various companies. That's all fine. If there is a legislative  proposal, he should put it to us. We'll obviously have a good look at it, as we have in  relation to all the other national security proposals, and our instinct very much is to  go about these things in a bipartisan way, and that will be the case here as well.

HOST: As mentioned, you're in Rockhampton for the Talisman Sabre exercises  between the United States and Australia. The United States, of course, is a very  large arms exporter. Interesting comments in the Fairfax publications this morning  from Defence Industry Minister Christopher Pyne, who says he wants Australia to  become a major arms exporter, and he wants to use defence acquisition funds to  build up a local industry, which designs, builds and exports military hardware. Is this  sensible? Is it realistic?

MARLES: Look, it is absolutely the case that, if you want to have a defence industry,  it's got to have an export component to it. You can't have a defence industry solely  based on your home Defence Force, particularly with a country the size of Australia.

When you look at countries which do have defence industries, what characterises  them is that they export their materiel. That needs to be done very carefully within an  appropriate legal regime to make sure that you're not exporting to places where your  material is going to be used in the wrong way, but within that framework, it is  important that we try and seek to be a defence exporter if we want to have a defence  industry.

The point I'd make here is that it's taken a long time for the Government to actually  realise that industry, and defence industry, is important. This is a government which  has presided over just about the biggest de-industrialisation of our country that we've  seen, the loss of the car industry. We're seeing a reaction by the government to that  in relation to the defence industry space. That's a good thing, that there is a focus on  building a defence industry, but they've come to the party pretty late here.

We shouldn't forget that our supply ships, for example, which are an important part of  our Navy, have had them being built in Spain, not Australia, so the Government's  record here isn't that flash. If we are now seeing a renewed commitment to industry  in this country and defence industry in particular, that's a good thing, but Labor has  always, absolutely, been focused on that.

HOST: Would you draw the line at what Australia makes and exports, as far as  weapons are concerned, and would that sit happily with Labor Party policy, certainly  morally, at least?

MARLES: Look, this all needs to be done within a very clear legal framework in  terms of who you're exporting to - which countries - but also what you're exporting.  There is going to be certain materiel that you produce which is going to be of such a  classification level, for example, that you're not going to want to export it. That's what  happens with countries which have defence industries.

But the fundamental point is this: you can't have a defence industry in this country  wholly based on your own Defence Force.

It's also important to understand right now that we've got companies that do engage  in defence export. Austal, which is a shipbuilder based in Western Australia, is  building a whole lot of ships for the US Navy. They've also built vessels for Oman.  It's not as though this is a new thing for Australia. We have a legal regime in place,  but from an industry point of view what matters here is that you cannot have a  defence industry unless you seek to export.

HOST: Richard Marles, given your time there in Rockhampton to witness Talisman  Sabre, the operation between American and Australian troops, you may well have  had a chance to meet and talk to the US commander of Pacific Forces, Lieutenant-General David Burger. He said he's keen for Australian troops to be deployed along  American troops in trouble spots in the region. Do you foresee a time when our  troops will be active in hot spots in the region, such as the Korean Peninsula, the  Philippines, and even the South China Sea?

MARLES: Well, look, I think it doesn't help to speculate on that.

Let me say a couple of things, though, about Talisman Sabre. This is an  unbelievable exercise that I've been witnessing during the course of this week. There  are 30,000 people involved in that - a number which rolls off the tongue pretty easily,  but when you see it in action, you realise the enormous scale of what that number  actually represents.

We're seeing a mock - albeit pretty significantly real - sea battle, air battle and,  indeed, now a land battle going on off the coast of Queensland just north of  Rockhampton. Right now, Australia's 3rd Brigade is involved in a fight with, basically,  elements of the 1st Brigade in the Shoalwater Bay training area. You've seen an  aircraft carrier strike group from the US, led by the USS Reagan, which is out in the  Coral Sea just off the coast of Rockhampton, and the capacity of our forces is  genuinely impressive. The degree to which we see our interoperability, the really  close, organic way in which we work with countries, particularly the United States,  but also, as you say, Canada has been involved in this, as has New Zealand and  Japan. It is a really remarkable thing to see.

We have played our part as a good citizen around the world, as we're doing now in  Iraq, as we're doing in Afghanistan, hand-in-hand with countries like those that I've  just mentioned. I imagine that that will continue. In terms of our own region,  obviously we should have a focus on South-East Asia, and I would actually like us to  have more of a focus on the Pacific. All that ought to be seen in a positive way, but I  don't think it helps to speculate on specific operations.

HOST: But a focus on the Pacific, in what manner?

MARLES: Well, I think it is important that - and I've spoken about this on a number of  occasions - that, as we look at our strategic framework, that we are demonstrating  leadership within the Pacific, not just in terms of the material and resources effort

which we place in the Pacific, which right now is actually quite significant, but in  terms of, I guess, the intellectual leadership that we provide.

This is the part of the world where Australian leadership is expected, both from  countries within that region but, indeed, from the rest of the world. We need to  demonstrate that, and I think we can do more work in respect of that.

I think it's also true to say that we need to increase our energy and our activity within  South-East Asia. It's important that we're seen to be doing that - doing that, let me  hasten to say, in cooperation, obviously, and in support of, the countries of those  regions.

HOST: And as you mentioned, Australian forces working side-by-side the Americans  in Syria and Iraq. There've been significant gains made there, certainly in the fight  against Islamic State. Would you like to see Australia's presence there maintained,  or perhaps even expanded, in the effort to defeat Islamic State?

MARLES: I think the level that we have in Iraq is appropriate, and indeed I think the  level that we have in Afghanistan is appropriate. I think what we're doing there now is  kind of - if I can dare to say - a smarter way in which we're contributing compared to,  say, the early 2000s, in as much as this is all trying to make sure that we're building  the capacity of the Iraqi national forces and the Afghans as well. In supporting them,  we're doing really important work.

I was there a couple of months ago, and the incredible work that our Defence  personnel are putting in there is very significant. I think it's important that that  continues.

We are one of many countries which are providing support to a coalition which is  doing a good thing for the world. This is us being a good citizen, but we're doing it in  a way which is commensurate with our size and our power, and I think that that's  appropriate that we continue to do it in that way.

HOST: Shadow Defence Minister Richard Marles, thanks for your time.

MARLES: Thank you.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: TONY HODGES 0435 594 552

