

THE HON. BILL SHORTEN MP  LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  SHADOW MINISTER FOR INDIGENOUS AFFAIRS AND  ABORIGINAL AND TORRES STRAIT ISLANDERS

MEMBER FOR MARIBYRNONG

THE RT HON. JACINDA ARDERN MP  PRIME MINISTER OF NEW ZEALAND



E&OE TRANSCRIPT   DOORSTOP  AUCKLAND  SATURDAY, 9 DECEMBER 2017

SUBJECT/S: Opposition Leader’s visit to New Zealand; New Zealanders living  in Australia; Foreign interference

JACINDA ARDERN, PRIME MINISTER OF NEW ZEALAND: Welcome everyone.  It's my pleasure to be able to have Bill Shorten here for a short period on his way  back to Australia. I understand that he has been in PNG, so no doubt conversations  around APEC being hosted there in 2019 will no doubt come up, particularly given  the role Australia intends, or will and is playing there.

I certainly will raise the issues that I raise with my Australian counterparts every time  we meet, and that will include citizenship issues for New Zealanders in Australia, and  particularly issues around tertiary education as well. As well, I am sure, a number of  other international issues. So, welcome. It's great to see you here again.

BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: It's great to be here Jacinda,  and I'm here, first of all to congratulate Jacinda on behalf of the Opposition and  millions of Australians. Jacinda-mania has spread across the Tasman. My daughters  want me to get a selfie with Jacinda to send back to them.

We're here to talk about ideas and policies. And as Jacinda has said, there are some  anomalies now in the treatment of New Zealand citizens in Australia in terms of  access to higher education and other matters, including education. Jacinda's well-known commitment to social justice, affordable housing and climate change. Also,  we're interested to hear Jacinda's views about the region. She is already showing,  and many Australians have noticed, you are showing global and regional leadership.

And I suppose, when all is said and done, whilst Australia has many close ties  across the world, New Zealand is family. And we look forward to this being the start  of many meetings, the beginning of a good and great friendship, and many  productive items to discuss as well.

ARDERN: Thank you.

Of course, we've met before at a past Labour Conference here in New Zealand, so  it's wonderful to see you again.

SHORTEN: That's right.

ARDERN: Happy to take some questions.

James, I know that you've got some at the ready.

JOURNALIST: I do. I want to see when you two had met (inaudible)?

ARDERN: It was a Labour Conference, it was some time ago.

SHORTEN: A few years ago, now.

ARDERN: It was down - gosh, my recollection is that -

SHORTEN: Wellington?

ARDERN: Yeah, Wellington. So maybe about two years ago now.

JOURNALIST: If there was one big issues that you're going to raise with Mr Shorten,  what will it be?

ARDERN: As I've said in my opening comments, the ongoing issue of New  Zealanders in Australia, particularly around the attempted change in approach to  students but also citizenship issues. It continues to be something that we advocate  with our Australian counterparts at all opportunities that we have.

JOURNALIST: How do you expect that to change, Bill Shorten, if you were Prime  Minister?

SHORTEN: Well, thanks James and good to see you doing so well over here, mate.  I think there are some anomalies in the way in which Australian law has treated New  Zealanders, especially long-time residents of Australia. Especially perhaps visa  holders after 2001 and more recently, there have been developments which I think  unfairly penalise New Zealand-permanent residents in Australia, in terms of some of  the costs of higher education. I want to hear Jacinda's views, but I think there is at  the end of the day, real merit in reviewing the way in which New Zealand-permanent  residents in Australia are getting penalised in terms of higher education cost.

JOURNALIST: Because an MFAT briefing to the incoming Minister of Foreign Affairs  said Malcolm Turnbull is a strong champion for New Zealand, who advocates for  Kiwi’s rights in Australia. What would you do that would be different?

SHORTEN: Well, I wouldn't talk about it, I'd do something. I think specifically, visa  holders after 2001 got caught up in changes in the law, and I also think that we need  to actually bite the bullet - and Australia needs to make a decision, do we want to  support New Zealand-permanent residents in terms of their access to higher  education in Australia, or are we going to treat them as second-class residents in  Australia.

ARDERN: I think the argument that we would make as well is that these are often  New Zealanders making a long-term commitment to Australia. If they aren't able to  get that same equitable access to tertiary education, it often means that they don't  pursue, potentially, wouldn't pursue tertiary education - that ultimately would hold  Australia back in our view. So, we know that New Zealanders who are in Australia  are making a good commitment, they are taxpayers, so we are simply seeking the  equitable treatment. Equally, I am sure we will discuss some of our proposed  changes to tertiary education here in New Zealand as well.

JOURNALIST: PM, Bill Shorten has recently been in PNG meeting Peter O'Neill. Do  you think you'll raise your offer of resettling refugees under Mr Shorten?

ARDERN: We haven't had a conversation about that but as I have continually said,  we will for a number of reasons, continue to work with Australia on that issue rather  than anyone else.

JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten, you’re still calling on Mr Turnbull to accept that offer?

SHORTEN: Well, I think that your new-New Zealand Prime Minister has shown  regional and global leadership and ultimately, it is a matter for our government. But I  think we should look pretty carefully and positively at the leadership that the New  Zealand Government is displaying on this matter.

JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten, while you are here (inaudible) ASIO have identified 10  Manchurian candidates as we see in the paper, people with links to China, at least  one of which has already been elected and stays elected in the local or state  jurisdiction. Are any of those candidates affiliated with the Labor Party?

SHORTEN: James, you'd understand that convention is that Australian politicians  travelling overseas don't talk about domestic politics when we are overseas.  Certainly though, when it comes to national security briefings, it goes without saying,  I won't be revealing the details of my close working relationship with Australia's  security agencies.

ARDERN: Gosh, we are adopting that convention, I can tell you!  Alright everyone.

SHORTEN: Thank you, have a lovely evening.

ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: LEADER’S OFFICE MEDIA UNIT - 02 6277 4053

