



1





The Hon Alan Tudge MP  Minister for Human Services



TRANSCRIPT

ABC NEWS 24

INTERVIEW WITH ANDREW GEOGHEGAN  27 AUGUST 2017

Topics: Drug Testing Trials for welfare recipients, Long-term welfare dependence, Asylum  Seeker income support, Same Sex Marriage.

E&OE…

ANDREW GEOGHEGAN:  Well to discuss this and other political issues of the week we are joined by Human Services  Minister, Alan Tudge. Alan Tudge, welcome.

ALAN TUDGE:   Good morning, Andrew.

ANDREW GEOGHEGAN:  Can you confirm the third site of the trial for drug testing welfare recipients?

ALAN TUDGE:  Yes. It will be in Mandurah in Western Australia, and that adds to the other two which we  have announced in the Western Suburbs of Sydney and up in Logan in Queensland.

Three sites in total, we aim to test about 5,000 unemployed people.

ANDREW GEOGHEGAN:  So why choose Mandurah?

ALAN TUDGE:  Mandurah, like the other two sites, has a high incidence of drug use. It also has quite a lot of  drug and alcohol services already in existence. And thirdly it has a form of cashless income  management in place as well.

It means that we can leverage that existing infrastructure. We will get these going early next  year and we hope it will have that impact of helping people to get off drugs and back into  the workforce.

ANDREW GEOGHEGAN:  Can you clarify, will all welfare recipients be tested or will it be a random sample?





2



ALAN TUDGE:  It will be a random sample of just new welfare recipients. As people come into the system  from early next year, in essence, they will be signing up to the fact that they may well be  randomly tested across the period of the next 24 months.

ANDREW GEOGHEGAN:  And how will you measure the success of the trial?

ALAN TUDGE:  A couple of things. Ideally we want to see some behavioural change, i.e. fewer people taking  drugs because they may be concerned they will be tested. Secondly though, we want to see  people get treatment, come off drugs and back into the workforce.

They are the two key things that we will be looking for.

ANDREW GEOGHEGAN:   If deemed successful then, can we expect that this will be implemented across the country?

ALAN TUDGE:   It is a trial in the very sense of the word. If you do a trial and it is successful, then of course  we would be looking at expanding it further.

In some respects, Andrew, it is a bit like our cashless welfare card trials. We did those  b  eginning about months ago now. We conducted a full independent evaluation of it.

It came out positive, and now we are rolling it out to a couple of new sites. I would expect it  would be similar here. If it is positive, we might roll it out further.

ANDREW GEOGHEGAN:   How do you expect that this will get people into work?

ALAN TUDGE:   As you know, Andrew, if you do have a drug habit, then it is a real impediment for getting  you into the workforce; and particularly for all those jobs these days, which require you to  be drug free, and in fact have very regular drug testing.

You think about the construction industry, the transportation industry, the mining industry,  Defence Forces, Border Protection, emergency services. You name it, you must be drug free  to get a job in those industries.

And so if you have got a drug problem today, you are effectively excluding yourself from all  of those jobs. We want to help people to get off their drug habit, and therefore be eligible  f

or those jobs, and of course be more capable of taking those jobs or any other job.

ANDREW GEOGHEGAN:   How widely have you consulted on this trial? I ask that because certainly Logan City Council,  the site of one of the trials in Queensland, the Council says they had not been consulted at  all.

ALAN TUDGE:   We will be consulting with them during the implementation phase. It does not actually  involve the Logan Council. It involves very much at the federal level through the provision of





3



welfare and also through the provision of services. They are not involved in the  implementation; but of course he will be getting a full briefing about the implementation  measures.

ANDREW GEOGHEGAN:   The Council is concerned that essentially this trial could stigmatise the area and its  residents, with the possibility that employers could discriminate against those jobseekers.

ALAN TUDGE:   I do not think that will be the case. In fact I would hope that the Mayor and the Council  would welcome this initiative in Logan; because what it will do is bring more investment into  that community.

Further, it will help some people get off drugs and back into the workforce, and surely that  is a good thing for his community.

ANDREW GEOGHEGAN:   Have you been listening to healthcare professionals, such as the AMA; who are saying there  is no evidence that this has worked elsewhere?

A



LAN TUDGE:   I am frustrated with them, because this is a trial in the very sense of the word. It has never  been done before. And so consequently, we are giving it a go. We will evaluate it and see  how it goes.

Every single medical advance is done through trial and error as well. If it is good enough for  health policy, why isn't it good enough for social policy to do it this way as well?

ANDREW GEOGHEGAN:   The AMA maintains the point that essentially it is not evidence-based in the way that this is  set up.

ALAN TUDGE:   We will have a full evaluation done on it. Furthermore, the fact that we are requiring  welfare recipients to undertake treatment, if they test positive twice, is consistent with  what we already do in the judicial system as well.

In the judicial system, quite frequently the courts will mandate that a drug user has to  undertake treatment as an alternative to some of other penalty. In some respects the  principles underpinning our drug testing regime are not new, even though the overall  method collectively, is a world-first.

ANDREW GEOGHEGAN:   When we look at welfare in Australia overall; do you maintain that there are too many  Australians on welfare?

ALAN TUDGE:   We would obviously like to see fewer people on welfare. Ultimately, as the saying goes, the  b

est form of welfare is a job.





4



We announced figures today, which I am concerned about, that there is over 100,000  p  eople who have been consistently and constantly on unemployment benefits for five years

or more. About 20,000 of those for 10 years or more.

Many of those people entered into unemployment benefits in the prime of their life; in their  20's or 30's. We have got to do better in that space, and we are taking several steps to try to  help those people get off welfare and back into the workplace; because that is ultimately  going to be good for them, as well as for the community at large.

ANDREW GEOGHEGAN:   Alan Tudge, can I just draw your attention to a report in Fairfax newspapers today that is  saying that the Department of Immigration is planning to cut income support to around 100  asylum seekers who are in Australia for medical reasons. Can you confirm that?

ALAN TUDGE:   This is about people who were on Nauru, or Papua New Guinea, in one of the facilities  there. They were taken to Australia for medical treatment, they have been treated, and  consequently now they are required to go back to Nauru, or to PNG, or indeed back to their  home country.

That is what this is about, and it is consistent, Andrew, with the principle that anybody who  arrives by boat to our shores, won't be settled in Australia; they will be settled elsewhere.  That is what this is about.

ANDREW GEOGHEGAN:   Is this right, it will affect around 100 people, and that their income support will be cut off, as  well as their support for accommodation will be withdrawn?

ALAN TUDGE:   Andrew, I cannot confirm the precise number; but it is right that now that they have had  their medical treatment in Australia, that they will be required to return to Nauru, to Papua  New Guinea, or back to their home country.

And here won't be the further provision of taxpayer support in Australia.

ANDREW GEOGHEGAN:   Can you give us any more update on the fate of those asylum seekers in both Nauru and  Manus Island? Given that we are still waiting on the United States and the vetting process.

ALAN TUDGE:   As you know, there's no longer any child in any of the facilities anywhere in Australia. We  a

re very proud of that fact. There is no more people coming into the system; because we  have effectively stopped the boats.

We are just down to the last remaining few who are in the facilities in Nauru and Papua New  Guinea. Obviously we are working very hard to try to provide permanent locations for those  people.

ANDREW GEOGHEGAN:   Alan Tudge, just before you go. I did want to ask you about same-sex marriage and the





5



postal vote. Are you concerned at all, in the lead-up to this, that some people are feeling  victimised?

ALAN TUDGE:   Inevitably there is going to be a robust debate; as there is in any significant public policy  issue which is discussed in the Australian community.

I hope that our debate, though, can be respectful, and that the debate on both sides can be  respectful to the other side. Ireland managed to do it, I hope we can do it also in Australia.

ANDREW GEOGHEGAN:   Minister for Human Services, Alan Tudge. Thanks for joining us this morning.

ALAN TUDGE:   Thanks very much, Andrew.

[ENDS]



