

SENATOR THE HON PENNY WONG  LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION IN THE SENATE  SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS  LABOR SENATOR FOR SOUTH AUSTRALIA

E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TV INTERVIEW  SKY NEWS THE MORNING SHIFT   FRIDAY, 3 FEBRUARY 2017

Subjects: Donald Trump phone call with Malcolm Turnbull; Visit to the US with  Parliamentary Joint Committee on Intelligence and Security; US refugee  resettlement deal; US Alliance.

TOM CONNELL: Labor’s Shadow Foreign Minister Penny Wong also joining us live  from Washington. Penny Wong thanks for your time. I’m interested in what Bill  Shorten had to say in the wake of this. He said that Australians shouldn’t be finding  out via the Washington Post. That Malcolm Turnbull should have come clean about  this whole conversation earlier. That doesn’t really go with the normal convention  does it of world leaders speaking in person and then just telling the media everything  that was said?

SENATOR PENNY WONG, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION IN THE SENATE: I  think the issue here is whether or not Mr Turnbull’s judgment In how he explained  the call on Monday or Tuesday was the right one. He was certainly much more  definitive about the agreement in relation to resettlement than, it appears, from the  reporting, he ought to have been. So it does seem that Mr Turnbull made some  questionable judgments about what he said to Australians on Monday about the call.

CONNELL: You said questionable judgment. So, what did he do wrong? Is he  supposed to have, as Bill Shorten said, told us everything that happened? That there  was a war of words, that Donald Trump was talking that strongly. Is that supposed to  have been what he told us?

WONG: He was very definitive about the resettlement agreement. Now, we want the  resettlement agreement to go ahead. You’d have to question whether or not how this  has been handled by the Government is going to make it more likely or less likely for  that agreement to be implemented.

I have to say I think that Mr Turnbull’s language earlier in this week, if the reports are  correct, doesn’t appear to gel with what we now understand to have occurred in the  telephone call.



CONNELL:  What are your thoughts on the relationship? Do you have concerns?  You have been over there in Washington, you are getting briefings. Everyone is  talking about the strength of the US-Australia relationship, but there must be some  concern within Labor at how Donald Trump is treating Australia? Yes, it’s the  Coalition, but it’s the Australian Government at the same time.

WONG: I think all Australians look to what’s occurred and many Australians are  concerned and disappointed if what has been reported in the Washington Post is an  accurate read out of the call. But the point I’d make is this, there are the individuals  who hold positions at any one time. And then there is the Alliance with the United  States which is both an historic Alliance and an Alliance going forward and we do  need to make sure we separate the two.

I said before the election of Mr Trump the relationship is bigger than any individual  and I still maintain that. I’ve been meeting today and yesterday with the FBI, the CIA,  we’ve been at The Pentagon and I can say to you there are very trusted strong  relationships between our two nations.  Obviously it’s very disappointing that these  matters have been reported in the way they have. And, if correct, it’s very  disappointing that an ally and trusted partner would be treated like that. But,  institutionally, what I would say to you is that the relationship is very strong.

AHRON YOUNG: You make a good point about trust there, and that seems to be  the biggest question here. We know Donald Trump is not happy about having to give  into Malcolm Turnbull on this issue. He’s made that pretty clear. But from your  perspective, from the Labor perspective, do you think Donald Trump is a man that  Australia can trust as an ally.

WONG: I wrote an opinion piece just after Mr Trump was elected and I made a  couple of points in that. The first I said was this was a change point because some of  his foreign policy positions that are relevant to Australia’s national interest were very  different to previous Administrations of both Republican and Democrat Presidents.

The second point I made was that we would have to navigate our way through being  able to stand up for Australian interests and Australian values where they differed  from the Administration’s, as an Alliance partner. So, within the Alliance to be able to  assert what we thought was right and I think we have seen that we will need to do  that. Whether it is in relation to the Executive Order and the ban on certain people  entering the US, which has been the subject of a lot of international controversy, or  on these matters, we are going to have to be able to stand up for our interests and  our values and we do have the right to do that as an Alliance partner that has really  demonstrated that we can be trusted in this relationship.

DANICA DE GIORGIO: Just following on from that, there have been some questions  raised about whether Donald Trump is a reliable trading partner, that what he says  as President can be trusted, and that perhaps has ramifications far beyond Australia.  What are your thoughts on that?

WONG: It’s certainly true we haven’t had a President using Twitter and making  statements through Twitter in the way President Trump has done. Certainly on trade

his position has been different to past Administrations and different to the way I  which Australia has approached these things.

Obviously, when it comes to China, China is a very important market for us and we  don’t want to see an escalation in terms of trade positions between the US and  China. That’s not in Australia’s interest and I’d suggest not in the world’s interest. So,  we’ll have to continue as a nation to assert, use this relationship, work though this  relationship to talk to the Administration about what we think is important and to give  them the perspective Australia has as a nation and ally in the Asia Pacific region.

CAROLINE MARCUS: Penny, can I just ask you about this refugee swap deal,  because the Federal Opposition has said that the Government might need a Plan B  for the refugees that are still on Nauru and Manus Island. Do you think that this deal  is going to go ahead? How confident are you that it is actually going to happen?

WONG: They’re questions you should ask Malcolm Turnbull. Labor has said  consistently we want this agreement to go ahead. We’ve said for some time now that  we need resettlement arrangements for those being held on Manus and Nauru. But it  is the Government that told us, just a few days ago, this was proceeding. That  appears to have been knocked on the head by both the report today in the  Washington Post but also what the President has said publicly.

So, those are very legitimate questions you ask and they’re questions the  Government has so far failed to answer.

CONNELL: Shadow Foreign Minister Penny Wong, live from Washington, thanks for  your time this morning.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: STEPHEN SPENCER 0423 596 573

