

PAT CONROY MP

SHADOW ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR CLIMATE CHANGE AND  ENERGY  SHADOW ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR INFRASTUCTURE  MEMBER FOR SHORTLAND





E&OE TRANSCRIPT  SKY NEWS INTERVIEW   THURSDAY, 25th MAY 2017

SUBJECTS: The House Standing Committee on the Environment  and Energy’s inquiry into the modernisation of Australia’s energy  grid



TOM CONNELL, PRESENTER: Nationals MP Andrew Broad is the  committee’s Chairman; the Deputy is Labor MP Pat Conroy, whose seat  of Shortland is of course close to coal country in Newcastle, New South  Wales. Gents thanks both for your time today. Does this mean we’ve got  a new bipartisan agreement on this there’s no more Weatherill versus  Frydenberg?

ANDREW BROAD, CHAIR OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON THE  ENVIRONMENT AND ENERGY: Well I think there’s going to be things  we’re going to have an argument over a beer later. But what we wanted  to do is look at how do we construct the Australian electricity grid. So  we’re staying out of the space of, you know, what form of generation.  But the future is going to take us in some different directions, we wanted  to create an enquiry into how do we construct the Australian electricity  grid so that it’s flexible, that it’s reliable, and that is affordable. And that’s  what a House of Representatives Environment Committee should do.

TOM CONNELL: I know you’re getting some open submissions  tomorrow. From what I understand networks are making about 6 per  cent off the infrastructure alone. What’s the situation here, is that too

much money, are we talking gold plating? What does this 6 per cent  figure mean?

PAT CONROY, SHADOW ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR CLIMATE  CHANGE AND ENERGY: We explored this in some hearings in March,  and they’re getting 6 per cent return on capital risk free. They cannot  lose on this investment. They’re getting 6 per cent which is above-

CONNELL: No matter how much it’s used basically?

CONROY: No matter how much is used.

CONNELL: But this goes to the gold plating we were talking about a few  years ago?

CONROY: Absolutely. And then the court case that came down  yesterday means that NSW energy consumers are going to face higher  electricity bills. Because, basically the courts ruled that the regulators  can’t clamp down on some of the inefficiencies, so there’s urgent need  for reform around how the networks operate. There’s also urgent need to  reform the grid that was designed when we had zero renewables. We’ve  got 15 or 16 percent renewables by now, there’s a bipartisan  commitment to have 23.5 per cent power coming from renewable  sources by 2020; we need a different grid.

CONNELL: And how do you change the 6 per cent, I mean this is sort of  baked in and companies are used to getting it can you do much about it?

BROAD: Well the challenge is not to duplicate what we’ve already built  so - the grid as we know it tends to be a generation point which might  be a coal fire power station and then you’ll have arteries and veins that  come from that.  Increasingly what we’re seeing now is the capacity to put other things at  the end of the grid where there is a drop out. So, you might put a, you  know, solar powered power station with some batteries, or you might put  some wind or you might put a gas plant. And so the discussion around  the enquiry is about how do we build the grid, that means we haven’t got  it just duplicated. And if we can keep the transmission lines in a smaller  capacity by having generation in different spots we therefore--

CONNELL: What so more smaller spots of generation essentially?

BROAD: Yeah, well that’s right, that’s what we’re starting to see as  we’re going through, I mean we don’t want to pre-empt--

CONNELL: And you’re talking about smaller gas, wind, whatever it  might be?

BROAD: Yeah.

CONNELL: More of them around the country, and essentially instead of  huge transfers from big power stations, it’s small little blocks?

CONROY: That’s right. And that can actually save consumers money  first by not having to invest in all the polls and wires, and secondly, by  increasing the reliability and the voltage control. Lots of countries have  done this; the state of New York in the United States has saved lots of  money by going to this system.

CONNELL: Does it mean building a lot more and maybe Government  backed runs? Is there a market out there for smaller power stations?

BROAD: Well, I think there is. You know and I think--

CONNELL: That’s the evidence you’re hearing that there is?

BROAD: That’s right, that’s right and sometimes it’s easy to, you know, I  mean a gas fired power station for example, which is a base load power  station - it’s essentially, you buy it out of a shipping container and  assemble. So you can put it in a remote area. But also as we’re seeing  with solar and with hydro and with pumped hydro and, also with wind -  perhaps there is a space there for them taking some of the, you know,  really heavy loads off and then not needing the transmission lines as  much when it doesn’t require as much output.

CONNELL: Is there an agreement that essentially the grid wasn’t built  for renewables [indistinct audio] it needs to be adjusted to make them  work so at the moment the two are not [indistinct audio] so who’s right  when we talk back to the Weatherill / Frydenberg punch on?

CONROY: No, no, they’ve got different arguments. Our committee is not  focused on how much renewables should be in the grid, but what is the  right grid structure to accommodate that. We’ve already had testimony  from a roundtable where all the Government regulators, so the

regulators [indistinct audio] have said that there isn’t any energy security  issues with having a grid with 40, 50, 60, 100 per cent renewables.

CONNELL: Not with having a grid, but this grid it is?

CONROY: Yeah, exactly.

CONNELL: So does that mean there sound have been an extent where  South Australia said, when they were planning on increasing it that  maybe they needed to factor in this grid isn’t friendly towards that?

CONROY: Well Tom, let me give you a quick South Australian example;  a simple tweak in the rules that would have required the wind turbines to  provide frequency controls and the mechanism for voltage drops. So  they had the complete capacity to do that, it happens all around the  world, they just didn’t have the instruction from the regulators to do it. So  simple rule tweaks can mean that we can have much higher levels of  renewables. But we need regulators and a governance model that’s 21st  century. It’s very archaic, it’s very bureaucratic--

CONNELL: Okay, I wanted to get you on sponsored refugees if I could  Andrew Broad, you’re supporting this call. Does this mean an overall  intake increase?

BROAD: Well what I was pointing out in my talk which I gave in the  Parliament is we’ve actually got an example of a town in Nhill - where  they’ve brought Karen refugees, who are Buddhist, Christian into that  town that’s driven the economic activity in that town. 10 per cent of the  population in that town are now Karen and it’s been a success story.  Now, the thing that gets people very nervous about refugees is when  they come out and they become a burden on the tax payer, when they  pay a…

CONNELL: It’s kind of either the burden or take my job isn’t it a bit of--

BROAD: Well, well but actually--

CONNELL: It’s the two things they express--

BROAD: In some of our horticulture industry and some of our abattoir  industry we need these people, ah, and what I want to see is people  come out, settle, and fill those jobs.

CONNELL: So, does that mean increasing the overall intake or are you  just saying get more to the country, work it better - what are you saying?

BROAD: Well I think get more to the country is the start. And then when  you integrate people--

CONNELL: And that could be part of a bigger overall intake are you  willing to--

BROAD: Yeah, yeah.

CONNELL: How does your party feel about that message?

BROAD: Well I’ll give you an example. I’ve got a town called Robinvale.  It has a billion dollars of horticultural activity and the shops in the main  street are dying, because the busiest place is Western Union because  they bring foreign workers in to pick the fruit - doing jobs Aussie’s don’t  want to do - and wire that money out of the town.

CONNELL: Whereas if they’re here--

BROAD: If they’re here, and they’re based - they can actually help the  community.

CONNELL: And is that a message that’s getting some currency with,  with your Nationals colleagues?

BROAD: Look I think it is, it’s just got to be done properly and done with  some sensitivity to people that integrate into Australian society.

CONNELL: Alright, Andrew Broad, Pat Conroy interesting discussion in  particular on electricity. We’ll see if we can really get some bipartisan  momentum behind this, keep us updated.



ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: PADDY DOULMAN 0459 106 424

