1



The Hon. Scott Morrison MP  Treasurer

TRANSCRIPT

DOORSTOP INTERVIEW, CANBERRA  MONDAY 28 AUGUST 2017

E&OE

Subjects: The Turnbull Government’s comprehensive plan to put downward pressure on electricity  prices  for  households  and  businesses;  Bill  Shorten’s  unfunded  attempt  at  WA  GST  catch-up;  Bill   Shorten’s latest demonstration of weakness on border protection

TREASURER: This week the Government has got a very strong focus on energy. The Prime Minister  today will be at Snowy and we’ve got a major project which we’ve got really starting to move,  drillings  are  already  happening  down  there  and  this  project  is  going  to  deliver some 5,000  jobs  in the   construction phase and it’s all part of the Turnbull Government’s plan to put downward pressure on  energy prices. Making sure gas stays in Australia when it’s needed to keep prices down; ensuring  that we get a better deal for Australian households and businesses out of energy retailers; making  sure  our  regulations  are  efficient  and  don’t  drive  prices  up  like  they  have  in  the  past;  putting  the   investment  into  new  generation,  storage  and  other  technologies  that  can  also  boost  the  supply  that’s needed in the market. And, finally, investing in low emissions technologies as well. So quite  clearly,  five  key  points  that  we’re  acting  on  and  today  we’re  focusing  on  quite  a  number  of  those,   particularly with the meeting with the energy retailers again later this week.

QUESTION:  New  figures  are  suggesting  that  a  large  number  of  Australians  are  paying  more  for   electricity than they should be. Why have you been letting that happen for so long? Why have they  been allowed to get away with that?

TREASURER: Well, we’re acting on it. That’s exactly what we’re doing, that’s why we’ve called them  in, that’s why we’re making these changes.

QUESTION: What else can you do, Treasurer?

TREASURER:  I  think  the  program  that  I’ve  just  outlined  to  you  is  very  comprehensive.  It’s  doing   everything from  a  long-term  supply  of  energy  to  the  deal  that  you  should  be  getting  right  now,  and   everything in between. This is a comprehensive plan to put downward pressure on electricity prices  for households and for businesses. The alternative to this is we’re seeing the one-off actions now  that we’ve seen in Victoria with a 40 per cent renewable energy target which is just going to drive  the prices up more and Bill Shorten indulging all of those sorts of policies that are driven by ideology,  not engineering, and will only make prices higher for consumers, not lower.

QUESTION: But do these figures suggest that you’ve hauled in these electricity chiefs a couple of  weeks ago and nothing’s changed?

TREASURER: No, these figures show that we’re right to act and that we are acting.

QUESTION: But you did have them in three weeks ago, is there evidence that they have done  nothing? Why...

2

TREASURER: No, no, they’re actually getting on with the things that we talked about three weeks  ago. That includes starting writing off to people who are going to be coming off their benefit period,  their discount period, to ensure that they get a better understanding of the better deal that they  could be on. So, those wheels are already in motion and there is a much broader agenda that we’re  pursuing with the retailers in the energy sector and we’ll be picking up on those issues. After the last  meeting, I said that complexity and inertia were the big energy companies’ best friends when it  came to their profits and their prices. Now, we need to reset the balance on that and make sure that  our customers, households, families, small businesses are better equipped, more empowered to get  the best possible deal for their power prices.

QUESTION: Has Bill Shorten now outbid you on the GST and I know that you’ve criticised it because  it’s  not  a  change  to  the  overarching  arithmetic  but  isn’t  the  beauty  of  it  that  you’re  not  short-changing  other  states?  If  you  put  in  separate  funding,  you’re  not  taking  money  off  New  South   Wales...

TREASURER: We’ve had top-up arrangements in Western Australia for three years to ensure that we  stop the drop on the GST share for Western Australia and we’ve funded that and the money’s in the  bank. Bill Shorten’s just made another promise like Wayne Swan made promises about setting up  funds and Kevin Rudd made promises about doing the same thing in Western Australia and none  of it ever happened. So they’ve just got no form on it. They’ve got a promise and no money for it.  We’ve  actually provided top-up payments  up until  now  but understood that that was  no  long-term  solution. You need to look at the fundamentals of how this thing works and that’s what we’re doing,  that’s what we’ve been doing now for some time. We’re working to a solution on that. Bill Shorten is  not acting in Western Australia’s interests - as always, he’s just got a fix for his own interests.

QUESTION: Treasurer, which way will you be voting in the same-sex marriage survey?

TREASURER: No.

QUESTION: You’ll be voting no?

TREASURER: Yes.

QUESTION: Will you be campaigning?

TREASURER:  I’ve  got  a  pretty  important  job  to  do  as  Treasurer  and  I’m  focused  on  the  nation’s  finances  and  I’m  focused  on  our  economy  and  how  much  Australians  are  earning.  People  in  my   electorate know my views on this, they’ve known it for a long time, I’ve always held the same view,  but I respect the views of everybody else. As an advocate for ensuring that all Australians have their  say, it’s time for them to have their say.

QUESTION: And what’s the reason for you voting no? Can you explain to us your rationale for that?

TREASURER: I’ve set that down in my own electorate over many years.

QUESTION: So you don’t have a problem with some of these senior Liberals - past and present...

TREASURER: Everybody will take their own choices about how they’re engaging with this, I’m very  focused on the job I’ve got to do.

3

QUESTION: Is it appropriate for the Federal President to be coming out and campaigning...

TREASURER: I’m not making any comment on that.

QUESTION: Is it appropriate though?

TREASURER: I’m not making any comment.

QUESTION: What’s your reaction to gangland widow, Roberta Williams, wanting to run in Bill  Shorten’s seat?

TREASURER: I haven’t seen those reports, I couldn’t comment on that.

QUESTION: Labor and the Greens have indicated they may try to block the Government’s move to  cut welfare payments to around 100 asylum seekers living in Australia. Any response to that?

TREASURER: What we’ve seen from Bill Shorten on this latest episode on border protection is that  he just doesn’t get it. Labor never, ever gets it. This is a targeted change to around about less than  70 people who gamed the system to get to Australia, now are trying to lock themselves out of being  sent back to Nauru or Manus, and to stay here at taxpayers’ expense and taxpayer funded housing  and Bill Shorten thinks that’s ok. He just doesn’t get it, that’s why Labor can never, ever be trusted  on border protection. I know firsthand the calls you have to make to keep borders strong in Australia  and I can assure you, he can’t do it. He doesn’t get it.

Thanks very much.

[ENDS]  Further information: Andrew Carswell 0418 505 376, Sonia Gentile 0455 050 007

