



1





The Hon Alan Tudge MP  Minister for Human Services



TRANSCRIPT

774 ABC MELBOURNE  POLLIE-GRAPH WITH RAF EPSTEIN  1 NOVEMBER 2017

Topics: Uluru decision, constitutional recognition, citizenship, Manus Island RPC closure.

E&OE…

RAFAEL EPSTEIN:   And the breaking news this afternoon of course the President of the Senate - kind of like the  Speaker of the House, the person who presides over the upper house - Stephen Parry, he's a  Liberal senator from the state of Tasmania, he's found out he does qualify for British  citizenship. He will have to leave the Senate as well.

Joining us today is Tanya Plibersek, she's the acting Leader of the Opposition while Bill  Shorten is overseas. She covers education and she's also Shadow Minister for Women.  Tanya Plibersek, good afternoon.

TANYA PLIBERSEK:   How are you?

RAFAEL EPSTEIN:   Thank you for joining us. Tanya's in our Sydney studio. Alan Tudge, I'm sure he'll will make a  point out of it, as well as being a Liberal member in the suburbs of Melbourne, he is the  Minister for Human Services in Malcolm Turnbull's government and he's long campaigned  on traffic issues which is why he's somewhere by the side of the road and not sitting with  me in the studio. Alan Tudge, welcome.

ALAN TUDGE:   G'day Raf. That's exactly right. There was an accident on the Monash, I think, which meant  that I couldn't be there in person.

RAFAEL EPSTEIN:   Well done answering the question without East Link, that's good.

ALAN TUDGE:   [Laughs] No, it's the Monash, not- I could talk about the East West Link if you'd like me to.





2



RAFAEL EPSTEIN:   I'm sure you could, I'm sure you could. Let's talk about the other bit of breaking news this  afternoon. I'll begin with you Minister Tudge. The traditional owners at Uluru have decided  to ban anybody from climbing the rock in two years' time. A lot of callers very happy, a lot of  callers very unhappy. Alan Tudge, what do you make of it?

ALAN TUDGE:   I'm disappointed in their decision because I think a lot of people did enjoy climbing the rock.  But at the end of the day, it's owned by the traditional owners' and it’s their decision and  their call and they've made that, so we have to abide by it.

RAFAEL EPSTEIN:   So disappointed because people won't be able to climb it, is that what you mean?

ALAN TUDGE:   Yes, basically. I think it's obviously iconic. It's part of Australia. Many people have in the past  enjoyed climbing it, many international tourists have done so and would like to do so in the  future. But it is owned by the traditional owner groups in central Australia and it's their call  at the end of the day and we respect their decision, and we abide by it. But that's what it is.

RAFAEL EPSTEIN:   Tanya Plibersek, what do you think of the ban?

TANYA PLIBERSEK:   Well, I'm absolutely happy to be guided by the traditional owners on an issue like this. I  think it's very reasonable to give people who've booked a holiday a year or two years ahead  the opportunity to climb the rock if they wish, but I really would hope people would respect  the wishes of the traditional owners and not do that in the meantime. You know, it has  really strong sacred significance for the traditional owners. You can understand why they've  made this decision. As a tourist you might want to have a cup of coffee while you're touring  St Peters Basilica but the idea that you have to allow someone set up a coffee cart in the  middle of it just doesn't hold. People need to respect the cultural significance of this very  important icon.

RAFAEL EPSTEIN:   Minister Tudge is undoubtedly right though, there will be people - there are people - who  are both angry and disappointed, Tanya Plibersek. What would you say to them?

TANYA PLIBERSEK:   Well, just what I said. We- all religions and cultures have sites that are very important to  them and being able to protect them and protect their sacredness should be allowed, and  these are the traditional owners. They've made a decision. They've given people a lot of  forewarning about that decision, seems very reasonable to me.

RAFAEL EPSTEIN:   Alan Tudge, if I can ask you about the Uluru statement from the heart. It's poignant perhaps  that ten year process, hundreds of meetings, real unanimity from Indigenous Australians.  They wanted constitutional recognition of an Indigenous advisory group. Your government's  decided not to put that issue to a referendum. What do you say to people who are  disappointed by that decision?





3



ALAN TUDGE:   This is a very complex one. As you probably know Raf, I'm in favour of some sort of  constitutional recognition of Aboriginal people. The debate has always been around the  form of that recognition, and there's a proposal put to us and to the Opposition which was  in essence to enshrine an Indigenous advisory body in the constitution. And part of our  concern was that it may not have success in succeeding through the Australian public in  getting constitutional change. It's very, very difficult to get constitutional change. So from  memory, it's only eight out of 44 referenda that have ever got up. The last substantial one  was actually the 1967 referendum on Indigenous voting rights, effectively. It's very difficult,  and I wasn't convinced that this would be successful.

RAFAEL EPSTEIN:   Tanya Plibersek, it's a good reason isn't it to be a little gun-shy of that referendum? It's  tough getting constitutional change.

TANYA PLIBERSEK:   It certainly is tough to change the constitution but where both parties, or both sides of  politics, have generally agreed we've had a much better chance of seeing referenda pass. So  I think if there was a proposition to enshrine an Indigenous voice that had bipartisan  support, if we had a Prime Minister and a Leader of the Opposition who were prepared to  go out and campaign together for it and to reassure Australians about it, then writing off the  proposal because we fear that it might not be successful, I don't think that's an answer.

RAFAEL EPSTEIN:   Can I move on at 20 minutes to 5 to issues of citizenship? Your questions are welcome at  1300222774. The phone number's 1300222774.

Alan Tudge, you're in the lower house, Stephen Parry's in the upper house. He didn't tell  anybody he might have a British citizenship issue. He signed the form, I think, three times to  swear that he does not have a citizenship issue. It's now been confirmed that he's British. Do  you think it was either honourable or sensible to not bring that up until the start of this  week?

ALAN TUDGE:   I know Stephen Parry very well and he's a very decent person, and he's done a great job as  President of the Senate. He's a former police officer before coming to Parliament. My  understanding is that it was brought to his attention because of the clarity of the High Court  decision, which took many people by surprise; 7-0, and a very, very black and white  statement in terms of saying …

RAFAEL EPSTEIN:   [Interrupts] I don't think it actually took that many people by surprise other than the  Government and the Solicitor-General, Alan Tudge.

ALAN TUDGE:   It still did take many people by surprise, and was contrary to the advice that we were  receiving from the Australian Government solicitor. So, off the back of that, he has said that,  listen, because of that decision, I may be British also. His father was born in England but was  an Australian citizen. He himself was an Australian citizen, born here as well, and so I don't  think it crossed his mind until that High Court decision.





4



RAFAEL EPSTEIN:   Can I interrupt again, Alan Tudge? I mean, that's just- do you believe him when he says it  doesn't cross his mind? That's just nuts, isn't it? That's all we've been talking about for  months, is people who've got a parent born overseas.

ALAN TUDGE:   I haven't spoken to him about it. I do know though that he is an honourable person and a  decent person, but now it has come out that he is a dual-national, and has consequently has  resigned, and sadly, that's the end of his career for the moment, and another person will be  duly elected. This has taken a lot of people by surprise, this issue, and we've got to deal with  it. The High Court was very clear in relation to it, but we want to be able to have the by-election for Barnaby Joyce, hopefully get him back in and then put this behind us and focus  on the things which matter to the Australian people.

RAFAEL EPSTEIN:   Tanya Plibersek, it was- Stephen Parry didn't think of it until the High Court decision?

TANYA PLIBERSEK:   Look, I actually like Stephen Parry a lot as well. I think he's actually a very nice man, but it  doesn't seem credible, does it, that someone who is presiding over people referring  themselves to the High Court didn't once think to ask whether the circumstances that led to  their referrals might also apply to himself, and of course the other question is, is it really  likely that he didn't talk to anyone about it at any stage. That this has just come as a  complete bolt out of the blue, that the Prime Minister didn't know, the Attorney-General  didn't know, that nobody else knew.

RAFAEL EPSTEIN:   Sorry, are you raising the- are you saying that he must have told someone in government?

TANYA PLIBERSEK:   Not saying he must have, I'm just saying it seems unlikely that he didn't discuss it with  anyone.

RAFAEL EPSTEIN:   Les is in Yarraville. What did you want to say, Les?

CALLER LES:   Alan, yesterday we heard the Prime Minister say that he's never had so much fun in his life.  Well, let me assure you, people out here in the real world aren't having much fun at all.  We've seen your government deliver a second-rate NBN; a second-rate energy policy; we've  got the Deputy Prime Minister and now the leader of the Senate not knowing what  nationality they are, so they're gone; we've got the Employment Minister who tried to stitch  up Bill Shorten, but that completely backfired all over her, and if she had any decency she  would resign…

RAFAEL EPSTEIN:   [Interrupts] Is there a question there, Les?

CALLER LES:   …we've got Manus Island, which looks like being chaotic, and I haven't even mentioned  Tony Abbott. Alan, your government looks like it's a shambles. It's in chaos. I've never seen





5



anything more dysfunctional since the last year of the Whitlam Government, and when the  Deputy Prime Minister came out- the Acting Prime Minister came out …

RAFAEL EPSTEIN:   [Interrupts] Sorry, if you can get to a question, Les.

CALLER LES:   Yeah, well, what are you going to about it? I mean, you are a complete shambles at the  moment.

RAFAEL EPSTEIN:   Okay, well, I guess shambles is the accusation, Alan Tudge.

ALAN TUDGE:   Well, he doesn't sound like a swing voter to me, but I hear the accusations which have been  made, and there's a lot of issues which he's raised there. We're dealing with something  which was unexpected in terms of the citizenship issue, and it's affected the Greens, it's  affected the National Party, it's now affected the Liberal Party, and we didn't want it to  occur, but the High Court's been very clear. We're moving forward on it. We'll have a by-election, and then we need to get back to 100 per cent focusing on the things which matter  to the Australian public. They are traffic congestion, they are the cost of living pressures, it is  national security, and it is issues like that which are concerns to everyday Australians, and  that's what we're going to be focused on, and that's what we maintain our focus on.

RAFAEL EPSTEIN:   That's Alan Tudge, the- forgive me, Tanya Plibersek. Alan Tudge is the Minister for Human  Services. You're about to hear from Tanya Plibersek. She's acting Leader of the Opposition  while Bill Shorten is away. It's a quarter to five.

Go for it, Tanya Plibersek.

TANYA PLIBERSEK:   Well, I just think, Raf, it's not just that these people have been found to be possibly citizens  of other countries or eligible to be citizens of other countries that's the problem, it's the  division and dysfunction that this whole process has exposed within the Government. So,  you've got the big fight over who's going to replace Fiona Nash; you've got Larry Anthony,  the president of the Nationals saying that the coalition agreement holds just for now; you've  got …

RAFAEL EPSTEIN:   [Interrupts] Liberal Party doesn't have a monopoly on internal tension, does it?

TANYA PLIBERSEK:   … you've got Barnaby Joyce saying the Liberals should be grateful to the Nationals, or they  would have lost last time around; you've got Julie Bishop getting ready for what looks like a  run at the leadership; you've got the brawl over who should be the Acting Prime Minister.  So there's all this difficulty and tension that it has exposed, and it's also, I think,  fundamentally a question of Malcolm Turnbull's judgement. I mean, he said that these  people were eligible …





6



RAFAEL EPSTEIN:   [Interrupts] It's Stephen Parry's judgement, isn't it? It's Stephen Parry's judgement. He's the  one who didn't tell anyone.

TANYA PLIBERSEK:   This latest problem, certainly, that's the case, but remember Malcolm Turnbull first of all  said when he was talking about the Greens that it was incredible sloppiness, extraordinary  negligence, and then he found out some of his own were under attack. He then allowed  Fiona Nash and Barnaby Joyce to stay in Cabinet while there were questions about their  eligibility while Matthew Canavan had to stand aside. Matthew Canavan's been found to be  okay and Barnaby Joyce and Fiona Nash have been found to be not okay, and the judgement  - the High Court will so find - that sort of stuff just doesn't sit well with people. People  understand …

RAFAEL EPSTEIN:   [Interrupts] Something the Prime Minister said in Question Time. I do want to ask about  audits, but I think Craig in Narre Warren has a query about the same thing.

Craig, what did you want to say?

CALLER CRAIG:

Yes, hi guys. I just want to say also, please, do the audit. At the moment, the general- I  would say pretty much the general populace opinion is that the majority of politicians are  not honourable and not decent because of the: oh, this rule doesn't apply to us, we'll wait  and see attitude that seems to have occurred with the Greens who initially resigned- sorry,  then the later politicians who were thought to have maybe had dual citizenship, and they  just sat around and wait and let's see what the court decides, because this doesn't apply to  us.

RAFAEL EPSTEIN:   So you want an audit. Can I just ask, Craig, who would you like to do the audit?

CALLER CRAIG:

Well, I think obviously it should be independent.

RAFAEL EPSTEIN:   Some sort of independent, maybe a retired Judge or something like that. Tanya Plibersek, I'll  go back to you. I don't think either of the major parties are keen. Why not have an audit?  Eric Abetz, who's now effectively a backbencher - Liberal senator from Tasmania - he wants  an audit. Tanya Plibersek, why not have one?

TANYA PLIBERSEK:   Well, because we're confident of our processes and we don't live in a country that has a  reverse onus of proof.

RAFAEL EPSTEIN:   Alan Tudge, why not have an audit?

ALAN TUDGE:   Well, Tanya and I are on a unity ticket on this one. I'll take a lot of [indistinct] …





7



TANYA PLIBERSEK:   [Interrupts] Don't tell your friends, Alan. Won't be good for my reputation.

ALAN TUDGE:   I disagreed with a lot of what you were saying beforehand, Tanya. I just let you go though,  very respectfully, but I agree with Tanya on this. In essence, it would change the onus of  proof. Now, people have declared themselves to be single nationals when they run for  Parliament and unless someone provides evidence to the contrary or they themselves come  forward like Senator Parry did, then I think we'd leave it at that [indistinct].

RAFAEL EPSTEIN:   [Talks over] Well feel free to respond to any of the things that Tanya Plibersek said, but  maybe if I put it this way: you know that people don't trust politicians; we've now had five  of them kicked out by the High Court; you've had a government representative, in my terms,  not fess up that they might have an issue. Alan Tudge, wouldn't an audit help restore a bit of  trust?

ALAN TUDGE:   There is a general issue in terms of the trust of politicians, and that's no doubt, and the trust  of large companies and other institutions in our society more broadly, and we need to be  cognisant of that and be aware of it.

I just don't think we should be fundamentally changing the onus of proof though here. If  someone has evidence that there's a Member of Parliament that may be a dual citizen, then  of course they can present that evidence. To date, we've had a lot of individual Members of  Parliament come forward off their own volition to say, hey, I actually may be, I hadn't even  thought of it, hadn't crossed my mind before but I’ll get it checked out, and I just think that's  the proper process at this stage rather than changing that onus of proof.

RAFAEL EPSTEIN:   Well, we get some more with Alan Tudge and Tanya Plibersek in a moment.

[Unrelated items - traffic report]

RAFAEL EPSTEIN:   Tanya Plibersek is with us for Pollie-Graph, so too is Alan Tudge. Tanya is Acting Leader at  the moment; she's Shadow Education Minister, deputy Labor leader. Alan Tudge is the  Minister for Human Services.

Minister, if I can ask you about Manus Island, your Cabinet colleague Peter Dutton says  there are places for the men to go to on Manus. The centre they've been in has been closed,  new facilities are being built. But Minister, the people there say it's not safe to go where you  and the PNG Government want them to go. It's not safe. How would you respond to that?

ALAN TUDGE:   Well, from what I understand, there's been people from the Manus Island facility who have  been travelling to this other destination on a very regular basis, sometimes to do their  shopping, sometimes they've already been staying in that new facility and returning at a  later stage to the traditional Manus Island facility where they've been more permanently  based for the last little while. So I think we've got to take that with a grain of salt. What we  have- well, ostensibly …





8



RAFAEL EPSTEIN:   [Interrupts] So you think they're not genuinely afraid?

ALAN TUDGE:   Well, at the end of the day, this is a decision of the Papua New Guineans to close down the  Manus Island facility and consequently other arrangements have been made. Now, if people  weren't a refugee - they've gone through the process, they're not a refugee - then they're  obviously asked to return back to their home country and we'll help facilitate that. If they  are a Refugee then there are options available to either stay on Manus Island, and there is  accommodation there available. There's options in Nauru, and of course they can apply to  the United States as well. But that's what we're dealing with, that's what the Papua New  Guinea Government is dealing with and handling quite appropriately.

RAFAEL EPSTEIN:   Tanya Plibersek, it does look like new facilities are being built on Manus Island for these  men. Would you accept that the facilities will eventually be available for them?

TANYA PLIBERSEK:   Well, there was an interview with Fran Kelly this morning - I'm not sure if you heard it, Raf -  with Nat Jit Lam, the deputy regional representative of the UNHCR that's actually currently  on Manus, and in that interview he suggested that the new accommodation is not ready, it  doesn't look as though it's ready. It's difficult for me to tell from here what the case is, but it  looked like, from that inspection, there was a shortfall of a couple of hundred-  accommodation for a couple of hundred people. I can't confirm that, that's just the report  from the UNHCR.

ALAN TUDGE:   No, that's not right. This came up in Senate Estimates, as you may know, Tanya, whereby  the officials did confirm that there was enough places available for everybody there. And  indeed, they had confirmed as well that many of the people who have been based in the  facility which has since been closed have already been travelling backwards and forwards to  the East Lorengau Refugee Transit Centre, where there is accommodation there and  shopping there and other things.

RAFAEL EPSTEIN:   Tanya Plibersek, you've got- I guess that you've got public servants in Estimates saying it's  ready. Do you believe them or do you believe the UNHCR on the radio?

TANYA PLIBERSEK:   Well, I think people will have to make their own judgement about that. There's also, of  course, reports …

ALAN TUDGE:   [Interrupts] What are you saying though, Tanya? I mean, the public servants are under oath  when they're making these statements, so surely you can't in fairness …

TANYA PLIBERSEK:   [Interrupts] So was Michaelia Cash.





9



ALAN TUDGE:   And she clarified the matter afterwards when she was made aware, so I'm not sure what  you're saying, whether or not you believe in …

TANYA PLIBERSEK:   [Interrupts] She spent all day saying one thing that wasn't true, so.

ALAN TUDGE:   [Interrupts] Don't divert here, Tanya. I mean, you either believe the public servants or you  don't.

TANYA PLIBERSEK:   Well, I am concerned when UNHCR representatives say that the facilities aren't ready. Of  course, there's the report from the Mayor that the local community haven't been consulted.  I am worried about what looks like a developing powder keg and I won't pretend that I'm  not worried. I'm worried both for the refugees and asylum-seekers on the island; I'm  worried that the local community feel nervous about the large group of men that are  moving. It seems to me an incredibly poorly handled situation. We've got a Minister who  has completely abrogated his responsibility to find third-country resettlement options for  these people. I'm worried about reports that healthcare has not been properly made  available. Yes, I have serious concerns about what's going on there at the moment.

RAFAEL EPSTEIN:   Alan Tudge and Tanya Plibersek are with us. Peter is with us as well. He's in Coburg. Peter?

CALLER PETER:

I just wanted to say what a disgrace Tweedledee and Tweedledum are on this Manus issue.  The Labor Party locked these people up, the Liberal Party are emptying these concentration  camps. The person on the ground, as a Senator from Australia, Nick McKim, he's told us that  there's no alternative for these people. I just can't believe the disgrace of the Labor Party,  that they won't stand up for these people, and they continue to kowtow to an almost fascist  attack on innocent people who have been in those places for more than five years because  of a direct consequence of decisions voted on in Cabinet by Tanya Plibersek.

RAFAEL EPSTEIN:   Okay, Peter. Let me get a quick response from both people. Tanya, I'll start with you.

TANYA PLIBERSEK:   Well, I think I just explained the difference between the Government's position and our  position.

RAFAEL EPSTEIN:   Peter clearly thinks you're part of the problem for locking them up in the first place. That  changed before you lost government under Prime Minister Kevin Rudd.

TANYA PLIBERSEK:   Well, I think people, like Peter, like to deliberately suggest that there is no difference, when  we have said, for example, that by 2025 we would double Australia's annual refugee intake;  we've said that we would end the secrecy, allowing journalists to have access to asylum  facilities; we said that there should be independent oversight of facilities and an  independent children's advocate; we said that we would restore references to the Refugee





10



Convention in the Migration Act; we said we'd get rid of temporary protection visas and give  people found to be genuine refugees a permanent Australian visa.

Remember, this wasn't our first choice. We wanted an arrangement with Malaysia that  would've been a proper regional resettlement arrangement that would've allowed people  to live and work in Malaysia, their children to go to school, proper healthcare provided to  them, and the Liberals stopped that. After they stopped that, 600 people drowned at sea.  That's the difference.

RAFAEL EPSTEIN:   Alan Tudge, you got both barrels from Peter there, including calling your Government fascist  for the way you dealt with people on Manus Island and Nauru.

ALAN TUDGE:   I just think it's absolutely offensive to say that these are concentration camps over there,  and it's offensive generally and it's particularly offensive to those who have actually suffered  in concentration camps or have had family members in proper concentration camps. And  they're nothing like it. These are open facilities where there's education, there's healthcare,  people are free to move about.

Now, the real problem here emanates from many years ago when the Labor Party opened  the borders again, let the people-smugglers trade occur, and we had thousands and  thousands of people coming to our shores on leaky boats, hundreds and hundreds drowning  at sea, and we're still dealing with the consequences.

Thankfully, we've now closed down, Tanya, 17 centres across Australia. Seventeen have now  closed down. Not a single child is in detention anymore. The last child was taken out of  detention two years ago, and now we've got no longer any boats coming to these shores  and that means that in the future we'll have fewer and fewer people in detention and we  can get more people from the genuine refugee camps.

RAFAEL EPSTEIN:   Alan Tudge and Tanya Plibersek, I need to end it there. I'm sorry. I know there's a lot more  you could both say. I need to thank you both for your time. It's been an enjoyable Pollie-Graph, but I need to get to Peter Newham at the Bureau.

[ENDS]

