





TRANSCRIPT



Senator James Paterson  Liberal Senator for Victoria

Wednesday 22 February 2017

Sky News AM Agenda

Subjects: US immigrant deal, Australian/Israel relationship

Kieran Gilbert:

Senator Paterson you’ve heard Richard Marles, critical of the comments on Andrew Bolt’s  program last night by Peter Dutton saying that he’s belled the cat in relation to the deal with  the United States. What are your reflections on that this morning?

Senator James Paterson:

Thanks Kieran. Yes, I did hear Richard there. I think he’s probably had a couple of extra  shots of coffee this morning, and got a little bit excited about this. I’m not sure what the new  revelations here are Kieran. The facts are these: Australia has agreed to take some Central  American refugees currently in Costa Rica that were bound for America. That is known and  has been known for some time. The United States has agreed to take some refugees on  Manus Island and Nauru that were bound for Australia. That has been known for some time.  There’s nothing new on the table this morning Kieran that there wasn’t yesterday, there’s  nothing new to be excited about here.

Kieran Gilbert:

Well what’s new is the fact that Mr Dutton made it pretty clear that one is now contingent  upon the other. That’s what’s new.

Senator Paterson:

I think it’s just common sense Kieran, that these two agreements have been publicly known  for some time. It’s clear there’s a connection between them, how direct that connection is I  don’t think is really all that important. The clear thing is the United States has agreed to take  a number of asylum seekers from Manus Island and Nauru. That’s a really good thing  because ultimately this government would like to close Manus Island and Nauru. They were





reopened by a previous government and we would ultimately like to close them and we’ve  secured a really good deal for Australia with the United States to achieve that end.

Kieran Gilbert:

The Prime Minister’s very strongly in support of the Israeli nation today in The Australian  newspaper against that UN Security Council resolution late last year, which said that the  Israelis had defied international law with some of their settlement activity. Is this going too  far, given how the Israeli approach to settlements is in flagrant, I suppose, opposition of the  prospect of any resumption of peace talks with the Palestinians?

Senator Paterson:

Not at all Kieran. I was really pleased to read the Prime Minister’s article this morning in The  Australian. It was a very strong statement of long-standing Australian policy to be supportive  of Israel, including at the United Nations, which has been shockingly biased and one-sided  against Israel in a really shameful way. The truth is Kieran, although Australia has warned  Israel against settlement expansion and although we do strongly support a two-state  solution, the truth is Kieran that settlements are not the main roadblock to peace in the  Israel/Palestinian conflict. People who choose to focus on and talk about settlements really  are ignoring much deeper and more underlying questions. In every peace settlement that  has been negotiated but not reached between the Israelis and the Palestinians settlements  has been one of the easier things to resolve. They only represent about one and a half per  cent of the West Bank by territory. The Israelis have always said they will do a land swap for  Israeli territory to make sure that those post-67 borders remain basically the same. This is  not the main issue in the conflict Kieran.

Kieran Gilbert:

Okay, Senator Paterson, appreciate your time, thank you, we’ll talk to you soon.

[ENDS]



