

BRENDAN O’CONNOR MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR EMPLOYMENT AND WORKPLACE  RELATIONS  MEMBER FOR GORTON

E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TV INTERVIEW  SKY NEWS AM AGENDA  TUESDAY, 29 AUGUST 2017

SUBJECTS: Section 44; Asylum seekers; Banking Royal Commission.

KIERAN GILBERT: With me, the Shadow Employment and Workplace Relations  Minister Brendan O’Connor. The Katy Gallagher issue, or not an issue according to  Penny Wong, but why is it comparable to the cases of Barnaby Joyce and Fiona Nash,  both dual citizens by decent.

BRENDAN O’CONNOR, SHADOW MINISTER FOR EMPLOYMENT AND  WORKPLACE RELATIONS: Well, she’s refuted the fact that she could even be a  citizen of Ecuador. That’s no different than every other Member and Senator who’s  refuted the fact or the question that they might be ineligible pursuant to Section 44.1 of  the constitution. As I think Michael Sukkar just said, we take Members and Senators  views on face value - and for that reason, given the evidence that Katy has just outlined  in detail I think that’s the end of the matter.

GILBERT: Do you think - the other thing that Michael Sukkar suggested is that Labor’s  running a protection racket in terms of not providing evidence, as the Government has  done. What do you say to that?

O’CONNOR: No. As I understand it, the majority of Members and Senators who’ve  certainly confirmed that they are not in breach of Section 44.1 are Government  Members and Senators - including Ministers - they have not been called on to provide  documentation. I take people at their word, unless there is evidence to suggest  otherwise, Kieran.

In the case of the Members before the High Court, other countries were confirming they  were citizens. That’s an entirely different proposition than that which confronts other  Members and Senators. For that reason I think it’s really important here that we be very  careful. If there’s evidence in the public domain that contradicts assertions by Senators  or Members in relations to section 44.1 then let’s see that, let’s deal with that. But  otherwise, I think we should move on and you know what? Focus on the issues that  really confront this country.

GILBERT: Ok.

O’CONNOR: I think the Government is certainly saying that’s what they want to do.  That’s what the Opposition wants to do.

GILBERT: I think most people would agree with that. Let’s talk about something that  concerns a lot of people, and that is the issue of border protection.

You are a former Immigration Minister. Yesterday, Peter Dutton suggested to David  Speers that really the case here is with these individuals - 100 of them, asylum seekers  - that the Government can’t force them out. That various injunctions have meant that  they will remain.

Is this a situation where despite the reports of them getting tough treatment these  people will still have work rights, which is usually the first and main demand of asylum  seekers in any Australian territory? The other issue is they will still have Medicare  support.

So while there are some tough elements to this, is the Government trying to toughen up  a situation which effectively means the courts have precluded them from their preferred  policy, which is basically to boot these people out?

O’CONNOR: Well, I do think we need to make sure that if people have come to  Australia for medical treatment - firstly I imagine if they have come from offshore centres  to Australia, then they were seriously ill, or potentially their lives were in danger,  otherwise it’s likely they would have been dealt with in the centre. That’s the first thing.

The idea then that you could tear away that support is not only against the interest of  those people - I don’t think it is in the interest of our communities to have people  without any support, if that is what was being suggested.

It may well be though, that it’s just the Government cranking up the rhetoric to try and  bring back this area of public policy into the centre of national debate for political  purposes. In many ways, that is reprehensible conduct. We have been working with the  Government on this issue, but what we do ask the Government to do is rather than  playing politics with those who might be currently in Australia, focus on finding other  countries that can settle those people who have been confirmed to be refugees that are  in offshore centres, or those who have come here for medical purposes.

GILBERT: In relation to the suggestion that they might be putting this back on the  agenda for their own political purposes, isn’t it also possible that Peter Dutton and the  Government are trying to send a message to people smugglers - that while they are  being prevented by the court system from having these people leave the country, they  are still cracking down on them to a certain extent? But the fundamental point is that  they can still work - and they will receive Medicare support.

O’CONNOR: Well, I do not know all the details, but I do know that the Minister is not  afraid of playing politics with this issue. I think in some sense the Government wants to  distract us from other issues like energy prices, low wage growth, and other issues in  the economy. I think people want them to focus on housing affordability, wage growth,  employment opportunities, and they are not doing that.

GILBERT: Have the Government now dealt a leave pass on the Banking Royal  Commission on the Banks now, with APRA launching its investigation into the CBA - is  it time for Labor to shelve that idea? You have the regulator investigating the culture

and the governance issues of the bank, you have various other elements such as  immediate compensation and recourse for consumers and customers who feel they  have been hard done by. The Government’s done quite a bit here.

O’CONNOR: Look it doesn’t seem like even a week goes by without some other crisis  hitting the banking sector. This has now gone on for way too long, Kieran. Its Labor’s  view, and it’s been Labor’s view since before the last election that we need to call a  Royal Commission into the sector. There are clearly some systemic problems in the  sector that can only be dealt with by a proper investigation with the powers of the Royal  Commission.

That’s why every time the Government tries to find a bandaid to fix the problem rather  than agree with Labor - it would be a lot easier for Malcolm Turnbull to just accept the  fact that Labor were right in calling for a Royal Commission, and work with Labor to do  just that.

GILBERT: Thank you, Brendan O’Connor.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: ERIN SMITH 0458 950 010



