



THE HON MARK DREYFUS QC MP  SHADOW ATTORNEY-GENERAL  SHADOW MINISTER FOR NATIONAL SECURITY  MEMBER FOR ISAACS





E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW  RN DRIVE WITH PATRICIA KARVELAS  TUESDAY, 30 MAY 2017

SUBJECT/S: Passport cancellations; Duncan Lewis; Sydney siege;  Uluru; Margaret Court



PATRICIA KARVELAS, PRESENTER: Mark Dreyfus welcome to the  program.

MARK DREYFUS, SHADOW ATTORNEY-GENERAL: Thanks for having  me.

KARVELAS: You’ve provided bipartisan support to this measure of  cancelling these passports. Why have you done that?

DREYFUS: We think that this is a measure that seems very useful, the  Leader of the Opposition stood up in Question Time immediately after the  Foreign Minister had announced this and said that in principle Labor will  support it, we have to see the legislation obviously. But you’ve only got to  look at the numbers. 800 Australians on the Child Offenders Register  travelled overseas in 2016 alone. Very many of them to destinations in South  East Asia which are known as destinations for child sex crimes. And if we  are cancelling passports for preventing people from going overseas for  reasons like them being bankrupt or reasons like Australians intending to  fight with ISIL, then I think we should extend it to child sex offenders.

KARVELAS: Many Australians may be surprised to learn that this doesn’t  exist already, let alone that it’s a world first. Do you think this will be  considered by other countries? Is it genuinely a world-first practice that  would really change the landscape around these issues?

DREYFUS: We’ll have to look at what the legislation is going to say. I’d pay  credit to Senator Derryn Hinch who put this to the government. And I say

again, you’ve only got to look at the startling statistic, the sheer numbers  involved - we’ve got a Child Sex Offenders Register here in Australia to  protect the Australian community, and this is now us saying we’re going to  protect the world community from people who are child sex offenders. We  know the recidivism rate, that is the repeat offence rate for people in this  category and I think that requiring them, which seems to be the  government’s proposal, to seek permission to go overseas and have a very  good reason to justify it is a small step that we can take.

KARVELAS: What about people who’ve not been convicted? Is enough  being done to stop these people from travelling overseas to commit child sex  offenses?

DREYFUS: Well you won’t be on the child sex offenders register unless you  have had a conviction recorded against you. People that are going to abuse  children overseas - it’s a vile crime, but unless we know of some  involvement, there’s not much that authorities can do. What we can do  however is engage with the people who are known and convicted child sex  offenders and deal with them.

KARVELAS: And there won’t be any appeal to this, which is an interesting  insertion into this law that I heard Derryn Hinch talk about. Do you think  that’s wise?

DREYFUS: Well I don’t think you can have a government decision that’s not  subject to appeal. As I say, we have to look at the legislation, but just as  people can appeal against cancellation of passports or adverse security  assessments which lead to cancellation of passports, I don’t think it’s within  the power of the federal Parliament to legislate to create a government  decision that’s not able to be appealed.

KARVELAS: So you object to that element because Derryn Hinch is  talking….

DREYFUS: I’m just saying it’s a constitutional question Patricia. You can’t  set up a government decision maker, in whatever form, and then say you  can’t appeal to the courts. There is always a right of appeal to the courts, at  least for what’s known as an error of law.

KARVELAS: Derryn Hinch talked about making that a condition or putting  that inside the legislation. That’s something Labor may contest on the basis  that it is unconstitutional?

DREYFUS: We have to always make sure our legislation, all laws are  constitutional. That’s why I say it’s in principle support and I’m sure it’s not  beyond the wit of the government to follow Senator Hinch’s very good  proposal and bring in a law which is going to enable us to prevent as far as  possible, convicted sex offenders from travelling overseas. Exactly what the  appeal rights might be, that’s going to be a bit of detail that’s subject to  discussion but I’m sure that can be got right too.



KARVELAS: Just on counter-terrorism, you say that the government should  stand up for ASIO head Duncan Lewis, after he was asked by Pauline  Hanson in Estimates about Islamic extremism being linked to refugees. But  don’t his answers stand for themselves?

DREYFUS: His answers were clear, and what’s been concerning is that four  days since Duncan Lewis, the boss of ASIO appeared at Senate estimates  and slapped down Pauline Hanson for some ridiculous suggestions she  made in her questions, we’ve had attacks on the Director-General of  Security by no less than coalition backbenchers including the former Prime  Minister. And that’s a step too far. We need to have the Prime Minister and  the Attorney-General stand up for the Director-General of Security and not  allow these absurd attacks to be made on him. I know whose judgement I  trust on these matters and it’s certainly not coalition backbenchers. It’s the  Director-General of Security, a former Special Operations Commander, a  former Ambassador to NATO and the person who is receiving all of ASIO’s  intelligence. That’s the person whose judgement matters here.

KARVELAS: Pauline Hanson is quite within her rights to ask those  questions, that’s what the Estimates process is all about isn’t it?

DREYFUS: Of course she’s entitled to ask questions, what she’s not entitled  to do is suggest a connection between refugees and terrorism which doesn’t  exist and that was the purpose of her questioning. And very directly slapped  down by the boss of ASIO, and it’s very helpful to have him do it. To explain  to the Australian community - this builds confidence in ASIO for the  Australian community to know they are not going to be pursuing fear-mongering as a basis for their intelligence operations, that they’re not going  to be pursuing prejudice as a basis for their intelligence operations, they’re  going to look at actual capacity for violence and that’s what they should be  doing.

KARVELAS: Just on the Sydney siege which has been a big story for a very  long time but of course this week too, with the Four Corners second part last  night, and of course the inquest findings last week, Andrew Hastie - former  SAS of course, now Liberal MP - says in the future if something is regarded  as a terrorist incident Defence should be called in. Is that something Labor  would support?

DREYFUS: We have to make absolutely certain that the full resources of our  defence forces are available for events like this. It’s something that in fact Bill  Shorten mentioned in a speech last November talking about these issues.  That’s what I think Andrew Hastie is saying. He’s not saying in all situations  we have to immediately go to the defence forces and the tactical operations  response people in the Army, he’s saying we’ve got to have procedures in  place where they can be called in and called in quickly when it’s appropriate  to do so. And that’s why in a sense we have - one of the lessons to be taken  out of the coronial report on the Sydney siege - that there were mistakes  that were made. And one of the issues that we’ve got to now nail down and

I’d be expecting that the government, the defence forces and Australian  police forces are right now talking through how to make sure that if defence  resources are needed in the future they can be got in quickly.

KARVELAS: The inquest into the Sydney siege laid blame on the  psychologist Police consulted during the Sydney siege saying he was not  qualified to advise on groups like ISIS. His own submission to the inquest  described any criticism of his work as ‘grossly unfair’. Has he been unfairly  singled out?

DREYFUS: There’s a really good example of learning a lesson. Let’s leave  the personal criticism to one side altogether. The point that I understand the  Coroner to be making here is ordinary sieges, or ordinary hostage-taking  situations, which have got some known pathology about them, and you  would expect the psychiatrist to understand in an ordinary situation, it all  changes when you’re in a terrorism situation or a quasi-terrorism situation,  whatever the Sydney siege was, where you’ve got someone who was clearly  - well - deranged in some ways but certainly motivated to some extent by a  religious fervour, you are going to get potentially different outcomes and  that’s the lesson you need to take. Where you’ve got someone that is waving  the ISIL flag, who has made public statement in the lead-up to this siege,  and it’s a point my colleague Anne Aly, a counter-terrorism expert and the  member for Cowan, she’s made in a couple of public comments on the  Sydney siege report since the report was delivered. She says, rightly,  different psychiatric considerations apply, different judgements have to be  made, different risks are arising and that’s why we have to learn lessons  from every event like this. That’s why we have coronial inquiries.

KARVELAS: Just on the Uluru statement, as the Shadow Attorney-General  issues of law and the constitution are pretty central to the work that you do.  Is Labor going to get behind the idea of a constitutionally-enshrined  Indigenous body to consult the Parliament?

DREYFUS: We’re going to listen to what the Indigenous consultation which  is now concluded at Uluru, it’s the last of some 12 Indigenous consultation  meetings conducted by the Referendum Council right across Australia.  We’re going to listen to what occurred there, we’re now going to wait  because we’re in a process for how the Referendum Council is going to deal  with these indigenous consultations and their outcomes, in the report that the  Referendum Council is going to make to the Prime Minister and the Leader  of the Opposition at the end of June. And that will be a further stage in what  has now been a pretty long process, but I’m not going to take the Uluru  statement or anything that was said in these Indigenous consultations as the  last word on the subject. What I am going to do is listen, and everybody in  Labor is going to be listening to what these opinions are that have been  expressed by the Indigenous community. On the specifics of it, the two  things that they’ve put forward, one being a call for a body, an Indigenous  body which will provide input to Parliamentary processes, and the other  being this notion of a Makarata council to work on treaty and agreement  making, obviously they are both ideas that can be, I think, incorporated into

the constitutional project or the constitutional change project that the  Referendum Council has been set up for.

KARVELAS: So you don’t think they go too far or, stretch too far or are too  radical.

DREYFUS: Well one of them is not a proposal for constitutional change at  all…

KARVELAS: No, that’s right.

DREYFUS: That’s the Makarata Council, that’s an agreement-making or  treaty-making proposition and obviously we need to take that idea very  seriously and look hard at it. On the other, there is a constitutional question  about how to incorporate the body that’s being sought, the voice of  Indigenous Australia that is being sought, whether that could be included in  the constitution. And that’s something the Referendum Council will be  advising us on. What is important is that all of the other things that are being  considered by the parliamentary committee that looked at this some time  back and the expert panel that looked at this some time back, they’re still  there, they’re on the table, they need to not be forgotten in the process as  well and that’s the changes to the race power, the removal of the racist  provision in the constitution section 25, the possibility of a formal statement  of recognition of Australia’s first peoples, they all need to be still there and I  expect them to form part of the Referendum Council’s report to the Prime  Minister and the Leader of the Opposition.

KARVELAS: Do you accept though, if Indigenous people don’t want those  things, I mean they didn’t put them in the proposal.

DREYFUS: They were simply silent on those proposals.

KARVELAS: Because they chose another option, that’s why. They weren’t  just silent. They went for another option.

DREYFUS: They chose additional options and as I say you need to consider  this in the context in which this occurred which is part of a consultation, a  long consultation that has run from I think last November through to now,  ending at Uluru, where the Referendum Council said as part of its  deliberations we want to listen to the Indigenous voices of Australia and  that’s what’s occurred here. But don’t think that this is the last word on the  subject, it’s not, it’s part of a process.

KARVELAS: It’s the beginning, or halfway through at least, it’s been going  for a while. Just very quickly because you are again Shadow Attorney-General and I know the issue of marriage equality is central again to your  portfolio. Grand Slam champion Samantha Stosur has hinted that tennis  stars may try to boycott the Margaret Court Arena at this year’s Australian  Open in relation to Margaret Court’s controversial views that have been  challenged by many on gay marriage. Is that appropriate?



DREYFUS: I think that the reason the Margaret Court Arena is named the  Margaret Court Arena is because she was an all-time great Australian tennis  player and I’m not sure that, necessarily, there can be a tremendous  argument about the views that Margaret has expressed recently on marriage  equality. I find some of the views she’s expressed extremely objectionable.  But I think we need to keep the two separate.

KARVELAS: Do you think activists, or tennis stars in this case but there  have been activists as well, are over-egging all of this?

DREYFUS: Well, as I say I find it possible to keep these things separate. I  think the reason the Margaret Court Arena is named the Margaret Court  Arena is because of her extraordinary and even now unmatched success as  an Australian tennis champion, just like the Rod Laver Arena in Melbourne is  called the Rod Laver Arena. And the fact that she’s chosen to enter public  debate on a political and social topic later in her life I think we can keep that  separate.

KARVELAS: Mark Dreyfus thanks so much for coming on the show.

DREYFUS: Thanks very much Patricia.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: JOANNA HEATH 0427 915 633



