

The Hon. Scott Morrison MP  Prime Minister





TRANSCRIPT

DOORSTOP INTERVIEW, TOWNSVILLE  TUESDAY 4 SEPTEMBER 2018



E&OE

Subjects: Townsville Port expansion; Education funding; Unions; Tennant Creek; Border protection

PHILLIP THOMPSON: I’d like to welcome everyone here today and thank you all for coming. I’d like to  welcome the Prime Minister of Australia for attending the Port. I’d like to welcome Senator Ian  Macdonald, the Member for Dawson, George Christensen, and from the Port Ranee and Renita. For the  last ten weeks since I’ve been pre-selected, I’ve been fighting hard and fighting for the Townsville Port  Channel Widening Project. I’d like to thank both the Federal Government to come to the party and  contributing $75 million. Mr Prime Minister.

PRIME MINISTER: Ok. Philip Thompson, our Candidate for Herbert, LNP Candidate for Herbert. It’s great  to be here with Phillip. I’ve been with him and met him on several occasions prior to this and of course  it’s great to be here with the Port Authority leaders as well as Senator Macdonald who has been a  champion for North Queensland throughout his entire parliamentary service and of course George  Christensen. It wasn’t that long ago, in fact it was just back in May after the Budget when I was here and  I made the people of Townsville a promise as Treasurer. I said that the $150 million that was locked into  that City Deal would be spent here in Townsville on projects that made a big economic impact for  Townsville. Now we’ve had the report come back on the TEARC Project, and it didn’t pass muster and as  a result we’ve taken the decision to redirect $75 million of the funds that were set aside for that project  into what will be an absolute jobs machine here at the Port. When I was here last I was briefed by the Port  Authority leadership on what was needed to actually take this port infrastructure to the next level and  unlock the significant economic opportunities and jobs that were not just here in Townsville but across  the district. Connecting into the agricultural sector, realising the tourism sector - this is a big exciting  project. It’s the sort of project that I think will give people in Townsville real hope. It will really back them  in. Already under the City Deal, when I was here last time and I expect that the project that we have on  building the stadium, $100 million to make that happen, that’s happening. You see it coming out of the  ground, I saw it when I was here several months ago. And now, teaming up together with the Port  Authority, together with the State Government, to put $75 million into this significant project which will  see more value, more jobs, more economic opportunities unlocked for people in North Queensland, but  particularly for people here in Townsville. Under my Government, as has been the case under Malcolm  Turnbull and under Tony Abbott, we’ve always understood one thing, and that is if you don’t have a strong  economy you can’t do anything else. The fact that we have been driving a strong economy as a  Government since we were first elected in 2013. More than a million jobs created. Over half of those  being full-time jobs. And even in just the last twelve months to the end of June, 95,500 jobs for young

people. The biggest jobs growth for young people we have seen on record since… for over 30 years - for  30 years in fact. Creating jobs. Creating opportunities. Giving people here in North Queensland and in  Townsville the backing in and the hope and the encouragement by investing in the infrastructure that  grows our economy. That’s what we’re about. A stronger economy here in Townsville, in North  Queensland, and across the economy. Because when you do that you can deliver the essential services  like Medicare, schools, hospitals, that Australians deserve, expect, and it comes from a stronger economy.  So, I made a promise when I was here last time and I’m here to keep that promise today and commit the  Commonwealth Government that I lead to $75 million investment partnered with the State to make this  port project an absolute reality and I can’t wait to see the result and the look on the faces of those who  will get jobs here and those who will get economic opportunities as a result of the investment we’re  making. It’s a great day for Townsville, it’s a great day for North Queensland, but it’s a great day for our  country because this is part of my plan to have a stronger economy.

QUESTION: Prime Minister, what other projects might you be considering with the remaining $75 million  from that $150 commitment?

PRIME MINISTER: We’ll continue to work with the local authorities here and with the State Government  and we’ll work with our own members. I’m sure Philip and Ian and George have many other suggestions  and I’m going to work that through. I’m only less than two weeks into the job at the moment and I’m  going to work closely. See what I’m interested in is investing in and backing in projects that come from  the ground up. Canberra doesn’t have the answers to the challenges for North Queensland. North  Queensland does. Just like Western Australia and south-west Western Australia has the answer to their  challenges. I want my Government to focus on backing in the plans, and when I was here last time I was  so impressed with the pitch on the project here, for the port. I got it, it was clear, it had clear objectives,  clear benefits. Every dollar we invest in Townsville I want to add value. I want it to create more economic  opportunity. It’s not about making an announcement; it’s about creating a stronger economy.

QUESTION: This has obviously been in the pipeline for quite some time. Are you just taking credit for  Malcolm Turnbull’s hard work?

PRIME MINISTER: This has been the work of our Government and I’ve been part of that Government for  the last five years. When I was up here last time as Treasurer I was doing exactly as you said. As a  Government for five years we’ve been building a stronger economy and building a stronger economy here  in north Queensland. And this project is an important part of this. And so absolutely, we are continuing  that work and we’re building on that work. Liberal and National Parties, the LNP here in Queensland, we  believe that a stronger economy gives Australians more opportunities, guarantees their essential services.  Now, my other priorities are keeping Australians safe and keeping Australians together. That’s what  creates an even stronger Australia. This project goes to the heart of that objective.

QUESTION: Some of those opportunities are going to come from the Eastern Access Rail Corridor. What’s  it going to take for the Government to back that in and get it off the ground?

PRIME MINISTER: Well one of the reasons we are backing in this project is down the line it actually makes  the TEARC Project more viable. We’ve set aside $5 million to preserve the corridor for the TEARC Project

so we are reserving that position. But the Port’s development and expansion here actually will make that  project viable. Now it’s not viable yet. That’s what the work that’s done has demonstrated so it’s not  about… people can make all sorts of promises and commitments but the commitments have to be part of  a genuine plan to build and grow the economy. Now this is a critical link piece of infrastructure in the  future of the Townsville and North Queensland economy, and this is where the investment needs to go  now. TEARC Project, it’s there for down the track but right now it doesn’t stack up because this needs to  stack up first.

QUESTION: Prime Minister, your Coalition colleagues repeatedly argue that the delay in announcing any  funding for the Port was they were waiting to look at the business case, but you funded TEARC before the  business case had come back and it found that it wasn’t yet viable. So which is it? Will you wait for the  business case or will you go in to fund certain projects straight away?

PRIME MINISTER: Well with the TEARC Project, we have the business case done and when it is  demonstrated that that hasn’t stacked up, I gave a commitment that the funding would remain here in  Townsville and that’s exactly what I’ve done. I’ve come here to keep my promise and make that  commitment. Now this project has been through a very rigorous process, otherwise the Port wouldn’t be  putting $43 million of their own money in there. Because they know the business case and the additional  requirements that we have to meet here to protect what is a very sensitive environment and I’m  absolutely satisfied about the process we’ve gone down to make sure that’s under control. So from an  environmental point of view, from a commercial point of view, from a business point of view, from a  community point of view, this is a project that I think will give great hope to the people of Townsville.

QUESTION: Prime Minister, now the money is in place, have you been given a timeline on how long it will  take to… [INAUDBILE]

PRIME MINISTER: Well I might invite you guys to talk about the details of the project. Ranee, why don’t  you tell us a bit about the timelines and where it goes from here? We’ll be working through the  negotiations about how our involvement is worked up with the State Government, of course, and that’s  the process we’ll commence now. But why don’t you give us a quick overview about how it’s all going to  roll out?

RANEE CROSBY: Yeah sure. So we welcome the funding commitment today and very much welcome the  State and Federal Governments working together on this project with the Port. We’ll be able to start  construction pretty much straight away so we have the environmental approvals in place and this funding  commitment means that we can get on with the business of doing the project. It is a five year project for  us. We will start with doing the rock wall to create a reclamation area to receive dredge material. That  work gets underway next month and from there we will do the dredging works. We will have incremental  gains to the channel over the period of the project. So we’ll be receiving larger ships in 2020. We have  received out first booking for a larger ship in 2020 so that’s fantastic. With the full project finished in 2023,  so we’ll be able to receive vessels 300 metres length by 2023.

QUESTION: Ranee, how are negotiations with Clive Palmer going?

RANEE: Oh look, we’ve had some constructive discussions with the Palmer Group about their future  operations and plans to reopen the refinery so we get to work through that. They’re commercial-in-confidence discussions of course but we certainly have an agreement about how we would like to progress  those discussions further and we’ll work together to see that there is a viable proposition to open the  refinery and if that happens that’s a great outcome for the region and we’d love to see nickel ore flowing  back through the Port of Townsville again.

QUESTION: Prime Minister if I may…

PRIME MINISTER: Sure.

QUESTION: This week we saw a leaked…

PRIME MINISTER: Just before we go there, can we just… are there any more questions on the Port?  Because if there’s no other questions on the Port I’m going to thank you guys so you don’t have to be  answering questions about other matters unless there’s other questions on the Port but I’m sure Ranee’s  available to fill in any other details you’d like to get.

QUESTION: Yeah, so we’ve seen an infrastructure plan for the election, election promises projects. There  was a project in Dawson, a project in Leichhardt but nothing for Herbert. Are there no major infrastructure  projects on the horizon?

PRIME MINISTER: Well I’m not going to comment on newspaper reports. I mean, the announcements we  will make, I’ll make, I’ll make them with my Ministers. We’ll make the commitments where we believe  they should be made. I’m listening closely with my colleagues here to Phillip and to Macca and to George  about what the priorities are here. I mean this announcement here today, I think is a very significant one  and that’s what we are focused on. Our plan for a stronger Australia and that means a stronger economy  here in Townsville.

QUESTION: Bill Shorten said this morning this was merely the Government following suit of what Labor  proposed earlier. What other… [INAUDIBLE]… is he going to follow?

PRIME MINISTER: Bill Shorten: he’s union-bred, union-fed, and union-lead. That’s what this guy is. You  can’t believe him. What we’re doing here is creating a stronger economy. I’ve been part of a Government  now for five years and I now lead a Government that is created, working with the business community,  with all of those across our economy, in creating more than a million jobs. That’s what we’ve been about  and that’s what we’ve been delivering. A $75 billion infrastructure plan, backing in business with lower  and more competitive taxes for small and medium sized businesses, instant asset write-offs which enables  those companies to go and invest and take their businesses forward. Personal Income Taxes, some of the  biggest changes we’ve had in Personal Income Taxes in a very long time. $530 dollars passed, legislated.  You know, these are things that we’ve been doing to create a stronger economy. Bill Shorten wouldn’t  know how to run a stronger economy. John Setka will be running the Australian economy if Bill Shorten is  given the chance. This bloke couldn’t get his arms more around John Setka if he tried, so that’s all you  need to know about Bill Shorten. He’s owned by the militant unions in this country. He can’t stand up to

them. Bob Hawke stood up to the unions. Macca will remember this. Sorry mate, not to reflect on your  long experience. But Bob Hawke stood up to the BLF, I remember that as a young kid. He was able to stand  up to the unions. This bloke can’t stand up to the militant unions. Because they own him; they put him  there. I’m my own man.

QUESTION: Prime Minister, speaking of the Opposition Leader, he is in Townsville this evening. Do you  anticipate you might cross paths?

PRIME MINISTER: Oh look, I’d say g’day if I saw Bill. I’ll say g’day but good luck to him if he’s up here. Good  for him. Why wouldn’t you want to be in North Queensland? I’ve come up here as a priority for me. I was  a bit further north this morning and it’s great to be here but it’s… I’ve been coming here for some time.  I’m really pleased to see, I’ve got to say, most recently in my visits here the improvement in the optimism  and the confidence I’m seeing in North Queensland. I know we’ve got a long way to go, but a few years  ago I know how tough things were. They were really tough. But I remember times before that when times  were good and so this is a gutsy town and it’s a gutsy part of the country and I get a lot of inspiration out  of it. So it’s not a hard decision to back in that sort of attitude. You’ve heard me say it already; in our  country you get a fair go if you have a go. Townsville’s having a go and their going to get a fair go from my  Government.

QUESTION: Prime Minister, a three year old was sexually assaulted in Tenant Creek earlier this week. Why  isn’t your Special Envoy looking into this? Isn’t something drastic needed?

PRIME MINISTER: These are matters that would be addressed specifically by law enforcement in the  Northern Territory. And these are sickening issues and on top of that where Indigenous affairs matters  more broadly, they’re addressed by the Commonwealth. That’s Senator Nigel Scullion who’s the Minister  and the Cabinet Minister who is addressing these areas. What I’ve asked Tony to do is something which  is very much about the future and that’s about young Indigenous boys and girls going to school. He’s very  focussed on that and I know how passionate he is here. One other thing I know about Tony, if he’s  passionate about something he can really make a difference. I’m really pleased he wants to come and  work with us on pursuing this important challenge of getting young Indigenous boys and girls into school.  That’s really important. What’s happened there in Tenant Creek makes your heart just cry and it’s  important that the law enforcement authorities and the others that are dealing with that situation on the  ground do just that. These are the outcomes that we want to avoid. These are the outcomes that we want  to stop. But to turn around communities, it starts really with the young people. You can get them into  school… I’ve seen the transformation in young boys through the Clontarf program. Boys who have come  from the most horrible of circumstances. Lives turned around by getting them into school. Getting them  into great projects. Now they’re getting jobs. They’re going back to their communities and they’re  changing their communities for one reason: hope. Hope. Hope is what they need and Tony is going to play  a key role in helping us create that help.

QUESTION: [INAUDIBLE]

PRIME MINSITER: I can’t hear two questions at once.

QUESTION: Just following on from my previous question, we are talking about three year olds here. Where  does that fall in terms of your priorities as Prime Minister?

PRIME MINISTER: There is no more important priority than the children of our country. I mean that is true  of, I think, every single member of Parliament. That’s a universal, totally understood, commitment from  everyone. You know, when boys and girls come to Parliament, which they do and we all meet them, don’t  we George, and Phillip I’d love you to have the opportunity to do that. I think you’d do a great job. One of  the things I say to them is that in this building we all agree and disagree on many things but one thing I  want young boys and girls to know about our Parliament is I think everyone who goes into that Parliament  wants to do the right thing for our children and for those boys and girls at school. So I would think that  everybody is on a unity ticket in terms of what happens for our young people and particularly for our  young Indigenous boys and girls who start a long way behind the line from everyone else.

QUESTION: Just on Nauru, the former New Zealand Prime Minister Helen Clark has said that the situation  is not sustainable. She doesn’t understand why Australia doesn’t just accept the long standing refugee  resettlement deal from New Zealand. Isn’t is just a way to end the situation?

PRIME MINISTER: I will never do anything that compromises the border security and border protection of  Australia. I know what makes the boats stop coming. I stopped the boats with Tony Abbott, five years ago  and plenty of people wanted to lecture me then, and before then about how that job should be done, and  plenty of people said it couldn’t be done. I knew how it had to be done, and we implemented that, and  Peter Dutton has carried on that job every day since. So while I respect the contribution of others on this  issue, when it comes to border protection, we are the ones as a Government that has set the standard  about what needs to be done to ensure the security of our borders. I was just up in Indonesia on the  weekend. There are thousands upon thousands upon thousands of people up in Indonesia. If you give  them a green light and say you can end up in Australia if you get on a boat, guess what will happen? It  won’t be happening on my watch. They know it. It won’t be happening on Peter Dutton’s watch. And they  know it. I can tell you, if Bill Shorten is in charge of the show, you may as well issue the invitation. Thank  you very much.

[ENDS]

Contacts:            Prime Minister’s office - Andrew Carswell 0418 505 376, Kate Williams 0429 584 675  The Hon. Scott Morrison MP, Sydney

