Labor

TRANSCRIPT WE'LL PUT PEOPLE FIRST  BRENDAN O'CONNOR MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR EMPLOYMENT AND WORKPLACE

RELATIONS

MEMBER FOR GORTON

E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP  MELBOURNE  MONDAY, 12 MARCH 2018

SUBJECTS: Batman by-election; Minimum wage; TPP; National redress  scheme; Refugees.

GED KEARNEY, LABOR CANDIDATE FOR BATMAN: Good morning everybody,  I'm Ged Kearney I'm the Labor candidate for the Batman by-election and here it is on  a public holiday in Melbourne and we're holding this press conference to talk about  the issue, the very serious issue of penalty rate cuts. We know that penalty rates  cuts affect the lowest paid people in our economy. They are unfair, they are cruel  and they are unnecessary. I'm very pleased to say I'm here with Brendan O'Connor  the Shadow Minister for Employment and Nikki a worker in hospitality who's going to  tell us first-hand experience with what it's like to work in the sector and the impact of

penalty rates cuts.

I'm very pleased to say that Labor oppose these penalty rates cuts, and introduced a  private members bill to stop the cuts going through and they have of course  promised to reverse those cuts should they be elected. And now without further ado I  will hand over to Nikki who will tell us first-hand about the hospitality sector and  some of the issues facing the workers there. Thanks Nikki.

NIKKI: My name is Nikki Keating, I work in hospitality and for Respect is the Rule,  fighting sexual harassment and assault. A lot of people like me rely on penalty rates  on public holidays like today and are suffering because of the Liberal Party's cuts. It  is amazing that the Labor Party has reversed those cuts and that it is supporting its  workers. As a former unionist, Ged understands this and is supporting us in every  way both in penalty rates and in fighting sexual assault and harassment in the  industry. And I will be supporting Ged because she supports workers like me and I  will now hand over to Brendan O'Connor.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR, SHADOW MINISTER FOR EMPLOYMENT AND  WORKPLACE RELATIONS: Well thanks very much Nikki and thank you very much  Ged. It's great to be here on Labour Day and we're here on Labour Day as Ged has  made very clear to ensure that the voters of Batman understand that if elected, a

Labor government will prevent penalty rate cuts occurring to retail workers,

hospitality workers, fast food employees.

As we know, the current Liberal government has chosen to support the cuts to  penalty rates last July. Not just last July, this July coming and the July 2019. We're  going to see workers worse off because of these penalty rate cuts. Low paid  workers, as Ged has said, will be suffering at a time where we have wage stagnation  in this country, the lowest wage growth in 25 years and yet we have a current federal  government that chooses to support the cuts to penalty rates.

As Ged has made clear, if she was part of the Labor team she would ensure, along  with Bill Shorten and the federal parliamentary Labor party that these cuts will stop.  That's why it's so critical on Labour Day of all days, that we remind voters of Batman  that we need a Labor government. Not just to stop penalty rate cuts I must admit, it's  also to ensure that workers like Nikki are safe in those workplaces.

We need to make sure that we have safer workplaces, not just construction sites, not  just depots and factories but work places in hospitality where women who are  employed can feel safe at work and therefore Labor does support any efforts that are  being made today to ensure that women feel safe in those industries and we need to  do more there.

We also need to do more to tackle precarious employment and the reason why I'm  here today is, of course I support Ged but Ged will be a remarkable member of  parliament. There are 10 candidates standing in this by-election, only Ged can claim  to be a local champion, a national leader and by the way, the very first nurse to enter  the federal parliament. What a trifecta. The fact is that Ged has fought for working  people all of her life. Whether it's been as a nurse and leading the nurses' union or  leading the union movement of this country and fighting the big fights. Fighting to  repeal WorkChoices, fighting to ensure decency and safety in workplaces has been  at the heart and soul of the efforts by Ged Kearney and that's why I think the voters  of Batman are very well placed. They have an opportunity to elect a unique individual  that brings all of those qualities that are unique in that she's a local champion, she's  a national leader and she has fought tooth and nail for working people in this  country.

So what better day than Labour Day for us to remind voters of Batman that they're  making a very important choice and if you compare Ged with any of the other  candidates, she really does show herself to be a standout candidate because of the  compassion, because of her passionate advocacy for working people and because  of the experience she has. It's not just about talking about these issues, it's getting  them done and with Ged forming part of the parliamentary Labor party and indeed  forming a Labor government if elected we will have a progressive advocate for  progressive ideals and policies that we need to bring to bear in this nation and I'm  sure that the constituency of Batman recognise that they have in Ged an advocate  that will fight for their interests.

Happy to take questions.

JOURNALIST: The Victorian government have written to Fair Work and thinks that

the country's lowest paid workers should get a $27 a week wage rise. Do you think  that's enough or would you like to see it higher or lower?

O'CONNOR: I haven't seen the submission by the Victorian government. I haven't  seen the detail of that but let me just make it very clear. The federal Labor party has  made three submissions on the national minimum wage since we have been in  opposition. In fact we are the only opposition that has ever made a submission.

For example the Greens party have made no submissions on the minimum wage  and we made those submissions because we think wages are falling in this country.  For example the minimum wage as a proportion of average wages in this country is  declining and for that reason we need to make sure that we see improvements to the  minimum wage.

The reason we need to do that is that people are suffering, they are feeling the cost  of living pressures. They are having trouble making ends meet because wages have  been falling. So I'll consider in detail the submission made by the Victorian  government. I do applaud the Victorian government making a submission to support  increases. We will have to look at the detail and we'll have something to say, but  until I've done that I can't make an unqualified statement. We would like to see other  state governments say that they will support low paid workers in this country as I  say, we will also be making a submission to this year's national wage case, a further  submission, to underline the need to raise wages. We have the lowest wage growth  in quarter of a century in this country, people are struggling, cost of living pressures  have become more acute, energy prices are going through the roof and yet wages  are flat lining. Something has to be done. We aren't seeing anything from the Prime  Minister or the current federal government and I'm not surprised that State  government's feel the need to fill the void left by the federal government.

JOURNALIST: Submissions are due tomorrow, what's your submission going to  say?

O'CONNOR: Our submission will very much be echoing the submissions we've  made in the past in relation to ensuring the proportion of the minimum wage vis a vis  the average wage is improved. What we've seen in the last 20 years is a decline in  the bite - that is the proportion of the minimum wage to the median wage. I think it's  now time that we ensure that we see an arrest of that decline.

We will also be looking at putting in a supplementary submission after the budget in  May. So there are two opportunities for us to finalise our submissions. Firstly is the  initial submission and if you want to have some regards as to what we might be

saying for tomorrow then I would just alert you to the fact that you can read our  submissions from previous years. But we will also have another opportunity after the  budget to make a more detailed or additional submission. That will be I guess in  keeping with hearing what the government has to say with respect of the budget.

But there is no doubt in our minds that when you are seeing flat lining wages, when  you are seeing penalty rates being cut, when you are seeing people precariously

employed, when you are seeing 1.1 million Australians underemployed, then

something needs to be done.

You know in this electorate, we have one in six workers who are suffering losses in  their wages because of penalty rate cuts. 13,000 workers in Batman have lost up to  $1,000 a year as a result of the penalty rates cuts. That's fast food workers, that's  people in hospitality and retail, pharmacy, we are seeing lots of workers who are low  paid, in many cases precariously employed, losing up to $1,000 since the cuts on  July 1 last year. Something has to be done. We don't see anything coming from  Malcolm Turnbull and the Liberals, but we need to ensure that we do respond to that.

Of course, as Ged has said Labor introduced a Private Members Bill to stop the cuts  to penalty rates and revert the penalty rate back to what it was at June 30 last year.  That has to be done as a matter of urgency, but we don't expect that the happen  while Malcolm Turnbull is Prime Minister.

JOURNALIST: On the TPP, how likely is it that Labor will back it in the parliament  despite your reservations about the intellectual property provisions and labour  mobility?

O'CONNOR: Look, we're very concerned as to what may or may not have been  traded away in respect to the TPP. No one has been provided any information about  the detail of this. As people say the devil is in the detail when it comes to very  complex agreements. We do prefer multi-lateral agreements to bi-lateral  agreements, but unless you see the detail, how can you conclude you can support or  oppose such an agreement.

Shadow Trade Minister Jason Clare and Labor leader Bill Shorten have made clear  we want to see the detail on the partnership agreement before we make our position  clear on our support or otherwise.

Labour mobility is a huge issue. If you diminish the protections of local workers, you  could be displacing those workers. You could be putting downward pressure on  wages by allowing for easing the inflow of temporary workers at a time when people  are already feeling the pressure due to casualisation and precarious work.

I don't think the Liberal Party really have a sense of this or really have a concern  about what some of these agreements can do to the labour market. Labor is always  concerned about the effect that trade agreements might have on working people.  That's why we need to see the detail until which we won't be making an unqualified  statement.

JOURNALIST: Christian Porter said last night that child sex abuse survivors have  every right to feel upset about the Catholic Church's initial response to the national  redress scheme. How do you feel about the way the Catholic Church has  responded?

O'CONNOR: Look I haven't seen the response, but if it is the case that there has

been no full understanding or appreciation of what is required from now then Labor  would share that concern.

Let's be very clear here it was Labor that knew it was critical that we have a royal  commission into systemic abuse of children involving institutions, including the  Catholic Church.

What we have seen through that process has been victims being able to tell their  stories, which was firstly critical. But there needs to be reparation. There needs to be  compensation for victims of abuse. If there are attempts to resist that requirement,  then yes, people who resist that deserve some censure.

Until people are properly compensated. Until there is recognition that damage was  done, not that everything can be repaired through financial compensation, but it is  critical that the government ensure that there is proper compensation to those  victims.

If the Catholic Church or any other institution seeks to resist that, then I would be  supporting the government, if it's of the view, that they are acting in a manner that is  against the interests of the victims and protecting the interests of the institution.

So I am glad to hear that the Attorney General has some concerns about the  institutions resisting that. You can be assured of this, Labor is very concerned if  there are attempts to deny justice to these victims of child sex abuse.

JOURNALIST: I have a question for Ged about the by-election. The Greens seem to  have stepped up their campaign about your stance on refugee policy. I know you  declined to attend a refugee advocacy rally here at Northcote town hall on the  weekend. Do you think this will be a real weak spot for you ahead of the election?

KEARNEY: I'm prepared to stand on my reputation with regards to my advocacy for  refugees. All my working life from the time I was a nurse, caring for refugees in the  community, right through to my time at the nurses, and of course at the ACTU, I  have had a very well recorded activism record standing up for refugees and humane  policy. I'm not going to walk away from that. I will be a strong voice for progressive,  humane policy within the Labor party.

JOURNALIST: Would you ever go against Labor Party policy and not support  offshore processing of refugees?

KEARNEY: I will within the party do my very best to be a very strong progressive  voice for human policy and at this stage that's all I can say.

JOURNALIST: The Greens have said this will be the issue that loses you the  election because it is such a strong issue here in Batman, do you agree with that?

KEARNEY: I stand by my record on this. I think everybody who knows me knows

very well that I have a very good record in regards to activism and progressive policy  for refugees. It's certainly what I'm telling electors whenever I get the chance and I  get a very good response.

JOURNALIST: There has been a lot of [inaudible] Is that a sign of nervousness  among Labor supporters?

KEARNEY: That was quite an upsetting and nasty development in this election. It's  something that I certainly don't condone - defacing a poster. I think it was a very  unfortunate development. I certainly just stand by my record which is quite strong  and good on this issue.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: ERIN SMITH 0458 950 010

