THE HON MARK BUTLER MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR CLIMATE CHANGE AND ENERGY  MEMBER FOR PORT ADELAIDE  ALP NATIONAL PRESIDENT

E&OE TRANSCRIPT  ABC NEWS BREAKFAST  TV INTERVIEW  FRIDAY, 25 MAY 2018

SUBJECT/S: By-election dates, ALP National conference, refugee resettlement.

DEL IRANI: Let’s go to federal politics now and five by-elections will be held on July the  28th when voters head back to the polls following more dual citizenship casualties.

MICHAEL ROWLAND: The Labor Party is now even considering whether to move its  national conference as it is due to be held over the same weekend. Labor members  have branded the decision of the date, announced yesterday by the Speaker Tony  Smith, as a disgrace, sneaky and partisan. One of those is Shadow Energy Minister and  Labor Party President, Mark Butler. He joins us now from Adelaide, Mark Butler good  morning to you.

MARK BUTLER: Good morning Michael.

ROWLAND: What’s wrong I guess is the question, with these electors in the five seats  to consider the various arguments put forward to them by all sides?

BUTLER: The usual thing would be for this by-election to be held on June 30th after all  of the arrangements were put in place this week. The Electoral Commission made it  clear in its written advice, to use its words, that it was “ready and able” to conduct the  by-election on June 30th which would be about five weeks from now, the usual way in  which these by-elections would be held. Presumably it could also conduct on July 7th,  July 14th and July 21st, but instead, this government has very clearly targeted the date  of the ALP National Conference to prevent the alternative government from being able  to put together a policy platform for a federal election that could be called as early as

August by Malcolm Turnbull. This is quite uncharted territory, I think, for Australian  democracy.

But I think what it also does Michael, is to disenfranchise about half a million Australians  for at least a month longer than necessary from the political process. I’m not talking  about having representatives in Parliament being able to vote on legislation. I’m talking  about the bread and butter work of Local MPs and their staff every day, helping people  with Centrelink disputes or immigration matters, for purely political purposes. Malcolm  Turnbull has disenfranchised about half a million people from a political process for at  least a month longer than needed be the case.

ROWLAND: Mark Butler hasn’t the Labor Party brought this upon itself through your  sloppy vetting processes for these MPs, disqualified from Parliament, leading to these  by-elections?

BUTLER: We’ve made it clear that we are very sorry that these by-elections have to  take place, but we’ve also maintained that we acted in accordance with legal advice that  reflected the High Court position at the time. Indeed, the Electoral Commission’s  handbook, its advice to candidates reflected that 1992 High Court decision that we were  acting upon - the so-called ‘reasonable steps’ test - as recently as the Batman by-election, which was only held a few months ago. The High Court has changed its view,  definitively put in place a few weeks ago a very different position that placed our MPs in  a very different position and they acted accordingly. But we were at the time acting in  accordance with legal advice that reflected the orthodox view of the High Court's  position since 1992 until very, very recently.

Now obviously we are very sorry about that but the government of the day has a  responsibility to put in place arrangements as soon as possible that ensures the people  in those electorates are enfranchised as soon as possible. That’s what they did when  Barnaby Joyce had to resign, when John Alexander had to resign, but instead they are  using this as a purely political device to attack its federal opponents, potentially only  weeks out from an election that could be called in August.

ROWLAND: Okay so what happens next, will Labor move its National Conference,  cancel it altogether?

BUTLER: I’m convening a National Executive Committee meeting later today but  obviously we are not going to hold a national conference during by-elections in five  different electorates across the country. This is a very important thing for us to do - for a  century or more the Labor Party has put its policy platform together for the Australian  people at a triennial conference. This is, I think, one of the signature events of the  Australian political calendar. It’s where so many of the important political debates in  political history have at least been rehearsed and often largely resolved going back to  the conscription debates during the World Wars, the uranium debate of the 80s, and  more recently marriage equality and the National Disability Insurance Scheme debates.  The government knew this, and the Government, for purely political reasons has

targeted our National Conference to try to hamper our ability to put forward a policy  platform that the Australian people are able to look through as they move towards a  federal election. It is quite uncharted, unprecedented territory for Australian democracy.

ROWLAND: We’re just about out of time, you say the election could be as early as  August, Graham Richardson writes in The Australian this morning, former Labor Party  Senator, that if Labor goes to that election saying it would bring refugees from Manus  Island and Nauru to Australia or even imposing a time limit on the time they spend in the  detention camps, you will throw that election away. What do you say to him?

BUTLER: We won’t be saying that. The Labor Party and the Government are as one  that we don’t intend to let the people smugglers get back into business. And every time  that Peter Dutton, for purely political purposes, pretends otherwise he is sending a  confusing message that people smugglers will seek to exploit. There is a difference  between the Labor Party and the Government though, and it is that those processing  centres set up in Manus and Nauru were intended to be processing centres - not  indefinite detention. Instead, what you have seen under Prime Minister Abbott and  Turnbull is a neglect of the relationship between the UNHCR, the High Commission for  Refugees, and no effort really to negotiate resettlement arrangements with other  countries other than the US and a paltry effort with Cambodia. What you would see  under Labor is a reinvigorated effort with the UNHCR and lots of energy put into  ensuring those people are able to be resettled - not in Australia - but in third countries  as soon as possible.

ROWLAND: Just quickly yes or no, do you support the move in the ALP’s draft National  Platform to impose a 90-day limit on the amount of times refugees spend in those  camps?

BUTLER: No I don’t, I don’t think Australia can put a firm time limit in place. What we  need to do is put energy into making sure people get to third-country resettlement  arrangements as soon as possible and that is what the Labor Party would do.

ROWLAND: Okay Mark Butler thank you for joining News Breakfast this morning.

BUTLER: Thank you Michael.

MEDIA CONTACT: LUCY CARUSO 0408 803 428

Authorised by Noah Carroll ALP Canberra.





