

BILL SHORTEN MP  LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION

SHADOW MINISTER FOR INDIGENOUS AFFAIRS & ABORIGINAL AND  TORRES STRAIT ISLANDERS  MEMBER FOR MARIBYRNONG



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP  ST ALBANS  SATURDAY, 25 AUGUST 2018



SUBJECT/S: Liberal party civil war; Labor’s plans for a fair go for Australia;  asylum seeker policy; climate change and energy policy.

BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Good afternoon everybody. It’s  great to be in St Albans, in the heart of the north-western suburbs of Melbourne. With  me is Natalie Suleyman, the State Member for St Albans.

I’ve just been out with my wife Chloe and one of my children, doing some green grocery  shopping, some of the fruit and veg. And I tell you what, what the voters of Australia are  telling me loud and clear is they think that the last week in politics has probably been  the biggest farcical week ever in Australian history.

That they may have changed the leader, but they haven’t changed the Government.  What we see here is the start of the week, the Government was divided, the  Government was in chaos. At the end of the week, the Government is divided and the  Government is in chaos.

I should just say, before I talk about what the future holds, I should just again go on  record, as I did last night, and extend my congratulations to Mr Turnbull’s three years of  service as Prime Minister of Australia. He and his wife Lucy are a fantastic and  formidable partnership. Mr Turnbull and I certainly didn’t see eye to eye. But in  Australia’s longest election campaign in 50 years, and indeed the campaign which  never seems to have stopped since, the last two years, I have to say that for all of the  fierce words of disagreement, I do not doubt for one second that Mr Turnbull was a loyal  servant of Australia, and he believed fundamentally in service to Australia.

I also just want to recognise the role that Lucy, his wife, plays in his life, and indeed,  they are a formidable partnership. And to Mr Turnbull’s family, I say thank you. It’s a big

sacrifice that families pay. And so I acknowledge, too, your service to the nation.

To Mr Morrison, the new Prime Minister, I extend him my congratulations. Being Prime  Minister of Australia is a great, great privilege. And to have achieved that high office is a  remarkable accomplishment, so I congratulate him.

I also say to him that we will contest you on ideas. I believe that the power of proper  policy is what should determine our politics, not the cult of personality.

So I say to Mr Morrison, game on. We’re going to work on the policies and ideas. And I  say to Australians, at the end of a dismal week, I hear the message loud and clear. I  understand that what people have seen is that back in 2013 they voted for Mr Abbott,  and then they got Mr Turnbull. Then in 2016 they voted for Mr Turnbull, and got Mr  Morrison. And I think a lot of Australians probably would have preferred Ms Bishop out  of the three of them. But the people have been ignored.

So I want to say to the Australian people, Labor has been stable and united. Our  preoccupation is with policies which will make Australia a better place for all Australians,  a fair go all round.

Are there any questions?

JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten, are you worried about what it would be like going up  against Scott Morrison? Would he be harder to defeat than what a Malcolm Turnbull  prime ministership would have been?

SHORTEN: No, I’m not. It’s up to the Liberals who they choose. I think what they’ve  done is they’ve sacked a more popular salesman for a less popular salesman, but the  real problem the Government has is they are still selling the same product.

This is a different leader but it is the same government. It’s a different leader, but it’s the  same chaos and division. And when I say it’s a different leader but the same  government, Mr Morrison has stood alongside Tony Abbott and Malcolm Turnbull and  actively supported all of the significant decisions of the last five years which have got us  into the problems we’re in right now.

I mean, Mr Morrison has been the Treasurer for the last three years. He’s the architect,  the author and the creator of the budgets which have seen corporate tax cuts proposed  for the big end of town. And we’ve got a situation right now in Australia where  everything is going up except people’s wages, and that’s Mr Morrison’s fault.

JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten, you mentioned policy, a battle of policy. Can we talk about  asylum seekers? Are you still against the indefinite detention of asylum seekers?

SHORTEN: Well, when it comes to boat people and asylum seekers, let me be very,  very, very black and white. We will stop boats. We don’t people taking unsafe sea

voyages to this country, where people put their lives - and in some cases, tragically,  die. We do not believe, however, that deterring boats and people smugglers and the  criminal syndicates who exploit vulnerable people, should be an excuse for indefinite  detention on Manus and Nauru. If we are elected, we will maintain the same strong and  vigilant attitude about stopping boats, but what we will also do is redouble our efforts to  resettle people in third countries, because we don’t think that indefinite detention is the  Australian way.



JOURNALIST: If we were to end up with a minority government, how hard and how  soon would you try to bring it down?

SHORTEN: Well, let’s go to what happened last week. What the new Prime Minister is  trying to do is just airbrush history. He’s trying to say that he wasn’t part of the old  government, and somehow you’ve had an election without having an election. That is  not correct.

Mr Morrison was the Treasurer for the last three years. That means that he’s been the  architect of giving away $80 billion to big banks [business]. He was an enthusiast for  increasing the GST, just like his old boss, Mr Turnbull. I think that what people look at  when they look at this week is on Monday, they had an elected Prime Minister called  Malcolm Turnbull. By Friday, they’ve got a new fellow called Scott Morrison, who half of  Australia hasn’t heard of.

I think most people think, and Labor’s learned this lesson the hard way, is that if you  want to change a prime minister, let the people do it through an election. I think most  people are also expressing surprise to me, that if it wasn’t to be Malcolm Turnbull, a lot  of everyday Aussies have said well, why didn’t they give Julie Bishop a go?

The reality is that the Liberal Party, and the powerbrokers of the Liberal Party, have  ignored the people’s wishes on Mr Turnbull, they’ve ignored the people’s wishes on  Julie Bishop, and they’re ignoring people when it comes to just recycling the same old  people at the front of the queue.

I think the sooner the people get a say, the better for Australia.

JOURNALIST: People will get a say at a by-election for Wentworth. What’s your  reading of that seat?

SHORTEN: Oh, it’s a 68 per cent Liberal seat, so let’s see what they do. But knowing  the Liberal Party, they’ll have a fight about that as they have about everything else  internally.

I mean, if the Liberal Party were half as good at fighting for Australians as they are  fighting each other, we’d have wages up and power prices down. The problem is,  they’ve got the wrong priorities.

JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten, just on climate policy. The Greens have expressed, I guess,  an interest in trying to figure something out with Labor. I mean, what would Labor’s  position be when it comes to climate change and energy policy?

SHORTEN: First of all, unlike the Liberal Party, everyone in the Labor Party believes  that climate change is real. What we want to do is, we want to go for the trifecta of a  winning combination for Australians. We want to invest in more renewables which will  lead to more jobs and lower energy prices, and that will also have the happy product of  decreasing pollution in the atmosphere.

JOURNALIST: How will your line of attack change under a Morrison Government?

SHORTEN: Well first of all, there’s been no real change in the Government except the  name of the prime minister. Everyone else is still there. So, that’s literally what’s  happened. There’s that old saying which has stood the test of time, shifting deck chairs  on the Titanic. I think we’ve had a pretty good example of that this week.

I mean, the other thing which we shouldn’t forget is that this government bitterly divided.  On Thursday it all got so hard they didn’t turn up to work. Anywhere else you’d get the  sack. In this case, some of them got to be made prime minister. I mean, seriously, Tony  Abbott and Peter Dutton are not going away. The hatred, the bitterness, the  backstabbing is not going away.

The one thing we do know is that the Liberal Party is the same old government with the  same old internal division and chaos.

JOURNALIST: So no need to change your strategy?

SHORTEN: Well, my strategy all along has been to listen to the people. I mean, I think  people are really shocked at what’s going on in Canberra. It doesn’t sit easily, I think,  with the Australian people, this knowledge that internationally they look at us and there’s  no point in a world leader bothering to get to know a prime minister because there’ll be  someone new here next week. People think that’s really disturbing.

What I want to promise Australians is that the Labor Party is united and we are stable.  What we’re interested in doing is making sure that we have better funding for hospitals  and schools, making sure that your kids can get an apprenticeship, making sure  pensioners are looked after.

You know, we think that we are on the right track, and what we’d just say to the  Government is, it’s not the leaders who need to change, it’s your policies.

Thanks everybody.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: LEADER'S OFFICE MEDIA UNIT - 02 6277 4053



















