AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL  MEDIA QUOTE  26 January 2018

Papua New Guinea: Sick asylum-seeker restrained and force-fed

Responding to news that an asylum-seeker being treated at a hospital in Port Moresby, Papua  New Guinea (PNG), for a serious medical condition, has been restrained for three days and is  being force-fed by hospital staff after he went on hunger strike for 20 days, Kate Schuetze,  Amnesty International’s Pacific Researcher said:

“Forcing medical treatment and feeding a patient without his consent, unless it is medically  necessary, may violate the right to health and the right to be protected from torture and other  cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment. He has gone on hunger strike to protest the poor  medical treatment he has received in PNG and his need for further medical treatment, which  cannot be provided in the country.

“The Papua New Guinea and Australian authorities must address the underlying concerns  raised by the asylum-seeker, and must transfer him to a hospital in Australia where he can  receive the appropriate treatment he urgently needs.”

Background  The asylum-seeker is currently at the Pacific International Hospital in Port Moresby, Papua New  Guinea (PNG), and is subject to a court order to facilitate force-feeding and current medical  treatment. He claims that he has been slapped by hospital staff attempting to force-feed him.

He was previously sent to Australia for medical treatment before being returned to Manus  Island. He has been informed by medical professionals that his condition cannot be treated in  PNG, yet Australian officials have refused to transfer him to Australia for further treatment. He  has been at the Pacific International Hospital for just over a month.

Around 800 refugees and asylum-seekers have been held on Manus Island in Papua New  Guinea for nearly four and a half years by the Australian government in restrictive conditions  that are cruel and degrading.

Just over 100 refugees and asylum-seekers were sent to Port Moresby in 2017 for medical  treatment, some have remained there for nearly a year. Amnesty International spoke to over 30  refugees in Port Moresby in November 2017, many of whom said they had been waiting for  months for medical treatment or had been told their conditions cannot be treated in Papua New  Guinea because of limitations in the health care system, including lack of equipment or available  specialists.

Asylum-seekers in Papua New Guinea are those who initially sought asylum in Australia, but  have not had the right to fairly present or appeal their claims, even though they may have  received an initial negative assessment from PNG immigration authorities. More than 800  refugees and asylum seekers remain trapped in PNG under Australia’s cruel policies of  ‘offshore processing’.

/ends.

