

THE HON. BILL SHORTEN MP

LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION

SHADOW MINISTER FOR INDIGENOUS AFFAIRS & ABORIGINAL

AND TORRES STRAIT ISLANDERS

MEMBER FOR MARIBYRNONG





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

RADIO INTERVIEW

ABC AM

TUESDAY, 31 JULY 2018



SUBJECT: Turnbull’s tax handout to the top end; Newstart Allowance; Labor

priorities; My Health record, asylum seekers, Emma Husar; Resignation of

Archbishop Phillip Wilson.



KIM LANDERS, HOST: As the Federal Government grapples with whether to

dump or change its approach to company tax cuts for big business, the Opposition

is watching and waiting. Labor road tested a lot of slogans and policies during the

Super Saturday of by-elections, and it thinks it's found a few key ingredients that

will help it fight and win the next general election. The Opposition Leader is Bill

Shorten and he joins me now from Melbourne. Mr Shorten, good morning.



BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Good morning Kim.



LANDERS: On corporate tax, what if the government decides to change up its

planned tax cuts for big business, perhaps putting a cap on them, or changing the

threshold, would Labor be up for that?



SHORTEN: I think the corporate tax cuts are a bad idea. They were a bad idea on

Friday before the by-elections and they are still a bad idea the Tuesday afterwards.

They're a bad idea because governments and nations have to make priorities. I

think it's more important to find money for hospitals and health care, more

important to find money for schools and apprenticeships and university places,

than it is to give big companies a tax cut.



LANDERS: So you're not interested in any sort of change to that policy?



SHORTEN: No the economic case hasn't been made out. It's of dubious benefit, it

smashes a giant hole in the budget and to what end? I mean if we have to pay for

these corporate tax cuts - this is something the government has been let off scot-free on in terms of the analysis. If you take tens of billions of dollars out of the

nation's ATM, to give away as corporate tax cuts, something's got to give. You

have less money available for schools and hospitals, or you have to increase

revenue elsewhere, or you pay greater interest payments on ballooning

government debt.



LANDERS: There's also been a bit of speculation that perhaps the government

might fast track the decrease in the current rate of  27.5 per cent to 25 per cent for

businesses under $50 million. Would you be interested in that?



SHORTEN: Well again, I'm not going to start reacting to hypotheticals, but where's

the government getting the money from? If you're going to decrease what's in the

nation's budget, you've got to explain what it is that you're willing to cut. Which

hospital do you want to cut, what waiting lists for elective surgery do you want to

see increase?



LANDERS: I'm just trying to get a sense of where your - what your bottom line is

on corporate tax, what Labor's bottom line is.



SHORTEN: We've already said what our bottom line is. The issue though is what

sort of nation are we becoming. Like the by-elections have convinced me that we

need to talk more about creating a fairer society, tackling inequality. What I heard

going around on the weekend and indeed for the nine weeks beforehand, wasn't

about should there be a threshold that corporations under half a billion dollars, a

small business, or that sort of rubbish. The real issue I heard on the weekend is

people said why is everything going up except our wages. Australians want a

government who is in touch with the people, not a government who is trying to

always pull the wool over the eyes of the Australian people.



LANDERS: When you talk about a fairer society and getting rid of inequality,

tackling inequality. Why not immediately promise to increase the Newstart

Allowance for young job seekers for example, rather than simply promising a

review if Labor wins office?



SHORTEN: I think you're right that the level of Newstart is a problem. What we've

said though is -



LANDERS: So are you going to increase it?



SHORTEN: Well we're not going to try and do everything from Opposition. What

we have said unlike the government, is we think it is a problem, that we do want to

review it in government. We're not -



LANDERS: But what review do you need? It's less than $40 a day, if it's a problem

why can't you commit to increasing it?



SHORTEN: Kim I'm not going to spend tens of billions of dollars on Radio National

this morning. What I'm going to do is take a sensible approach. But the difference

between me and the other fellow is I actually think that how people at the bottom of

the heap are going, matters more than how people at the very top are going.



LANDERS: If I can turn to My Health, a new report from the office of the

Information Commissioner has revealed that the health care sector has had the

highest number of reportable data breaches in the last three months. Now you've

called for the government to suspend the rollout of the My Health record of which

there have been no data breaches so far. But what's your advice to voters this

morning, should they be in or out?



SHORTEN: Well it's a personal decision, and I don't want to take a party political

view on this, but I think the people of Australia want a better answer from the

government. I mean, believe it or not I actually think it's the same problem that we

see with the way the government is handling these corporate tax cuts. People

want, from the government, a government that is more in touch with them. Labor is

not trying to be difficult, we support the principle of storing health records digitally,

but we proposed an opt in scheme. The government need to attend to this issue.

I'm not saying that this was the biggest -



LANDERS: Well you've called, you've called for the scheme to be suspended.



SHORTEN: Yes.



LANDERS: So, what is it that your - what’s your advice to voters, what do you

say, don't bother with it?



SHORTEN: Voters have to back their own instinct. But what I think is that this is a

matter close to people. It wasn't the biggest issue in the by-elections, I'm not

saying that. But I actually feel that the people of Australia are being treated as

mugs. They're being told nothing to see here, no problems. Yet we do hear reports

day after day, of detail which is not resolved, and when you said before there

haven't been any breaches of the My Health Record, that is so far. I mean in

Singapore just recently one and a half million records, health records, were hacked

including that of the Singaporean Prime Minister. A government should never treat

its people as mugs.



LANDERS: Let's turn to another policy issue, asylum seekers. You've said that

you don't believe in indefinite detention of asylum seekers. So what time limit

would a Labor Government be prepared to put on it.



SHORTEN: Well what we would do is, in a positive sense, put more effort into

renegotiating - into negotiating regional resettlement. Now, I can't give an absolute

time limit obviously, from Opposition. But what I would say to people is we'll -



LANDERS: So you can't commit three months, six months, a year?



SHORTEN: Well first of all, this is a bigger issue than just one word answers. We

will stop the boats and we share the view of the government that this policy has

been effective in deterring people smugglers. But I also believe that we shouldn't

have, what is emerging to be indefinite detention for people in these facilities. So

our plan is to negotiate regional resettlement options with the countries in our

region. Now if you're asking -



LANDERS: So have you got some specific countries in mind?



SHORTEN: I think there's a range of countries within Asia in the Asia-Pacific who

we could talk to, yes.



LANDERS: Such as?



SHORTEN: Well I think there's big economies right through the Asian continent

who would be, I think worthwhile for us to talk to.



LANDERS: Specifically which countries?



SHORTEN: Well, Japan, South Korea, Taiwan, Canada, New Zealand.



LANDERS: Have you reached out to any of those countries?



SHORTEN: We're the Opposition. We're the Opposition. You know, really what I

would like to do is actually see the problem resolved, and I'll say something this

morning which might surprise some people listening. I'm pleased that the Turnbull

Government has been able to keep the negotiations with America on track. This

issue should be above party politics. But what we're seeing is a whole lot of

debate, and I think that Australians actually expect their government to deter the

people smugglers but not keep people in indefinite detention.



LANDERS: If I can move on to another topic, will you promise that the report

commissioned by New South Wales Labor to investigate bullying accusations

against one of your backbenchers, Emma Husar, will be made public?



SHORTEN: I don't know what's in the report. It hasn't been concluded. I don't know

if any of the complainants or any of the concerns that have been raised have done

so on the basis of confidentiality. I'm going to wait till I see the report.



LANDERS: She's one of your team she gets her salary from the taxpayer. You

don't think the public should be able to see some of it?





SHORTEN: Well I don't know what's been reported. I don't know if some of the

basis of the report has been confidential. There'll be protocols in place. What we

need to do is respect the interests of all the people involved.



LANDERS: Do you welcome the decision by the Adelaide Archbishop Phillip

Wilson to resign after his conviction for concealing child sexual abuse?



SHORTEN: Yes I do. But I need to say this at the outset, as this story broke last

night. My first thoughts are with the victims. None of this is going to ultimately

change what has happened to them. I am pleased that the decisions have been

made, but for me you know having met victims of clerical abuse more generally,

nothing ever compensates people. It should never have happened in the first

place, and their search for justice has been too long. But I am pleased that this has

happened absolutely.



LANDERS: Bill Shorten thank you very much for speaking with AM this morning.



SHORTEN: Good morning.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: LEADER'S OFFICE MEDIA UNIT - 02 6277 4053





Authorised by Noah Carroll, ALP, Canberra.











