

CHRIS BOWEN MP  SHADOW TREASURER  MEMBER FOR McMAHON





E&OE TRANSCRIPT   RADIO INTERVIEW  ABC RN DRIVE  TUESDAY, 30 JUNE 2018

SUBJECT/S: Leader of the Opposition’s Address to the National Press Club.

PATRICIA KARVELAS, PRESENTER: Bill Shorten pledges a national anti- corruption body.

(AUDIO) BILL SHORTEN: We want to make sure that the administration of the  Commonwealth is impartial and free from untoward influence. So what we are  proposing would cover the judiciary, it would cover the Commonwealth public  service, it would cover businesses and people who transact with the Commonwealth,  including the Governor-General.

KARVELAS: You’ll be hearing further details from the Shadow Treasurer Chris  Bowen. The PM has defended for Immigration Minister Scott Morrison following  revelations that Mr Morrison tried to prevent permanent protection visas for asylum  seekers. …

Opposition Leader Bill Shorten has delivered Labor’s policy pitch for 2018: restore  trust in Parliament and boost wages. If elected Labor would establish a National  Integrity Commission modelled on the New South Wales ICAC to sniff out corruption  in Parliament and the public service. And Mr Shorten also sketched out the future of  Australia if stagnant wages growth is not properly tackled.

(AUDIO) BILL SHORTEN: If we don’t do something about the living wage, if we  don’t do something about the cut to penalty rates, if we don’t do something  about eh gender pay gap, if we don’t do something to fix up the bargaining  system, we’re going to create two Australia’s. We’re going to create a ‘left  behind’ society.

KARVELAS: Chris Bowen is the Shadow Treasurer and has been instrumental in  putting together a lot of these policies.



Chris Bowen, welcome.

CHRIS BOWEN, SHADOW TREASURER: Good to be with you Patricia, happy new  year.

KARVELAS: Happy new year to you too. Why do we need a federal ICAC? How  much corruption is there in federal politics or the public service?

BOWEN: Well look, I haven’t seen any, but that doesn’t mean you shouldn’t have  the best policy framework at your disposal. This is an idea that has been a long time  coming, and we think now is the time to proceed with it. We’ve had an ICAC in New  South Wales for thirty years, so we haven’t rushed to this. But I think it’s very  important to note that a National Integrity Commission, or a Federal ICAC if you like,  will play a number of roles. It’s not just about sniffing out corruption, as important as  that is as you identify, it’s also about an educative role, it’s about assisting  departments to reach best practice in their anti-corruption mechanisms. I don’t think  there’s much corruption at the federal level under governments of both persuasions,  but that doesn’t mean that we shouldn’t engage in best practice when it comes to our  policy frameworks and institutions.

KARVELAS: So if systemic corruption of undue influence were to be found, who  would fix it? How would it be addressed?

BOWEN: Well what a National Integrity Commission would do in the case of  particular instances is refer to the Director of Public Prosecutions, but also we would  see a role for the National Integrity Commission in advising departments and  developing their expertise, on what policies and procedures they should have in  place for anti-corruption. That’s what they do in the NSW ICAC and with similar  bodies across the country. Why shouldn’t there be a similar body at the federal  level?

KARVELAS: What about federal political donations, former federal MPs lobbying in  advocacy roles? Would the commission be able to look at those sort of issues?

BOWEN: Well, the commission would have the jurisdiction to look at commonwealth  parliamentarians and their staff, and obviously that would include people who were  carrying out a public role as a former MP, office holder, statutory officers, the  commonwealth judiciary, and the Governor-General not that we would expect there’d  be much to look at for the Governor-General. So it would have a broad role, it would  look at matters of serious and systemic corruption.

Now of course Patricia, the Government has with our support, set up the  Independent Parliamentary Entitlements Authority, which has its own independence  and its own role to play and will continue to play that role.

KARVELAS: Okay. Would this have been something that could have dealt with Sam  Dastyari? That was obviously making headlines last year. This new construction  commission, not construction (laughs), that’s another commission, this corruption  commission, would it have dealt with Sam Dastyari?



BOWEN: Well Patricia, with respect, I don’t think it’s useful for us to go through  individual cases and say ‘ would the commission have acted or not’. It will have  broad ranging jurisdiction with a focus on serious and systemic corruption.  Importantly and I’m not sure how much coverage this has got during the day, this is a  very important part of what Bill announced, we would see the appointment of the  Commissioner and two Deputy Commissioners as being bipartisan, needing to be  approved by the Parliament. Needing bipartisan agreement as to the  Commissioners.

So we see that as a very important part of what we have announced today, to get  that trust and to have the public confidence, but confidence also of the political  system, that we are making solid, non-partisan appointments to this very important  body.

KARVELAS: I want to move onto the big economic part of the speech which is of  course your area. We know that the cost of living is up. We know wages are not up,  in fact I think it’s a massive issue for many Australians and no doubt that’s partly why  it’s been addressed by Bill Shorten’s speech. How are you going to fix it though?

BOWEN: Well I think Patricia, that what we’ve done in Opposition is outline a range  of matters, the issues that we are trying to address and then outline policy solutions  after that. So with housing affordability obviously we were looking at that for a long  time before we announced our negative gearing policy. Bill is similarly engaging in  highlighting these issues which the Government has frankly ignored. I also think  there’s no single solution to this. I mean this is a complex problem with a complex  solution.

We have a range of policies that we’ve already announced, and others that we  continue to develop. So for example, we will restore the penalty rates cut. Now we  have a Government that seems to think the answer to low wages growth is to cut  corporate tax and to cut wages through the penalty rates cut. So we don’t support  that, we would reverse that.

Similarly the Government wants to increase the tax on low and middle income  earners. They talk about a tax cut now, but actually their policy is to increase tax.  They have legislation before the parliament which would see somebody earning  $60,000 a year, $300 worse off for example. That’s the Medicare Levy increase,  that’s their policy. We oppose that. There are 7 million people that would have a  lower tax under a Labor Government than a Liberal Government.

So all of these are parts of the solution. But we’ve also been thinking about, Brendan  O’Connor’s been very active in talking about ending exploitations through the labour  hire system. Bill was identifying other issues today which we can continue to  consider in our normal deliberative way about a sensible solutions. But we are  pointing out that the system isn’t working as it should. For example, Bill pointed out  today that 16% of people were on awards which is meant to be the safety net, meant  to only cover a small number of people, 16% of people were on awards in 2012  which is not that long ago, and now 24% of people are on awards, and that  determines their pay. Again these are real issues.



The Government not that long ago was telling us that we have a wages explosion on  our hands which is utter fallacy. We identify a different of problems and we have a  range of solutions, whether they be tax, whether they be penalty rates, whether they  be the bargaining system, whether they be labour hire and casualisation. As I said,  some of which we’ve already announced detailed policies to deal with, others which  we will continue to consult.

KARVELAS: Reinvigorating enterprise agreements is part of that. So does that  mean you’re planning major industrial relations reform?

BOWEN: Well we are continuing to deliberate on all these matters and to consult not  only with employers, unions, academics and others, business, we want to bring  people together. Bill’s made the point that he sees this not as an ‘us and them’ but a  system in which we can come together to try and make improvements. I don’t think  that there’s many people that would tell you that the system as its currently  constituted is working. The Government might think that it’s working perfectly. We  don’t.

So I’m not here to announced detailed bargaining or industrial relations policy, that’s  a matter for the Shadow Cabinet to continue to deliberate on it. But we will continue  to talk to all interested groups, whether they be businesses or unions about some of  those policy options. I would hope the Government would engage in a similar  process.

KARVELAS: Sure but the industrial relations settings have actually been set by a  previous Labor Government. It was the Gillard Government’s Fair Work Act that has  dictated all of this. Are you looking to amend the legislation that you actually built?

BOWEN: Well Patricia, just because something was right for 2013, or 2007 for that  matter, doesn’t necessarily mean it’s right for 2018. We continue to think about policy  options. We are concerned about low wages growth. We don’t think that just hoping  employers will magically start paying people more is the answer. There are no easy  answers here. But there are very serious policy options which need to be  considered. We continue to do that work.

KARVELAS: The gender pay gap was the other one. Is that being looked after in all  of your offices? Is there a gender pay gap in all of your offices? Bill Shorten’s?  Yours? Are women getting paid the same as men? Is that something you’re doing?

BOWEN: Well I imagine so. We have a number of very senior women in our Shadow  Ministry staffing. Very senior women obviously right across the board, from Bill’s  office down who would receive the same pay as their male counterparts for their role.  We have senior policy advisers, female chiefs-of-staffs, which we are very proud of,  who do great work.

The gender pay gap is a real issue. I've made speeches about it, there has been  good work done by the Senate inquiry led by Jenny McAllister and others on the  problem being that often while of course it has been a law since 1969 that women  should be paid as men, women are continuing to work in lower paid fields and we

are not seeing that getting any better and of course a lot of the jobs growth is in that  personal services and health area which is in many instances low wages and  casualised which is not and of course heavily female dominated so of course the pay  gap is not getting any better.

We were told it would get better and it's not getting any better. And of course the pay  gap then leads into a superannuation gap which is in some senses even worse. Too  many women are retiring into poverty, not retiring into a dignified retirement because  they haven't, because their career has been interrupted through family raising and  being in lower paid jobs. They haven't been accumulating the same level of  superannuation as their male counterparts. That is something which deeply concerns  us as well and we will have more to say.

KARVELAS: I just want to get you on another key element before we go and that’s  the critique on private health and the way that junk policies work. The tax payers  subsidies to private health insurance industry are to a tune of $6 billion. You know,  Bill Shorten talked about the problems but he didn't tell us what he was going to do  about them. Would you consider legislating some kind of indexation of a premium  perhaps linked to a CPI?

BOWEN: Well Patricia again as I think you would acknowledge Bill made a very  major policy announcement today on the National Integrity Commission and I don't  think you could complain that there wasn't enough meat in his speech when he's  made such a big policy announcement but he also identified private health insurance  which we don't think is a system that is working for people. We make no apologies  for that.

Again he is identifying the issues, similar to housing affordability and cost of living,  identifying issues we are going to tackle and he will say more and we will say more  about how we propose to tackle those in coming weeks. But what we have is a  situation where the only person who seems to think that private health insurance is  working for Australians at the moment is Greg Hunt who celebrates the fact that the  increase he approved was more than wages growth and more than inflation. He  seems to think that is some great achievement and right across the country you are  seeing Australians who know that the health system is subsidised by the taxpayer  and know that there are penalties under the tax system if you don't take out private  health insurance but they don't feel they are getting the value from these big  increases.

KARVELAS: Do you except Chris Bowen though that you've left yourself open to  really a scare campaign on the private health insurance? You know you have  diagnose a problem but you haven't answered what would happen and of course  many people have private health insurance, they will worry very much about what  the implications will be for them and the years that they have paid it.

BOWEN: Have we left ourselves open for a scare campaign? All this Government  does is scare campaigns. Whether it's negative gearing, whether it's tax, whatever it  is this Government revels and celebrates scare campaigns. Of course they will run a  scare campaign against us on all sorts of issues. I don't care about that. I care about  good policy and I appreciate the fact, I welcome the fact that Bill has today identified

that this is an issue. We have a track record of announcing very detailed policies. We  will continue to do that. We will do that in this space. Greg Hunt can fulminate all he  likes, he can beat his chest all he likes. When we announce our policy he will have a  lot less to beat his chest about but I don't doubt that he will try.

KARVELAS: Chris Bowen many thanks for your time

BOWEN: Nice to talk to you Patricia.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: JAMES CULLEN 0409 719 879



