

SHAYNE NEUMANN MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION  FEDERAL MEMBER FOR BLAIR



E&OE TRANSCRIPT   DOORSTOP  BRISBANE  THURSDAY, 30 AUGUST 2018

SUBJECT: Explosive emails over Peter Dutton’s au pair intervention

SHAYNE NEUMANN, SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER  PROTECTION: Well Peter Dutton, what’s the situation with the au pairs? What’s the go  with the au pairs?

The new explosive leaked emails today reveal Peter Dutton’s ministerial intervention to  stop the deportation of an au pair was not routine. It was anything but routine. The  emails clearly show that the Minister, Peter Dutton, was warned by the Australian  Border Force against granting the visa to this individual. The emails today also reveal  that there was financial liability associated with the taxpayer if he intervened and  granted the visa. The emails today also warned Peter Dutton that this individual was  counselled previously for breaching terms and conditions of visas. Despite all of this,  Minister Peter Dutton intervened to grant a visa to this individual. Now as each day  passes, more and more serious questions are raised concerning this particular matter  and the other matters of the other au pairs. Peter Dutton needs to answer these  questions. That’s why Labor is calling on the Prime Minister to make sure that Minister  Dutton to immediately, fully and completely comes clean to the Australian public. It’s  time for him to answer the questions. Happy to answer any questions myself.

JOURNALIST: Shayne do you think he’s broken any laws?

NEUMANN: Well that’s really a matter for Peter Dutton to explain. I’m not going to  proffer legal advice in relation to this issue. But he certainly has answers which he  needs to deliver to the Australian public.

JOURNALIST: Is Labor suggesting removing ministerial powers?

NEUMANN: Labor is suggesting ministerial powers should be done properly and they  should done in accordance with the best evidence and on their merits.



JOURNALIST: Do you think the powers should be reviewed after this?

NEUMANN: I think Mr Dutton’s conduct should be reviewed in relation to this issue.  Ministers have discretion - whether it’s Labor Ministers for Immigration or Coalition  Ministers. Mr Dutton’s conduct is what should be looked at in relation to this matter and  he’s got a lot of explaining to do.

JOURNALIST: Is Labor going to investigate decisions made by former Labor  Immigration Ministers?

NEUMANN: This is about Peter Dutton’s conduct and his actions in relation to this  issue. It’s not about what’s happened five years or more ago. It’s about his conduct in  relation to this individual case and he needs to explain himself and I’m calling on the  Prime Minister makes sure he fully, completely and immediately explains his conduct  and actions in relation to this matter.

JOURNALIST: Have you ever personally ever asked Peter Dutton to intervene in any  cases?

NEUMANN: I’ve had discussions with Peter Dutton in relation to other matters that  relate to issues in my area - as other Ministers, and other Shadow Ministers, and other  Members of Parliament have - but I’ll tell you what, I’ve never asked for him to do  anything like this before.

JOURNALIST: But have you ever specifically asked him to use his ministerial powers to  intervene?

NEUMANN: I’ve asked him to look at issues in relation to matters as a local Federal  Member of Parliament; I’m sure nearly every Member has. But the circumstances here  are not routine; they are not routine. The situation here is that he has defied his own  Border Force’s advice to undertake issues where I think most Australians would expect  this woman to be put back on a plane and punted out of the country. Mr Dutton has a lot  of explaining to do.

JOURNALIST: Do you think the AFL have anything to answer to as well?

NEUMANN: I’ll let the AFL talk about that. It’s all about Mr Dutton and the exercise of  his ministerial powers and intervention in relation to this matter and that’s why he needs  to come clean right away.

JOURNALIST: Do you think he needs to come before a Senate Inquiry for this?

NEUMANN: I think his departmental officials need to and I’m calling on him to  cooperate fully. And if that’s necessary, if he needs to go before a Senate Inquiry, he  should explain. It would not be the first occasion a Minister for Immigration has done

that. The current Prime Minister did it once in relation to a report - he stood before a  Parliamentary inquiry - and I think it behosed Mr Dutton to do similar in similar  circumstances and similar circumstances such as this and explain his own actions and  conduct.

JOURNALIST: How many decisions did Chris Bowen and Tony Burke intervene in  when they were Immigration Ministers?

NEUMANN: I’ll leave them to explain that. This is not what about happened many,  many years ago. I am certainly not aware of any circumstances that are anything  remotely like this. This is a Minister who has defied his own Department’s warning,  admonition and advice. He’s intervened with an expedition that the public would be  astonished about.

JOURNALIST: Does it say something about your priorities when you never call a media  conference to talk about the treatment of asylum seekers but you’re quick off the block  here when it’s a political issue?

NEUMANN: I have stood in this very spot, had a media conference, calling on the  Government to release the details of the US refugee resettlement arrangements. And  today, I’m calling on the Minister to explain not just that, but his own conduct and  actions, words and deeds in relation to this matter.

JOURNALIST: Just to clarify, Labor is accusing Mr Dutton of making this decision  because of the family’s Liberal connections and donations?

NEUMANN: I’m asking him to answer the questions that have been raised by the new  explosive leaked emails which raise serious questions in relation to his conduct.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: TIMOTHY DUNLOP 0428 043 110













