

THE HON BILL SHORTEN MP  LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION

SHADOW MINISTER FOR INDIGENOUS AFFAIRS AND ABORIGINAL  AND TORRES STRAIT ISLANDERS  MEMBER FOR MARIBYRNONG

E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP  PERTH  THURSDAY, 12 APRIL 2018

SUBJECT/S: Armadale Line Extension; Byford Station Creation; Fair Share for  Western Australia Fund; Melbourne Airport Rail link; China Diplomatic Relations;  Regional WA; NZ resettlement of refugees; South African farmers; NDIS

MATT KEOGH, MEMBER FOR BURT: Good morning everyone and welcome here to  sunny Armadale.

So Armadale is deep in the heart of my electorate of Burt. It's great to have you all here  and it's great to be joined by Labor Leader Bill Shorten, by Labor's Candidate for  Canning which starts just up the hill, Mellisa Teede, and of course Premier Mark  McGowan and Minister of Transport, Rita Saffioti.

We're here today because this is part of demonstrating Labor's clear commitment,  because Labor understands the issues that confront the people of Armadale, the issues  that confront the people of these southeastern suburbs of Perth. The issues that  confront the people of Byford.

These are rapidly growing outer suburban areas and they need connectivity. They need  connectivity like trains and public transport and good roads so that people can get to  where they need to be, whether it's for work or for study, or all the other things and  services that people need to be able to do.

And we've seen that through Labor's commitment and delivery of projects like the  duplication of Armadale Road, fixing up of Denny Avenue, a new bridge for Armadale  Road and the freeway, and of course the Metronet projects.

Things like extending the Thornlie railway line with new stations in Canningvale, and  critically for these rapidly growing outer suburban areas, extending the Armadale  railway line through to Byford.

The people of Byford need that connection. This is a rapidly growing area. Thousands  of people moving into the area and they need to be better connected not just to the city  of Perth, but also to places like right here in Armadale. Being able to access our  shopping centres, being able to access essential government services here, being able  to access the TAFE just down the road.

That's important for the people of Byford and by extending this railway line to Byford  they will be able to access all of those services and more. But for the people of  Armadale it will mean as people from Byford come here more and more we will see an  increase in retail activity, and critically, jobs.

We'll see more job opportunities for the people of Armadale and the surrounding  regions. And of course there will be the construction work which will provide even more  jobs which is so important for these growing suburbs and for the entire state.

Federal Labor is committed to projects like this and we want to see them happen. That's  why I'm so glad to have all of these people, in particular Labor's Leader Bill Shorten  here. And I'm going to hand over to Bill to talk about Labor's commitment to seeing this  project happen. Thanks Bill.

BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Thanks Matt. Good morning  everybody. It's the sixth day of my visit to Western Australia and it's great to be here  with Matt Keogh and Mellisa Teede, Labor's representatives at the federal level in this  area.

It's also great to be here a with my friend Premier Mark McGowan, and Transport  Minister Rita Saffioti, and other State Labor Members of Parliament.

I'm here to announce that if Labor is elected at the next federal election, we will  contribute $241 million to extend the rail line from Armadale another eight kilometres to  Byford, and to help build a railway station at Byford.

Cities need public transport. Metronet and Western Australia is a fantastic idea. The  business case is very well put together. There's been amazing advocacy from the  McGowan Government about putting the resources into building better rail lines.

Today finishes a series of announcements we have made previously from, the Morley-Ellenbrook extension, the Midland Bellevue extension, plus also the road projects we've

announced with Stevenson Avenue road interchange and of course extending the  Mitchell Freeway from Hester Avenue down to Romeo Road in Perth's north western  suburbs.

Labor has a vision for Western Australia which is all about improving the  communication, the liveability and decreasing the congestion. The announcement today  of this extra $241 million is part of Federal Labor's Fair Share for West Australia  Fund which recognises that the West hasn't been getting a fair deal on the GST, and it's  also about creating long-term, sustainable, good quality jobs. The project we're  announcing today will generate 3000 direct and indirect jobs.

It'll improve the liveability of the suburbs beyond Armadale and it'll I think provide a  great economic boost.

I'm now happy to hand over to Premier Mark McGowan to talk further about this exciting  project.

MARK MCGOWAN, PREMIER OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA: Thanks everyone, and  thanks Bill. And can I  in particular thank Federal Labor for this important $240 million  commitment to the Byford rail extension.

As we know Byford is a rapidly growing area. You'll go to Byford today and you'll see a  sea of houses and more springing up. It's actually the fastest growing suburban area in  Australia and it deserves a rail line, and this $240 million commitment from Federal  Labor will assist us to provide that rail line as part of our Metronet plan.

We are very committed. We are very committed to rail. I see you know about Metronet  and our extension to Ellenbrook, our extension to Yanchep, the Thornlie-Cockburn link,  and the Byford extension are all important parts of making sure that Perth is a much  more connected city, that we have much greater usage of public transport, and we  connect people into job opportunities around our city and around our state.

So Byford has missed out. Byford has missed out before. I don't think there's been  sufficient recognition of the massive growth in that suburban area. This $240 million  commitment from Federal Labor will assist us to put Metronet through to Byford and  make sure we provide those job opportunities, that exciting connectivity and the  opportunity for kids in Byford to access everything that Western Australia has to offer.

So I'd like to thank Federal Labor for their commitment.

RITA SAFFIOTI, MINISTER FOR TRANSPORT AND PLANNING: Thanks again,  just reiterating the Premier's comments.

As we know Bill Shorten's Fair Share Fund is really about recognising the need to  contribute to WA's infrastructure.

Byford is one of those areas where we've seen a lot of new families move into. We want  them connected to jobs, we want them connected to education opportunities as part of  our Metronet plan.

It's all about making sure that we have new housing, with new rail infrastructure  and new public transport, and this is a big step today.

I'll take any questions on this and then we'll pass on to - any questions? All good?

SHORTEN: Are there any other questions?

JOURNALIST: Yes, since we're on rail. Will a Shorten Labor Government support the  proposed $5 billion dollar train line to Melbourne airport? And would you call on the  Victorian Government to back it?

SHORTEN: I've previously been on the record supporting the need to have a light rail or  a public transport link between Melbourne and Tullamarine Airport. There's plenty of  congestion and the number of flights - the number of passengers coming in and out of  Tullamarine has been increasing, so this has been long overdue and much talked about  and I do support it. I support having a connection.

Now is the time though to make sure that we explain to the people how it will actually  work. What we now need to do is belt and brace it with some proper planning, some  proper detail and of course some proper consultation.

I want to take traffic out of the backyards of people living in the north western suburbs of  Melbourne where I live, and where I understand the problems of congestion.

I want to make sure though, we're not just taking people's backyards as well. So it's very  important that when you make a sort of a statement of principle about building a link,  which I do support the principle of, that we now do things in the proper way.

Let's have the consultation with the people. Let's study the business case. Let's make  sure there is the business case and let's advance it from there.

JOURNALIST: Should the US be telegraphing plans to strike missiles through social  media?

SHORTEN: Listen, I've made it a practice not to comment about the American  President's tweets, but going to the deeper issue, which is shocking and barbaric use of  chemical warfare against citizens in Syria. The attacks are absolutely despicable and  barbaric. And the Assad regime has a record of using chemical weapons against its  own citizens.

Unfortunately because the Russians used a veto at a United Nations Security Council,  that is effectively condoning what has been happening in Syria. I think we need to see  the Russians step up. I think they need to support chemical weapons inspectors being

sent in and being safe to actually investigate and make sure there are not chemical  weapons available.

Beyond that, I did previously, and Labor did previously, support the proportionate  response used by the Americans last year. Beyond that, I do think that we can't allow  the use of chemical weapons against civilians to go unchallenged.

JOURNALIST: Reports this morning that China has refused visas to several Federal  Ministers, and the Australia Week in China expo might be cancelled - have relations  with China hit a new low?

SHORTEN: Mr Turnbull said that no visas have actually been refused. I think the  Government needs to clarify this issue. There's no doubt I think that in recent times, the  relationship with China has been, had more turbulence in it than you'd normally want to  see. But China is a very important part of Australia's future. I know that if we're in  government, we'll make sure that relations work in a constructive fashion.

JOURNALIST: Has this government been treating the region with disdain?

SHORTEN: I don't want to do foreign policy on the run at the Armadale railway station,  sorry.

JOURNALIST:  The WA Nationals say they have been ignored this week in your  funding commitments. Do you agree with that? Do you think -

SHORTEN: The WA Nationals?

JOURNALIST: Yes.

SHORTEN: Alright, okay. No, they're wrong. I've been out in Kalgoorlie, that was a  great visit.

[STATION ANNOUNCEMENT]

No, the WA Nationals are talking out of their hat. Labor's proposals for infrastructure will  benefit West Australian business. I visited Kalgoorlie, I visited one of the largest open  cut gold mines there. I'm interested in how we provide more skilled workers and mining  engineers. That's got to be good for the regions. I'm interested in how we can help  diversify Kalgoorlie's economy, and the Goldfields - Kalgoorlie-Boulder's  economy -  and the Goldfields economy. I think that Labor's policies of making sure that there are  not cuts to regional hospitals. There's been $15 million worth of cuts in regional  hospitals in Western Australia under the current Federal Government. We want to make  sure that schools in regional Western Australia are properly funded.

If the Nats want to do something for the regions, don't vote for cuts to hospitals, don't  vote for cuts to schools and do something about lifting the very weak wages growth in  Western Australian regions.



JOURNALIST: Should the Government accept a long-standing offer from New Zealand  to resettle 150 refugees from Manus and Nauru across the ditch?

SHORTEN: Well, I think they should accept the offer. I've said that in the past. As soon  as I said that we should work with New Zealand to resettle some of the people on  Manus and Nauru, Dutton and the rest of the Government piled in on me and accuse  me of working with the bad guys. Now it turns out that even though the Government  bagged Labor for saying that Australia should look at the resettlement offer from New  Zealand, it turns out that behind everyone's back they've been doing exactly that.

This Turnbull Government's got to stop using immigration as a political football - or  indeed using immigration for various leadership aspirants to trail their coat to the right  wing of the Liberal Party.

JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten, do you have sympathy for the plight of white South African  farmers and do you think that Australia should accept more or a bigger intake of these  people?

SHORTEN: I've got sympathy for everyone anywhere who are the victims of violence.  Violence doesn't discriminate between someone's skin colour though, and nor does  Australia's immigration policy. So yes, I have sympathy for people who are the victims of  violence - not just overseas, but in this country too. But we have maintained a non-discriminatory immigration policy and that's a policy which I note the Government's also  supporting.

JOURNALIST: If all states and territories support the Government's National Energy  Guarantee - will Federal Labor?

SHORTEN: There are a few big ifs there, aren't there? We do want to see though an  end of uncertainty, of policy uncertainty. The single biggest driver of energy prices in  this country go up and up and up is a lack of policy certainty. One thing's for sure; the  Government has to get over its political game playing and its aversion to renewable  energy.

Labor if elected supports reaching 50 per cent of our energy mix by 2030, coming from  renewable energy sources. Renewable energy is getting cheaper every day and the  technology is working better and better. I want consumers and small businesses to pay  lower household bills.

So we're up for policy certainty but the Government, if it wants policy certainty has got to  ceasefire on its war against renewable energy.

JOURNALIST: Are you confident that your funding announcements all week have sort  of resonated with WA voters so far out from an election?

SHORTEN:  The reason why we're making our announcements well before any election  is because I've got respect for the voters. I think voters hate it when you just turn up at  the last minute and make big announcements which you know, they're appropriately  cynical about. But what's good about our promises we've been announcing is that the  West Australian Government's advocacy means that a lot of the work and the detail is  done. So I'm confident when we propose extending the rail line from Armadale to Byford  - I'm confident because of the work of the McGowan Government and the work of our  own local representatives like Matt Keogh, this is a well anchored and designed policy. I  think that when you've got an announcement, get it out early and talk to the people. See  what they think, see what fine tuning they want to present back to you.

And the reason why we're doing this is because Western Australia hasn't been getting  its fair share of GST and only Labor can be trusted to deal with the real issues of  Western Australia.

And the other reason why we can make these announcements so far out is because I'm  not giving $65 billion dollars to large multinationals and big banks. Mr Turnbull says that  if you've got taxpayer money, he wants to give it away to the big end of town. I believe  that taxpayer money is precious, every dollar. And if you're going to expend it, it has got  to be in the interests of working and middle class people.

I would much rather see $240 million spent to build eight kilometres of railway line here,  than give it away to NAB, CommBank, ANZ or Westpac who are already raking in the  profits.

JOURNALIST: How have you found the reception and have you a sense that there is  still a disengagement in WA with Canberra politics whilst the national debate seems to  be centred on things like energy in a very east-coast-centric way. Is there a sense of  disengagement in WA that you've found troubling?

SHORTEN: I think people are pleased with the change of state government - that's the  first thing I must observe. I think that people cannot believe the mess that the Liberals  got Western Australia into over eight and a half years.

Beyond that, I think the disengagement with Canberra is that people think that the  politicians are just in it for themselves. What I am endeavouring to do is demonstrate  that we are listening to the West. I don't come here like my opposite number just to say  you've got a problem then scoot off two hours later in a plane. I've spent six days here.  What we recognise is that the solutions to Western Australia's growth, to being a fair  society, a liveable community, are found here. So I come here and I listen.

That's why I did a public meeting at the Wanneroo Tavern; hundreds of people, just  listening to their views. I think people are beginning to listen to Labor federally. I think  they're off the other side. They can't that believe Mr Turnbull is so out of touch that he  just talks about tax cuts for big business.

What middle and working class people want in Western Australia is they want to know  that they can afford to see the doctor when they're sick. They want to know that their  kids are attending schools which are well-resourced. They want to be sure that their  kids when they grow up can get an apprenticeship or go to university if that's what they  want to do. They want to make sure that when they grow old that there's not long  waiting lists. They want to make sure that hospitals are properly funded. They want to  make sure the train lines are getting built and congestion is getting dealt with.

I think our message is a good message for the West but I'm going to keep coming back  and back and back and listening and working.

JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten is there one view that you've heard? Like in all that listening  of people over six days, is there one thing that has struck you, new that you've heard  from WA?

SHORTEN: I think that the end of the mining boom and the long period of growth, came  as a bit of a shock to people. I think people had sort of factored in a certain level of  financial affluence and when that came to a halt, I think people looked around at levels  of government said well, we've been paying our taxes what you can do for us?

Now, I actually think that people realise that Perth for example, is growing rapidly. But if  you like, the infrastructure hasn't been keeping pace. What people want is a plan from  government. Mark McGowan and Rita Safiotti in the state team, they've got a plan.  What they want from us federally is not to talk about ourselves but to talk about the  people.

The big message I'm getting out of the West is: don't tell us that there's a problem with  GST, do something about it. Don't tell us that there's a problem in terms of our  economy, what are you going to do to generate sustainable jobs.

Perth and Western Australia is tremendously liveable. It's a fantastic part of the world.  My family have enjoyed being over here, it is a great place. They just want a bit of love  from Canberra to make sure that we're backing them up when, you know a helping hand  is required.

JOURNALIST: The AMA has said today that you should support a rise in the Medicare  Levy across all income tax brackets to properly fund the NDIS. Will you do that?

SHORTEN: No, I don't agree the AMA at all. You know, I think the AMA is being used  as a pawn there by the Government. The fact of the matter is why is it that with people  profound and severe disabilities, Malcolm Turnbull says someone on $50,000 has got to  pay more tax when we're giving away $65 billion in tax handouts to big business?

Running a government is all about priorities. Mr Turnbull says the only way you can look  after people with disability is people on $50-60,000 paying more tax. I say wrong, wrong  and wrong, Malcolm. What you need to do is you need to actually stop giving tax cuts to  millionaires, stop handing away billions of dollars in tax subsidies to the very wealthy -

there is another way to fund the NDIS and to fund the Government and to fund railway  lines and to fund schools and hospitals - don't give away billions of dollars to the top end  of town and millionaires who are already doing very well, thank you very much.

Listen, it's been a great visit. I don't know if you have got state issues for Mark but it's  been lovely to see you all. I look forward to seeing you again very soon.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACTS: LEADER’S OFFICE MEDIA UNIT - 02 6277 4053

Authorised by Noah Carroll ALP Canberra

