



THE HON. BILL SHORTEN MP  LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  SHADOW MINISTER FOR INDIGENOUS AFFAIRS AND  ABORIGINAL AND TORRES STRAIT ISLANDERS

MEMBER FOR MARIBYRNONG





E&OE TRANSCRIPT  PRESS CLUB ADDRESS  CANBERRA  TUESDAY, 30 JANUARY 2018

SUBJECTS: National Integrity Commission; cost of living; asylum seekers;  citizenship; private health insurance.

JOURNALIST: Thank you, for your speech, Mr Shorten. If I could ask about the  National Integrity Commission. The Public Service Commission, I saw in the Senate  Inquiry said that if we were to set something up like this it would be probably  expensive, perhaps unnecessary and it would be far from certain whether it was  going to find any more corruption than the current public agencies already do now.  Now you said there are gaps and there are inconsistencies in the current system.  Could you tell me what those gaps and inconsistencies are?

SHORTEN: Alright, just to go to the first part of your question. I'm sure that when  state anti-corruption bodies were created, there would have been a Public Service  Commission submitting to the State Parliament before that there's no need to look  here. I think though that we have seen over time that the state anti-corruption bodies  have indeed found some problems and indeed, I think are serving an educative role  and lifting the general standard of ethics. And I think it's now time for the  Commonwealth to do that. I do believe that we need to have a National Integrity  Commission. Whilst we've got a range of agencies who do some of the functions, it's  clear when you study it that there are inconsistencies and there are gaps and I think  a National Integrity Commission as we design it can look at where we can include  any of those functions currently performed by other bodies. But I have got no doubt  that Australian people do want to see us step up.

And as I said earlier, I have no knowledge of any corruption, if I did I'd report it but  the point about it is that we do need to actually set up a body which restores faith by  people in the system. Now reality is a third of Australia are not interested in the major  parties at the moment and if you ask more Australians, they think politics is just all  about being in it for yourself and not for the people. What we need to do is show that  we're willing to make tough decisions, to restore a bit of faith. I don't think if the

Government back this and I back this, that it is going to change the outcome of the  election but that's not why I'm doing it. We've got to rebuild faith in our institutions.  So I've got no doubt that as we work through the design principles, as we consult, I  think most Australians are going to support what I've outlined today and I invite the  Government to do the same.

JOURNALIST: Phoebe Bowden from Network Ten. You say that 2017 was a  particularly bad year for federal politics and that people have lost trust. What do you  see as the most damaging recent example from Federal Labor for the public  perception?

SHORTEN: I think it's a collective responsibility but I do think the citizenship debate  made us all look like we just focused on ourselves and not on the needs of ordinary  people.

JOURNALIST: Tom Iggulden from the 7.30 program at the ABC, Mr Shorten thank  you for your speech. I wanted to bring you to your comments that the wages system  isn't working for working people and try and bring you to a specific example of that.  Do you think that the aborted train drivers' strike in Sydney should have gone  ahead? Do you agree with Sally McManus, that it didn't go ahead was a sign of a  broken system and what would you do to fix that broken system?

SHORTEN: As you know I think that what drives the train drivers' dispute, and I  haven’t followed it closely, is that the New South Wales system is relying upon  overtime to be able to get its trains to run. I think any system which relies upon  overtime as a core business model is a problem. I think the real problem in the New  South Wales train dispute is that the New South Wales Government hasn't trained  enough train drivers.

In terms of the arbitration and resolution of the dispute, that'll work through. The  broader issue I'm saying about the system not working is that traditionally we've  been brought up on a classical economic theory which says that as job markets  tighten, wages go up - that's not happening. And I think it's, you know even  conservative economists who perhaps traditionally wouldn't be ones who'd support  seeing wages move, are actually forming an unusual coalition with unions and others  who say actually what is holding the economy back is a lack of confidence.

But I want to say that the lack of confidence is, it's too many people getting left  behind. You know, when you see power bills - I went through them, power bills  increasing at multiple times the level of wages, that's a problem. Where you see out- of-pocket healthcare costs increasing at a far greater rate than wages, that's a  problem. When you see the back to school costs of education that is a problem,  going higher than wages. Where you see a whole range of issues, cost of living, from  energy to healthcare, housing prices - and our wages' system is not delivering. There  is a disconnect.

Do you know in the last 10 years productivity has risen about 20 percent but real  wages 6 percent. The deal is that Australians work hard, they generate productivity  but then they get the fair distribution of the growth and productivity. That nexus is  broken. And to be fair to some employers, they've got some pretty sharp lawyers.

They say, you pay your workers, maybe, you know contractors - there's  an Esso dispute down at Longford in Victoria. What's happened there is that you can  use a labour hire company in WA, sign up three or four workers to a much lower set  of conditions than applies to six companies and 200 maintenance contractors in  Gippsland and then the company says well, that's the new agreement.

So all of a sudden 200 workers who work in rigs and all sorts of conditions are faced  with take it or leave it contracts for work practices they have already negotiated. The  system is not working and my real fear, Tom, is that if we don't do something about a  living wage, we don't reverse the cuts to penalty rates, if we don't do something  about the gender pay gap, or we don't fix up the bargaining system, we're going to  create two Australia’s.

We are going to create a left-behind society. And the people in that left-behind  society, they are already feeling it. The kid who drops out of university because he  can't juggle the second job and go to university. The family who's on a waiting list for  public housing but has to wait 20 years - left behind. The older worker left behind  because of the discrimination in the workforce against older people. You can look at  example after example after example and what we're seeing is a left-behind society.

And Labor is not going to leave people behind and that's why the wages' system,  front and centre, it is one of the imputs into cost of living and the capacity to cope  with it.

JOURNALIST: Would you say that it's a fair point to say that the Fair Work  Commission has removed the right to strike and do you think that's something that  needs to be fixed?

SHORTEN: I think the ability to bargain is important and in bargaining, of course,  people have always had the right to take legally-protected industrial action. But for  me, if you like, the question about the strike is the wrong way around. The problem is  we have got companies terminating agreements. Business doesn't want to bargain  anymore. I always understood that if we moved away from central wage fixation and  a reliance on the awards system to bargaining, that was the deal, workers negotiate  productivity. But now what happens at the end of every agreement is even though  the workers have traded off conditions to get pay rises, they're presented with a pay  cut unless they trade off more conditions. So it's not - it's like paying for your house  every three years, it's not fair and I think we can do better.

JOURNALIST: Hi Mr Shorten, Phil Coorey from the AFR. Just on the wages and  cost of living stuff you've talked about bargaining, private health insurance and the  minimum wage. Can we deduce from that, on enterprise bargaining that you will  remove some of the powers of employers using legislation to remove their ability to  terminate agreements and so forth and what are you getting at on the minimum  wage? Are you going to change the way that is set? Are you going to put limits, limits  on how that's going to be done so it will be increased? And on private health  insurance, you identified a problem but you didn't say what you might do. Are you  talking about a moratorium on increases or linking them to CPI? Could we just get a  bit more detail, please.

SHORTEN: Well, let me answer those three or four questions. The first one about  the bargaining. We have said and we've previously said and I think it's right, that the  ability of companies to unilaterally terminate agreements and say to workers, who  might be on $60,000 or $70,000 or $80,000 a year, that unless you take a wage cut  we will put you back on the award which is, you know could be $25,000 or $30,000  that is unfair. So we don't think that should be allowed.

I think existing agreements should stay in place till they're renegotiated by mutual  agreement. In terms of the awards' system, I think the IR experts call it the bite - the  difference between the median wage and the minimum wage. And that bite, the gap  is getting bigger and so at the same time as we see more people going onto the  awards, the distance between the minimum wage and median wage is growing.

And no clearer example of that than women workers.  A lot of the new jobs that are  being created through the NDIS, a lot of those jobs are in irregular work, contract  work, casual work and of course, it's a feminised industry. So what's happening is  that you are seeing the jobs growth happening at the low end of the market where  wages are not increasing and you're seeing people squeezed. So I do think that we  need to have a look, not just at the minimum wage but what is the living wage?

If you go through 2017 those list of items I went through, your health costs are up -  no question about that - the freeze has had its effect. The private health insurers well  they're on their own, they're having a party and then you've got the energy prices,  they're up. Have a look at your water bill and your gas bill, that's up. Have a look at  the income tax increase that Mr Turnbull is trying to increase - you know, another  half a percent out of your tax, up to $87,000. There's a lot happening. So we need to  revisit the living wage. But that takes work, it takes consultation and that is what I'm  committing to do this year.

In terms of private health insurance, there's a number of options which are potentially  on the table and we're working through them. But I put private health insurance, the  big end, the big multinationals, the big profitable companies on notice - business as  usual doesn't work. If you are getting a $6 billion subsidy from the taxpayer yet  you're making record profits, yet the prices are going up and the exclusions are  going up, well that's a problem.

Now that's not - they are not the sole player in the system, it's very complex but I'm  committed to consultation, working through the issues. But private health insurance, I  want to save it. You're not going to save it by increasing the prices the way they are -  they've gone up for families a thousand bucks since the Liberals have got in.

Whilst you know, maybe Mr Hunt was well intentioned, he said, oh it's only a 4 per  cent increase this year - where do the Government think people find the money for?  You know we now have a left-behind society where some people when they get their  electricity bill pay that on the credit card because they don't have the cash to pay it  and then of course then they're caught in the trap of paying 20 per cent  interest. That's a left behind society and we've got to do something about cost of  living.

JOURNALIST: And briefly, if the private health insurance doesn't fix itself would you  withdraw the government subsidy or threaten that?

SHORTEN: Listen, you're, that's getting well ahead of me there. I want to talk to the  private health insurers but business as usual is not cutting it. If you ever want to go  to a barbecue and talk to a stranger, have a whinge about your private health  insurance bill, you'll make a friend straight away.

JOURNALIST: Great party. Network Seven.

SHORTEN: It's Canberra.

JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten, Tim Lester from the Seven Network. Anthony Albanese  has suggested twin referendums on Australia Day - Indigenous recognition and the  Republic. Can you endorse Mr Albanese's formula here today and if you can't, what  would you do as Prime Minister to meet the expectations that’s emerged about  changing Australia Day, the date of Australia Day?

SHORTEN: I think it's an interesting idea and both Albo, Noel Pearson, a range of  people have been commenting about what we should do on Australia Day. But I  think the more substantial point which he made and which I've made previously is we  should have an Australian head of state.

Really, you know, Australia's been around and modern Australia has been around  for, since 200 plus years. It's time for us to have our own head of state. So I think  that is a priority for Australia and I have appointed an Assistant Shadow Minister to  help champion that. But the other thing which I also, fundamentally believe and I am  indebted to our Indigenous MPs in the Labor team who I think have given me, who I  know, have given me great guidance on this, is first and foremost, we should have  recognition of our First Australians in the Constitution.

I thought Malcolm was intemperate when he just ruled out of hand that the Uluru  Declaration, the Statement from the Heart. I don't think it was necessarily what  people were expecting as the proposed model after all the consultations but why do  we in Parliament, get the right just to tell first Australians what they're allowed to put  to us?

So I do think a voice has got a basis and it won't be a third chamber of Parliament as  some of the scaremongers and the knuckle draggers said. The idea of consulting  people before we make decisions which empower them I don't think that's radical. I  actually thought it was quite a conservative proposition.

So they're my two priorities - the voice, and then the Australian head of state. In  terms of Australia Day, I'm sure there's plenty of more interesting discussions to  come on that matter. What I won't do, though, again I thought Malcolm was perhaps  ill-advised to sneer at the people who want a debate changing the day. It's a free  country, we're allowed to express our views. There are legitimate alternatives and on  that basis, we will keep looking at that issue too.

JOURNALIST: The Australian.



JOURNALIST: Hello, Greg Brown from the Australian. I'd like to ask you about  negative gearing. Given the property boom is ending, largely due to a number of  factors but due to a tightening of mortgage lending and there are expectations of  price declines this year, particularly in inner city apartment markets. Does this show  that your policy has become redundant as prices are going to moderate anyway. And  does the policy become more politically tricky coming up to the next election in an  environment where people are going to see the values of their houses decline and  they may even be struggling to sell them?

SHORTEN: Well like most Australians, I spent my summer not thinking too much  about the day-to-day of politics. I took the opportunity, we're very lucky in Australia  over summer, that you can have that opportunity and think about the long-term and  that's what I've done and started to explain to you.

But one issue which did penetrate my consciousness as you're sitting on  the beach, was the revelation the Treasury had looked at our policy on negative  gearing and found out the Government had been just a tad naughty in the way they  characterised it.

It's a good policy, we're sticking to it. It will help I think ease some of the price  pressures on housing so we will stick to it. I think the longer term question is why is  the Government so determined to give priority to investment speculators over people  trying to find their first home? I would suggest to you that whilst there are points in  what you say about housing prices going down, or apartments, or in some regions,  go and speak to families at the next Saturday of auctions and see if they reckon that  prices are really going down.

So I do think there's still a problem with first homeownership in this country. Only  Labor has a plan to support first homeowners getting an equal go. It's all about this  left-behind society. I can promise you, and I'm sure many of you in this room and  many people watching this across Australia know, families, couples, who've saved  up, they think they're in with a chance to make that bid, only to come 20 and 30 per  cent below what the house goes for.

We do have a first home problem in some of our big cities and Labor is the only party  with a fair dinkum, albeit politically difficult proposition as you flagged, to help first  homeowners get an equal go because I don't want people who don't have rich  parents who can't help them buy their first home left behind.

JOURNALIST: Michelle Grattan from The Conversation. Can I return to that issue  which so dominated us last year, the citizenship issue. It does seem that the High  Court is not going to deal with the case of David Feeney for some little time, which  would push the expected by-election into midyear which wouldn't be very convenient  for you. Do you expect Mr Feeney to pre-empt the court and quit in the next week  and have you advised him to do so?

SHORTEN: David did the right thing by referring himself to the High Court when he  couldn't discover papers to demonstrate that he'd done what he said he'd done. I

think he has the right to prepare his case in the manner in which he chooses to and  I'm letting him do that.

JOURNALIST: Hello Mr Shorten. Katherine Murphy from Guardian Australia. I hate  to quote your own speech to you, but I will just for a moment. You've said to us today  that any political party with an ounce of character will go to the people at the next  election with a proper recognition of the economic and environmental reality of  climate change and a proper demonstration that we have the courage to do what has  to be done, even if that might be politically difficult.

Now, this morning in The Guardian we've quoted a range of experts who say that  environmental protection is the hardest to secure now than it’s been since the  Franklin campaign of the 1980s. The Adani campaign in Queensland is the biggest  civil society campaign we've seen since the Franklin - what would an incoming Labor  Government do to stop this project?

SHORTEN: I've said about the Adani project that it has to stack up commercially and  environmentally. I was very fortunate to be able to visit the reef last week and talk to  some of the experts and also talk to landholders and environmentalists about the  project. I think it's fair to say that the reef is under great stress. Some people say  you're not allowed say that because then no one will go to the reef. The reef is still  there, people should still go there. But I think the reefs has done so much in the way  of jobs, it's arguably our greatest natural asset. I do think that we need to do more to  protect the reef, so that's one point - one post I want to put into the ground.

The second thing is, I do get that there is legitimate concern about the Adani  project.Some people say that we should be concerned because the banks won't  back it. That is a point. Others say that we should be concerned because there's a  glut of this coal on the international market. Others say we should be concerned  about the project because it might jeopardise the job security of other coal mining  regions of Australia. Overs have pointed to me the concern about the Great Artesian  Basin and the lack of clarity about whether or not the open cut processes of Adani  will in fact, interfere with the Great Artesian Basin. There's concerns about the reef.  There's also the more general proposition which I respect and that is at the heart of  the point of my speech and I'm flattered you read it out to me.

You can't be serious about climate change and energy and have a bet every which  way. So we're certainly looking at the Adani matter very closely. If it doesn't stack up  commercially or if it doesn't stack up environmentally it will absolutely not receive our  support

JOURNALIST: Do you have a time frame on that?

SHORTEN: It's under way.

JOURNALIST: Date?

SHORTEN: Which date do you want?

JOURNALIST: The one where you conclude on it.



SHORTEN: We're looking at it. I tell you what, we will conclude it well before the next  election.

JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten, Sarah Martin from The West. I want to ask you about  Labor's position on the company tax cuts. You were steadfastly opposed to the $65  billion package, but $30 billion of that is already locked in and legislated. Can you  confirm today that you will go to the next election with a policy to reverse those $30  billion in tax cuts and if not, is it not misleading to continue to campaign against the  entire $65 billion package?

SHORTEN: Well, we've made it perfectly clear for well over a year that we support  the tax cut for businesses up to $2 million. So I'd be very happy if we could be very  clear on that. We've supported that ever since it was said. And for the record that's  87 per cent of businesses.

But the case has not been made by this Government to give companies with very  large turnovers tax relief. The fact of the matters is that many of these companies,  the profits will be returned to foreign shareholders. The fact of the matter is that there  is no guarantee - and we haven't seen it happen because there's been corporate tax  cut reductions - they have not been handed to workers in increased wages otherwise  we wouldn't have the wage stagnation we've got.

So we will finalise our policy in response to that after this Budget. We certainly see  the case for under $2 million. We certainly have not seen the case made for  unfunded tax cuts, for lots of large companies. I mean put it this way - if you take  billions of dollars out of the national ATM, that's foregone income, that has two  effects. One effect it has is that you increase the debt or you've got to cut services  further. If you increase the debt, it means that the remaining budget has to service  higher interest payments or you just cut billions and billions of dollars further from our  universities, from our pensioners, from our schools, from our hospitals. The case is  not made out.

The other thing that the Government love to say about corporate tax cuts is Labor  has previously supported corporate tax cuts, but only when you have new revenue to  replace it. There's three alternatives to this Government to fund this corporate tax cut  - new taxes, higher interest payments on the deficit or cutting services. They have  not answered that question.

JOURNALIST: Thank you, Mr Shorten. Mark Kenny from The Sydney Morning  Herald and The Age. Can I take you back to the national anti-corruption body that  you've announced as a commitment too today - get a few details on that I guess.  What's your thinking behind the fixed maximum five year term for the commissioner  and deputies? What would be the remit? How broad would be the remit of this body?  Would it for example, be able to, for example last year would it have been able to be  used to do the Parliament-wide audit of MPs in relation to citizenship matters? Would  it have been able to look at say, the helicopter flight of a certain person who was  Speaker in the past, would look at the pecuniary interests, say the receipt of a bottle  of Grange, as was a big story in the NSW ICAC. Is that the kind of thing it would be  able to do?



SHORTEN: You asked a series of questions, what was the very first one, the term of  appointment? In forming the design principles which we've adopted, I'm indebted to  Transparency International, I'm indebted to a range of senior judges and people  who've been involved in state corruption commissions. After discussion with them  and of course with my Shadow Attorney-General, Mark Dreyfus, we formed a view  this position is so powerful that one term is enough, and they agree. So the design  principle is one which we worked out in consultation, talking to not only my own  people but the Australian Institute, Transparency International and other reformers  who have been calling on this.

In terms of expenses and all of those matters, we have now set up a Parliamentary  Expenses Authority. I believe that for expense matters in the first instance, that is  where they will go.

The remit of the National Integrity Commission is this. We want to make sure the  administration of the Commonwealth is impartial and free from untoward influence.  So what we're proposing is it would cover the judiciary, it would cover the  Commonwealth public service, it would cover businesses and people who transact  with the Commonwealth and it would even cover the Governor-General. So it would  have a broad remit. We will, and we have got a discussion paper and a series of fact  guides which, if you haven't got, we will distribute to you very soon, today and we will  sit down with people. And I also say to the Government, I know that the Deputy  Prime Minister ruled it out on Sunday, we are happy to work with them. It doesn't  have to be a Labor-Liberal Punch and Judy show.

Specifically for instance the appointment of the commissioner will be done by the  Parliament, it wouldn't be a Liberal appointee or a Labor appointee, but a Parliament  appointee. I think that is an important development too.

JOURNALIST: David Speers from Sky News. Thank you for your speech. I certainly  look forward to seeing the fact sheet on what you've announced today. Can I go to a  specific question that may or may not be in that fact sheet. Would this integrity  commission look at political donations and how that may influence what a politician  does or says? Would it look, for example, at the Sam Dastyari case of last year? Can  I also just clarify something you said earlier too on private health insurance,  are you  looking at winding back the private health insurance rebate?

SHORTEN: OK, let go to the first, the NIC stuff first. Specifically, on the Dastyari  matter, I'm not going to play national integrity commissioner. What we would do, is  we want to see donations reform, in addition, we think that foreign donations to  political parties should be stopped - my party's already stopped that. We think there  should be transparency of donations over $1,000. I don't see the National Integrity  Commission as the only reform. I think that we do need to reform our donation  system in addition.

The National Integrity Commissions’ remit would be to look at systemic and serious  corruption, so it would depend on the facts of the matter.

JOURNALIST: In terms of private health insurance?



SHORTEN: In terms of private health insurance, I think the first thing we want to do -  let's not put the cart before the horse, is I think the fees increased too much. I think  premium rises are too high. I think that's the issue. We see people dropping out of  private health insurance. I think there needs to be better monitoring of  exclusions. This has to be done with the industry as well as talking about the  industry. I'm sure that we can get a better deal. I'm not convinced though in the last  five years this Government, when it's had a 25 per cent 26 per cent increase in  premiums can arguably say mission accomplished. It is a major cost of living burden  on top of the Medicare freeze. The fact of the is under the Liberals, it just costs more  to go to see a doctor, it costs more to go and get a consultation with a specialist and  those increases have been increasing faster than wages.

Today for me, it's all about making sure that the economy and growth, not only that  we have it, but that we don't have a left-behind society where we have people who,  you know pensioners who put off taking their blood-thinning medication and their  prescriptions because they simply can't afford to. This is the real world which too  many of our Australians are forced to live in because of cost of living pressures. We  will be champions of people who are suffering cost of living pressures and we will  have arguments with vested interest in the top end of town because someone has to  do it on behalf of the people who are doing it hard.

JOURNALIST: Marija Zivic from SBS, thank you very much for your address. Some  leaked cabinet documents today show that Scott Morrison, while he was Immigration  Minister, tried to delay permanent protection visas for asylum seekers. The Prime  Minister has defended that this morning. Given that under your leadership Labor's  immigration policies have inched closer to those of the Coalition, would you defend  that too?

SHORTEN: I don't know all the facts of the case. When you say inched closer, let  me make it very clear, because sometimes the Government tries  to mischaracterise Labor's position. We want to stop the people smugglers.  Whenever the Government says Labor won't do that, they are giving a signal to the  people smugglers to test our system. I wish for once they would think about the  national interest and people's safety rather than trying to turn it into a partisan issue.

More generally, I will have to examine what was said in those cabinet papers. I've  been preparing for this today.

JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten, Claire Bickers from News Corp. Similar to that issue,  there was a report this morning that 25 asylum seekers left Indonesia on a boat  bound for Australia. That was late last week. There was Rohingya Afghan refugees  on board. An ANU expert has already predicted this could be the start of a fresh  wave of asylum seekers headed for Australia. If you become Prime Minister, what  will you do to counter this?

SHORTEN: We will certainly continue the boat turn-back policy where it's safe to do  so, as the current Government does. We will do everything we can to discourage  people smugglers. But let's also go to perhaps the part of the question which is  unasked but a lot of Australians ask me in the street - that does not mean therefore

we should have indefinite detention for people on Manus and Nauru. I don't accept  it's a binary. Indefinite detention or smugglers, I don't think that's right.

In terms of stopping people smugglers we will take the advice of our security experts,  and our border security experts and we maintain absolute commitment to defeating  and stopping the people smugglers. Because when they persuade and lure people  onto the boats, they are not only making money and trying to exploit people, but are  exposing people to drowning and death, so that's why we don't want them in  business full stop.

JOURNALIST: Collin Brinsden AAP. Labor's been ahead in the polls seemingly  forever. Yet despite the concerns of wages, electricity prices etc the Liberals are  always seen as the better managers of the economy. What has Labor got to do to  change that perception?

SHORTEN: I think if you ask people who is better at managing the economy in the  interests of working and middle-class people, I think people look at Labor pretty  positively. The battleground for Australians is cost of living. There is growth. We don't  argue with that. We're pleased with it. There are jobs growing, we're pleased with  that. I'm not going to be mealy-mouthed or negative about that, it's excellent.

But what isn't happening is I don't believe the benefits of growth are being distributed  equally in our society. We've seen productivity go up, I think I quoted that number in  an earlier answer, 20 per cent yet real wages 6 per cent. Corporate profits went up  20 per cent last year and yet wages went up 2 per cent. There is a disconnect. We  are in danger of creating two societies, a left-behind society.

You're left behind if you have to give up your uni place because you're juggling two  jobs and you can't afford to do it all. You're left behind if you are on a public housing  waiting list and it goes for years and years and years. You are left behind if you can't  afford to buy your first house because you're 20-30 per cent shy of the ultimate  settlement price.

You're left behind if you are in your middle years and one of your loved parents has  got dementia and there is a hundred thousand person waiting list.

You're left behind if you are in a region, a country town and your hospital hasn't had  any capital works or any modern equipment.

You are left behind if you are in your 50s and 60s, you've worked hard your whole  life, you have been dislocated by manufacturing change and you can't get another  job.

So this country is not working equally.

You're left behind if you're a woman working in a feminised industry and you  effectively work your first two months every year for free because men in male- dominated industries have got a 20 per cent wage advantage over women working  in feminised industries are working at a 20 per cent disadvantage to mail  equivalents.



My concern is we are creating two Australia’s, that we're leaving people behind and  the problems are real.

Business as usual doesn't cut it and my concern is that Australians have given up.  Many of them think both political parties are just in it for ourselves and they want to  know who stands up for them. They don't need me to tell them that their health costs  are too high. They don't need me to tell them that taking kids to the doctor is more  expensive than it was five years ago. They don't need me to tell them that their  income tax is going to go up, they don't me to tell them that their power bills are up.

I don't need to tell young people, don't worry about the Great Barrier Reef that we're  not going to do anything to mitigate the effects of climate change, don't worry about  it, it will be a problem for you in the future. This country can work better. It is not  about Liberal and Labor it's about can this country, can we be better?

Today I've outlined some of the priorities and the approach we're taking this year. It  is a bit of a change from last year. We want to be better in the way we conduct  ourselves.

We are proposing a National Integrity Commission because we think we can be  better, we want to be better in the policies we talk about and the solutions we offer.  We're going to talk to the Australian people. That's our work for this year.

And I think we can all be better. Thank you.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACTS: LEADER’S OFFICE MEDIA UNIT - 02 6277 4053

