

THE HON AMANDA RISHWORTH MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION AND  DEVELOPMENT  SHADOW MINISTER FOR VETERANS’ AFFAIRS

SHADOW MINISTER FOR DEFENCE PERSONNEL  MEMBER FOR KINGSTON

JIM CHALMERS MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR FINANCE  MEMBER FOR RANKIN

DES HARDMAN

LABOR CANDIDATE FOR FORDE



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP INTERVIEW  LOGAN QUEENSLAND  MONDAY, 4 JUNE 2018

SUBJECT/S:  Turnbull Government’s unfair child care package, Commonwealth  Bank settlement, Barnaby Joyce, By-elections

DES HARDMAN, LABOR CANDIDATE FOR FORDE: Good morning, everyone.  Thanks for coming along today. My name is Des Hardman, and I am Labor’s candidate  for Forde in the next federal election. I’m here today at Goodstart Early Learning Centre  in Shailer Park, in the electorate of Forde, with Amanda Rishworth, the Shadow Minister  for Early Childhood Education and Development and Jim Chalmers, who is our local  Member for Rankin, right next to where we are located here in Forde today. We are  here to talk to the people at Goodstart and the early educators and some parents today  about the Coalition’s changes to early childhood education benefits and rebates for  parents. Early childhood education is an essential service. With the changes, the ability  for people to access these essential services is going to be made more difficult for  parents to access through changes in the way they assess their activity and also cuts  making it harder for people on low incomes to access early childhood education.  There’s around 3000 families in Forde which will be worse off under these cuts from the  Coalition. These changes are going to make it more difficult for kids in their early years,  in an important age and important time in their lives, to access education. As I said, it’s  going to be more difficult for these parents to go to work and to educate themselves so

they can go out and get a better job. This is a really important issue. I am also a dad  and I know how important it was for my children to access early childhood education,  and I know at what cost it came to for me. So I can’t imagine how much more difficult  this is going to make it for parents to access early childhood education in Forde. I spoke  to one lady the other day that I’d like to give as an example: she has twins and she is a  single mum. She came to me and said after the first of July, I am going to be $600 a  week more out of pocket for childcare while I am trying to educate myself with a  university degree. Just to have my twins in childcare in early childhood education for  three days a week. That’s an incredible statistic that I can’t believe and it goes to show  how bad it is going to be for some people. Thank you very much and I’ll hand over to  Amanda.

AMANDA RISHWORTH, SHADOW MINISTER FOR EARLY CHILDHOOD  EDUCATION AND DEVELOPMENT: Thank you very much it’s wonderful to be here.  Des is just an outstanding candidate and when I said I was going to come here he said  you’ve got to come and see the great work being done at Goodstart. It is also great to  be here with my Parliamentary colleague, Jim Chalmers, because these two  representatives will have the hardest hit, when it comes to families, who will be worse  off come the first of July. The first of July is coming around very quickly, which is when  the Government’s new childcare changes come in. Indeed in the seat of Rankin close to  33 per cent of families will be worst off as a result of the government’s child care  changes, and in the seat of Forde 25 per cent of families. Now these aren’t Labor’s  figures these are the departments own figures which say families will be worse off. Now  contrary to the Minister’s claims, these are not all wealthy families. Indeed the majority  of families who will be worse off are low or middle income families. Today we heard the  story of one family who has five children, where one child wants to access early  childhood education here at Goodstart and as a result of the governments changes it is  going to make that families life more difficult. Now I don’t know what the Minister thinks  but looking after five children is not sitting on the couch doing nothing as he would like  to put it. These are families that deserve support for early education. Now, in addition  last week in Senate Estimates we found out that 43 per cent of families haven’t even  registered yet to access the government’s changes. 43 per cent of families could be cut  off come the first of July unless they register. Now the government have put out a slick  advertising campaign but it’s actually been up to centres like this one working at the  coalface with no extra resources who have had to work with families to support them to  change over. It is places like this that deliver excellence early education and real  opportunity not just for workforce participation but for high quality early education. We  need to continue to support families to access this, not leave it up to families and indeed  last week the Minister blamed families for not signing up. This is just not good enough;  this Minister really needs to answer what will happen to those families who have not  registered. Why are these families going to be left in the dark? And importantly what is  he going to do for those families, those 33 per cent of families in Rankin and across the  state of Queensland one in four families, who will be worse off as a result of these  changes. I’ll hand over to Jim.

JIM CHALMERS, SHADOW MINISTER FOR FINANCE: Thanks very much, Amanda.  When families in my electorate wake up in four weeks’ time, 4298 of them will be worse  off because of the Turnbull Government’s changes. They are part of 279,000 families

worse off around the country because Malcolm Turnbull is so out of touch with the cost  of living pressures that families, especially those on low incomes, face in this community  and indeed right around the country. This is another attack from Malcolm Turnbull on  the family budgets of people already doing it tough. People who are doing the right  thing, going to work, raising their kids, doing what they can to ensure that the next  generation has access to early childhood education at great places like here at  Goodstart Early Learning centre in Shailer Park. Now this guy, Malcolm Turnbull is so  out of touch with what’s going on in suburbs like this one that he wants to make it harder  for families to make ends meet, not make it easier.

Families right around the country are crying out for cost of living relief and that’s why  Labor has made such a priority to give bigger, fairer tax cuts to 10 million Australian  working families. It’s why Amanda Rishworth, Des Hardman and others have been so  alive to the damage these childcare changes will do for communities right around  Australia.

The Turnbull Government has become a B-grade soap opera. For as long as Malcolm  Turnbull as his colleagues are obsessed with the B-grade soap opera around Barnaby  Joyce and Michaelia Cash and Pauline Hanson, families in Australia will not get a look  in. For as long as Malcolm Turnbull’s Government is consumed by chaos and self-obsession and this B-grade soap opera that is consuming the government, the families  of Australia will not get their cost of living pressures addressed by a Liberal  Government. The only chance that the families of Australia have to see genuine cost-of-living relief is to see the end of this B-grade soap opera, which is the Turnbull  Government, and elect a Labor Government, which genuinely cares about the cost of  child care; about bigger, fairer tax cuts; about good quality health and education  services for the families of this country.

I’d just like to touch on one more issue before I throw to you and that is on the  settlement which has just been announced between the Commonwealth Bank and  Austrac over the money laundering revelations; the issues that were uncovered by  Austrac and has been going through a court proceeding for the last little while. This  $700 million settlement is the biggest civil settlement in Australian history but it’s still  only around one-sixth of the tax handout that Malcolm Turnbull intends to give to the  Commonwealth Bank. Malcolm Turnbull’s tax handouts, $17 billion of which will go to  the four big banks, will see the lion’s share go to the Commonwealth Bank - the bank at  the centre of the extraordinary revelations that have led to this settlement. I think it says  everything about Malcolm Turnbull’s priorities, when he sees the rorts and the rip-offs in  our banks, he wants to hand them a $17 billion tax cut, of which the Commonwealth  Bank will get the lion’s share. There is a very stark contrast between the major parties in  the Parliament of Australia. Malcolm Turnbull wants to compensate the perpetrators of  rorts and rip-offs and Labor wants to see the victims of the rorts and rip-offs  compensated. Malcolm Turnbull is so out of touch he wants to give the biggest tax cut  to the Commonwealth Bank, which today has had to settle for $700 million with Austrac  after revelations of money laundering. The Commonwealth Bank settlement is the  biggest ever, but still around one-sixth of what Malcolm Turnbull intends to hand out to  the Commonwealth Bank as a part of his tax cuts for big business.

JOURNALIST: Is $700 million an adequate penalty though?

CHALMERS: It’s the biggest we’ve ever seen, and I think a reflection of the seriousness  of what has gone on here. The fact that we’ve got a $700 million settlement with one  bank over these sorts of very serious issues around money laundering, certainly  indicates that there has been a lot of bad behaviour going on. It is up to the parties to  determine the settlement based on all the information they have. The point that we  would make is that Malcolm Turnbull is a merchant banker himself. He knows the kind  of things that goes on behind closed doors in these banks. He has fought for two years  to keep this kind of behaviour under wraps. Malcolm Turnbull has fiercely resisted the  Australian people getting to the bottom of some of these issues with the Royal  Commission. It says it all about his priorities. It says it all about the contrast that, while  Labor cares deeply about the cost of childcare and the quality of our health and  education, Malcolm Turnbull’s highest priority is to be an apologist for the big banks and  to give them a $17 billion tax cut of which the lion’s share will go to the Commonwealth  Bank at the centre of this extraordinary settlement today.

JOURNALIST: Are you saying that Malcolm Turnbull has specifically covered up the  allegations that the bank has now been accused of and forced to pay a $700 million  penalty for?

CHALMERS: Malcolm Turnbull’s record speaks for itself. For two years he resisted a  Royal Commission into the behaviour of the big banks and what that tells us is that he  did not want the Australian people to see the kind of behaviour that’s going on. He did  not want the Australian people, especially the victims of these rorts and rip-offs, to have  these issues aired publicly. That is not an opinion of the Labor Party; that is a fact. That  for two years he resisted the Royal Commission. He is of that world; he knows what has  been going on in the financial system. It is up to him to explain why he resisted the  Royal Commission for so long.

JOURNALIST: How did you spend your Sunday night? Did you watch the Barnaby  Joyce interview?

CHALMERS: No, I saw snippets of it, in the previewing and the subsequent coverage.

JOURNALIST: Didn’t have the popcorn out?

CHALMERS: I certainly didn’t, no.

JOURNALIST: Any reaction from the Party, what is it like?

CHALMERS: That kind of show is not really my bag, and I think that the personal  issues...

CAMERAMAN: Tsk, tsk, tsk.

CHALMERS: (Laughs) It doesn't make our friends from Channel 7 happy. I'm sure a lot  of people watched it, but I wasn't one of them. I haven’t seen all of it. I’d make these  points though: it’s not for me or for us to comment on the very personal aspects of what

has gone on here. For all of us as parents of young kids, I think the priority should be  that that beautiful little kid is healthy and happy and feeding and sleeping, and that the  initial weeks of his life are as stress-free as possible. More broadly, I think you can see  why, particularly the middle- and low-income families can’t get a look in, because the  Turnbull Government is consumed by what is essentially a B-grade soap opera. And for  as long as Malcolm Turnbull and his colleagues are obsessed with this kind of stuff, not  just around Barnaby Joyce but around Michaelia Cash and Pauline Hanson, all of this  self-obsession and internal chaos, I don’t think this country will be governed effectively  and that’s really our main priority, to make sure that the low- to middle-income earners  of this country get the representation that they need and deserve. They won’t get a look  in for as long as the Government is distracted and diverted by things like what we saw  in that program.

JOURNALIST: Amanda, I do want to talk to you about childcare, you mentioned a mum  of five, there are some exemptions for those that can’t make those activity hours, does  that not apply to her?

RISHWORTH Everyone’s circumstances are different but what this activity test has  done is that is has left, by the government’s own figures, 33 per cent, which is close to  one in three families, worse off as a result of the governments changes. Some people  will still be able to get some hours and some will get no hours what so ever. But what  we do know from the government’s own figures as well is that the majority of those who  will be worse off will be in the two lowest income brackets. These aren’t Labor’s claims,  these are the Government’s own figures where they’ve estimated what will happen to  those on activity tests. Now I know here at Goodstart, they are working very hard with  families to try and help them achieve the activity test but we know from the  government’s own figures that it won’t be achieved for everyone. Indeed as I said 1 in 3  in Rankin and 1 in 4 in Forde will be worse off, according to the Government’s own  figures. The Minister’s reaction has been well they should get off the couch and do  some work, he said that in a press conference. I think that doesn’t understand two  things, one the complex nature of families and two, the importance of early education.  He refuses to acknowledge that if we give children the best start to life that is the best  investment we can make and he is not actually recognising that important fact.

JOURNALIST: They have until July to update MyGov, do you suspect there will be a  large number that will miss out because they don’t update?

RISHWORTH: Well Senate Estimates last week revealed that the Government is way  behind what they thought they would get in terms of registration of families. So yes, I am  deeply concerned. Come the first of July, a lot of families will find themselves with large  out of pocket costs. That’s just not good enough. The Government have sought to  blame families for this, saying that it is all their responsibility and they should do it. Well  it’s the government that changed the rules, it’s the government that ripped up the  system and brought in a new system. Trying to shirk their responsibility for not properly  informing families is just not good enough. Now I understand that they have started to  put out SMS’s and letters but they should be working a lot harder and they should be  working with centres that are at the coalface of this. I have had Centre’s tell me that  they have been told by the Department of Education, to get a laptop and put a staff

member at the front to register people. Now that shows a lack of responsibility that the  Government is taking when it comes to enrolling families.

JOURNALIST: Jim maybe just an unrelated question, there was a Sky News/Reach  TEL poll out this morning which showed that a majority of voters in the electorate of  Longman were opposed to asylum seekers on Nauru and Manus Island being resettled  in Australia. Did the results surprise you?

CHALMERS: I know there have been a couple of polls, or a couple of questions asked  in Longman and Braddon. I think overall the lesson we take from those polls is that we  have never said anything other than those seats will be challenging for Labor. We take  no votes for granted; we take no seats for granted. Both Longman and Braddon were  held by the Liberal Party before the last election, so we take them very seriously. We  take every seat and every vote very, very seriously around the country. When it comes  to the issues that have been in the polls, our position is determined by a lot of careful  thought and consideration, not by opinion polls. We are aware of them as they bounce  around on different issues, but at the end of the day we want to do what’s right for the  country, whether that be with asylum seekers or right across the board. So while those  polls will be of interest to a lot of people, they don’t necessarily change our view about  how we go about managing a very important area of public policy.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: KATE HANNS 0423 974 363

Authorised by Noah Carroll ALP Canberra

