

THE HON BILL SHORTEN MP

LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION

SHADOW MINISTER FOR INDIGENOUS AFFAIRS AND ABORIGINAL

AND TORRES STRAIT ISLANDERS

MEMBER FOR MARIBYRNONG



SPEECH AT THE PARLIAMENTARY FRIENDS OF THE AFL



PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA



MONDAY, 20 AUGUST 2018



Good evening everyone



I acknowledge the traditional owners of the land upon which we meet, I pay my

respects to elders, past and present.



I acknowledge Michael McCormack, representing the Prime Minister here tonight,

a late change at selection.



And Peter Khalil, kindly reminded me that he too had a football career. He was

going to play under 19s, for North Melbourne? Until his mum stopped him.



He tells you that story unsolicited. He's the member for Wills.



Politics can be a brutal business, can't it? I've got to say that Malcolm and I were

pretty crushed when we were sacked by The Age and the Herald Sun for footy

tipping this year.



And I want to thank Gil for coming here again this year, the Colt from Kooyong. He

is up here with the cup he has brought to Canberra and it's one of the best-attended events we see in the parliamentary calendar.



Now, I actually do say, Gil, as we try and explain politics, when we're explaining

the passion and the scrutiny of politics, when it can be at its worst, what we then

do to cheer ourselves up, is we have been watching you explain:



 The 20 metre goal squares

 The 6-6-6 zones

 And of course, the night grand final.



Of course, after you deal with the tough issues, we breathe a sigh of relief here in

Canberra when we have to talk about things like energy policy.



And we talked about football careers -  the Deputy Prime Minister spoke about his

football career.



I have to say my footy career ended very close to the time it started.



You know those great players of footy, they have so much time, they make it look

like the game is in slow motion.



I certainly had the slow motion part sorted but everyone else was still moving at

normal speed. And wherever the ball was, by the time I got to it, it had bounced

somewhere else.



But I'm redeemed by my eight year old daughter, Clementine. She is well on her

way to being the best footballer in the family, she has done at least two Auskick

clinics.



I also think that thanks to the remarkable success of AFLW, we're going to see a

lot of dads who are able to recount the fact that their daughters will be able to have

footy careers which they could have only ever dreamed of.



And I think that tonight, when you watch that fantastic film, we see what football

does best. I mean, it brings people together.



As Gill said, men and women, young and old from all sides of politics, from all

around the nation - including Tasmania - and we want to see them get an AFL

team. That was just to suss-out the Tasmanians in the room.



But on a more serious note, last Tuesday evening in Canberra, we had a no-name

Senator dive-deeply into the worst kind of racism and prejudice.



In parliament by the Wednesday, we heard lots of outstanding speeches from

people from all sides of the political spectrum condemning his words and

reaffirming our support for multicultural Australia.



And whilst those speeches were impactful and they were strong and they were

necessary and they were appropriate. I wonder if any of them had as much impact

as the sight of Ahmed Saad and Bachar Houli shaking hands at the centre of the

'G before the game on Friday night.



When you think that Australia can't get it, and when politicians underestimate the

people of Australia, seeing those two fine athletes shake hands - and the support

they received from the audience - made you proud to be Australian again.



And made you proud to love AFL.



I think about round 17, that absolute classic at Etihad Stadium.



Nine goals kicked in the last quarter.



When you look at it:



Two were by Buddy Franklin, a proud Aboriginal man from Western Australia.



One by Ben Brown from Devonport.



And two were from men who came here as the children of Sudanese refugees,

Majak Daw and Aliir Aliir.



All of those 44 players had travelled different roads to get to that ground.



Every player has a backstory which has helped make them an elite athlete.



They've all got a different story and a different set of circumstances.



But what you've got to love about AFL - the truly indigenous football code of this

nation - is that when they put on the jumpers of their teams, what you saw there

was just Swans and Kangaroos.



All were equal and what you are judged by is your effort and by how much you're

part of the team.





I do think that's what we're actually celebrating.



And I agree with the truism that politics shouldn't be in sport and you know, we've

got a aim to make sport above it all.



But when sport is the best expression of our better selves. And when AFL football

is the best expression of ourselves as Australians, I think that's why we're here to

celebrate the AFL.



And no one does it any better, Gil, than you and your team.



I mean where else have you seen an organisation get the sport named after it? We

no longer play Australian rules, we now play AFL.



What I love about that is that we're all united by it.



So I'm looking forward to the Grand Final this year.



Could you believe that we might just have a Richmond versus Collingwood Grand

Final?





Authorised by Noah Carroll, ALP, Canberra.













