

SHAYNE NEUMANN MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION  FEDERAL MEMBER FOR BLAIR

QUEENSLAND CORONER’S FINDINGS INTO 2014 DEATH ON MANUS ISLAND



The Queensland Coroner has found the 2014 death of an asylum seeker on Manus Island  was preventable and the result of “compounding effects of multiple errors” in the healthcare  provided including “ineffective processes” relating to medical transfers.

These are serious findings that cannot go unanswered or ignored by the Turnbull  Government.

It is incumbent on the Turnbull Government to respond to all recommendations by the  Queensland Coroner in a timely manner to urgently improve how it looks after asylum  seekers and refugees in Australian-funded offshore regional processing centres.

Peter Dutton continues to bury his head in the sand and ignore his portfolio responsibilities  - including ignoring two recommendations about medical treatment and transfer processes  from the Labor-initiated Senate Inquiry into serious allegations of abuse, self-harm and  neglect of asylum seekers on Nauru and like-minded allegations on Manus Island.

On 21 April 2017, the Senate Inquiry made recommendations including:

Recommendation 1: The committee recommends that the Department of Immigration and  Border Protection, as a matter of urgency, commission an external review of its medical  transfer procedures in offshore processing centres.

Recommendation 2: The committee recommends that the Australian Government  undertake to seek advice in relation to whether improvements are required to the medical  treatment options available to asylum seekers and refugees in the Republic of Nauru and  Papua New Guinea, particularly mental health services.

Peter Dutton is a tick-and-flick Minister incapable of managing his own Department and has  failed to justify why he won’t act on these reasonable recommendations from the Senate  Inquiry to address concerns held by the wider Australian community.

Labor wrote to Peter Dutton in August 2017 seeking an assurance that medical transfers for  people living in Australian-funded offshore regional processing centres would be available  when required and recommended by medical experts.

Labor strongly believes that medical transfers for refugees in Australian-funded offshore  regional processing centres should be made available when a particular treatment is not  available on island and where the treatment is recommended by appropriate medical  practitioners - not departmental bureaucrats.

Labor’s policy on asylum seekers is clear - we will never let the people smugglers back in  business. Labor believes in strong borders, offshore processing, regional resettlement, and  turn backs when safe to do so because we know it saves lives at sea.

Ensuring Australia’s strong borders does not absolve the Australian Government of its  obligation to provide appropriate health, security, and welfare services to people living in  Australian-funded offshore processing centres while they wait for Peter Dutton to negotiate  third country resettlement agreements for eligible refugees.

Malcolm Turnbull must immediately guarantee access to appropriate medical treatment for  asylum seekers and that refugees and asylum seekers will not suffer as a result of Peter  Dutton’s continued failure to manage his portfolio.

MONDAY, 30 JULY 2018  MEDIA CONTACTS: TIMOTHY DUNLOP 0428 043 110

