

THE HON JULIE COLLINS MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR AGEING AND MENTAL HEALTH  MEMBER FOR FRANKLIN  E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP INTERVIEW  CANBERRA  WEDNESDAY, 20 JUNE 2018

SUBJECT/S: Malcolm Turnbull’s offensive remarks to aged care workers; Labor’s plan  for bigger, better, fairer tax relief for working Australians; asylum seekers

JULIE COLLINS, SHADOW MINISTER FOR AGEING AND MENTAL HEALTH: Yesterday  what we heard from the Prime Minister in Question Time when it came to the aged care worker  question from Burnie was absolutely appalling. I was astounded to hear the Prime Minister and  the way he spoke about the valuable contribution aged workers make to Australia every day.  There are more than 360,000 aged care workers in Australia today who are going about one of  the most difficult jobs, caring for older Australians, many of them vulnerable, some of them with  dementia, in their own homes in residential facilities who were insulted by what the Prime  Minister said yesterday in Parliament. He should apologise, I called on him to apologise  yesterday, he didn’t do it. I hope he’s had time to reflect on his comments and he realises just  out-of-touch and arrogant his comments were. To say, or to imply that aged care workers in  Australia do not make as valuable a contribution to our society as an investment banker is  outrageous. That’s what the Prime Minister told aged care workers yesterday: their contribution  is not valued. We do value aged care workers on our side of politics, the community values  aged care workers, the families and the carers of vulnerable older Australians value aged  workers and the Prime Minister should value them too. He should come out today and he  should apologise to aged care workers for what he said yesterday. It was outrageous.

JOURNALIST: On personal income tax cuts, Pauline Hanson’s One Nation party has indicated  that they will support tax cuts to get through the Senate, has Labor conceded the upper hand to  Senator Hanson in terms of delivering low income workers a tax cut?

COLLINS: What Labor’s done is put forward a better plan for low income workers, like the aged  care worker from Burnie. What we are saying is that aged care workers, who are on $40,000 a  year, deserve a bigger, better tax cut than investment bankers who get $7,000 under Malcolm  Turnbull’s plans, that’s what Labor is saying. What we want to do is provide a better deal for  those workers - low income and medium income workers - who actually have not had a decent  pay rise in years.

JOURNALIST: Are you concerned that there could be a backlash in the lead up to the election  if the Government passes this legislation with Pauline Hanson’s support? Pauline Hanson will  be able to say that they’ve looked out for low and middle income workers and delivered them a  tax cut while Labor can’t say the same - do you have anything concerns there?



COLLINS: Well what Labor can say is that we are not going to stand by and say yes to tax cuts  in 7 years’ time that give an investment banker a bigger tax cut than an aged care worker today.  We could pass income tax cuts for low and middle income workers today if Malcolm Turnbull  would split his bill. The only person standing in the way of low and middle income workers  getting a tax cut is Malcolm Turnbull.

JOURNALIST: Just on today’s Newspoll, we have seen the gap between the major parties  appears to be closing in terms of asylum seeker policy and the closest it’s been, the narrowest  margin, it’s ever been. Does that urge greater consideration, do you think, for a more humane  asylum seeker policy?

COLLINS: I think what this shows is that nobody is believing what this Government is saying.  Nobody believes, when this Government says that it is doing the right thing by people. Nobody  believes that indefinite detention is the right thing to do, that’s what it shows.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: LIAM CARSWELL 0438 469 119

Authorised by Noah Carroll ALP Canberra

