Labor  t.

TRANSc Aff4iRIIIFOR

AUSTRALIA

BRENDAN O'CONNOR MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR EMPLOYMENT AND WORKPLACE RELATIONS

MEMBER FOR GORTON

E&OE TRANSCRIPT

DOORSTOP

MELBOURNE

THURSDAY, 19 JULY 2018

SUBJECTS: ABS Labour Force figures; Wage stagnation; Craig Kelly;

Labour hire; By elections; Offshore processing.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR, SHADOW MINISTER FOR EMPLOYMENT AND

WORKPLACE RELATIONS: I'd like to comment on the unemployment figures that

were out today from the ABS and welcome the increase in jobs. There's been

some increase but I note, however, that the unemployment rate in this country

remains at 5.4 per cent and that means that there are firstly more people

unemployed today than was the case than when Abbott was elected in 2014. More

people lining the unemployment queues today - 19,000 more.

So before the government gets too cocky and exhibits hubris about these things

it's important to note that well over 700,000 Australians are unemployed and more

than 1.1 million Australians are underemployed. That's in excess of 1.8 million

Australians either looking for work and not being able to find it or looking for more

work and still not being able to find it. That's why we are seeing people struggling.

Of course along with that we have the lowest wage growth in 20 years and yet we

have a government and a Prime Minister in his harbour side mansion who is willing

to see further cuts to real wages by supporting cuts to penalty rates, not supporting

Labors plan to stop the rorting in labour hire, not stopping the rorting that is going

on in the gig economy, where you are seeing people being paid one third of the

minimum wage.

We have exploitation in this country, underpayment of wages. We've got high

profile employers underpaying their staff and getting caught and doing it again. Too

often we are seeing that happen and we don't see a sufficient response by the

government. We have a Prime Minister who doesn't want to provide a decent tax

cut to workers when Labor is providing almost double their tax cut. So there are a

lot of things for the Government to be doing here.

And whilst any extra job in the economy is a good thing, and we welcome the

increase in job numbers, let's not forget we have more people unemployed than

was the case five years ago. The unemployment rate at 5.4 per cent is still too

high. The underemployment rate is the highest we've ever had. For that reason we

are concerned, and I say to the government you need to keep working here and

you need to keep working not just on employment but also on wage growth

because it is in serious decline. We've seen the Reserve Bank Governor show how

concerned they are. The Commonwealth Bank reports show that there are

recession like conditions insofar as sectors of the economy where wages are

stagnating.

So there are problems that need responses by government and yet of course we

have a government divided on a whole range of issues. And we have some really

quite remarkable things recently by governments, remarkable comments by

government members including of course Mr Craig Kelly who has offended the

families of the victims of the MH1 7 disaster where of course those passengers

were murdered and yet we see some remarkable comments and a qualified

apology by Mr Kelly.

Of course we've also seen a misrepresentation by the candidate for Longman for

the Liberal Party insofar as his military record is concerned. So there are plenty of

things going on in this country that the Prime Minister needs to stand up and show

some integrity and some honesty and we are yet to see that from him. Happy to

take questions.

JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) the unemployment rate remains low and there has been

an increased in the participation rate, surely that's good news for the government?

O'CONNOR: It is good to see improvements. As I said any new job is a good thing.

In fact that's why we welcome increases in employment numbers. I just make the

point the unemployment rate is the same as it was last month and it is just

marginally lower than was the case after the election in 2013. Indeed there are

more people unemployed today than was the case in 2013.

It's just important to note because we have very, very arrogant and out of touch

Ministers who like to continue on as if it doesn't matter that there is 1.8 million

workers with no job or finding too few hours. Yet that does matter. So as an

opposition we want to hold them to account and see what else they are doing. It is

also important to say that whilst people have a job they are insecure at work too

often. They are not getting any sense of security because many of the jobs are not

permanent full time and that's shown up by the underemployment rate where we

are seeing 1.1 million - 1,123,000 to be exact - who are calling for more work and

not being able to find it.

These are important things. You can't just look at the one statistic. Let's remember

this, when you define employment as one hour a week you have to look at the

other statistics that are in the ABS to show the full picture. And the full picture is

that the underemployment rate is very high and also wage growth is very low. They

are important elements too that really make up the whole story as to what's

happening in the labour market and for that reason they should be mentioned and

that's why I mention them.

JOURNALIST: What would you like to see the government be doing in order to

improve-

O'CONNOR: We know what they should be doing. Firstly they should be

supporting Bill Shorten's Private Members' Bill to stop the cuts to penalty rates. We

have some of the hardest working, low paid workers in this country in retail and

hospitality that are losing wages in real terms. They lost wages last July, they lost

wages this July and they'll be losing wages next July if we don't stop that. That's

the first thing they could do, stop the cuts to real wages by supporting legislation to

stop the effects of the penalty rate decision.

The second thing they could do is make sure they match Labor and say that if a

labour hire worker is working in a workplace, he or she is not going to be paid less

than the direct employees. We have thousands and thousands of Australian

workers who are working under labour hire who are not paid the same or not paid

at least the same as those that are direct employees. Now we think there is a

legitimate use for labour hire and yet, too often labour hire is misused.

We would also say they have to crack down on temporary work visas. The

temporary work visas have increased by 200,000 under this government, 200,000.

If you want to know why unemployment amongst young people is so high

compared to other OECD countries, just look at the amount of visas being issued.

It is 1.6 million, 200,000 extra since they were elected. We have people that are

here on student visas who too often are not here primarily to study. We have

people on holiday maker visas who are not here to take a holiday and the

government should be looking at that.

So there are forms of employment that are all legitimate but they should not be

misused or overused or abused and yet they are being abused and it explains why

underemployment is one of our highest numbers ever and why in fact people are

crying out for more work and why people are finding that their work is not

sufficiently secure for them to get a home loan, to get a car loan, to make ends

meet or to put food on the table for many and that's important and the government

should be attending to that.

JOURNALIST: So how quickly would a Labor Government act on some of the

policies the ACTU has put forward and what are the priorities? What are you going

to do if you win government?

O'CONNOR: Well the ACTU can put policies forward all they like. Labor

announced that it would actually stop the cuts to penalty rates a very long time

ago. In fact we introduced a Private Members' Bill to stop it. We didn't want to wait

until we won the election, and if we do win we will move very quickly. We don't

want to wait until Malcom Turnbull calls an election to fix workers' wages, we want

Malcom Turnbull to join Labor and fix them now and he can do that by supporting

our Private Members' Bill in the Parliament. That's our announcement, that's not

the ACTU's policy, that's our policy and the ACTU agree with us on that.

It's the same with the labour hire policy. Many employers already do the right thing,

they pay equity, they pay site rates for labour hire workers and why should those

employers that do the right thing get disadvantaged against other employers who

don't want to pay the same rates of pay for labour hire workers? That's a good

policy. We accept that labour hire is a legitimate form of employment when used

appropriately, but it shouldn't be used to undermine collective bargaining or

standards of employment, and so for that reason we would like to see that happen.

In terms of how fast we would move? Well we have made it clear that in the first

100 days of a Shorten Labor Government we will introduce legislation that will stop

the effects of the penalty rate decision and we would revert the penalty rate back to

June 30 last year. So whilst people would have already lost money and we can't

remedy all of that, we would make sure that the rate was restored as of 30th June

last year and we will do that in the first 100 days, that is our intention.

We will also be ensuring that we introduce fairer conditions by our labour hire

policies, by making sure we crack down on independent contractors when they are

not genuinely independent. We have now gig workers in our economy that just

because they are selling their labour over social platforms, they are being paid $7

an hour. We have people being paid at nearly a third of the minimum wage in this

country and it is unacceptable. The reason they are getting away with it is they are

pretending these people are in contracts, that these people are not employees.

Well quite frankly, when you only have one client who is controlling your hours,

you're an employee and you should be paid a minimum wage at the very least, so

we will be cracking down on that.

We will be cracking down on directors of companies who phoenix companies to

stop paying creditors. That is, they liquidate the company, refuse to pay creditors,

which includes workers, and then they set up a new company, that's why it's called

"phoenixing", and just start all over again without paying their debts. That has to be

stopped and we will go after that. Our policies are about looking after working

people, making sure that good employers, and the majority of employers are good

employers, are not also being undermined by rogue employers.

We would expect the Prime Minister, if he cared about working people, if he spent

some time talking to workers rather than merchant bankers then he would actually

understand these things. Here is a man who we know hasn't lived in financially

difficult times, he's never struggled financially, we know that. But just because he

hasn't struggled financially doesn't mean he shouldn't empathise with people who

are struggling now to make ends meet. Clearly he doesn't have any regard for

those workers and for that reason we will have to, it would appear, win the election

to have these things happen.

JOURNALIST: Is Bill Shorten's leadership safe if any of the by-elections-

O'CONNOR: Bill Shorten will be the leader going into the next election. Bill

Shorten has bought this party together, we are united and coherent. We came

within a whisker of winning the election in 2016. When we were defeated in 2013,

let's be honest, we were divided and demoralised and we were indeed bereft of

coherence. Since then, we have become coherent and united. In fact, in my 17

years in parliament, I have never seen Labor at a federal level, so united and

focused on the plans of this country's future. That's in large part due to Bill Shorten

as leader, and he'll be leader into the next election.

Of course we want to win the by-elections, they're going to be tough. We can see

they're marginal seats, we can see that One Nation is seeking to preference to the

Liberal party in Longman, we know that One Nation, really acts as a subsidiary of

the Liberal party. That's what they've been doing, they've voted for the Liberal

party 90 per cent of the time in the Parliament. We know things are tough, but we

think we have the best candidates and the best policies and we think we'll do very,

very well.

By the way, while we're talking about the by-elections it's also a test for Malcolm

Turnbull. Mayo is a safe Liberal seat. The reason why they lost that seat, was

because the former member for Mayo was brought into disrepute and had to

resign. That of course meant that for at least a short period, they would lose that

seat. Well, that problem has gone away for the Liberal party, so why is it then that

Mayo looks like it may not return to the Liberal ranks?

Well, one of the reasons for that, clearly, is the failure by Malcolm Turnbull as

Prime Minister. That's why they had to drag in John Howard to campaign in Mayo

yesterday because Malcolm Turnbull is not cutting through, because his policies

are not fair. He doesn't care about inequality, he doesn't care about job insecurity,

he wants to give $85 billion to multinational companies and big business. He wants

to give $17 billion to banks and he wants to rip $17 billion away from schools. He's

so cowardly and craven that he won't debate Bill Shorten. I mean, he's in the same

electorate as Bill Shorten often, as he campaigns in these by-elections, yet he

won't stand to debate Bill Shorten on these issues.

Quite frankly, it shows a lack of courage and conviction if you can't debate your

opposite number before the by election. So, again, we call upon Malcolm Turnbull

to accept Bill Shorten's invitation to debate Bill Shorten on penalty rates, on

whether we should be giving $80 billion to multinational companies and big

business, on investment and education and health. Let's have the debate and if

he's got any ticker, he'll do it.

JOURNALIST: Today marks five years since Kevin Rudd set up the off-shore

processing. Has it been a success or a failure?

O'CONNOR: Well, it's quite clear that this is a very vexed area of public policy.

Anyone who's worked in this area as I have knows that it's a very difficult area. I

think, one of the real disappointments for me, is that it has been very under-focused in insuring that people that are in those off-shore centres have already

been provided haven in other countries.

I have to say, the Government has not made it a priority to ensure the legitimate

asylum seekers, who are found to be seeking asylum legitimately, have not been

afforded other places of haven. So, to that extent I think a lot more should have

been done. Of course there's been questions about what's happened, since this

Government's been there. So, I have to say, nobody comes to this issue with a

perfect answer.

There is no perfect answer with dealing with the displacement of 65 million people

around the world. I think if we look at this issue in a broader sense, we need to, for

example, revise the Refugee Convention to make sure it's contemporary; that it

actually involves more countries that are signatories than there currently is signed

up to the Convention. We need to have much more engagement with the transit

countries, Malaysia and Indonesia. They should have already been much more

involved and I think we need to engage with them and try and find a way to have

them at the table.

So, it's not a question of just looking at one element of this really complicated and

difficult area. It's looking at a whole host of things that need to be done

internationally, with countries, source countries, transit countries and countries of

destination. Of course, fundamentally, the best way to stop displacement is to stop

and be involved in preventing where possible conflicts, war and starvation, where

people movement occurs for other reasons. Most people would prefer to be in their

own community, their own country, but they're driven off and driven out and yes,

it's true that people are more driven to go to first world countries as they do.

So, I think it's fair to say that we need to be vigilant here, but we also need to make

sure we do the right thing here by people that are genuinely refugees and for those

it should be a priority in making sure that those people are provided refuge in other

countries and that's what I would say about those that are waiting to have their

matters processed in those centres.

Thanks very much.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: ERIN SMITH 0458 950010

Authorised by Noah Carroll, ALP, Canberra.

