



SENATOR THE HON PENNY WONG  LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION IN THE SENATE  SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS  LABOR SENATOR FOR SOUTH AUSTRALIA





E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  NINE NETWORK TODAY SHOW  FRIDAY, 4 MAY 2018

SUBJECTS: Craft beer; Budget; Aged care; Live sheep exports.

GEORGIE GARDNER: There is big news for beer drinkers this morning who are no  doubt raising a glass to Treasurer Scott Morrison. He has announced a tax cut in next  week's Budget that will bring down the price of craft ale. It’s just one of a range of  populist measures he is planning and joining me now is Christopher Pyne and in  Adelaide Penny Wong. Good morning to you both.

Christopher to you first. Cheap beer makes a great headline but is it what we really  need?

CHRISTOPHER PYNE: It is a good idea because why should the craft beer makers be  charged more just because they have smaller vats and kegs? It has fixed an anomaly  that should have been done a while ago. And of course it will be popular with craft beer  drinkers and there is a lot more of them than there used to be because there is only one  Australian major beer producer and that is of course in Penny's and my home state,  Coopers.

GARDNER: Of course it is an Anthony Albanese idea. Are you going to steal any more  of his ideas?

PYNE: .Anthony likes to take credit for everything. I think he is trying to take credit for  the Sphinx and the pyramids as well when he was Infrastructure Minister. But he can’t  claim to be the first person to think of charging craft beer producers the same as  everyone else.

GARDNER: Penny, you can't argue against cheap beer though.



SENATOR PENNY WONG, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION IN THE SENATE: I think  it is a good idea and it is Albo's idea. He is your mate Christopher. You should say  "Good on you Albo" it’s such a good idea we picked it up.

PYNE: He’s a good man, but we’re happy to have you this morning Penny. Much better  looking.

(Laughter)

WONG: Oh come on. Flattery, first thing in the morning Christopher.

GARDNER:  Penny, the Budget leaks keep coming and tax breaks to entice more  Hollywood movie makers to come to Australia. That is hard to argue against?

WONG: We want to see what the Budget contains. The best thing the Budget could do  is not cut $17 billion to schools and instead of giving the banks a $17 billion tax cut how  about we give our schools a bit more money and stop the cuts to Medicare? I think  those are the things that the Australian people would really welcome in the Budget. But  we do welcome the change on the beer tax. As I said, it’s something that Labor and  Albo and others have been arguing for for a long time.

GARDNER: We have been talked a lot about aged care on the show. It matters to so  many people. We know that an estimated 100,000 people are currently waiting for  assistance. They want care in their own homes. They don't want to go to these facilities.  What are we going to see in the Budget that helps those people?

PYNE: The first thing we have already announced Georgie is that we are bringing  together the three different agencies that manage aged care in Australia into one  national organisation. I think that is a good idea, where compliance and regulation are  altogether in the same agency.

Of course this is a very difficult issue. Nobody really likes to see their loved ones, their  parents, or grandparents going into aged care. A lot of the homes are very, very good.  Both my mother-in-law and my mother are in aged care and they are excellent facilities.  Every now and then you do get a bad outcome, a rogue trader if you like, and those  people need to have the book thrown at them in the same as anyone who breaks the  law needs to have that happen.

GARDNER: But I am talking about people who want to stay in their own homes, who  don’t want to go to a facility. What are you doing for them?

PYNE: We have a lot of programs for people who want to stay in their own homes  because it’s actually a lot cheaper for the Australian taxpayer and for Australians if  people stay in their own home for longer. That is why we have a whole lot of programs  to keep people in their own homes, run by local councils on behalf of the Australian

Government and we continue to expand those. They are called Home and Community  Care packages.

GARDNER: It is a big issue Penny isn't it?

WONG:  It really is and there aren’t enough Home and Community Care packages.  That is the reality and certainly as a Senator that is what people tell me. They want  more support to stay in their homes for their parents or obviously for the individuals  themselves. I hope in this Budget the Government does actually respond to this  demand in the community because frankly, there’s a lot of people who need more  support to stay out of residential care and they are not getting it.

GARDNER: Alright, let's move on. Labor has announced they are committed to ending  live sheep exports. The PM has condemned the decision, calling it emotional and  reckless. Penny, the findings of the review into live exports are due out in about two  weeks, why not wait for the findings?

WONG: I think that Joel Fitzgibbon chatted to Ben about this and said we are not  announcing it immediately. We are not in government. What we have said is this is what  a number of people in the industry even have said which is that we need to transition  out of this industry.

GARDNER: Does that mean stopping live exports altogether?

WONG: Yes. It means over time transitioning out of the industry. Ending this and going  to chilled meat exports rather than having a situation where we continue to see the  problems in the industry which have been around for a long time. Let’s remember, I  think it was in 2006 even John Howard had to suspend the trade. I think that the public  and the industry know that are problems so we do need to work on a plan to transition  out of it. We do that with industry as Joel explained.

GARDNER: Christopher.

PYNE: Well Georgie this is just another example of Labor making policy on the run.  They said two weeks ago they would wait for the McCarthy Review. That was a sensible  decision. That was bipartisan. We all want this trade to be either conducted properly or  not at all and if there is a rogue trader in live exports they need to have the book thrown  at them as well.

WONG: Well why did you remove the regulator?

PYNE: Labor of course are just being populist. They think this will make them popular in  the short time. It is a good example of why they shouldn’t be in government.

WONG: Oh Christopher.

PYNE: You need a calm, methodical approach to government, not this jumping around  knee jerk approach. There are thousands of Australians that get their livelihoods from  live exports and they need to be thought of as well as the welfare of the sheep and  cattle who are part of it.

WONG: Can I just respond to that? First, you have even got Liberals calling for an end  to the trade. Sussan Ley, one of your own members of your party room has called for an  end of the trade.

PYNE: Methodically.

WONG: You have looked pretty calm and methodical over the last six months mate.  How many tax policies have you announced?

PYNE: We are doing pretty well.

WONG: Barnaby Joyce, speaking of calm and methodical, removed the independent  inspector.

PYNE: Now you are just getting nasty.

WONG: I am not getting nasty. I leave that to you Christopher. The Inspector-General of  Animal Welfare, the independent oversight, was one of the things he removed when you  came to government. Well, you are paying the price for it now. The reality is it is better  for the economy long-term. Of course we will work with the industry to ensure it is  supported.

PYNE: It’s like with asylum seekers. Labor wants to bring the people smugglers back.

WONG: Oh settle down Christopher.

GARDNER: Oh let’s not start another issue. Regrettably we are out of time. Penny it  has been lovely to have you on this morning. Come back soon.

PYNE: What about Anthony?

GARDNER: We love Anthony as well.

PYNE: We love having Penny on.

WONG: I don’t mind that you love Anthony more. I can cope with that.

PYNE: I love you both equally.

(Laughter)

WONG: Even people on the set are laughing.

PYNE: They know it is true.

GARDNER: Enjoy a craft beer over the weekend. Thank you both very much.

ENDS

FRIDAY, 4 MAY 2018

MEDIA CONTACT: STEPHEN SPENCER 0423 596 573

Authorised by Noah Carroll ALP Canberra



