

THE HON BILL SHORTEN MP  LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION

SHADOW MINISTER FOR INDIGENOUS AFFAIRS AND ABORIGINAL  AND TORRES STRAIT ISLANDERS  MEMBER FOR MARIBYRNONG



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP  CAIRNS  TUESDAY, 23 JANUARY 2018

SUBJECTS: Labor’s Northern Australia Tourism Infrastructure Fund advisory  panel, ALP, immigration

BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Good morning everybody, it's great  to be here in Cairns and Australia's tropical north talking about Labor's fantastic kick- start to invest in tourism in Northern Australia.

Today I'm pleased to announce that if Labor is elected at the next election, we will not  only invest $1 billion tourism infrastructure into Northern Australia, but we will make sure  that local voices are consulted and that local expertise is deployed.

So I'm pleased to announce that on top of our commitment six months ago to have a  Northern Australia Tourism Infrastructure Fund of $1 billion, that today, having listened  and consulted with our locals, with our Shadow Ministers Jason Clare and Anthony  Albanese, we will create an expert stakeholders panel, an expert local panel to make  sure that the Infrastructure Fund gets spent where the demand is.The best people to  help grow Northern Australia are the stakeholders in Northern Australia. We'll be  encouraging local representation on an expert advisory board, to assist the  fund allocate the scarce resources, and we'll be asking for people, local businesses and  communities, right across from Cairns and Townsville, Rockhampton and Mackay, to  Darwin and Broome, and North Western Australia.

Tourism is a big part of Australia's future. We want a lot of people in the south of  Australia to come north, and enjoy Australia's own amazing tourist experience. And of  course, being on the doorstep of Asia with the massive expansion in the Asian middle  class, we want to encourage more people internationally to come to Australia. But you  can only do that if you've got good local infrastructure: better roads, better regional  airports, better facilities for ships, all of this and more and encouraging of course a  greater understanding of our Indigenous culture. There's so much to see in marvellous  Northern Australia, we've just got to make sure the locals have the last word in the  allocation of scarce tourism infrastructure so we can get it right.



Happy to take any questions.

JOURNALIST: Will this money be diverted away from existing fund?

SHORTEN: Well we've proposed that using a $1 billion from the Northern Australia  Infrastructure Fund and putting $1 billion of that specifically into tourism. There's been  plenty of problems with the Northern Australia Infrastructure Fund, they're well known,  you only have to talk to business leaders to understand that.

It appears that the Northern Australia Infrastructure Fund is nothing but a mining play.  Big mining companies, be they local or international don't need more taxpayer money.  And what we need to do is involve our councils. We need to make sure that some of the  proposals are not so big - over the threshold of $100 million - that necessary local  tourism infrastructure gets neglected.

JOURNALIST: Can anyone request to be a part of this panel?

SHORTEN: In the next few months we'll establish the panels and we'll be talking to  people, but I want to hear from small business, I want to hear from Indigenous Australia,  I want to hear from the people training the workforce, and we want to make sure we  hear from right across Northern Australia. So yes, it's very open.

JOURNALIST: It's a large area, how are you going to make sure that each area is  listened to from a tourism perspective (inaudible)

SHORTEN: I think it is important that Cairns and tropical North Queensland as you said,  I think it's important that Townsville is, I think it's important that Rockhampton and the  surrounding communities are. I think it's important that Mackay gets it's say. But it's also  important the Northern Territory does and of course North Western Australia has got  many marvellous and beautiful places to visit, that's why I mentioned Broome and of  course other parts of the Kimberley and the Pilbara.

JOURNALIST: What would you say to people who think it might be counterintuitive to  kind of divert money from infrastructure and put it into tourism?

SHORTEN: I think that tourism needs infrastructure. I think it's counterintuitive just to  focus on mining and not look at the diversity of Australia's north. There's a lot more to  Northern Australia than mining, and mining is important - let me make that clear.  Tourism is where a lot of the sweet spot for economic growth is.

You look at the Great Barrier Reef. The Great Barrier Reef is probably Australia’s  number one natural asset. It's been looking after Australia, now it's time that we look  after the Reef and one way we can do that is making sure that we invest in tourism  infrastructure. 64,000 people make their living from the Reef, many of them are tourism  jobs. Right across Northern Australia well over 200,000 people work in tourism. The  middle class of Asia, it's growing in financial success and they've got more disposable  money to spend than ever before. I don't want to miss out on having some of that  resource and some of that experience come to Australia rather than going to Europe or  North America. Australia has got a great story to tell and I also want to encourage  Australians from down south, to come north for the holidays, you don't always have to  fly over Australia to go somewhere else, there's a lot of great things to do up here in the

north.

JOURNALIST: Talking about all things north, do you plan on keeping NAIF going?

SHORTEN: Well we've been disappointed by the performance. We think there is a role  to have infrastructure investment incentivised in the north but I think that if you were to  judge the current NAIF; it's been more talked about than actually implemented.

I think if you talked to business leaders right around Northern Australia, I think there's a  general degree of disappointment. It's been all red tape, all bureaucracy and not a  lot has emerged.

JOURNALIST: You talked about the $1 billion diversions to tourism infrastructure last  year, has anyone approached you about particular projects that they want to get off the  ground?

SHORTEN: We won't embarrass all the confidential or commercial discussions that  we've heard about but there is an appetite to access low-cost finance to invest. You just  have to go and talk to business leaders here and in Port Douglas, or you talk to  business leaders and tourism operators in Townsville, you go and do the same in  Darwin and Broome and other places in north Western Australia. There are people with  good ideas and not a lot of them require a lot of money.

And of course, the regional councils up here have got a very good set of ideas for local  tourism, they just need a bit of leadership from Canberra and that's what we're offering.

But today's announcement is very straightforward: we're saying that we have a $1 billion  tourism infrastructure fund and we're going to invite the locals to be part of the process,  not just making applications but helping advise and filter the grants and applications to  make sure that we get it right. If you want to know how to do something go and talk to  the locals, that's what I know.

JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten can I just get you on something else?

SHORTEN: Sure.

JOURNALIST: The Government is suggesting that New Zealand's offer to resettle  some asylum seekers from Manus Island has led to an increase in people smuggling  boats. You support Jacinda Ardern's offer, is there a risk that this is effectively  undermining Australia's border control efforts?

SHORTEN: Well, if the Government really believed this rather than overreaching why  are they concluding the American deal? I mean if the argument is that people may want  to go to New Zealand, I'm sure that people might want to go to America. The fact of the  matter is, that I do support the resettlement deal in the United States, for example.  We've got to get those people off Manus and Nauru.

Now what the Government tries to do is that because we have and support constructive  efforts to resettle people that somehow that means you're against stopping the people  smugglers - that's not right.

If you follow Mr Dutton's logic to its conclusion, the only way that you could deter people  from people smuggling is keeping them indefinitely for the rest of their lives in  settlements on Manus and Nauru. I don't even think he believes that.

Labor is very clear: we do support stopping the people smugglers, we don't support  bringing people who come by boat and people smugglers to Australia, but that doesn't  mean we've got to keep them indefinitely in these facilities in PNG and Nauru.

JOURNALIST: Labor's National President, Mark Butler has lashed out at factional  warlords in the party, warning the ALP will wither if local members aren't given a say. Do  you agree with that assessment, that no other labour or social democratic party gives  members fewer rights?

SHORTEN: I haven't seen the entire contents of Mark's speech but what I would say is  this: the Labor Party before I became Leader had about 42,000 members. It's now got  about 56-57,000 members, so we've had a 30 percent increase in membership.

But Mark is right we've got to keep pushing to involve people. I made it clear when I  became party leader in 2014, in a speech which Mark generously referred to, that we  need to be a party which has more members and involves more people in decision  making.

I have to say I am grateful for the degree of unity that the Labor party has shown. I think  that the Liberals when they peer over the neighbouring fence, and the Nationals, are a  little jealous of the Labor Party's unity compared to their own division. I'll have a look at  all of the proposals before our National Conference.

JOURNALIST: Weren't they some pretty damning comments by Shadow Minister Mark  Butler? He says that backroom buffoonery and factional warlords are destroying the  ALP and left members with fewer rights than, he believes, any other party. What  confidence can voters have in the ALP if its own party members are showing that it's full  of Labor buffoons?

SHORTEN: Well both Mark and I were elected by ballots of the rank and file so the  Labor Party has engaged in reforms. Mark's right, no party can ever rest on its laurels.

I have no doubt though that when you look at the alternative - I mean the Greens are  notorious for their lack of democracy; trying to understand the Green party is like  understanding, sort of - you know, Russia, and understanding what is going on there.  And as for the Liberal Party, they are going through all sorts of agonies in New South  Wales for their very basic reforms.

The Labor Party always needs to do better. We always need involve more people. I am  very pleased that we have had a 30 per cent increase in membership since I became  leader but I'm keen to do more.

But what I want to do if we want to restore people's faith in democracy, we've got to  make sure that we talk about the issues which everyday Australians are concerned  about. And top of that has got to be cost of living. We've seen wages growth at the  lowest in 50-plus years. So what ordinary working Australians and pensioners see is the  cost of everything is going up, except their wages.

That's why I don't support Mr Turnbull's proposition to give a $65 billion corporate tax  cut - that's the issue which Australians stop me, Australians say to me in the street, “Bill  why is Malcolm Turnbull copying America with $65 billion tax cuts for rich companies,  big banks and multinationals, at the same time, ordinary wage earners and pensioners  are battling cost of living?”

It all comes down to priorities between different political parties. When it comes to tax  reform, Mr Turnbull has picked his priority and I have picked mine. Mr Turnbull has  picked tax cuts for large companies - $65 billion worth - and I have chosen to support  wage earners and not increase the taxes of people under $87,000 a year with a  Medicare Levy increase.

JOURNALIST: But looking at those comments that Mr Butler has made, they're pretty  damning. Would you say they're embarrassing? Would you regret them? Like is there  anything you can do about those specific comments?

SHORTEN: Well, what we will do is that the Party will discuss further ideas about  increasing Party membership. But I suppose at the end of the day, what Australians  want to see is their political parties reflecting their experience.

The Labor Party has membership which is nearly 60,000. We benefit from having trade  union affiliation which provides us and puts us in touch with the working experience of  millions of Australians.

I think that when you look at the internal division in the Liberal Party, we saw it again as  recently as yesterday between Mr Turnbull and Mr Abbott - the disquiet in the LNP and  the National Party and indeed, some of the ructions in the Greens.

The Labor Party is focused on the cost of living battles of everyday Australians.  We  want to restore peoples’ confidence in the process. That's why I'm here today talking  about boosting tourism in Northern Australia, which will be a driver of growth, and jobs,  and sustainability and good jobs. And that's why when it comes to tax cuts, corporate  tax cuts, I notice that the International Monetary Fund has done some analysis of Mr  Trump's corporate tax cuts - what I say about that is that what Mr Trump does in  America is up to him. I'm interested in Australia. I know for certain that when you give  $65 billion away in corporate tax cuts to large companies and multinationals, when  ordinary wage earners and pensioners are battling cost of living, that's neither smart nor  fair.

I have got my priorities on tax; that's looking after working class and middle class  Australians. Mr Turnbull has made his priorities, his choices, he is looking after the top  end of town.

JOURNALIST: But in terms of the Shadow Minister, there's no kind of commentary  there?

SHORTEN: No.

JOURNALIST: Can I ask a question about the Great Barrier Reef?

SHORTEN: Yeah, please, that's great.



JOURNALIST: So yesterday, the Turnbull Government announced they were putting  $60 million into really revamping it. Do you guys - does Labor think that's enough and  what do you guys have in store because obviously it's huge for tourism?

SHORTEN: I think that everyone agrees that we need to protect and save the Reef -  and if we want to save the Reef, it's time to get serious.

Mr Turnbull's superficial announcement yesterday shows he's not getting serious about  the Reef. I said earlier in this press conference that the Great Barrier Reef is probably  Australia's number one natural asset. The Great Barrier Reef in many ways has looked  after Australia, it's now Australians' turn to step up and do a little bit of looking after the  Reef. That's why we think that Mr Turnbull, rather than doing these superficial and small  amounts, should have looked at greater protection for the Reef, greater resources for  the clean-up.

The other thing I'd like to say to Mr Turnbull is that if you're serious about the Reef, it's  one thing to splash a couple of million here and a couple of million there, as nice as that  is - you have got to have real policies on climate change. Everyone knows that climate  change is threatening the viability of the Reef, we want to protect the Reef, we want  people to keep coming here as we encourage them to do. You can't be serious about  protecting the Reef whilst you're pursuing other policies which do nothing to stop the  harmful effects of climate change on the Reef.

Thanks everybody, see you later.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: LEADER’S OFFICE MEDIA UNIT - 02 6277 4053

