H

I if

,- r. j

H HI rH -

-

THE HON. BILL SHORTEN MP

LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION

SHADOW MINISTER FOR INDIGENOUS AFFAIRS & ABORIGINAL  AND TORRES STRAIT ISLANDERS  MEMBER FOR MARIBYRNONG  E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW  ABC 774 - JON FAINE  FRIDAY, 16 MARCH 2018

SUBJECTS Labor's plan for a fairer taxation system; Batman by-election;  foreign affairs

JON FAINE: Mr Shorten, good morning to you.

BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE LABOR PARTY: Good morning Jon.

FAINE: How does announcing franking credits being withdrawn entice Liberal voters  to support the Labor Party instead of the Greens on the cusp of a by-election in  Batman?

SHORTEN: Reforming the Budget, making changes of a system which  disproportionately favours the wealthy, where you can get an income tax refund even  though you haven't paid any income tax, is good policy but what it also does is it  shows that Labor is determined to make sure that we can fund our schools, that we  can reduce the waiting lists for elective surgery, that we can do something about the  long lists of aged care where people are not getting support.

FAINE: Sure I understand that's tax reform, I'm specifically asking you though about  the wisdom of announcing about franking credits being taken away. You're trying to  get Liberals in Batman, in Preston, in Reservoir, in Northcote to vote for you but  you're attacking one of their core issues days out from a by-election, how is that  smart?

SHORTEN: No I think that treating the voters with the respect to put forward ideas  as opposed to just slogans, I think that's actually what Australian politics requires.  The last six months of Australian politics I think we would all agree, regardless of  one's political biases, has been tiny and tawdry. What this nation wants is they want  to know, who has a vision for the future and of course how can you make sure that it  happens. I do want to create space in the Budget so that we can look after our aged,

that we can look after our health system and we can make room for tax relief for low

and middle-income earners.

FAINE: Do you accept the assurances you're now receiving from any number of  pensioner groups, as well as individuals telling their story, that there actually are  people dependant on the aged pension, with a tiny little nest egg and withdrawing  their franking credits, the cashability of franking credits, will affect their quality of life,  will affect their income, they will be worse off?

SHORTEN: I think that pensioners and part-pensioners always deserve the support  of governments and oppositions.

FAINE: Do you accept some of them would be worse off under your policy?

SHORTEN: Well I think that pensioners are always better off under Labor and I can  say that because it's Labor who has fought for the energy supplement, $360 to make  sure that it goes to pensioners, the Government won't do that. It's Labor who has  said that we don't want to increase the working age to 70, the oldest in the world.  We're the ones who want to close down some of the gap in out of pocket expenses  which have occurred under the Liberals.

FAINE: So you give with one hand but you take with the other?

SHORTEN: I think the health costs for pensioners is a number one issue, Jon I have  to say that.

FAINE: But income, franking credits income, for some people that's something that  they regard as untouchable and sacred and you're taking it away.

SHORTEN: Well it's a system which has been in for a total of 16 years so it hasn't  been - when you say 'sacred'. I do think that we need to put some facts on the table  about our changes. One, no one's pension gets reduced, two, no one's share  dividends gets reduced, three, no one pays any extra taxes but how fair is it that the  taxes of people who are going to work, listening to your show, they pay taxes to  Canberra and then those taxes get paid to people sometimes in the amount of two  and a half million dollars to give -

FAINE: Sorry there's one example of that you don't make a policy on the basis of

one example of it -

SHORTEN: Well, no I think you'll find that 50 per cent of all of these tax refunds go

to the top 10 per cent wealthiest self-managed super funds. What we have is a two  class tax system in Australia Jon. You're never going to convince me it's fair that the  more money you have that you can opt out of the tax system.

Labor has got a track record in the last two, three years of tackling hard issues, as  you would say the sacred issues - negative gearing, why is it fair that property  investors get a tax subsidy and first homebuyers have to compete? How is it fair that  some people can have big discretionary family trusts and they can split income,

when the men and women in our hospitals can't go down to payroll and split their

income?

FAINE: Well then attack family trusts then if you've got that problem.

SHORTEN: Well we've done that.

FAINE: But let's just go back to the franking credits, do you repeat your assurance  made two days ago that under these reforms no one, no pensioner will be worse off?

SHORTEN: What I said two days ago, and it's been our whole voting tradition of the  Labor Party, is that pensioners are always better off under Labor and we'll have  more to say about how we'll help pensioners going forward.

FAINE: Are you inconsistent in the message you're bringing to the people of Batman  about the Adani mine in Queensland? You're up in Queensland saying one thing to  the locals there about jobs and investment and the future and down in the heavily  Greens populated areas of Batman, you're saying something quite different.

SHORTEN: Jon, come on you're a bit better than running Liberal propaganda. I  have town hall meetings in Central Queensland and I have town ball meetings in  Melbourne and Sydney and I say the same thing.

For me, I am a sceptic of Adani, I don't like it, I'm not a fan. And I've said that  because it just doesn't stack up commercially, it's not me who's passed judgment on  the commercial attractiveness of this project, no Australian bank wants to touch it, no  Australian super fund. But what I won't do is create sovereign risk in Government, no  responsible Prime Minister would.

FAINE: No but it creates jobs and sometimes job creation requires government  assistance, you supported the car industry, that required government assistance to  maintain jobs and the Adani mine will require government assistance to create jobs  in Far North Queensland.

SHORTEN: Well I won't be providing taxpayer assistance to that mine project full  stop. And by the way, not only do I say that in Queensland and Victoria I said it two  years ago.

FAINE: To move to Peter Dutton. yesterday he said that he thought that some South  African white farmers needed the help of a civilized country to escape persecution.  South Africa have expressed their outrage at that and have demanded an apology,  but let's go through this bit by bit. Do you accept that there are South African white  farmers who are requiring assistance?

SHORTEN: There are some media reports which would indicate that some farmers  who are experiencing difficulty. I have to say though that I also read media reports  that other South Africans can be the victims of crime. Let's go to the heart of the  matter here: we have a non-discriminatory immigration system. It doesn't matter who  you are, if you're facing persecution you've got the right to apply for protection. That  could equally go for South Sudanese people, refugees or white refugees in South

Africa if they're there. For me what matters is that a case should be assessed on its

merits, if there are applicants the Department should be allowed to do its job and  assess them.

FAINE: Some critics of Peter Dutton's situation, particularly the Greens with whom  you're locked in battle in Batman, have said his comments are racist. Do you think  he's racist in these comments?

SHORTEN: I think observing that there are some people in a minority group get  persecuted, I don't think that makes you racist -

FAINE: No but saying you'd give priority to white farmers from South Africa over

people -

SHORTEN: My view is very clear. We have a non-discriminatory immigration

system. If it's Rohingyas in Burma being persecuted, if it's Hazaras in Afghanistan if  its Christian South Sudanese in Northern Sudan or if it's other groups. For me it is  not the skin colour of the refugee or the, the victim that matters to me its whether or  not they're the victim of a crime and that's the way we treat people in Australia and if  that's the way we treat people in Australia I think that's a sensible principle to  apply across the world.

FAINE: Is Peter Dutton being inconsistent then in his treatment of this group as  opposed to other persecuted groups?

SHORTEN: I don't know what's motivated Dutton to make those comments, you'd  have to ask him.

FAINE: You don't know or you're just not prepared to say?

SHORTEN: No, I don't agree with quite a lot of what Peter Dutton says so, to be  honest-

FAINE: He's appealing to a base, surely he knows precisely what he's doing, he's  appealing to people who are wary and suspicious of migration from some parts of  the world and are welcoming migrants from other parts of the world.

SHORTEN: As an alternative Prime Minister I'm not going to deep dive into every  motive of Dutton or any of the other conservative ministers. What Australians want  from both sides of politics is a plan for the future and what I'm offering is a plan for  the future. This year alone we've said we want to create a national anti-corruption  commission, I've said that we will take on the private health insurers and we're going  to cap the exorbitant price increases at two per cent a year for the first two years of a  Labor administration.

FAINE: Sure but Peter Dutton is an alternate Prime Minister if indeed Tony Abbott is  true when he says after 30 losing Newspolls, which is looming for Malcolm Turnbull,  then the leadership should be reconsidered. It may be Peter Dutton that you contest  the next federal election with, would you rather contest Malcolm Turnbull, Tony  Abbott or Peter Dutton?

SHORTEN: I don't care who the Liberals pick, I think none of them are any good for

this country in terms of their policies for the future. No, listen you're going to find this  year, I'm not always going to keep this, I'm going to try to talk less about the day to  day opponents and more about the big picture, where we want to take the nation.

Quite frankly I've been walking around Preston Market with Ged Kearney this  morning. I'm interested in how people are dealing with cost of living, the fact that our  power bills are going up, the fact that out of pocket costs to go and see the  doctor are growing, the fact that wages growth is flatlining, that young people are  concerned if they're going to afford to go to university. I want to make sure that  pensioners don't feel scared by whatever hysteria the Government's whipping up.

So I'm interested in how ordinary Australians are making ends meet and we've got a  plan to lift productivity, we've said to business if you invest in job creating technology  well we will back you in with tax support. We've got a plan to improve wages, I'd like  to see fair wages, productivity growth, I want to see the economy growing but most  of all I want to see our economy work in the interests of working people. At the  moment a lot of our fellow Australians Jon, think that the game is rigged, that the fix  is in and that unless you're a part of the vested interests, unless you're a part of the  top end of town nothing happens for you. I intend to change that cynicism by offering  good policies and we're going to stick to our guns, fight for what we believe in, that's  what people want to hear.

FAINE: If you were the Prime Minister would we be expelling Russian diplomats as  Theresa May says she's going to do?

SHORTEN: If a Russian diplomat had committed crimes in Australia then we would.

FAINE: No no they haven't in Australia but would we be showing solidarity and  support.

SHORTEN: Oh okay I thought your question was would we expel them in  Australia. No I actually think that Malcolm Turnbull is right on this and that we should  show solidarity with the UK. I am still angry that Putin has never fully cooperated with  the circumstances around the shooting down of the Malaysian plane over eastern  Ukraine. So, if I guess people believe this is as it should be I think Turnbull is right to  be calling out the behaviour and to be supporting Theresa May.

FAINE: Would you go further and expel any Russians from Australia and say we are  lining up with Theresa May, we'll dispatch a couple out of Canberra as well?

SHORTEN: Well to take actions in Australia I'd want to know what actions had been  taken against laws of Australia.

FAINE: In other words no you wouldn't?

SHORTEN: No I'd wait to see what would happen and I'd be advised by our security  agencies. One thing which is little known sort of -

FAINE:

This is what emboldens Mr Putin isn't it? He conducts an act of aggression  and there's no doubt that he's behind it, everyone acknowledges that and next to  nothing is the response.

SHORTEN: Well actually if you go back and look at the response when Tony Abbott  - forget about his shirt fronting comments to Putin - but when he expressed his anger  at what happened to Australians on that plane we were in complete solidarity with  Tony Abbott and again with Malcolm Turnbull here. I'll be guided, when it comes to  the defence of Australia, by our security agencies and our defence experts.

FAINE: Alright I've got one minute left. Indonesian  President Joko Widodo says Australia should now be allowed to join ASEAN, the  meeting gets underway in Sydney today. Would you be encouraging Malcolm  Turnbull to do so?

SHORTEN: Yes.

FAINE: And that gives us as clear an answer as ever. We will see what happens in  Batman by-election, we will see whether or not indeed the plastering of  the neighbourhood with Adani signs, 'stop Adani' the Greens signs has had the  desired effect. Thank you for your time this morning.

SHORTEN: Well I'll just put in a plug for Ged Kearney, she's been a nurse, she's  stood up for workers and the disadvantaged, she's just what the  Batman electorate could use.

FAINE: There's a headline: Bill Shorten supports Ged Kearney, thank you for your  time this morning.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: LEADER'S OFFICE MEDIA UNIT —02 6277 4053

Authorised by Noah Carroll ALP Canberra

