

SENATOR THE HON PENNY WONG  LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION IN THE SENATE  SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS  LABOR SENATOR FOR SOUTH AUSTRALIA





E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  SKY NEWS AM AGENDA  THURSDAY, 3 MAY 2018

SUBJECT/S: Mike Pompeo swearing-in; North Korea; Emmanuel Macron visit;  Australian-France relations; China; Foreign Aids cuts; Budget; Asylum Seekers;  Business tax cuts.

KIERAN GILBERT: Live to Adelaide now, the Shadow Foreign Minister and Leader of the  Opposition in the Senate Penny Wong. Thanks for your time.

It was a very clear message from Mike Pompeo, the new Secretary of State to the diplomats  there at the State Department, saying that the State Department “will get its swagger back” as  he put it. Also to Kim Jong-un, in this, his first official day as Secretary of State, he says “this  is an unprecedented opportunity to change the course of history on the Korean Peninsula” but  “I underscore the word opportunity”. What do you say to those remarks this morning?

SENATOR PENNY WONG, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION IN THE SENATE: First, we  welcome his confirmation, his swearing-in, and also the words that he spoke to the State  Department which project a confidence and a willingness to ensure that American diplomacy  continues to operate around the world and is strengthened and that is a good thing.

My view is we approach this upcoming summit and the developments in relation to North  Korea with both hope and caution and I agree with the Secretary that this is an opportunity.  But he is right to continue to assert the position that the world holds in relation to North Korea  and that is it must commit to permanent, verifiable and irreversible denuclearisation, the  removal of the capability. So he is right to both point to opportunity but also underscore what  the US and the world's position is in relation to its nuclear capability.

GILBERT: As I discussed with Cameron Stewart a couple moments ago, with Pompeo saying  that we’re in the beginning stages here one thing is certain he says, the Administration will not  repeat the mistakes of the past, “our eyes are wide open”, “it’s times to solve this once and for  all” that sort of language. If Kim Jong-un thinks he is playing the Trump Administration,  Pompeo is saying maybe not, you should think again.

WONG: Well again, hope and caution, and the caution comes from the lessons of history  which the Secretary of State is rightly referencing which is we've seen this before from  previous leaders. We've seen North Korea make commitments to President Clinton, to  President Bush which were reneged upon. And we've seen this sort of behaviour where it  looked like there was some hope of a more sensible path and then they took a different one.

So it is an important point for the Secretary to keep asserting what the position is. And the  point we have all made is that whilst these are unprecedented events and they are events we  all hope will yield an outcome, we have to remember that the international community must  stand together resolute in the imposition of sanctions and ensuring that economic and  diplomatic pressure continue on North Korea.

GILBERT: And what is your view on how we have got to this point?  Foreign Minister Bishop  has been very positive about the Trump approach in ending what was known as the doctrine  of strategic patience when it came to North Korea, because that just let them make  incremental gains in the view of our government and others including Donald Trump. But  what's your take on what brought this to a possible resolution?

WONG: There are many factors. There is no doubt that President Trump’s approach has  shaken things up and that has prompted a recalculation by many players and actors in the  region. We’ve seen China more engaged. We’ve seen the international community, including  China, putting in place much stronger sanctions and much stronger pressure on North Korea.  On a less positive note some might suggest that North Korea also believes it has sufficient  capability to bring people to the table. So there are a range of reasons why this might have  occurred.

We are at a point where there is an opportunity, as Secretary Pompeo has said. I hope, we all  hope, that this can lead to the denuclearisation of the Korean Peninsula.

GILBERT: Emmanuel Macron is wrapping up his visit here. He said yesterday it is necessary  to introduce balance in the region, and it is important not to have any hegemony. This was in  the context of China. Is there more scope in our relations with the French, particularly in the  Pacific in a strategic sense or a counterbalance sense to the assertiveness of China?

WONG: The French are a Pacific power and we welcome more engagement, a deeper  cooperation with them.

What I would say is two points. The first is if you read President Macron’s speech to the US  Congress I think what he articulated there were values and interests that we share. As he  said, balance in the region, stronger multilateralism, a regional order in the 21st century world  order that isn't predicated on hegemony.

The second point on the Pacific - and I know you have spoken to me and to Richard (Marles)  about this previously - is obviously Australia needs to do better. We need to do more. We've  seen a lack of focus by the Prime Minister and others on the region. We’ve seen more  competition in the region which we have spoken about.

So we do need to work with other partners but we also need to ensure we pay attention, we  work in partnership and the government should ensure that there are no further aid cuts in the  Budget which is handed down next week. We need to work harder and making sure you  maintain and increase your aid budget is part of that. Instead the government has been going  in the other direction with $11 billion in cuts.

GILBERT: So let’s pick up on that because I’m interested in your thoughts on foreign aid  spending less than a week out now from that Budget. Can we expect in the Budget reply an  increase on that front, given not just the humanitarian idea but, as you rightly point out, there  are strategic implications as well out of overseas development?

WONG: That's right. We have an interest in a peaceful, stable and prosperous Pacific and  international development assistance is part of that.

I’ve already made the commitment as Shadow Foreign Affairs Minister that we will spend  more than the government. We will invest more than the government in international  development and we will be clear about the quantum of that prior to the election.

But really the test is for the government here. There is not much point bringing out a White  Paper that talks about increasing soft power when you are cutting development assistance  which is part of that and that is what Julie Bishop has done. The government really needs to  make sure it puts its money where its mouth is and stops using the international development  budget as an ATM to fund company tax cuts.

GILBERT: Did you regret the fact that it was the Gillard Government that first stopped that  trajectory to the original goals set by Kevin Rudd, which would have met the Millennium  Development Goals? It was Julia Gillard’s Government that paused that trajectory, that’s the  history?

WONG: The history is aid increased in every year we were in government. Aid in this  Government has been cut by $11 billion.

GILBERT: But that trajectory..

WONG: You can talk about trajectories, how about real cuts? We are at the lowest level of  international development assistance since records began. That’s what has happened under  this government. You can’t project power in your region if you are walking away from it.

GILBERT: Onto this poll that we have done, Sky News and Reachtel, it shows there is strong  support for this idea of a 90 day limit for asylum seekers in the offshore centres of Manus and  Nauru. This is something put forward as draft platform by Shayne Neumann to have a 90 day  limit. Is this an idea that you support?

WONG: The principle of offshore processing being temporary is of course a Labor principle  and it has been really appalling the way in which Peter Dutton and others in this government  have used offshore professing as an indefinite detention.

I think what your polls shows is that Australians do understand the importance of breaking the  people smuggling business model, of making sure that we don’t have in place incentives for  people to get on boats, but, they do want a system which is reasonable and fair and this  government has turned offshore processing into a system of indefinite, and at times, punitive  detention. I think what this poll shows is that is not where most Australians are and that is  certainly not the approach Labor is taking if we are to win government.

GILBERT: Do you support the idea of a 90 day limit on Manus and Nauru for those asylum  seekers? Is this something you’d advocate at the Conference?

WONG: It seems to me we should be advocating for detention for processing purposes to be  limited. It’ll be a matter for Shayne about how we approach that. We don’t have a specific limit  in our policy currently and these will be matters that the National Conference will discuss.

I think the more important point is what is the purpose of offshore processing? It doesn’t have  a purpose of indefinite detention and that has always been our position.

GILBERT: The risk though is, you’ve got that policy on the one hand of supporting the  offshore processing and that these people won’t be resettled here, if you get to any limits set  by Labor what do you do then?

WONG: The point is, you want a system that is temporary and you need to ensure there are

countries of resettlement, third countries, and what have we seen in the years of this  government? Inaction on that.

My view is that if Labor had been in government that would have been a diplomatic priority for  us, to ensure, in the context of increasing our humanitarian intake, that we negotiated third  country resettlement options. That has not been a priority for this government.

GILBERT: On to some economic stories. As we mention, the Budget looming, some numbers  done by AlphaBeta run by the former Kevin Rudd adviser Andrew Charlton. The front page of  the Australian shows those companies that have received their first wave of tax cuts created  jobs 24 percent faster than those that missed out. Is this an endorsement of the government’s  economic prescription?

WONG: Let’s dig into the figures that that survey actually showed. It showed the majority of  companies - and remember, these are small and medium enterprise companies where you  might suggest that the behaviour might be different to say the Commonwealth Bank - but the  majority of the businesses that got a tax cut actually banked it and fewer than 1 in 5 employed  more people.

So if they’re the statistics that the government is relying on, it is no wonder that the BCA  members refused to sign a letter that guaranteed higher employment as a consequence of  this $65 plus billion - it will be more, I’m sure, at the next Budget update - but this $65 billion  tax cut this government wants to hand out to big business and to foreign shareholders.

GILBERT: But half the cut went to wages, investment or growth - that’s pretty significant isn’t  it?

WONG: I think it’s about 19 percent actually led to higher employment, and over 50 percent  banked the cut if you look at the statistics. As I said, it isn’t any surprise is it, that you’ve got  the BCA and some of its members refusing to sign a letter to the government saying we’re  going to employ more Australians.

GILBERT: Shadow Foreign Minister Penny Wong, appreciate your time as always, we’ll talk  to you soon.

WONG: Nice to speak to you Kieran.

ENDS

THURSDAY, 3 MAY 2018

MEDIA CONTACT: STEPHEN SPENCER 0423 596 573

Authorised by Noah Carroll ALP Canberra



