SENATOR THE HON MARISE PAYNE Minister for Foreign Affairs

MEDIA RELEASE

AMBASSADOR TO LEBANON

Today I announce the appointment of Ms Rebekah Grindlay as Australia’s next Ambassador to Lebanon.

Australia and Lebanon share longstanding and warm relations underpinned by strong community and  cultural links. Australians of Lebanese descent make a valuable contribution to modern Australia.

The Australian Government is a strong advocate of Lebanon’s sovereignty. In 2016, we announced a  three-year $220 million package for humanitarian assistance to those affected by the Syria conflict to  provide shelter, food, water and sanitation, health and medical services. This includes $76 million to  help refugees and host communities in neighbouring countries, including Lebanon.

Lebanon’s economic development provides opportunities for growth in trade and commercial ties. Its  prospective oil and gas industry and growing demand for education, infrastructure development and  financial services present opportunities for Australian companies.

Ms Grindlay is a career officer with the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade (DFAT) and was most  recently Director, Iraq and Syria Taskforce. She has previously served overseas as Deputy Head of  Mission, Australian High Commission, Islamabad and Second Secretary, Permanent Mission to the  United Nations, New York. She also worked for the United States Congress as Energy and Security  Adviser.

In Canberra she has served as Acting Assistant Secretary, Middle East Branch, DFAT; Head, International  Energy Taskforce, DFAT; Director, Resources and Energy Section, DFAT; and Director, United Nations  Security Council Taskforce, DFAT.

Ms Grindlay holds a Master of Public Policy from Princeton University and a Bachelor of Commerce from  Sydney University.

I thank outgoing Ambassador Glenn Miles for his contributions to advancing Australia’s interests in  Lebanon since 2015.

Media Contacts  Henry Budd: +61 429 531 143

No publication date: received by Parl Library 09/10/18

Wade Laube: +61 409 193 057

Authorised by Senator the Hon Marise Payne, Minister for Foreign Affairs, Australia.

No publication date: received by Parl Library 09/10/18

