

CHRIS BOWEN MP  SHADOW TREASURER  SHADOW MINISTER FOR SMALL BUSINESS  MEMBER FOR MCMAHON





E&OE TRANSCRIPT   DOORSTOP INTERVIEW  SMITHFIELD  SATURDAY, 25 AUGUST 2018

SUBJECT/S: New Prime Minister, same bad policies; Banking Royal Commission  a “populist whinge”; big business company tax cuts; speculation of a mini-Budget.

CHRIS BOWEN, SHADOW TREASURER: Thanks for coming everybody. After a  week of soap opera, intrigue, chaos and dysfunction. A where the Government of was  so concerned about the people of Australia that they shut down the Parliament to avoid  a confidence vote and to avoid Question Time because they had no ministry and no  Prime Minister. The end result is, we have a new Prime Minister with old policies. The  new Prime Minister a key architect of the Turnbull Government’s failed policies.

The Turnbull government was not unpopular because of Malcolm Turnbull's personality,  the Turnbull Government was unpopular because they have the wrong policies for  Australia. Wages growth is at a record low; the Government's big priority was an $80  billion corporate tax cut, and because they resisted for so long the calls and need for a  Royal Commission into Australia's banks. We now have a Prime Minister who said the  Royal Commission was a populist whinge and who voted against a Royal Commission  into the banks more than 20 times. The day he becomes Prime Minister is a day that the  Counsel Assisting the Royal Commission said to the Royal Commissioner that he is  within his rights to consider the recommendation of criminal charges against two of  Australia's biggest banks. None of this would have happened if Scott Morrison got his  way. None of this would have happened if Scott Morrison was in charge of the policy in  which he was opposing the Royal Commission. It only happened because Labor  insisted on a Royal Commission being called and Malcolm Turnbull gave in.

This is a man whose signature policy was an $80 billion corporate tax cut, a man whose  big idea on becoming Treasurer was increasing the GST. Scott Morrison was not a  success as Treasurer and now he's been rewarded for that failure with promotion to  Prime Minister.



Well, there's one way to end this chaos and dysfunction and this illegitimacy at the top  of Australia's government and that is to call an election. Labor's ready. Labor is ready  for an election. We would welcome an election any time the Prime Minister chooses to  call it.

An election will give the Australian people the chance to throw this mob out once and for  all and install a Prime Minister in Bill Shorten with a proper agenda for Australia's future.  A Prime Minister that doesn't believe in cutting penalty rates for those working on  Sundays a Prime Minister that doesn't believe that the best thing that could happen for  Australia is an $80 billion corporate tax cut, that doesn't believe that $17 million of cuts  to schools is the right thing for Australia. With a united Labor team behind him, unified  purpose and policy, unified with an alternative plan for Australia.

This Government is broken, and getting rid of Malcolm Turnbull does not fix the  problems, it underlines them. The Abbott-Turnbull-Morrison government has been a  failure and a key architect in many instances is now the Prime Minister of Australia.

Happy to take any questions.

JOURNALIST: Josh Frydenberg has made his first public appearance with Peter  Costello. What do you make of that?

BOWEN: Congratulations to Josh Frydenberg on being appointed Treasurer, I look  forward to debating him during an election campaign on as many occasions as we can.  He is of course the architect of another failed policy, the National Energy Guarantee,  which in many instances, in many ways, was the reason for the fall of Malcolm Turnbull.  So, we will give him a day, which he can celebrate his appointment with Peter Costello,  but Josh Frydenberg will be judged on his performance, and I look forward to holding  him to account for that performance.

JOURNALIST: There has been some discussion already about a mini-Budget. Is that  something you would like to see from the government?

BOWEN: A mini-Budget will only be successful if it drops cuts to schools, a mini-Budget  will only be successful if it deals with low wages growth, a mini-Budget will only be  successful if it delivers something like Labor's bigger, better tax cuts for Australians  earning less than $125,000 a year. A mini budget is for a reset of policy. The trouble this  Government has is that the Prime Minister was the Treasurer, he wrote the failed  policies. The new Prime Minister = and congratulations to him - can't come in and  expect that he can institute new policies, when he was essentially number two in the  Parliament. We need a policy reset, and a mini-Budget won't bring about a policy reset,  but an election will.

JOURNALIST: Do you think the new Prime Minister will be under pressure to move the  party to the right?



BOWEN: Well Scott Morrison has had a track record of playing both sides of the street  when it comes to playing the right and left wings of the Liberal Party. What we need is a  government with a clear agenda, a clear mandate, and that can only be delivered by an  election.

Scott Morrison can play factional games and try to start a new balance between various  factions in the Liberal Party, but we argue an election would deliver a new government  with the unified agenda, and that would deliver what the country needs. This is just  shuffling deckchairs. After this week of melodrama, chaos and dysfunction, the  Australian people look at this Government and say that a mini-Budget  won’t fix it, an  election will.

JOURNALIST: Does a Scott Morrison Prime Ministership present a bigger challenge  than Peter Dutton Prime Ministership?

BOWEN: We are ready any of them, we relish an election at any time. Whether it be  Peter Dutton or Scott Morrison. These are all people who have subscribed to failed  policies. Failed policies. We set the policy agenda for five years, made the tough calls  and tough decisions, called for a Royal Commission when it wasn't fashionable. Scott  Morrison said it would never happen and that it was a ‘populist whinge’. Bill Shorten and  Labor have got the big calls right. Tony Abbott, Malcolm Turnbull, Scott Morrison, all  three of them, have got the big calls wrong. The Abbott-Turnbull-Morrison government  has been an abject failure, and the way to fix it is an election and an election soon.

JOURNALIST: Now Scott Morrison yesterday mentioned backing Medicare, does that  take away from Labor’s attacks on their Medicare policies?

BOWEN: Two words don't change the policy. This is a guy who sat around the cabinet  table when they were putting a $7 GP tax on, when they froze Medicare benefits, this is  a guy who has presided over cuts to hospital funding. The Australian people know there  is one party that cares about Medicare, the party that invented it - Labor.

JOURNALIST: One last question from me, Labor wants to end indefinite detention of  asylum seekers. Does coming against the man who stopped the boats impact Labor's  chance to portray itself as tough on border protection?

BOWEN: We have made tough policy calls on this, we believe there should be more  effort on resettlement. We think the New Zealand offer should be accepted. What we  believe is we can do that in a way that maintains strong border protection, and again  that is the policy we will take the election.

Scott Morrison has been the architect of the policies as Treasurer, which he is now  seeking to distance himself from, and we won't be participating in that exercise, but we  will be reminding people that he was right by Malcolm Turnbull’s side as penalty rates  were cut, as corporate taxes were proposed to be cut. We have a different agenda, Bill

Shorten has a positive agenda and unified team behind him.

If Scott Morrison is so confident, go and see the Governor General again and call an  election. Call it today, we would welcome it, we are ready for it, we would relish it.

Thank you very much.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: JAMES CULLEN 0409 719 879





















