



THE HON ANTHONY ALBANESE MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR INFRASTRUCTURE, TRANSPORT, CITIES AND

REGIONAL DEVELOPMENT

SHADOW MINISTER FOR TOURISM

MEMBER FOR GRAYNDLER



E&OE TRANSCRIPT

RADIO INTERVIEW

5AA ADELAIDE - TWO TRIBES SEGMENT

WEDNESDAY, 22 AUGUST, 2018



Subjects: Liberal Party, Malcolm Turnbull, Tony Abbott, Australian political

system.



HOST: Good morning to Anthony Albanese and Christopher Pyne.



CHRISTOPHER PYNE: Good morning gentlemen.



ANTHONY ALBANESE: G’day. I think that Two Tribes is now just about the

Liberal Party. I am redundant.



HOST: No. We will get to you Albo.



PYNE: Boom tish.



HOST: You will have your turn.



HOST: You guys changed the rules to make it too hard. You can’t have any fun

these days.



HOST: I would argue that what the Liberals are going through now is something

that was invented by the Labor Party about 10 years ago Albo. But we will get to

that shortly because we are going to start with Chris. Now Chris, you are obviously

a Malcolm Turnbull loyalist and you tried yesterday to do your level best to prevent

Peter Dutton from becoming Prime Minister. The consensus though is that

Malcolm Turnbull’s position is untenable. Given that that is the case, what is Plan

B?



PYNE: I don’t think that is correct that Malcolm Turnbull’s leadership is untenable.

Yesterday he won 48-35. A number of people who voted for Peter Dutton have

indicated to the Prime Minister in writing that they will support Malcolm Turnbull

and not support another spill motion. That means that in fact Malcolm Turnbull’s

position has strengthened, not weakened, since yesterday’s vote. I don’t believe

that we will see another spill in the short term. In fact I think the Government is

skating close to the precipice and my colleagues need to understand that. We

have three colleagues who have indicated they would sit on the cross benches if

Peter Dutton becomes the Prime Minister and in that situation, you know we could

well be at an election within a matter of weeks. So people need to really take stock

of the destruction that they are wreaking on the Government and that this is

actually a zero-sum game. One party wins, another party loses. And if the other

party wins it will be the Labor Party in government and Bill Shorten will be the

Prime Minister. That is what people are playing with.



HOST: But how can Malcolm Turnbull go into Question Time today when everyone

in Australia knows that more than a third of his ministers don’t want to work for

him?



PYNE: Because he has more than 50 per cent plus one of the party room ballot

and that is a win. There is an old saying in politics that one vote is a win, two votes

is a landslide and three votes is wasted effort. The truth is of course that it is a

saying, but what it means is that a win is a win is a win.



HOST: Given how much damage, and it is undeniable damage that he has

sustained in the past 24 hours, what do you make of the theory, and it is a strong

one, that rather than the more progressive people in the Liberal Party copping

Peter Dutton ending up seizing power, that you come up with a compromise

candidate, namely the Treasurer Scott Morrison, and that for the good of the party,

to stop the blood-letting, Malcolm Turnbull should walk away and that Scott

Morrison should contest a ballot?



PYNE: Because Malcolm Turnbull was elected Prime Minister in the 2016 election.

He is the person who is most popular in the country to lead the country. All of the

polling indicates that he is vastly more popular than Bill Shorten. The public willed

Malcolm Turnbull to succeed and they want him to win and to do well. The idea of

removing him simply because there are a group of people in the Liberal Party who

have tried to destabilise his leadership and that the answer to that is for them to

win and for him to walk the plank is quite frankly absurd. Malcolm Turnbull is the

Prime Minister. I support him. A majority of the party room supports him. The public

wants him to stay. Stability is our watchword for the future. Instability will see Bill

Shorten as Prime Minister of Australia and potentially very soon.



HOST: We will get to Albo in a tick. Thanks for your patience Albo. One final one to

you though Chris.



PYNE: This happened to him the other day too, if you remember.



HOST: It did. It did.



ALBANESE: I had nodded off.



HOST: We will get to you shortly. Neither of you were disappointed about playing

the role of mute either.



PYNE: He did it better than me.



HOST: Chris, would you serve under a Dutton Prime Ministership on the

frontbench?



PYNE: I don’t believe that there will be a change of leader. I believe Malcolm

Turnbull will lead us to the next election and with a growing economy, with a million

jobs in the last five years, with reform in education and health, in aged care, in

child care and defence industry that we have been able to do as a Government I

think we will win, especially when the contest is between Malcolm Turnbull and Bill

Shorten.



HOST: But what if you didn’t? What would you do?



PYNE: I’m not going to speculate about that because my view is that Malcolm

Turnbull will lead us to the next election and I am a loyal member of his Cabinet.



HOST: Albo, what is wrong with our political system? This is the fourth time now in

less than a decade that the Australian people have voted for X and got Y.



ALBANESE: I think there is a bit of a cultural problem. I bring it back to - I don’t

want to blame any individual - but I think the rise of Tony Abbott to the Opposition

leadership in 2009, where he had a ruthless and relentless negative campaign

against the Government, including between 2010 and 2013, when Julia Gillard was

the Prime Minister, the argument that an elected Government wasn‘t legitimate, I

think, did a lot to damage the fabric. We saw motions in Parliament every single

day to suspend standing orders and to disrupt and wreck and the problem is that

Tony Abbott brought that wrecking strategy into Government as the Prime Minister

and he is still doing it now.



HOST: OK, but tell the truth Albo. That might have sounded too strong. I’m

certainly not suggesting that you are lying. You can say what you like about Tony

Abbott, but you were a massive Kevin Rudd loyalist right through that whole

torturous process within the ALP. Surely you would have to concede that this

knifing, backstabbing, backgrounding model that the Liberals are now paralysed by

themselves was pioneered and perfected by the ALP with what happened to Kevin

Rudd in 2010.



ALBANESE: I say that publicly. I said it in Parliament again last night that the

mistake of the 23rd of June, 2010, where people woke up the next morning and

saw that there was a different Prime Minister and there was no lead-up to that at

all. You will well recall people including the caucus chair, Daryl Melham at the time,

as he left Parliament House saying the ABC were making it all up.



HOST: Yes.



ALBANESE: Which is what most people thought. That changed politics in this

country.



HOST: Because I’ve got to say and to both of you and you Chris, I mean as

Defence Minister the big story here has been the insecurity for the workers at the

ASC. You guys on both sides of politics, not to put too fine a point on it, are giving

our listeners the shits because it looks like you are just talking about each other

and not talking about the voters.



PYNE: Yes and I absolutely hate it. And I agree with them. They are right. Those

colleagues of mine who want to have this introspection here in the bubble in

Canberra, fed by the media, but they are obviously giving them the story, are not

talking about the things that people care about.



Those 90 workers at the ASC, I am happy to be able to say that we have put in

place, I have done this as Defence Industry Minister, a number of other projects

which means that even though they might not be wearing ASC t-shirts they could

well be wearing Offshore Petrol Vessel t-shirts, Collins Class Sustainment and

Maintenance, Osborne South Shipyard and Construction, Osborne North

Submarine Construction, scholarships at the Naval Shipbuilding College. And that

is what I have done. We have created about 1200 new positions across the

shipyard so even though the 90 are at risk on the Air Warfare Destroyer because

of course the Air Warfare Destroyer is finishing, I believe they will all get jobs

across the shipyard so that we won’t lose their skills from the workforce.



Now that is the kind of stuff that we should be doing. When Anthony was the

Minister for Infrastructure and Transport, every day he got up and he tried to do

jobs for the Australian public that made their lives better and as Defence Industry

Minister, that is what I want to be able to focus on every day and I think I have

done for the last two years. But these kinds of ludicrous distractions, the public are

right to be furious about them.



ALBANESE: Can I say this David, I agree with what Christopher just said. The

Whitlam Oration speech I gave a couple of months ago, that got written up by

people who never read it, talked about his. It talked about the political culture. It

talked about the need for more consensus across the political spectrum between

unions and business as well. The form of politics that we have descended into at

the moment is a huge problem and I tell you what people missed perhaps in the

poll that was out on Monday was there was a 32 percent vote not for the Liberals

or the Nationals or Labor, but for someone else.



HOST: We made that point yesterday on air.



ALBANESE: Now what that shows, well - great minds think alike David. You know

32 per cent are voting for what ends up being chaos because we know what

happens when we have the minor parties in control. They swap around and you

don’t know what you are getting. But that is an indictment of - we need to do better

- the Coalition and the Labor Party - need to do better.



HOST: Is this where potentially someone like a Peter Dutton might well be a more

dangerous political adversary for Labor at the next election? Nineteen percent of

that 32 you mention are from other - largely One Nation, Bob Katter in Queensland

and others. If the Liberals are led by a conservative more able to galvanise the

conservative vote, doesn’t that make him potentially more dangerous than Malcolm

Turnbull for you?



ALBANESE: I think it is delusional. I think the idea that you win elections from

either the hard right or the hard left in Australia is delusional and Peter Dutton we’ll

see, if he was the Leader of the Liberal Party, we’ll see people who are currently in

the Liberal column go across to us because he’s divisive. When he was Health

Minister he was the guy who wanted a GP tax. He was the guy who cut health.

He’s the person who has shown on asylum seeker issues no capacity for any

empathy with people at all.  I think that he would alienate the great mainstream of

Australia, which is basically in the centre and I think that he would be a disaster for

the Liberal Party if he was Leader.



HOST: I note that Christopher didn’t interrupt you once as you were providing that

free character assessment there Albo. Was any of that wrong Chris?



PYNE: Well I think Malcolm Turnbull is the best person to lead the Liberal Party to

the next election. I have been saying that for many years. I have strongly

supported Malcolm Turnbull. He is the person with the biggest brain in the room

and he is the kind of guy who I think the Australian public warm to. If he wasn’t

being attacked from within his own side I think we would be in a much better

position politically and I don’t think that we should change the leadership. I think

that the disease of the last 11 years in politics, when people feel that there is a bit

of pressure on the first thing to do is smash glass and change the Leader, is very

destructive and I would leave you with one statistic. We have had six leadership

spills in the Liberal Party in the last ten years. We had four in the previous 50.



HOST: The numbers do speak for themselves.



PYNE: They do.



HOST: Chris Pyne, Anthony Albanese, as always a rollicking chat and that was a

particularly good one. You guys are absolutely in the thick of it over there in that

mad house and we appreciate you making time for us here in Adelaide. We are

particularly glad too Chris that you gave us that answer on that ASC question

because, as you both said in your own different ways, that is exactly what politics

should be about. Chris Pyne and Albo, good on you.



PYNE: Thanks a lot.



ALBANESE: See you guys.





ENDS

WEDNESDAY, 22 AUGUST, 2018

MEDIA CONTACT: MATTHEW FRANKLIN 0411 659 868



