THE HON ALAN TUDGE MP  MINISTER FOR CITIZENSHIP AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS

TRANSCRIPT

CREDLIN - SKY NEWS

INTERVIEW WITH PETA CREDLIN

12 March 2018

Subjects: Government performance; Cost of Living; Proposed citizenship changes; English  language testing; Population growth

EO&E

PETA CREDLIN:  Australia's immigration and citizenship programs have been called into question over the  past few weeks, with calls for the Government to look at reforms, and they are getting  louder.

Joining me tonight in the studio is the Minister for Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs, Mr  Alan Tudge, a Victorian, proud Victorian. Nice to see you in Sydney.

ALAN TUDGE:

G'day, Peta.

PETA CREDLIN:  I want to get into the detail, because people are hungry for a debate on these issues that  you now have in your portfolio, and I think also, with your background in Human Services,  you have got a lot of experience with the coal-face issues of integration that we are seeing  in a lot of our communities, particularly in Victoria.

But you are going to cop a general political question. I know you from your time at  Melbourne Uni as the president of the student union. You are a student politician, now a  Minister...

ALAN TUDGE:

A long time ago now, Peta.

PETA CREDLIN:  The Government is starting to get runs on the board, you started to get those runs on the  board going into Christmas.

There are policy wins; of course, the jobs argument is one of the strongest you have got; this  trade win over the weekend; I think the economy broadly speaking, the numbers there, the  growth is certainly still there.

Why, if all of that is put together into a narrative, are you still 18 months behind in the polls  and it still looks like, poll after poll, that we will see Bill Shorten go to the Lodge? What has  got to change?

ALAN TUDGE:  I hope Bill Shorten does not go to the Lodge, and as you pointed out, we actually had quite  good momentum up until Christmas and early this year, and then had a couple of issues  which stopped that momentum.

And we need to now rebuild it and continue to focus on those core strengths of ours and  the core things which matter to the Australian people.

And that is their economic circumstances, do they have a job, are their wages growing, are  we getting cost of living pressures down, and are we ensuring that the nation is safe and  secure? Those are our twin priorities and that is what we are going to be focussing on.

PETA CREDLIN:  I think you have got runs on the board in both of those areas, particularly national security,  and I know you have got a lot of experience in that area.

I think the economic runs are there, but the Government is so focussed on the high level  economic narrative —jobs and growth, which does not mean a hell of a lot to ordinary  people, and quite rightly these corporate tax cuts - but they do not tend to have a personal  household impact.

But they have got cost of living pressures, they have got the power bills going up, they are  worried about their mortgage payment and the credit card bill that hits every month, and  too much is put on the never-never with people because they cannot make ends meet.

The Labor guys go out there, the ACTU, with this new Work Choices Mark 2 sort of  campaign, tapping into the issue of wage growth and people feeling like they are falling  behind.

The Government, I watched this happen to us in '07. If the Government does not get out in  front of that campaign, the unions can outspend you four-to-one, easily.

What can you do to sort of contend with what you know is coming from the Labor Party and  the unions and start selling a more household message, as opposed to a high level economic  message? And it is not either or, to be fair. It is not either or.

ALAN TUDGE:  And I think it is both. The fundamentals fundamentally are there, as you have pointed out,  and we need that to translate into wages growth and we think that it will. We also need to  ensure that jobs growth continues, and we have got a great track record there.

When there is strong jobs growth, people have more job security generally, because they  know that they have got other options. If that job falls through, they have got other options  in relation to jobs.

And then on the other side of the ledger is the cost of living pressure, as you are pointing

out, the main one there being energy costs, and that is where we have done a power of

work there, led by Josh Frydenberg.

We are seeing downward pressure now on those energy bills, and we want to ensure that

they continue.

If we have got good job security, if we have got wages going up, and then on the other side

of the ledger, if we have got cost of living pressures coming down, then I think individuals

will start to feel better off and start to reward the Government more.

PETA CREDLIN:

I always think it is so important for ministers to give voice to concerns from their own

portfolios, but issues that, you know, you might be working on in a policy sense which are

high level but they touch on the lives of ordinary people.

You are in a perfect position in your portfolio to do that, to give voice to their concerns. You

gave a big speech to the Menzies Research Centre last week.

You touched on a whole raft of changes. You want to bring in reforms to citizenship and

English language testing, and I guess cultural integration. Take us through those.

ALAN TUDGE:

In essence, what I was arguing last week in my speech to the Menzies Research Centre was

that we have been tremendously successful at integrating people into Australia, and that

has been the secret to our multicultural success.

But the past is no guarantee of success for the future, and in fact, there is some early

indicators that we are not doing quite as well as we have done in the past. For example,

English language is no longer as prominent amongst migrants.

We are seeing a greater concentration of the overseas-born in particular pockets, more so

than in previous decades. And that says to me that we need to do further work to guarantee

that people will be integrated and therefore guarantee our multicultural success in the

future, hence, an English language test.

We want to ensure that people are taking reasonable steps to integrate. And we want to

assess that, and we also want to ensure that people are adopting Australian values, and do

some sort of assessment of that also before they become a citizen.

PETA CREDLIN:

Let me just jump in there so I can follow you. This is from the point where they apply to

come to Australia, or once they are here they are assessed, you are saying, in an ongoing

way?

ALAN TUDGE:

Different people come in in different pathways. Typically people will be here for three or

four years before they become a citizen. In that time, we would like people to have a

demonstration that they have made an effort to integrate, that they have adopted

Australian values.

And certainly, when they are applying for Australian citizenship, that they can speak the

language at a reasonable level and can read and write in English, because fundamentally

that is the glue for the community, and if we do not maintain English as a common glue,  then you will start to get fragmentation.

PETA CREDLIN:  When you had this as part of a package of legislation last year, the Labor Party violently  opposed the English language component. They called it snobbery and other things.

I know from in the past that when I have looked at polling on English language testing, often  it is migrant Australians who support it more than ever, who say unless I came here and  learnt the language as I did, I would never have been able to, my kids to feel like they are  real Australians after one generation.

So do you think the Labor Party will be locked into their position of opposition? You are  hoping to turn the crossbench if that is the case?

ALAN TUDGE:  I am having very good negotiations with the crossbench. I am taking it steadily. I am trying  to communicate with the Australian public about the importance of this as well.

Now, where will Labor end up? They are almost saying today that English language is no  longer important for migrants, and I think that is a ridiculous position because it is the glue  to our community and it underpins our social cohesion.

It is also in the interests of the migrant, by the way, because if you have got better English,  you have got a better chance of getting a good job, you have got a better chance of taking  advantage of all of the opportunities which Australia has to offer.

And indeed that is why people like the Migration Council came out and supported my  position last week, as well as other prominent members of the multicultural community,  because it is in the interests of the migrants to learn English, as well as being in the interests  of society generally.

PETA CREDLIN:  If I was critical of the Government today, one of the things I have found, there is not enough  contrast with you and Labor. You have not fought along those ideological lines that decide  why you vote one way as opposed to another.

This is the perfect fight and it is not a budget cost. It is a fight about what sort of country do  we want, where do we want to see ourselves go.

ALAN TUDGE:  Absolutely. This is fundamentally a battle about how we want to see Australia in the future.  Our multicultural success is built on integration, not on assimilation, but not on separatism,  which you sometimes see in Europe, on integration.

And we want to make sure that we guarantee the future of Australia's model of  multiculturalism. The Labor Party appeared to be, from their position on things like English  language, to want to more be going down the separatist path, which is the European path.

I do not think it has been particularly successful, where you do get ethnic enclaves.  Sometimes they do not adhere to the national values of the particular country and they do  not speak a common language, and so you do not get social cohesion.

In fact, you get social fragmentation. Let's stick to our model. It has worked, but we have

got to build on it and we have got to put in place these key things to guarantee our future.

PETA CREDLIN:

Speaking of Europe, you know, a lot of those countries are, and I am thinking of the outer

areas beyond Peripherique in Paris where you have Sharia law operating, for example, you

have areas where there are complete police no-go zones.

There are places in Birmingham and Luton in the United Kingdom which are the same. When

you talked before about cultural values and mores testing and things like that, I can see how

you assess English language.

How do you assess those other, less tangible parts of what makes Australians Australians?

And what are you going to do to contend with the treatment of women in some of these

communities?

There were statistics last week around International Women's Day, 200,000 women in

Australia are at risk of genital female mutilation. So how do we teach people coming to this

country that Australia has a very different view to women than the countries they might

perhaps have come from?

ALAN TUDGE:

It is a very good question. So the three things which I want to see in place before you

become a citizen, a) reasonable level of English, b) a demonstration that you have tried to

integrate, and c) a demonstration that you have adopted Australian values.

One of the core Australian values is equality of the sexes, and you can reasonably assess

that. If a couple is not sending their daughter to school, for example, because they do not

believe in girls' education, well clearly they are not adopting that fundamental value of

equality of the sexes.

If they believe in female genital mutilation or some of those other practices, then that again

would be contrary to our fundamental values...

PETA CREDLIN:

Are we going to be brave enough then to knock them back from citizenship?

ALAN TUDGE:

We have not documented exactly what this values framework will look like. We have

indicated a few of the common values which have to be there.

The rule of law, the belief in our parliamentary democracy and obeying the law, equality of

genders, freedom of speech, those fundamentals which underpin our society which we have

to adhere to.

In addition, as I said, the other component is what I would call the integration framework.

We want a person to have demonstrated that they have made an effort to integrate before

they become a citizen.

That could be as simple as sending your kids to school, it can be endeavouring to get work

rather than always being on welfare, and also involving yourself in the community because

you have joined the local soccer club or the Rotary Club or something like that.

A pretty simple test, but nevertheless a strong signal you are making an effort to join  mainstream Australia.

PETA CREDLIN:  I was a bit shocked when I saw some statistics in a speech recently to say that there were  about 60 per cent of people on welfare, Menzies Research Centre statistics, still on welfare  after ten years, coming in on the refugee program, which brings me to the whole issue of  immigration more broadly.

Bob Carr has been outspoken, Dick Smith has been outspoken, not about immigration per  se, Minister, but about the rate of immigration, and in the case of Dick Smith, wanting to see  Australia have a considered population plan.

We plan for everything else in this country. You know government better than me.  Everything has a plan.

The only thing that does not have a plan is immigration, because it is the whim of the  Expenditure Review Committee, Treasury, and the Treasurer every time we go into a  budget.

Right now they will decide what our immigration plan looks like, when there is no plan that  anyone else in the public can see. Why are we so scared of the debate on immigration and  the rate?

Luke Foley, no friend of Tony Abbott's, was out there today saying we have got to have this  conversation. If we have got pressure on infrastructure and housing and roads, we have got  to say that looking at the rate of immigration is a smart way to go.

ALAN TUDGE:  Let me just firstly pick up on the introduction to that question, which was talking about the  employment rate of migrants.

Actually, the employment rate of migrants is about the same rate as everybody else. There  is an issue with the humanitarian- with the refugees, where they are not getting employed  at the same rate and we need to do further work on that.

PETA CREDLIN:  Yeah, the refugees. Yes, yep. I mentioned the refugees.

ALAN TUDGE:  But they represent about 10 per cent of the overall employment intake as such. Should  there be a broader debate about immigration policy? I think there is one which is going on  at the moment.

There actually is a population plan in the form the Forward Estimates, as you know, Peta.  The Forward Estimates, over four years, does document what the population growth will be,  and what the immigration intake roughly will be over the next four years, and then it is  reassessed every year.

As you know, there is a consultation around that as well, Peta. It does go out to the  migration councils, to the different community groups, the business groups, and asks them  what they think about the population for the year ahead and the four years ahead.

PETA CREDLIN:

Yes, Minister, but there is not a formal consultation. It is calls from the Immigration Minister

to a few mates, let's be very honest, and I have been in the ERC room when this has been

discussed.

It is Forward Estimates, based on what it does to the bottom line. You say to them oh, well,

we are not coming in where we want to come in on growth; Treasury, you might have to dial

that immigration number up a little a bit, or Treasury, the Prime Minister wants to dial it

down a little bit.

It is used as an input to the bottom line of the budget. It is not about how many immigrants

can Australia take at this time, what does our infrastructure in Sydney or Melbourne look

like?

Because we cannot bring people to this country and under law require that they live in

Dubbo. I wish we could, but we cannot and it is never successful when we try.

Foley's point today is, in Canberra you set these numbers, and in Macquarie Street he and

Gladys Berejiklian have to deal with the infrastructure problem, but they do not get a

chance to say what they think is a good number for New South Wales, and similarly Victoria

and Queensland.

If you said just then we are having this debate anyway, why, Alan Tudge, don't you want to

be part of this debate? Why doesn't the Federal Government want to be part of an

immigration debate? Is it just because it came from Tony Abbott, or do you just not want to

talk about it?

ALAN TUDGE:

I am talking about it in the area of my responsibility, which is largely in relation to

integration. For the people who come here, I started a debate last week to say well, how do

we best ensure that people come here and integrate to guarantee our social cohesion? That

is my responsibility.

PETA CREDLIN:

And all credit to you for having the conversation that a lot of Australians are having,

particularly in your state of Victoria, particularly in Melbourne.

They are having this conversation at home, you are at least talking about it publicly. Why

can't you get your colleagues to talk about immigration rates as well?

ALAN TUDGE:

There is, as I said at the outset, there is a broad discussion already in relation to the

immigration rate, and it is looked at each and every year by the Cabinet in the Budget

context.

You are right, you have been in those meetings; I have not been in those ERC meetings

when they are decided.

PETA CREDLIN:

And the Cabinet look at it the day the budget goes out. The Cabinet do not see it before the

budget goes out. It goes out the day.

ALAN TUDGE:  There are a lot of decisions, though, which are made by the ERC, as you know, Peta, in the  budget context. But the forward projections, though, of course are in the Forward Estimates  for everybody to see.

The New South Wales Premier, the Victorian Premier, can see those numbers, can have a  reasonable expectation about what the migration figures are going to be. Of course, that is  just one input on population.

It constitutes maybe about half of the population growth. The other half is from births, and  in relation to New South Wales and Victoria, often there is a net migration out of the other  states to those states as well, so immigration is probably a smaller component overall of the  population growth for those cities.

The problem, to be honest, is that, particularly in Victoria, the infrastructure has not kept  pace with the population growth. I am up here in Sydney at the moment, there are  infrastructure builds going on everywhere across the city.

There is not that in Victoria. In Victoria, they are cancelling infrastructure projects, which  you know, particularly the East-West Link project, and spent $1.2 billion to not build a road,  rather than actually build the roads which are needed.

We are particularly feeling it in Victoria, and I know that if Matthew Guy is elected later this  year, he will reverse that situation and get on with the job of ensuring that Melbourne can  move again.

You made a point about can you put people in other parts of Australia. In part, you can.  About 20 per cent do have conditions on their visas, but it is difficult to do that.

And of course once they do transfer and become citizens, as many do down the track, then  of course the right of the citizen is to live wherever you like. Most of the jobs happen to be  in Melbourne and Sydney, and so that is where people want to go.

PETA CREDLIN:  All credit to you. You are having a debate that Australians want to have about what their  communities look like in 20 and 30 years' time, and I think it is a privilege to be an Australian  citizen and you are ensuring that people earn that privilege.

But please, go back to Canberra and invite them to start to get into a rate of immigration  debate as well. Thanks for your time, Minister.

ALAN TUDGE:  Thanks, Peta.

[ENDS]

