1











THE HON ALAN TUDGE MP  MINISTER FOR CITIZENSHIP AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS



TRANSCRIPT

ABC NEWS

MATTER OF FACT WITH STAN GRANT



22 May 2018

Subjects: Regional migration

E&OE…

STAN GRANT:   One Nation Senator Pauline Hanson today repeated her call for a cut to Australia's  immigration numbers. But elsewhere in Canberra there was a different message on  migration.

The Regional Australia Institute wants country towns to become priority settlement areas  for new migrants. They argue that such a program will make these, sometimes dying towns,  especially those in need of workers, prosperous again.

The idea comes at a time when the Federal Government is considering changing the skilled  visas program to bind migrants to rural areas. But is restricting the movement of new  arrivals the right approach?

Australia's population is growing and metropolitan cities like Melbourne and Sydney are  experiencing growing pains. Despite a housing bubble, rapid population growth and a strain  on the infrastructure, people continue to flock to the country's two largest cities.

But the opposite is happening in regional Australia, rural towns are suffering a brain drain  with young, educated people fleeing the sticks to pursue life in the city.

These suburban refugees take their local talent and innovation with them and then leaving  behind boarded up ghost towns with local employers scrambling to find workers.

A new report by the Regional Australia Institute says migration is the key for future rural  growth. The report's authors say the problem isn't that there aren't enough jobs for people  in rural areas but there aren't enough local workers to fill them.

2



With the right incentives migrants could help provide stability to Australia's regional  communities. Some communities are already experiencing the positive impacts of  migration.

In Mingoola in regional New South Wales the local school has reportedly been saved from  closure and African migrants are working at local farms.

Now the Government is considering changes to regional skilled visas to force migrants to  spend a set period of time in rural areas - but will forcing people to live in the country  deliver the outcomes for the communities?

Alan Tudge is the Minister for Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs. I spoke to him earlier.

[Excerpt]

Minister, thanks so much for giving us your time.

ALAN TUDGE:   A pleasure.

STAN GRANT:   I do want to get into the issue of regional migration in a minute but of course immigration is  front and centre in the news today with Pauline Hanson withdrawing her support for the  Government's corporate tax cuts.

Because of her concerns about immigration those votes were crucial, so where does this  leave the corporate tax cuts now?

ALAN TUDGE:   We still want to get those corporate tax cuts through because we think they are vital for the  future prosperity of the nation.

We have to be competitive internationally because capital is mobile these days, Stan, and if  we have got high tax rates it may well go elsewhere. We will continue to negotiate with the  crossbench and still try to get it through.

STAN GRANT:   Mathias Cormann has said that it is going to be difficult now to try to win One Nation  support. If immigration cuts is what she's looking for is that something that the Government  would consider?

ALAN TUDGE:   We have got our settings for the next 12 months and they are reviewed every 12 months.  And what we've said is that there will be a cap of 190,000 permanent residents come into  the country and that has been the case for the last few years.

We may well fall underneath that which is what we are tracking towards for this financial  year to be considerably lower than that.

STAN GRANT:   That wouldn't placate Pauline Hanson but from what you are saying there, can I read into  that that it's something you may reconsider in negotiations if you are looking 12 months  from now of reducing that number to win One Nation support?

3



ALAN TUDGE:   The Prime Minister and the Treasurer have been pretty clear that our immigration settings  are a right, they are largely demand driven, Stan.

And when the employment market is becoming very tight we actually do need people to  come in from overseas to be able to fill the job vacancies because Australians simply aren't  available in many regions to be able to fill those spots.

And we don't want to slow down the economy because we have put a brake on desperately  needed immigration.

STAN GRANT:   If the price of getting Pauline Hanson's support is cutting immigration you are saying, no,  you don't want that support on that basis?

ALAN TUDGE:   We have got our settings which have been made for this financial year, then the upcoming  one and we will be sticking to those settings.

STAN GRANT:   Okay. Let's move on to this issue of regional migration and you talked about the need for  jobs.

At the moment there is a visa where people commit to working in regional areas for a set  number of years or are sponsored by a regional employer. What you are looking at now,  how will that differ?

ALAN TUDGE:   We are taking a look at this, Stan, because you can, in essence, get sponsored into a region  by a business as a permanent resident.

So when you step into the country you go to that region as a permanent resident but you  may only stay there for a few weeks or months and then decide to quit that job and move to  the city.

We would like to have a look at that to say is there any way that we can effectively bind that  person to that region, at least for two or three years so they have got a chance of settling.

STAN GRANT:   What do you mean by bind? Is this an enforced number of years? Is this a visa with  restrictions of movement? How do you define that?

ALAN TUDGE:   We haven’t got to that yet, Stan, because we are still working through that. But when they  are on a visa we can obviously put conditions upon that visa even if it is a permanent  residency visa.

And what we would like to do, if somebody is sponsored into the country to go to a region  to work in a business who have sponsored them there, we ideally want them to stay there  for a few years and hopefully make that their home.

And if their kids start to go to school there, they get involved in the local community, then  the chances are they will stay in that region and they will start to make that region flourish.

4



STAN GRANT:   Aren't incentives though a better approach than restrictions which may be difficult to  enforce?

ALAN TUDGE:   There already are some incentives there for people to go to the regions. I mean here we are  talking about, you know, can we put conditions upon the visa to stay in that particular  region for at least two or three years?

Because we have heard too many times where people are sponsored into the country, they  get into the country and then they soon quit that job and then go back to the cities and that  is against the spirit of what the visa was there and provided for in the first place.

STAN GRANT:   So just get specific on what those conditions might be. Would they be that if you do not stay  for X number of years, your visa is cancelled?

ALAN TUDGE:   People have suggested that that is what should be put in place but we haven't settled on  this.

We are having discussions with various people as to how we'd do this. We have got a  problem generally in many regional areas where they have now got more jobs than there  are workers.

And so we are going through an exercise of thinking well how do we encourage new  migrants who come to the country to want to go into those regional areas and make it their  home.

And in doing so they not only fill the jobs which are there but also they take a bit of pressure  off the big cities.

STAN GRANT:   You deal with skilled migration. So what are the types of positions that would be available,  where are the needs and what types of areas - what regional centres are you looking at?

ALAN TUDGE:   There is a list of 673 occupations already which we have identified as having skill shortages  in the regions.

And if your occupation is on that list then a business can sponsor a person into the country  for that occupation if they can prove they can't get an Australian to do the job.

But even with that extensive list, what we are finding is that there are still some locations  which have incredibly low unemployment.

I was in Kalgoorlie, for example, two or three weeks ago where the unemployment rate  there is three per cent and the locals tell me that they have got 500 jobs which are going  vacant because they simply can't get any warm body to be able to do the jobs.

So they are speaking to me about can we make it a bit easier to be able to in essence  sponsor people in from overseas for those positions, so that those businesses can still grow  and those regional centres can still grow and we are taking a close look at that.

5



STAN GRANT:   How much more has to be, yes there are jobs and there may be lifestyle advantages, but we  know that people who are coming to Australia are looking first to the cities.

They maybe have family connections there that may be more opportunity there. So how do  you wean people away from going first to those cities and to looking at regional Australia?  An area they may not be in any way familiar with?

ALAN TUDGE:   That is a very good question, Stan, and that is what we are putting our mind to at the  moment. And you are right that most people do go to the cities. In part because most of our  immigration program is demand driven.

And what I mean by that is that it is either businesses or other family members who sponsor  an individual into the country and for a particular location, for a particular job or indeed it is  because you have got a spouse or your family member who is joining you.

And most of those jobs and most of the existing migrants who are sponsoring other people  in tend to be in the capital cities.

We have already got some initiatives in place to encourage people to go into the regions but  we are looking at what else we can do to encourage people to do that.

That might mean looking at the skills list and ensuring that there could be a broader set of  skills at least for example that enable people to sponsor people in.

It could also mean, as I am currently doing with the Goldfields and up in Far North  Queensland, a regional agreement specifically for those regions which enable those regions  to be able to take in more people from overseas to fill positions.

STAN GRANT:   Just finally, are there questions as well about social cohesion? You are taking people from  different cultures, different backgrounds, potentially different religions.

We know that there is traditionally an inherently more conservative, cautious maybe  approach- attitude in some of these regional areas. How do you deal with this question of  social cohesion and create opportunities for people in those communities?

ALAN TUDGE:   I think the best examples are actually when they are community led and we do see pockets  of that around the country where you have got sometimes the local town leaders or the  local council who will lead an initiative to try to get more people into the country - into their  towns from overseas.

Sometimes they put their hand up actually for refugees to come there. For example in  Katanning a small town in Western Australia, where I visited recently, it has got quite a large  population of Burmese refugees who are there now working at the local abattoirs.

They are connected into the local church and they are very warmly welcomed by the  broader community as far as I could tell.

So there are good examples of how it does work and I think by and large Australians are  very warm hearted and do have open arms for people who want to come here, who want to

6



work, who want to contribute and to want to make the country flourish. We've built on  immigration and I think we can do more of it.

STAN GRANT:   Minister, appreciate your time. Thank you again.

ALAN TUDGE:   Thanks very much, Stan.



[ENDS]



The Hon Alan Tudge MP, Minister for Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs  WANTIRNA SOUTH, VICTORIA

