NICK CHAMPION MP

SHADOW ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR MANUFACTURING AND  SCIENCE  MEMBER FOR WAKEFIELD

E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  AM AGENDA WITH TOM CONNELL  THURSDAY, 5 APRIL 2018

SUBJECTIS: Reliability in the power sector, magazine expense allocation, South  African farmers humanitarian visas

TOM CONNELL: Joining me now is Labor front bencher Nick Champion from our  Adelaide studio. Nick Champion thanks for your time today.

I want to start on Liddell. I found it interesting that Alinta is buying this or wanting to buy  at least on the basis of saying manufacturers have come to Alinta and said we need  power we'll give you a guarantee amount of power we'd like to buy. Fifty thousand jobs  is what they're talking about is the amount of jobs involved in the manufacturers push.

Does that give you pause for thought on why these people might be really keen on this  energy?

NICK CHAMPION: Well Manufacturers Australia have been lobbying on this for some  time. They came to see me in 2013 or maybe a bit before that. I made a speech to the  Parliament about the need for urgent action in particularly to protect the gas market and  gas prices. They've been lobbying Government for a long time. The unfortunate thing is  that they've got a Government that is at the present moment consumed with its own  division, consumed with its own, if you like makeup. We've got one section of the  Government that one to nationalise one fuel source, sort of conservatives become  communists and we've got another part of the Government run by Mr Turnbull which  just wants to talk, endlessly talk and not take any action. This is a Government that's  divided, really hasn't got any achievements in energy to hang its hat on. So what we  have now is yet again more talk about jawboning one company into selling an ageing  power plant which has been around since the time of the HT Holden.

(cross talk)

CONNELL: Just on want Alinta wants to do Nick Champion. They're keen to buy it, they  want to do the due diligence. If they go in and say this, this old girl can go for five or  seven years yet. Wouldn't you be ready and willing for that to happen given you are  talking about 50,000 blue collar jobs?

CHAMPION: Well we have to be cautious, I think, about these sorts of offers because  due diligence will turn up many facts. Maybe Alinta will be interested in the plant at the  end of the process and maybe they won't. Alinta has had some form in this regard.  These are essentially commercial decisions made by commercial entities. But even if  we kick the can down the road Tom, that won't get the Government off the hook.  They've got to actually do something about ensuring that there is reliability in the power  sector. We've seen Professor Finkel make a report and that report lasts a couple of  weeks after being announced. We've seen now this "energy guarantee" be proposed  but the Government I see we've got back benchers like Mr Kelly out there creating  doubt and uncertainty about the Government's capacity to implement that. What we've  got is a Government that is at war with itself and how can any commercial entity have  any confidence in investment or indeed divestment of power plants in the present  circumstances.

CONNELL: To be fair Craig Kelly said he says he supports the NEG and is seeking to  influence it. We'll see if he can get the states and territories to sign up. I want to ask you  about this story in the Daily Telegraph today about several Labor MPs using a big chunk  of their magazine allowance. This is to send money to a Labor back think tank. It's via  spending up to a $1000 a year on a magazine subscription, the Tocsin. Do you  subscribe to this magazine?

CHAMPION: I don't. I subscribe to a few other magazines like The Economist and  Foreign Affairs. You'll find MPs of all party colours do subscribe to magazines, that's  what this allowance is there for. Some MPs buy books to give to primary schools and  the like when they visit. So it gets used for a variety of purposes. I think this particular  purpose done by these particular MPs is done within the guidelines and I don't really  see we are having a debate about in the national media.

CONNELL: Within guidelines but a $1000 for something each year that is available free  on line it doesn't raise any eyebrows?

CHAMPION: The print copy of any material is always more or the digital subscription is  typically added to a print subscription anyway. You'll find that with The Economist or any  other magazine with a print and digital addition you can do this sort of analysis. It's a bit  strange Tom to be honest with you. I think this is a legitimate magazine done by a  legitimate think tank. It's within the rules so why are we debating it on national TV... or  in national papers.

CONNELL: Alright, fair enough. I'll ask you about Peter Dutton. There is still talk of him

considering these South African farmers being brought to Australia on humanitarian  visas. Now the South African Government is saying thanks but no thanks, there's no  issue here. Wouldn't they naturally say that if we're saying there's a possibility in these  reports of a possibility of persecution and the Government at best is turning a blind eye?  Isn't right and proper we don't just take the South African Government's word?

CHAMPION: If there are concerns about law and order or about human rights in South  Africa we should take that up with the Government there. In terms of applications for  refugee status then of course they should be considered on their merits. Of course we  would examine them or have the Immigration Department examine them in a  dispassionate way. The only reason this is again a public issue is because it's part of  the leadership dynamics and the divisions within the Government. We should really,  when we talk about these issues, talk about the Rohingya's or the Hazara's in  Afghanistan or indeed persecuted Christian minorities throughout the Middle East. All of  those people should be also be discussed if we are going to discuss particular groups  that might be vulnerable or persecuted. It's odd that this issue is consuming so much  heat and light within the Government. These issues need to be in any immigration  system really considered dispassionately to see if people are classified as refugees  under the convention. Individual claims should be treated individually while  acknowledging that there are some groups around the world that are persecuted.

CONNELL: Nick Champion thanks for your time today.

CHAMPION: Thanks Tom.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: RICHARD BROOKS (CHAMPION): 0409 285 296

Authorised by Noah Carroll ALP Canberra

