

SENATOR THE HON SIMON BIRMINGHAM  Minister for Education and Training  Manager of Government Business in the Senate  Senator for South Australia



MEDIA RELEASE

7 August 2018

Turnbull Government backs vital youth development program

Young Australians are set for a $1.5 million boost in support from the Turnbull Government to take advantage of the  highly respected Duke of Edinburgh International Award.

Minister for Education and Training Simon Birmingham announced the extra funding in Darwin at the Clontarf  Academy at Sanderson Middle School. Minister Birmingham said the Turnbull Government had committed the extra  funding for the Disadvantaged Youth stream so more young people could build the “essential life skills” the Duke of  Edinburgh International Award fosters.

“We’re backing this program to get more young people from all backgrounds to be engaged and active members of  the community,” Minister Birmingham said.

“The Duke of Edinburgh International Award is one of Australia’s longest-running and proven youth development  programs.

“From right here in the Territory to right across the country, the Duke of Edinburgh International Award has changed  the lives of thousands of young Australians and we want to open it up to more people.

“Our extra $1.5 million in support means 2500 more young Australians from disadvantaged backgrounds can get  access to a program that will foster important life skills that will help them access more education and employment  opportunities.

“The program’s strong voluntary service element also encourages participants to get more connected and actively  engaged with local organisations which will have longstanding benefits for them and the local community.”

Minister Birmingham said the funding boost would allow the Award to reach more young Australians within the  Northern Territory.

“We’re providing a platform for young Territorians to get more engaged in their local communities and learn those  essential social skills which will ultimately help them succeed in school and beyond,” Minister Birmingham said.

“Currently around 550 young Territorians have been funded to participate in the Award and I expect this number to  grow as the program expands and goes from strength-to-strength in the coming years.”

Over 3700 young Australian’s have been involved in the Duke of Edinburgh Award’s Disadvantaged Youth Program  since 2015.

The Duke of Edinburgh’s International Award helps young people aged 14 to 24 to build essential life skills through  volunteering in their community and participation in sport and recreational activities.

The Duke of Edinburgh Award’s Disadvantaged Youth stream supports Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander youth,  refugees, youth at risk, young people in regional and remote communities and young people with a disability to get  involved and participate in the program.

For more information visit: http://www.dukeofed.com.au.

Minister Birmingham’s media contact:   Nick Creevey 0447 644 957

Benn Ayre 0428 342 325

Department Media:                                                          media@education.gov.au

Senator the Hon Simon Birmingham, Adelaide

