

Senator the Hon Bridget McKenzie   Deputy Leader of The Nationals  Minister for Rural Health  Minister for Sport  Minister for Regional Communications

TRANSCRIPT



Sky News with Laura Jayes  16 July 2018  12.00pm



Topics: Immigration inquiry, physical education in schools, FIFA world Cup final

E & OE

Laura Jayes  Let me just quickly ask you about population. Is there any need for an inquiry or is Treasury and Home Affairs  doing enough?

Bridget McKenzie  I think what we have been able to achieve through a strategic and thoughtful approach to our immigration  policy has got the best results. We have got a skilled migration program that is delivering what we need as a  nation in terms of skillsets and I am really comfortable with how Peter Dutton, as the minister responsible  has been handling this.

Jayes  Dean Smith also, as part of this inquiry, wants to see how more immigrants can be encouraged into the  regions. Is enough being done there?

McKenzie  Yeah I think there is. We’ve got some really positive examples within National Party electorates around the  country. We’ve got the Karen Group in a small Mallee town called Nhill, who have really positively integrated  there and are performing key work at Luv-a-Duck, a duck processing program and initiative there, a business.  So we have got some great examples right across regional Australia - the Sikh community obviously, up in  Coffs Harbour in horticulture - of immigrants from right around the world coming and choosing to live out in  our regions. I think we understand the congestion issues within our capital cities and we have a skillset that  needs to be met. So I think we get the settings right, I think we have taken careful and considered approach  to that policy and it is delivering.

Jayes  What is the disconnect then? Because Tony Abbott has been calling for this for quite some time. He says the  annual migration rate needs to be cut by around 90,000 and he’s not alone in all of that. I guess, is there a  perception that immigration is the cause of some of our problems in the cities such as Sydney and  Melbourne in particular when it comes to congestion but it’s not actually that. Is it a bit of a furphy in a way?

McKenzie

Look I am really comfortable with how our immigration policy has been rolled out we have stopped illegal  arrivals through a really focused approach overtime and for that formal migration program, having a  thoughtful approach and making sure we assess applicants according to our needs and our national interests  I think is delivering the right results. Now if that means we don’t meet a certain number, well that’s a good  thing because it means we’ve got the people we need serving our communities and being part of the  broader Australian community. We’ve got a great story to tell on migration as a Nation and we are incredibly  cohesive and we are incredibly diverse. I think we need to celebrate that and sport has been a great part of  actually connecting communities.

Jayes  (laughs) Well let me get to that because the French President, we just showed at the start of the show, was  more excited about this World Cup win than anyone I have seen. well, there were a few people on the  Champs Elysees - I might add. He was dabbing, he was out of his seat, he was certainly very excited, he was  even happy to stand in the rain. Now were you up watching the World Cup and at risk of upsetting a greater  diaspora from either Croatia or France, who were you backing?

McKenzie  I look I am the National Party Deputy Leader so I always back the underdog so I was definitely on Croatia’s  side.  Zen Seselja, a great Senate colleague of mine is also of that background and in the capital city of the state I  represent, Melbourne we have a huge Croatian community so you've got to dance with the one who brung  ya so I think Croatia’s story was actually a fabulous story. A tiny country of 4 million people getting to the  World Cup final I mean it’s just a fantastic story. I have been captured by the World Cup in a way that I  probably hadn’t have prior to becoming Federal Sports Minister and the world game, throwing up some  magnificent examples of athleticism and skill which has been fabulous to watch albeit it in the wee hours of  the morning.

Jayes  Absolutely the we hours of the morning. I have got to confess I was not up for it, I slept through my alarm,  I’ve got 1 million excuses but are you using this, because I think there is a lot of hype around the World Cup,  I’m definitely someone that jumps on the bandwagon and I think a lot of people are, which is great but you  know in true political style, are you jumping on this to try and help encourage more children into sport? Is  this why today you want to launch this push to have sport compulsory in schools?

McKenzie  Well it’s not a new idea, it’s not the first time I’ve said it, it is the conversation I’ve been having nationally  since I became the Federal Sports Minister. We know that Australian children, 81 per cent in fact are not  actually getting enough physical activity and that’s just not good enough.   We know that they graduate primary school without knowing how to swim in many states and territories and  for a Nation that prides itself on its international sporting success in the pool and has all of that inspiration  and motivation that those athletes bring and we just love getting out in the water to our beaches and our  waterways. But our young people need to know how to swim, how to have that fundamental skillset just like  they need to be able to read, just like they need to be able to write and do their times tables.   And so I think we need to get serious about making sure we connect young Australians with sport and  physical activity in a way that is meaningful for them and makes a difference.

Jayes  Now Senator, when I was at school I always thought that sport was compulsory. I don’t know whether the  wool has just been pulled over my eyes and that was a way of forcing me to play sport at school but what is  the situation at the moment at both primary school and high school?

McKenzie

Well physical education as a formal subject is mandatory until year 10, except in South Australia, but every  different state and territory has different ways of implementing that particular target, so not sport proper if  you like, but physical education which might add up to 80 hours over school year.   What we need to be making sure is that young people have opportunities to be active right throughout the  school day. We know that the more that they are active, the more physically fit they are, the better they are  going to do academically. The research is clear there. We have got young children rocking up to school in this  country that do not know how to hop, skip and  jump and it is very,  very difficult to fall in love with sport and  physical activity, to get good at something if you do not have those basics, right? We expect children to be  able to read books, to study Shakespeare, well if you do not have the basic building blocks of literacy, of  reading and writing and spelling, then you are not going to be able to take that next step to Shakespeare.   So it is the same with physical literacy you have to get those building blocks right and that will give you the  confidence and competence to participate in sport and physical activity more broadly. So there is a lot of  work to be done and that is why I am calling on my fellow state Sport Ministers to discuss this at our next  meeting.

Jayes  Okay, so I was just about to ask you that, is this just another call or are there steps towards action here,  because as you point out, you can’t do anything without all of the states and territories on board, you know  it is state run. The second part to my question is, teachers and schools are being asked to do more in the  upbringing of children really, I mean parents have different expectations of students, you know being taught  ethics, morals, manners. Is it really up to schools to do it or is that parents?

McKenzie  Well, I think as a society we need to have a conversation about what is really, really important as part of a  holistic education and I would argue that physical literacy, like numeracy, like functional literacy around  reading and writing, is important to having those fundamental motor skills.   Any good education has to be done hand-in-hand with parents and communities. I mean having been a  former teacher and a lecture in this space, you cannot expect schools to do everything by themselves. I am  the Federal Sports Minister, I’m not a state Education Minister, I recognise our roles and responsibilities, but  I think it is also my job, if I’m wanting to see more Australians, more active, more often then we have got to  start talking about where that can happen.   It happens in community sporting clubs which is why, through the federal budget there’s a lot of money on  the table from the Federal Government to back them in, to increase participation, it also needs schools to  come on board and that means we need to have really collaborative and positive conversations with our  state education colleagues and it means, as parents, we need to take responsibility.   When I went to school and it was way before when you went to school, we had to go through a whole series  of learning how to swim, when to put your face under the water etc until you could swim a full lap of the  pool that just doesn’t happen any more except in Victoria and Tasmania.   So what you are seeing now is parents having to pay upwards of $800 a year per child to get their child to  learn to swim. Now for many parents when they have more than one child, that’s a serious dinner table  conversation about how do we actually give our kids what they need to not be Ian Thorpe, but to actually be  safe and secure around water.  I think we need to get serious about thinking, what is the role of society and  schools in making sure young people have those key skills that they need to be physically active for life and  swimming is one of them.

Jayes  Yep and I’m sure that conversation is being had around many dinner tables or breakfast tables.   Senator Bridget McKenzie, thanks so much for your time, I appreciate it.

McKenzie  Any time Laura.

Media enquiries: Sally-Anne Kahl 0427 604 564

