











THE HON PETER DUTTON MP  MINISTER FOR HOME AFFAIRS

TRANSCRIPT

ADDRESS TO THE NATIONAL POLICING SUMMIT 2018,  CANBERRA





www.minister.homeaffairs.gov.au



17 September 2018

EO&E...........................................................................................................................................



Tim, thank you very much. I acknowledge all of the representatives from the Australian law  enforcement and intelligence communities here today. Thank you for your leadership and  thank you for keeping Australians as safe as they can be in the modern environment.

In particular today I would like to acknowledge Michael Phelan the CEO of the ACIC. There’s  important work coming out of the ACIC today and I’ll touch on that briefly.

It is a pleasure to be here with you. Thank you for the invitation and for the opportunity to  speak about the Government’s work to secure Australia’s borders and to keep Australians  safe.



Australians are fortunate because we inhabit a lucky country. As a nation built from  migration - populated with people from different ethnicities from all around the globe - we  are in the main a tolerant, respectful and inclusive country.

We are also an economically prosperous country. One in which as the Prime Minister says; if  ‘you have a go’, ‘you will get a go’.

Australia prospers from international trade and travel. From the movement of people  coming to our country, being involved in trade, in goods, services, businesses, money and  ideas have flowed across our borders and if we are open for business, we all benefit.

In fact last financial year, travellers to our country made more than 43 million crossings  across the Australian border. It averages more than 117,000 people every day and these  numbers are expected to grow to 53 million by 2020-21.

In 2017-18, we also welcomed more than 9.1 million international visitors, who injected  some $42 billion into the Australian economy.

2

www.minister.homeaffairs.gov.au

So by being open for business, Australians have continued to contribute to a global supply of  investment, of ideas and of skilled labour.

During the same year more than 59,000 Australian businesses exported their goods and  services to the world and each year, our farmers feed 60 million people around the globe.  So being connected to the world and open for business benefits our nation, but this same  connectivity as we well know is not purely a force for good.

It is also being exploited by individuals and groups who wish to evade our border controls,  undermine our sovereignty, destabilise our democracy and to harm Australians.

Not only do we face growing and intersecting challenges - from both at home and abroad - the threats are becoming much more sophisticated.

The operational context in which Australia’s domestic security and law enforcement  agencies work is constantly changing as our world becomes increasingly connected through  the use of new technologies.

Accordingly, Australia’s border security is fundamental to safeguarding our unique and our  fortunate way of life.

The challenges Australia faces require innovative responses and strong leadership. With the  Government’s establishment of the Home Affairs Portfolio in December last year, we have  been on the front foot.

Until this point, we were dealing with the 21st century with a somewhat antiquated  manner. Commonwealth capabilities did not have a consolidated focus on domestic security  and law enforcement. They were dispersed across a number of departments and agencies.

The ability to respond to rapid changes in the threat environment was constrained and as  we know too well, malicious groups and individuals are highly adept at finding and  exploiting your weaknesses.

Yes, Australia’s law and enforcement and security agencies have a strong and commendable  record. They are, as we all know, among the best in the world at what they do, but in the  Government’s view, the status quo was no longer enough. If the threats that we face are  evolving, so must we.

This morning I will delve into some of the threats we face and how the Government is  responding to them.

The ocean around us - the maritime border zone consisting of territorial and economic  waters - is as we know the crown jewel in our border protection system - but we can’t take  it for granted. The threat posed by people smugglers is ongoing. We saw this very clearly  with the recent arrival of a boat of asylum seekers to the north coast of Queensland.   This was the first illegal maritime venture to reach Australia in more than four years and the  Government responded immediately.

3

www.minister.homeaffairs.gov.au

All 17 individuals who arrived on that venture have now been returned back to Vietnam  with a very strong message that others who seek to do the same will follow the same return  path.

Moreover, to reinforce the security of our borders, maritime surveillance and response  capabilities have been bolstered with expanded aerial surveillance and on-water patrols.  This recent illegal maritime arrival is testimony to two things: one, the enduring nature of  the threat and two, the ongoing vigilance and commitment to our border protection policies  remains absolutely essential.

While this people smuggling venture failed, the reality is that people smugglers are still  likely to use the arrival of this group to our country to persuade others to attempt to take  the illegal journey.

There are 14,000 people in Indonesia right now who are waiting to get on to vessels to  come to Australia. We must never forget the lessons of the past: that between 2008 and  2013, Australia’s borders were undermined, our sovereignty was surrendered with more  than 50,000 people travelling illegally to our country on more than 800 individual boat  voyages.

Just as we must not forget the lessons of the past, so too must we not forget the lessons of  the modern day: that the migration crisis in Europe continues to play out to this very day.

The Government will not tolerate a return to past circumstances under which more than  1,200 drowned at sea, as we are seeing on the Mediterranean people are drowning every  day.

I spoke earlier about the sheer volumes of travellers across Australia’s border. To put this in  a broader perspective; in 2017 more than 4.1 billion people globally travelled by air. The  increase in the international flow of people and goods is an enormous challenge for those  tasked with ensuring the security of travellers and those goods.

The Australian Government’s first priority is, and will always be, to keep Australians safe and  secure - both at home and abroad.

History has shown that the aviation sector remains a particularly attractive target for  terrorists. They are motivated by the potential for the high civilian casualties, the significant  economic damage and widespread fear and disruption an attack can cause, and the publicity  which accompanies a successful attack. We saw this risk almost come to fruition just over a  year ago in our own country.

Last July, a group of men - inspired by Islamic extremism - were involved in a plot to  smuggle an Improvised Explosive Device onto an Etihad A380 flight out of Sydney, carrying  400 passengers and crew and bound for Abu Dhabi.

4

www.minister.homeaffairs.gov.au

Thanks in part to intelligence provided by partners including Israel, Australian authorities -  as part of a joint operation - were able to uncover the plot, and identify and arrest those  involved.

What could have been a tragic and devastating incident was thankfully avoided.   In the wake of this incident, the Government is investing $294 million in a range of new  initiatives to protect Australians and strengthen the security of our aviation sector.

In addition, the Government has introduced legislation designed to give police broader  powers to conduct identity checks at airports. They can order a person under our proposed  legislation to ‘move on’ from airport premises where they pose a criminal or security threat.

These are powers that the Australian Federal Police have advised they need to better secure  our airports. The Government has heeded that advice and hope the Parliament will follow  course.

Aviation security is also a priority issue for our international partners. As part of Five  Country Ministerial meetings late last month, I met with my counterparts from Canada, New  Zealand, the United Kingdom and the United States to discuss how we can better  collaborate to meet our common security challenges.

From these talks we will established a new group - the 'Aviation Security 5'. This group will  support enhanced information sharing about emerging threats in the aviation sector and  bolster global standards for aviation security. Through initiatives such as these, we will  ensure Australia remains a safe place to travel and is a world-leader in aviation security.

Sadly, we are also a world-leader in a far less desirable category. Australia’s appetite for  illicit drugs is insatiable.

We are all too aware of the harmful effects of illicit substances on our streets. Beyond the  enormous financial and health costs; the impact of drugs on our communities and families is  incalculable.

While some threats, like terrorism, can at times feel far away from every day life for most  Australians, very few of us have been spared the impact of drugs. Most know a friend, a  family member or a colleague who has struggled with addiction or been the victim of drug  related crime.

This morning, the Australian Criminal Intelligence Commission will be releasing the Illicit  Drug Data Report 2016-17. This report provides the national picture of the illicit drug  market and includes detection, seizure, arrest and price data.

It’s vitally important that we understand these details when shaping strategies to combat  illicit drugs - and again I want thank ACIC’s CEO Michael Phelan, as well as the team at the  Australian Institute of Criminology, for their efforts in producing it.

5

www.minister.homeaffairs.gov.au

The Report demonstrates that illicit drugs remain one of the most significant threats to  Australians. While cannabis is the predominant illicit drug market, the methyl-amphetamine  market is large and intractable - and the cocaine market is increasing rapidly. In fact, from  the National Wastewater Drug Monitoring Program it shows that average cocaine  consumption in both capital cities and regional sites has almost doubled since the program  began in in August 2016.

Drugs continue to arrive on our shores via international mail, air and sea cargo and air  passengers and crew. Our law enforcement officers remain as always vigilant - with a  record 27.4 tonnes of drugs seized in the 2016-17 reporting period.

In Australia there is one illicit drug seizure every five minutes; one kilo of drugs seized every  19 minutes and one arrest every three and a half minutes, but despite record seizures, an  estimated 8.3 tonnes of methylamphetamine is consumed in Australia each year; as well as  over three tonnes of cocaine; 1.2 tonnes of MDMA; and over 700 kilograms of heroin.

Australia is a particularly high profit illicit drug market, compared to many other countries.   High profit margins mean that Australia’s illicit drug and precursor market is a major source  of profit for organised crime groups. Unsurprisingly, these criminals are highly motivated to  preserve this market.

The Commonwealth Transnational Serious and Organised Crime Centre within the  Department of Home Affairs leads the national effort to combat the rapidly evolving threat  posed by transnational serious and organised crime.

The Centre is working with the states and territories, as well as a range of other domestic  and international partners, to harness the expertise of multiple agencies and protect the  community from the illicit importation of dangerous drugs.

Outlaw motorcycle gangs, as we well know, continue to be a persistent menace in their  endeavour to import illicit drugs. Between December 2014 and August 2018, I have  cancelled or refused the visas of 194 organised crime offenders - which has included 177  Outlaw motorcycle gang members.

This has removed dangerous and potentially violent criminals from our streets, making our  communities safer. On some estimates we save 1,000 Australians from falling victim to the  194 and their nefarious activities.

It has also saved $116 million in tax payers dollars, or over $630,000 per offender. It allows  surveillance resources to be reapplied to other priorities and while seizures of illicit drugs  and prosecutions will always remain an integral aspects of countering drug supply, we must  also increasingly look to disruption of supply chains ahead of the border.

Taskforce Blaze, a joint agency taskforce between the Australian Federal Police and the  Chinese National Narcotics Control Commission, is an example of just how important  international collaboration is. Focused on investigating organised criminal syndicates

6

www.minister.homeaffairs.gov.au

importing ice to Australia, to date, Taskforce Blaze has intercepted more than 15 tonnes of  illicit drugs headed for Australian streets.

Just as organised criminal groups seek to identify weaknesses in law enforcement, we must  continually look to evolving methods through which we can disrupt criminal enterprise. This  includes targeting the proceeds of crime and dislocating criminal organisations from  legitimate businesses.

In June 2018, new laws were introduced to Parliament to support a national cooperative  scheme on unexplained wealth, which - once passed - will strengthen law enforcement’s  ability to disrupt criminal activity and target money and assets from the drug trade.

We are determined to continue to reduce the supply of drugs - but the Government also  recognises that the centre of gravity in the fight against illicit drugs is the reduction in  demand.

Ultimately, this is not a law enforcement lead. We must continue to develop strategies to  educate Australians; treat and support victims; and reduce the harm of this epidemic.

Ladies and gentlemen the Government is putting as much energy into protecting Australians  from cybercrime as it is physical crime. Eight in 10 Australians access the internet every day,  and 94 per cent of adult Australians use the internet to bank, buy and sell goods and for  service transactions.

Transnational, serious and organised crime networks are engaged in an array of cybercrimes  - as we well know - such as money laundering, illegal cryptocurrency movement, identity  fraud and the purchasing of illicit drugs.

With up to 70 per cent of Australia’s serious and organised crime threats based offshore or  with strong offshore links, cyber technology is critical to their activities. While encryption  enhances our cyber security, it is also having a serious impact on criminal and national  security investigations and prosecutions.

Criminals are exploiting encryption technologies to communicate, to commit offences and  to operate ‘in the dark’ from law enforcement and to strengthen the ability of our  authorities to adapt to encryption, the Government has developed the Assistance and  Access Bill.

This legislation, once passed, will assist law enforcement and national security agencies to  overcome challenges in the digital era. The measures expressly prevent the weakening of  encryption or the introduction of so-called ‘backdoors’. These measures, along with many  others, demonstrate our commitment to ensuring Australians remain in a country where  business can thrive, free from online interference and malicious attacks.

Preventing child exploitation is one of my highest priorities and certainly one of the  Government’s key priorities.

7

www.minister.homeaffairs.gov.au

The circulation of child abuse material on the ‘Dark Net’ and the ‘Deep Web’ more broadly is  a pressing and wicked problem. Online child abuse has become a growing commodity.  It is horrifying to know that through pay-per-view arrangements, a buyer can watch, in real-time, a child being sexually abused by an adult or another child. Every seven minutes, a  webpage shows a child being sexually abused. This is truly a borderless crime with an  organised nature and it is a challenge that is only compounding, not fading.

In my capacity as Minister for Home Affairs, I have cancelled 58 visas of individuals who  were convicted of one or more sexually-based offences involving a child. Every disturbing  and horrifying occurrence destroys the life of a child, their parents, their family and  ultimately the fabric of our community and this is why the Government has opened the  Australian Centre to Counter Child Exploitation - a $68.6 million initiative - and the Centre  supports a national and coordinated effort to combat the global epidemic of child abuse.

The Centre targets online predators and transnational child sex offenders. It will seek to  identify exploited children - in Australia and overseas - and to remove them from that  harm.   The Centre brings together experts from the Home Affairs Portfolio, from all of our agencies,  other federal departments, state and territory agencies, industry, and non-government  organisations.

I am confident that the dedicated staff who work within this Centre, not only have they  undertaken the most difficult area of law enforcement endeavour, but they will play a  crucial role in helping to reduce the occurrences of child exploitation in our community.

Ladies and gentlemen, we live in a world where threats are evolving at a rapid pace. Public  confidence in the Government is contingent on it being able to protect its citizens. It  remains and always will be the first duty of any government.

Since returning to power in 2013, we have been a Government which has been cognisant of  the threats at a national and international level - not blind to the facts. We have  implemented prudent and often tough policies - rather than letting the threats we face  undermine our way of life - and we have ensured the tools we have available to all of us as  law enforcement people involved in the area of law enforcement, are used with surgical  precision to enhance Australia’s security - rather than employing them in heavy-handed  manner which would of course compromise the liberal, democratic principles upon which  our society is based and thrives.

The bringing together of our domestic security and law enforcement capabilities under  Home Affairs is testimony to a Government which can continue to be relied upon to do  what is necessary to protect Australians and in the years ahead, our nation will continue to  face new and pressing challenges - as we always have in the past - threats which will  require us, more than ever before, to draw on our collective security, intelligence and law  enforcement capabilities; but if we can do that, we will ensure that the prosperous, secure  and united nation we are fortunate enough to live in today remains so for generations to  come.

8

www.minister.homeaffairs.gov.au

Thank you very much.

[ends]

