

MARK BUTLER MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR CLIMATE CHANGE AND ENERGY  MEMBER FOR PORT ADELAIDE

E&OE TRANSCRIPT  ABC ADELAIDE  RADIO INTERVIEW  WEDNESDAY, 24 JANUARY 2018

SUBJECT/S: Party reform, security laws impact on universities, AEMO report  backing Labor’s plan for renewable future, Xenophon’s views on wind energy.

DAVID BEVAN: Good morning Minister for Education, Simon Birmingham.

SIMON BIRMINGHAM: Good morning David, Ali and everybody.

BEVAN: And where are you talking to us from?

BIRMINGHAM: I am in Adelaide this morning but just juggling a couple of events so  couldn’t get into the studio.

BEVAN: Sarah Hanson-Young, Greens Senator from South Australia talking to us I  think from Davos, is that right Sarah?

SARAH HANSON-YOUNG: That’s right I’m in chilly Davos, I think last time I  checked the temperature it was -7. So I’m sorry you guys are sweltering while I am  over here freezing.

BEVAN: What are you doing over there? Is this work, did our listeners pay for this?

HANSON-YOUNG: No I paid for this myself but it is work of course, because it is  important Australia remains connected to the rest of the world. I’m here talking to  world leaders, business people and other community leaders about how Australia  can help transition to the new economy. Obviously the TPP and trade deals have  been discussed here as is how do we really train our young people to make them fit  for the future.

BEVAN: And Mark Butler, ALP National President, and Federal Labor Member for  Port Adelaide, welcome to you.

MARK BUTLER: Good morning.

ALI CLARKE: Is it true you are only actually in our studio because you are hiding  from the rest of your Party right about now after what you said on Monday night?

BUTLER: No it is not true; I’m not sure who told you that Ali. I’ve had a very positive  response from Party members to the speech I gave the other night.

CLARKE: So some of the things you have said is essentially Labor is treading water  with falling numbers, only about 50,000 out of a country population of 25 million. One  quote “I’m sorry to say but ours remains a Party that gives members fewer rights  than any other Labor or Social Democratic Party I can think of” and you are really  sick of the backroom buffoonery of factional warlords.

BUTLER: The speech was really a call to arms for our National Conference in July  this year to get on with the job of party reform that we have been dealing with since  Bob Hawke and Neville Wran issued their first blueprint fifteen years ago. The  speech was directed particularly at the two larger branches where that reform effort  has stalled. We’ve seen really good reform happen here in South Australia, in  Queensland, Tasmania and in the Territories. But in the two big states, particularly in  Victoria I have to say, reform efforts particularly to give members a vote in selecting  Senate candidates have stalled. This July we have a conference coming back to  Adelaide for the first time since 1979 and I want to have a full debate about making  sure across our country, not just in states like South Australia, but across our country  members are given full rights to vote in all important decisions in our Party.

CLARKE: Simon Birmingham were you one of the most positive to Mark Butler  about that speech?

BUTLER: He hasn’t called me yet; I’ve been waiting with bated breath for Simon’s  analysis.

BIRMINGHAM: I’m very happy for Mark to expose factions in the Labor Party but of  course there is a bit of hypocrisy from Mark. David, who was covering state politics  throughout the era which was known as “the machine” would recall the period where  Mark, as the head of the Missos Union, would sit down with Don Farrell as head of  the Shoppies Union and carve up every single Labor pre-selection in the state.  Frankly, for all the talk of democratic change in the Labor Party I’m not sure much  has changed.

BUTLER: The challenge in Party Reform I think is giving up power, Simon would  understand this. There is a debate within the New South Wales Liberal Party to give  members more of a vote. Simon’s group, the left of the Liberal Party, is crushing that  movement. The challenge is to give up power and give up influence. Jay Weatherill  here, Peter Malinauskas when he was the President, led a reform effort that is giving  members of the South Australian branch of the Labor Party for the first time a vote in  selecting Senate candidates. That was my call in the speech the other night for  Victoria to do the same.

BEVAN: So who is running the show in Victoria and New South Wales?

BUTLER: It’s very hard to decipher that.

BEVAN: You know, it is not very hard at all, especially because it is not many people  so you would probably be able to name them?

BUTLER: My focus was particularly Victoria because that is a bit of a moveable feast  I think in the factional arrangements there. In New South Wales I think there has

been a positive approach to party reform, they lead the debate around community  pre-selection.

BEVAN: You say there isn’t grassroots power in Victoria and New South Wales so  who is running the show in Victoria?

BUTLER: It is hard to work out, there are shifting sands and my focus was on some  decisions to carve up influence in the Victorian branch that were taken before  Christmas.

BEVAN: Mark Butler you know.

BUTLER: I could go through a long list.

BEVAN: Well it doesn’t sound like a very long list at all. It’s a pretty short list, that is  your point.

BUTLER: The point is there is a carve up of influence in Victoria that is derogating  from the reform effort, not advancing it. That is really my call for the party conference  in July to deal with. Our Party needs to be a Party not just of ideas. At the end of the  day your listeners will vote for Labor, or not vote for Labor, according to our ideas but  our ability to implement those ideas, those policies, depend on the health of our  Party organisation. We are not a think tank; we are a movement that has to put  thousands of thousands of shoulders to the wheel to implement those ideas.

CLARKE: Sarah Hanson-Young?

BUTLER: Look Mark I think your speech is a really important one and I think it is a  warning sign for all political parties. At a time when the public is increasingly  frustrated with politics how on earth do we expect people to be active members of  whatever political party, and you know I want people to join the Greens, but I also  understand there are diverging ideas and passions out there and I just hope people  are involved in politics full stop. That is the priority and then let’s have a debate  about what those ideas are. But in order for people to be engaged they have to feel  like they have a voice in their Party. So I think it is a really good message and when  you look around the world, whatever you think of people like Jeremy Corbyn for  example, he has generated a massive interest where he now has so many young  people joining the Labor Party there in the UK. We’ve got to find ways to engage  people.

BEVAN: Moving onto another topic, Federal Education Minister Simon Birmingham,  we heard an interview in AM a short while ago that universities are worried that anti-spy laws that your Government is going to introduce could damage research into  cancer and aids. Can you explain what are your new security laws and do you say  they propose any threat to academic independence?

BIRMINGHAM: There is a bit of hysteria coming in those interviews. I note that other  academics in fact academics like Clive Hamilton, a former Greens Party candidate,  were welcoming the views of foreign interference laws the Government has before  the Parliament. The first point to make here is those laws are before the  Parliamentary Committee on Intelligence and Security, they are taking submissions  and hearing evidence in terms of the detail of those laws.

BEVAN: What do those laws actually do?

BIRMINGHAM: Sure, so what we are seeing is an increase in foreign intelligence  engaging in convert influence and activity across Australia. What the law seeks to do  is make it easier to identify whether entities are taking funds, engaging in activities,  on behalf of foreign governments and engaged in policy lobbying or advocacy on  behalf of foreign governments. The laws set in place, register if you like and allow  the public to have greater transparency over activities of foreign governments within  Australia, and put obligations on Australian entities. Now the idea that a researcher  undertaking clinical research in different health fields is somehow going to be  prevented from doing their work, clearly is not the intent. We don’t believe it would be  captured by the laws as they are written, but it is before a Parliamentary Committee.  Universities Australia arguments will be heard and if there needs to be amendments  to those laws before they pass Parliament to make sure there is absolute certainty  well then we will make it.

BEVAN: Mark Butler does it worry you?

BUTLER: We work as hard as we can with the Government through the committee  that Simon just referred to in relation to national security laws and we will do so in  relation to the laws that are currently under consideration as well. But I think all of us  would agree that the ability of Australian universities to work with universities  overseas is incredibly important to the research, particularly medical research that  has been supported by governments of both political persuasions for decades now.  So we will work constructively with the Government on these laws but we also want  to engage with universities to understand their concerns about them.

CLARKE: To you Sarah Hanson-Young?

HANSON-YOUNG: I think obviously if there are security issues let’s deal with them  and come up with recommendations and ways forward. But I think the broader issue  here, and this is what the universities are worried about, it is something I’ve been  hearing really disturbingly quite a bit while I have been in Davos the last couple of  days, is that there is a growing sense that Australia is starting to shut its doors. That  we are starting to pick on particular groups, whether they are international students  or migrants from certain areas, or workers that are coming to Australia from certain  areas and saying you know what we don’t really need you, or you are not really  welcomed, you are not going to be of equal value when you come to Australia. I think  that is a really concerning trend and you have to be careful about when we talk about  these issues that we don’t do it so broadly that you paint an entire group of people  with the same brush. I think the student Chinese community, other international  students, universities are worried that they are coping the brunt from a Government  that just doesn’t talk about migration properly.

BEVAN: Is it just the universities Simon Birmingham, what about the state education  department and some of the liaisons they’ve had with Chinese governmetns, state  governments sponsoring various programs? The Sydney Morning Herald did a lot of  work on that a year or so ago.

BIRMINGHAM: David, you could go to state governments and their dealings with  Chinese government owned companies in relation to Australia’s ports and pose  questions about at what point disclosure needs to be made on those issues that

were of course revealed in The Advertiser over the course of the last week. These  laws put in place the register, they also tighten laws around espionage and treason  in a way that will ensure we have adequacy in terms of prosecution if it comes to that  at some stage down the track. If this is about safeguarding Australia’s interests and  putting them first but nobody wants a situation where our universities, particularly our  researchers can’t engage with others. We expect collaboration and we gain much  from collaboration with universities from around the world, and other research  institutes around the rest of the world. So that will absolutely be safeguarded.

CLARKE: It is fourteen minutes to nine; you’re listening to ABC Radio Adelaide. Just  staying with you Simon Birmingham the front page of the Sydney Morning Herald is  talking about a new radical plan outlined by the Australian energy Market Operator  which says they can reduce greenhouse gas emissions by more than twice the rate  proposed by your Government. They are also flagging they are expecting trouble  form you. So Simon Birmingham are you already lining AEMO up?

BIRMINGHAM: No, this is a consultation paper that AEMO has had out since the  17th of December. It looks at a range of scenarios from an engineering point of view  to allow them to plan in relation to the energy market. They are looking at how  different targets and scenarios would affect transition investment and therefore  transmission infrastructure and the like. That’s AEMO properly getting on and doing  its job. The Government has our targets for emissions reduction, between 26 and 28  per cent reduction by 2030. They are out there on a per capita basis, on a GDP  basis; they are world leading reduction targets.

CLARKE: But they are saying a potential reduction of 52 per cent to all electricity  emissions by 2030?

BIRMINGHAM: One scenario that they are modelling out of an abundance of caution  on behalf of AEMO to look at all of the difference scenarios from an engineering  perspective they need to be conscious of.

BEVAN: Mark Butler you would be welcoming this.

BUTLER: Well we are looking forward to working through this report in detail. It just  demonstrates again there are two parallel universes operating here. There is the  Government that is having to play, not particularly to Simon because I think he  understands these issues well, but to Tony Abbott, Barnaby Joyce, Craig Kelly and  others who just want to stop the world and get off and pretend that there is not  around the world a massive transition happening in our energy systems and in our  transport systems, in our passenger vehicle systems around the world. What I think  the AEMO report will reflect is the views that have been canvased for a number of  years now, which is the electricity sector should be doing more than its mathematical  share of its abatement task around the economy. I think that that is not a particularly  new revelation but it is very challenging for a government that is trying to hold things  back rather than lean forward.

BEVAN: Mark Butler do you think it is appropriate to ridicule people who claim wind  farms have affected their health?

BUTLER: I’m not into ridicule but I think you do need to be evidence based about  these things. The National Health and Medical Research Council and its equivalents

overseas have been quite definitive about this, that there is no evidence to suggest  causation between the operation of wind farms and some of the health effects that  are claimed by some groups.

BEVAN: I’m referring to the video that your Party has released during the state  campaign.

CLARKE: We’ve actually got a bit of it for you.

BEVAN: We can play a bit of it.

BUTLER: That’s great for radio.

BEVAN: Well it shows an interview that Nick Xenophon gave about four years ago  where he is saying that there is a link or there may be a link between wind farms and  people’s mental health. Then you won’t see this on the radio a tinfoil hat appears  from nowhere and lands on his head and there is this sort of scifi music from the  1950s.

XENOPHON (RECORDING): How can you have people turned into wind turbine  refugees because the noise, the infrastructure, that low-frequency sound that  actually affects brain activity is ruining their lives? (Rewind screeching) affects brain  activity; (rewind screeching) affects brain activity (scifi music).

CLARKE: That is signalling the arrival of a tinfoil hat. That’s ridicule, Mark Butler.

BUTLER: I think Nick Xenophon deserves ridicule for that. He went out there as a  national political figure and voiced an opinion that has no evidence behind it. That  has been debunked by our health and medical researchers. The problem with Nick  Xenophon is he tries to work both sides of the street on renewable energy.  He turns  up to rallies that are against renewable energy and rallies that are in favour of it. He  supported every weird claim about renewable energy that I have seen advanced  over the last several years.

BEVAN: What if a respected university was enquiring into the effects wind farms  have on people’s health?

BUTLER: There may be a university you are able to pluck out of hundreds around  the world. The government has asked on a couple of occasions now, the National  Health and Medical Research Council to do a full literature and evidence review  about these issues and it has come up with nothing. Other researchers around the  world have done the same.

BEVAN: Well Flinders University is doing just that.

BUTLER: So it might, I am very confident it will come up with exactly the same  conclusion the NHMRC and countless other universities and bodies similar to the  NHMRC have done as well. There is no evidence to support this suggestion and  frankly national political figures like Nick Xenophon should not be continuing to  perpetuate what has been demonstrated to be a myth.

CLARKE: Sarah Hanson-Young is Nick Xenophon going down the wrong track in  trying to find support for non-wind farms?

HANSON-YOUNG: I think there has always been some concern about Nick  Xenophon’s disparaging comments about wind energy. Of course it is a huge  industry for our state and he always talks it down. He does peddle these myths that  have been debunked right around the world. You talk to other countries that have  invested hugely in wind energy, they have been through these studies and they  know that these claims are false. Why do we want to be stuck in the old ages when  as this AEMO report shows today, we can reduce pollution from our electricity  production much faster than the Government is saying. We can get away from coal.  We know that these fossil fuel power plants aren’t even reliable in the heat, we’ve  seen it in the last week with the heatwave across the country. They are not fit for  purpose anymore and in fact if we invested more in renewables and battery storage  in the grid we can move to the future. Why on earth Nick Xenophon isn’t backing this  is beyond me.

CLARKE: So essentially you would have helped make the tinfoil hat for the ad if you  could have?

HANSON-YOUNG: Look I think you asked about ridicule, I do think Nick Xenophon’s  position and policy on this is laughable but it is also dangerous.

BEVAN: So those people who ring our program and say they are suffering from real  distress and it is being taken serious from people at Flinders University, those people  they also deserve that ridicule?

HANSON-YOUNG: No this is about a political leader who peddles -

BEVAN: No this is about facts.

HANSON-YOUNG: This is about facts and the problem here is Nick Xenophon  doesn’t stick to the facts when it comes to renewable energy. That is what is being  called out here. So if you have community members concerned about these things,  we’re always willing to listen and talk to them and to ensure they get the facts.

BEVAN: And patronise them.

HANSON-YOUNG: No, no, no you talk to them and you listen. But Nick Xenophon is  a leader of a political party he wants to be the next Premier and he thinks there are  wind farm refugees, come on, get real and get serious.

CLARKE: Sarah Hanson-Young Greens Senator for South Australia thank you for  your time all the way from Davos, Switzerland. Mark Butler, the Labor Member for  Port Adelaide thank you for coming in and Simon Birmingham Liberal Senator for  South Australia and Education Minister we appreciate your time as well.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: LUCY CARUSO 0408 803 428



