MEDIA RELEASE

MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS

The Hon Julie Bishop MP

8 March 2018

HUMANITARIAN ASSISTANCE TO AFGHANISTAN AND PAKISTAN

Today I announce that Australia will increase its contribution to support Afghanistan in  defeating terrorism and pursuing peaceful development and regional stability.

During a debate in the United Nations Security Council, I announced that the  Australian Government will provide $60 million over three years in humanitarian

assistance to help meet critical food security, protection and health needs of displaced

people, refugees and host communities in Afghanistan and Pakistan.

This latest contribution will enable the World Food Programme to provide emergency

food assistance and support longer term interventions to improve food security and  community resilience.

Support through the United Nations Population Fund will enable almost 800,000

women and girls to access critical health services, including maternal health care and  to access assistance for those who are survivors of gender-based violence. Our  contribution to the Afghanistan Humanitarian Fund, managed by the UN Office for

Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, will enable humanitarian agencies to address  emerging and priority needs, as the situation evolves.

The funding will be drawn from our existing bilateral aid to Afghanistan and Pakistan.

Our diplomatic, defence and development engagement is helping the Afghan  Government and its international partners create long-term security and development.

This includes our contribution of 300 Australian Defence Force personnel to the NATO-led Resolute Support mission, who are helping train, advise and assist local security  forces.

We support the Afghan Government's vision of an Afghan-led peace process and  welcome its offer to engage in talks with the Taliban. Afghanistan's neighbours have

much to gain from improved regional stability and we welcome their constructive

engagement in this process.

MEDIA RELEASE

Conflict and instability in the region has resulted in one of the world's most protracted  humanitarian crises. The United Nations estimates over 12 million people in  Afghanistan and over three million people in Pakistan will require humanitarian  assistance in 2018.

The Australian Government acknowledges the toll that conflict and insecurity has had  on the Afghan people and stand by them as they seek to build a safer, more  prosperous future.

Foreign Minister's Office: Lauren Gianoli 0478 488 874

Rebecca Chirichiello 0481 904 440

