





MEDIA RELEASE

May 10th 2018

One Nation Announces Matthew Stephen as Longman Candidate

Pauline Hanson’s One Nation is proud to announce that their candidate will be local  Caboolture business man Matthew Stephen.

“Matthew is  a strong  local  candidate, a  fourth  generation Australian,  who  lives  and  works in the community with his wife and family. I’m very proud to say he is ready to  fight for the people of Longman and I think he would make an excellent Member of  Parliament.” Senator Hanson said.

“This is a chance for the people of Longman to elect someone to parliament who will  be able to hold the Coalition and the Labor party accountable.”

“Susan Lamb was never upfront with the people of Longman. She treated them with  disrespect and took them for granted.”

“She has known for many months she was a dual citizen yet she did nothing and the  Labor party protected her. Susan Lamb and the Labor party have failed Longman  and they do not deserve a second chance.”

“People should remember these by-elections have been called because Bill Shorten  told Australians there was no cloud over any Labor MPs, despite knowing the  member for Longman hadn’t renounced her citizenship.”

“If you can’t trust Mr Shorten to be fair-dinkum over the eligibility of Labor MPs, how  can you trust him with pensions, national security and the cost of living?”

“The former Labor  Member  for  Longman  and  her  party  proposed  a  policy  to  rip   money from pensioners and the elderly.”

“Labor’s new policy to weaken our offshore detention process could send Australia  back to the time where under Labor we had 50,000 illegal  boat arrivals in just one  year. That’s enough people for a new city the size of Caboolture.

“Bill  Shorten’s  energy  policy  will  see  the  price  of  electricity  for  Australians  living  in   places like Bribie Island skyrocket,”

“And both Bill Shorten and Malcolm Turnbull have failed to listen to the people and  cut  back  the  out  of  control  immigration  numbers  that  are  driving  up  cost  of  living,  putting pressure on our roads and hospitals, and lowering our quality of life.”

“The people of Longman deserve better than what Labor and the Coalition have to  offer.”

--END--

