

HON. LINDA BURNEY MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR HUMAN SERVICES  MEMBER FOR BARTON

E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  SKY NEWS - SPEERS  WEDNESDAY, 23 MAY 2018

SUBJECTS: Newstart; China; Asylum Seekers

DAVID SPEERS: I’m joined by the Shadow Minister for Human Services Linda Burney.  $17 a day after accommodation. What do you think? Could you live on that?

LINDA BURNEY, SHADOW MINISTER FOR HUMAN SERVICES AND MEMBER  FOR BARTON: Of course I couldn’t live on that. And anyone who says they can is not  being very honest. As you say, you pay rent, particularly in one of those big cities where  a one bedroom apartment could cost $400-$500 a week. And we know that Newstart is  $500 a fortnight. If you’ve got children, we know that the experience of many families is  that parents are going without eating so that their children have something to eat,  especially as they get closer to pay day. For many families, the reality is, whether we  like it or not, is that Newstart has become a way of life. There are some families that will  have to rely on that, not a transitional payment, but on what they live on for a very long  time.

SPEERS: We heard the Minister say that this is a transitional payment. It’s not a  permanent allowance for you to live on. Here’s the thing. Can you actively present  yourself, prepare yourself for job interviews and applications on that money?

BURNEY: I don’t think you can. The reality is that with the present government, there’s  a reduction in Newstart. Because Newstart is a payment under which you’re also  eligible for the Energy Supplement. There’s a reduction of $8.80 a fortnight.

SPEERS: That hasn’t passed yet, has it?

BURNEY: The proposal is that it will be reduced. The reality is, is that it’s not just the  Salvation Army. There is an enormous outcry from the business community saying  there is a real issue -

SPEERS: - Well even John Howard has voiced concern about the level of Newstart.  Labor’s position is only to review it.

BURNEY: You and I have spoken about that previously. And I know a lot of people who  would say, well that’s a politicians answer. But I can assure you that Labor is incredibly  serious about a proper look at Newstart.

SPEERS: It will be increased under Labor, is that a fair assessment?

BURNEY: We recognise that Newstart, in the community as well as the business  community, that it is inadequate. What we want to do is, as we did with the age pension  previously, is have a proper look at a whole range of issues. It’s not just the amount.  Everyone’s focused on the amount. It’s about where people are living; who are the  recipients; and how long people are staying on it.

SPEERS: But it’s fair to say you’re not going to leave it where it is.

BURNEY: Well, I can’t make that commitment.

SPEERS: Is it fair to say that you don’t think it can stay where it is?

BURNEY: My personal view is that people who live on welfare, on Newstart, should be  able to live with dignity.

SPEERS: And they can’t at the moment.

BURNEY: It would appear from all the reports coming in - and a lot of organisations are  saying it - there is a huge issue in inequity -

SPEERS: - It can’t stay where it is: is that your personal view?

BURNEY: My personal view is that people should be able to live with dignity, and there  is a massive question as to whether you can do that on Newstart.

SPEERS: Let’s talk about China. Do you think the Government deserves the treatment  it’s receiving from China?

BURNEY: I have to say I’m baffled by Andrew Hastie’s statement. The Prime Minister  says he wasn’t aware of what Andrew Hastie was going to say - using parliamentary  privilege to make the statements that he made. I note that Julie Bishop is in Argentina at  the moment speaking with her Chinese counterpart and it will be interesting to know  what she knew prior to her discussion.

SPEERS: Do you think Andrew Hastie was wrong?

BURNEY:  I don’t think any of us fully understand what his motivations were. What is  more surprising is that the Prime Minister and his office were not aware that statement  was going to be made.

SPEERS: His motivation was that the Australian people deserve to know more about  this man. Is that valid?

BURNEY: I can’t speak for Andrew Hastie. I don’t know what his motivations were.

SPEERS: China is clearly annoyed. Do you think Australia has done anything to  deserve that?

BURNEY: I’m really not in a position to say. I think there may be a bigger story to this. I  don’t know what it is. I suspect that you don’t. That’s why we’re asking for a full  explanation as to why the statement was made.

SPEERS: Seems that China is annoyed every time Australia expresses its position on  the South China Sea.

BURNEY: What I do know is that in the electorate that I represent, there are 19,000  people of Chinese heritage and they are an incredibly important of the Australian  economy.

SPEERS: Does the Prime Minister deserve the treatment he’s receiving from China?

BURNEY: Well, I don’t know the full story. I don’t think anyone knows the full story.

SPEERS: Labor will be discussing asylum seekers at its conference in a couple of  months. What’s your own view?

BURNEY: It will be an issue at the National Conference. Indefinite detention is what  we’re arguing against. Look at what has happened on Manus in the last 24 hours -

SPEERS: - so they shouldn’t be there indefinitely?

BURNEY: That’s being worked on by the appropriate people in my party. It’s not my  portfolio -

SPEERS: Well how long does Labor think those people should be stuck there?

BURNEY: That will become clear over the course of the next -

SPEERS: But Labor will put a time frame on it?

BURNEY: I’m not responsible for the area, but I do believe that they shouldn’t be held  indefinitely, and logically that means there’d be a time line.



MEDIA CONTACT: DARYL TAN 0422 028 222

Authorised by Noah Carroll, ALP Canberra

