

8 May 2018





NICE FOR SOME

BUT A GOOD BUDGET WOULD BE MORE THAN SOME ELECTION SWEETENERS





The Federal Budget is a mixed bag. It’s good to see a better deal for Tasmania, such as the  funding finally being forthcoming for the new Bridgewater Bridge which will better connect  Denison to the rest of the State. The second $60m instalment for the freight rail revitalisation  project is also welcome, as is the $400m Tasmanian roads package.

But there’s a disappointing lack of funding for necessary infrastructure like a northern  suburbs light rail, UTas’s proposed STEM project, or improvements to the Tasmanian  Freight Equalisation Scheme, and seemingly no progress towards a Hobart City Deal.

The Government needs to understand that a better deal for Tasmania goes beyond just  transport. It’s disappointing that there was effectively no boost for science and research in  Hobart including reversing the devastating cuts to the CSIRO and the Australian Antarctic  Division. And there are virtually no targeted measures to ease pressure on housing  affordability in Tasmania such as waiving the State’s housing debt and additional funds for  more crisis and supported accommodation.

The Budget also needs to deliver a better deal for everyday Australians, especially those who  are disadvantaged or need government support. To that end it’s good to see an increase in  aged care funding, although the 14,000 new home care packages are well short of the  100,000 that are required. And health, and in particular mental, primary and allied health care  remains chronically underfunded, despite some small boosts including for hospitals.

The Budget should also have included real reform to government pensions and payments,  including lifting Newstart and related payments including Youth Allowance, Austudy and  Abstudy by $75 a week. It should also have reversed the billions of dollars in cuts to tertiary  education and properly funded schools with the $6.5bn a year that David Gonski originally  recommended. Foreign aid continues to be used like an ATM.

What this Budget does instead is again go after some of the most vulnerable in the  community. For example the Government appears to be expanding its disastrous Centrelink  robo-debt program and introducing other unreasonable debt-recovery measures. Also  migrants and refugees will wait even longer to access social security.

The Budget is also a chance to lay down a clear and coherent pathway for how we are going  to pay for all this. That’s why it was disappointing that the Government did not abandon its  proposed corporate tax cuts, and did not introduce measures like a super profits tax to raise  revenue, nor tax reform on property investments. This Budget was also a missed opportunity  to rein in wasteful spending like the increased defence expenditure and the money spent on  offshore processing.

While there are some things to celebrate in this Budget including for Tasmania, overall it  misses the mark when it comes to looking after those who need it, and when it comes to  offering a clear and coherent plan for the future.



For more information: Tim Hurd 0447 427 292

Authorised by Andrew Wilkie MP 188 Collins St Hobart



