Speech

Andrew Broad Member for Mallee  Monday 5"  February 2018  A speech given in the Australian Parliament today

CONTENT WARNING: Please note some of this content may be destressing to readers

File Wiesel, the great Jewish writer who survived Auschwitz and wrote the book  Night, quoted:

When adults wage war, children perish.

I was, I guess, a witness to some of that a few weeks ago when I was in Cox's  Bazar at the Rohingya refugee camps. The striking thing that confronts us firstly is  the number of children there—children with smiles on their face but dirt on their  face, barefoot and running around, at risk of a major disease outbreak in 60 days  when the monsoon season comes—who are the victims of this trauma.

People might say to me, Why would a member for regional Victoria be interested  in the children in the refugee camp at Cox's Bazar?' I say to them that we are the  beneficiaries of a very robust and prosperous country and that very robust and  prosperous country affords us great opportunity but also great responsibility, and  that is to ensure that the values that we hold dear are reflected in other parts of  the world.

It is warming to my heart to know that Australia is the third-largest donor to the  refugee camps in Cox's Bazar. I was able to go there with Senator Lisa Singh  from the Australian Labor Party to see the work that took place. Senator Lisa  Singh and I co-chair the Parliamentary Friends of UNICEF. I want to reflect on  what I saw—a story of what is the worst of humanity, coupled with some of the  best of humanity.

The worst of humanity, which is quite confronting, was to hear the stories of  women who were raped by soldiers whilst they watched their husbands being  hung. They didn't want to take their eyes away from their husbands as they died  because they wanted to at least give some sort of support. Rape was used as an  act of terror. It is not the case that 600,000 or 700,000 people shift for small  atrocities; they shift because they are fleeing for their life.

Email and rew. broad.mp@aph.gov.au   Web www.andrewbroad.com   Phone 1300 131 620

Media contact: Tori Masters

Email tori.masters@aph.gov.au   Phone 0418 445 233

Speech

Andrew Broad Member for Mallee  We heard stories of the unfolding crisis of 40,000 babies that could be born. Those  women are carrying those babies not knowing if they were fathered by their now  dead husbands or if they were fathered as a result of rape. The aid organisations  have to think through how they will deal with the issues of abandonment if those  babies turn out to be fathered as a result of rape.

Standing on a hill, looking as far as the eye could see, you could see a bamboo and  tent city that essentially was forest six months ago, showing the rapidness with which  people had arrived—people who had arrived basically starving after trekking up to  eight days. We were told how, with 60 days before the monsoon season, they  needed to shift 80,000 people from areas where they are at risk of landslide when  the rain starts. We heard that drainage needs to be put in place in order to ensure  that disease doesn't perpetrate through that group of people.

But we also saw the compassion of our aid workers. Can I just say on the record: I  saw no waste—the great criticism that Australians make is: 'The waste that's in the  aid program'—but I saw no waste. I saw hardworking, diligent people. A lady said to  me—she's from Perth and been involved in the aid program work for a long time— that she cries at a Kleenex tissue ad, but she said, 'I can't cry here because that  doesn't help these people. I'm here to work. I'm here to make people's lives better.'  They are doing a tremendous job. Things like sanitation-1 00 people to a toilet—and  like water supply. I have to say the farmer in me, who set up water supplies on my  own farm; we got talking about bar pressure and pumps and how to set water up.

We saw medicine and we saw also education.

The challenge, of course, is: what is the future for those people? People without  hope cannot be left to stagnate. And this is the challenge, because the Myanmar  government doesn't want to take them back. They don't want to go back in a hurry.  The Bangladesh government doesn't want to absorb them, and I think there is  probably a real discussion to be had about the way the World Bank and the countries  of the world create trading zones, investment and opportunities. I don't think that  these people are going to be going back to Myanmar in a hurry. It's simply not safe.

Ultimately, we need to create hope for these people because, otherwise, it does  sadly become a breeding ground for disenchanted young men and women.

Email and rew. broad.mp@aph.gov.au   Web www.andrewbroad.com   Phone 1300 131 620

Media contact: Tori Masters

Email tori.masters@aph.gov.au   Phone 0418 445 233

Speech

Andrew Broad Member for Mallee  I say we should be proud of Australia's contribution, but, of course, we will need to  do more. It was a privilege to go with such hardworking people. We saw the worst of  humanity, but we also saw the best of it.

-ENDS-

Email andrew.broad.mp@aph.gov.au   Web www.andrewbroad.com   Phone 1300 131 620

Media contact: Tori Masters  Email tori.masters@aph.gov.au   Phone 0418 445 233

