Andrew Wilkie MP  INDEPENDENT MEMBER FOR DENISON

18 June 2018

ENDING THE NATION'S SHAME  WILKIE TABLES REFUGEE PROTECTION BILL

The Independent Member for Denison, Andrew Wilkie, will introduce a Private Member's  Bill this morning that would provide for a fairer, more sustainable and more humane  approach to asylum seekers and refugees. A copy of the bill, explanatory memorandum,  and fact sheet are attached.

Mr Wilkie will introduce the bill at approximately 10:15am this morning in the House of  Representatives and then be available afterwards for comment with the Independent  Member for mdi, Cathy McGowan, who is seconding the bill.

WHEN: 10:45am TODAY 18 June  WHERE: Mural Hall, Parliament House CANBERRA

"The Liberal and Labor parties are in a race to the bottom when it comes to asylum seekers,"  Mr Wilkie said. "What we need is an approach that's humane and developed in conjunction  with other countries in the Asia Pacific region.

"That's why I'm introducing legislation today that would establish a better way forward. This  bill should be seen by the Government and the Opposition as an alternative to the current  cruelty that's taking place in offshore detention centres.

"This bill enables the establishment of a network of centres, located in and run by Asia  Pacific countries including Australia, where asylum seekers can go to be registered, have  their immediate humanitarian needs met and lodge a preference for country of re-  settlement. If the asylum seeker selects Australia, and is within the specified quota, this bill

establishes a process for assessing their claim in Australia with appropriate oversight, limited

timeframes and judicial review. The bill does not allow mandatory detention and prioritises  the applicant's immediate needs and refugee and international human rights law.

"This bill has been developed in accordance with UNHCR guidelines and crucially is  consistent with international human rights law, something the Government and Opposition  have been wilfully ignoring.

"I have also consulted extensively with the refugee sector to develop a proposal that is not  only fair and humane but also workable.

"I ask the Coalition and Labor to take a look at this alternative proposal so that we can open a  discussion about a better way forward, rather than the current miserable and cruel bipartisan  policy."

For more information: Tim Hurd 0447 427 292

Authorised by Andrew Wilkie MP 188 Collins St Hobart

2016-2017-2018

THE PARLIAMENT OF THE COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Refugee Protection Bill 2018

EXPLANATORY MEMORANDUM

and

STATEMENT OF COMPATIBILITY WITH HUMAN RIGHTS

Circulated by authority of

Andrew Wilkie MP

1

Refugee Protection Bill 2018

OUTLINE AND SCOPE

This bill provides for a sustainable, equitable and humane response to the protection and processing of

asylum seekers and refugees in the Asia Pacific region. A key component of this bill is the Asia Pacific

Asylum Seeker Solution (APASS), a regional framework to be initiated by the Australian Government in

partnership with other Asia Pacific countries. All countries party to APASS must be legally bound to provide

effective protection for asylum seekers and refugees as provided under international law.

This Act enables the establishment of a network of centres, located in and run by Asia Pacific countries

including Australia, where asylum seekers can go to be registered, have their immediate humanitarian

needs met and lodge a preference for country of re-settlement. If the asylum seeker selects Australia, and

is within the specified quota, this Act establishes a process for assessing their claim in Australia with

appropriate oversight, limited timeframes and judicial review. The Act does not allow mandatory detention

and prioritises the applicant's immediate needs and refugee and international human rights law.

The APASS centres will be located to enable ease of access to and for asylum seekers and refugees,

providing a legal and safe alternative to the service of people smugglers. These centres will be developed in

cooperation with, and funded by, parties to APASS. The purpose of the APASS centre is to stabilise people's

situation as quickly as possible by screening and registering new arrivals and providing them with a

recognised legal status. An APASS applicant may remain at the centre where they are registered or be

transferred to another APASS centre. A transfer arrangement for an APASS applicant must prioritise the

applicant's immediate needs, the best interests of the child, the principle of family unity, international

human rights law and responsibility sharing between APASS member states as a priority. Each APASS

applicant will be assigned an APASS case officer who will be responsible for the processing conditions of the

applicant, including access to free independent legal advice, accommodation and financial support, as well

as working with authorities to ensure an applicant's visa is processed within the statutory time frame. Each

step of this process will have restricted time frames, appropriate oversight and review. Australia will take a

specified quota of APASS applicants each year who will be considered for permanent visas in Australia

based on their refugee status.

This bill provides that alternatives to immigration detention, which may take various forms depending on

the particular circumstances of the individual, are preferred to immigration detention. Under this Act,

immigration detention for APASS applicants must be lawful, necessary, proportionate and be for the

shortest time possible. Mandatory detention is illegal under this Act. This bill clearly outlines the reasons

and the time frames, communication and services that are to be available in immigration detention, which

will be independently monitored.

APASS establishes a mechanism for regional cooperation on the registration, processing and settlement of

asylum seekers and refugees in the Asia Pacific region. It incorporates principles of genuine responsibility

and cost sharing between member states and is able to build on existing forums such as the Bali Process,

the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) and the Asia Dialogue on Forced Migration. APASS

enhances the region's capacity to respond effectively to the movement of asylum seekers and refugees as

well as provide safe entry for people seeking protection in Australia. Such a framework may also play an

important role in the allocation of foreign aid to beleaguered countries so that asylum seekers may safely

2

return to their country of origin. Fundamental to this bill is the primacy of international agreements for the

protection of rights and the principle of family unity and the best interests of the child. These laws and

principles are paramount to the development of the APASS framework and to all decision-making under

this Act.

As it is unconstitutional for a bill to direct the executive arm of government to enter into a regional

agreement, this bill is enabling legislation only. It should be seen by the executive as a viable alternative to

Australia's current asylum seeker policy as it has been developed in accordance with United Nations High

Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) guidelines, the Refugees Convention and international human rights

law.

This bill should be read as a primary bill as it requires the subsequent passage of consequential

amendments. The interaction of this bill with the Migration Act is complex, as is the legal status and

transitory arrangements for current asylum seekers and refugees if this bill is passed. The consequential

amendments bill will address this, and any other inconsistencies with Commonwealth, state or territory

law.

FINANCIAL IMPACT

The bill will have no financial impact.

NOTES ON CLAUSES

PART 1 - PRELIMINARY

Clause 1: Short Title

1. This clause is a formal provision and specifies that the short title of the bill is the Refugee Protection Bill

2018.

Clause 2: Commencement

2. This clause provides for the commencement of the Act on the day it receives Royal Assent.

Clause 3: Simplified outline and object of this Act

3. Subclauses 3(1) and (2) provides a simplified outline describing what this Act does and how it works.

4. Subclauses 3(3) and (4) sets out the object of the Act, which is to provide a sustainable, equitable and

humane legislative response to people seeking asylum in Australia by enabling a regional framework for the

protection of asylum seekers and refugees, initiated by the Australian Government in partnership with

other countries in the Asia Pacific region.

5. Subclause 4(b) specifies that this Act uphold Australia's obligations under the Refugee Convention and

international human rights law.

Clause 4: Act binds the Crown

3

6. This clause sets out that this Act binds the Crown in each of its capacities.

Clause 5: Definitions

7. Subclause 5(1) defines several terms used specifically in the Act. APASS (short for Asia Pacific Asylum

Seeker Solution) is the name given to the regional framework, enabled by the Act, to manage movements

and placement of asylum seekers and refugees in the region. A regional framework does not currently exist

and it is intended that such a framework will be initiated by the executive, in cooperation with regional

partners, as a long term policy solution.

8. Subclause 5(2) sets out that a term or expression used in the Act that is defined for the purposes of the

Migration Act has the same meaning in this Act and it would in the Migration Act 1958. It is not the

intention of this bill to rewrite definitions under migration law unless the current definitions are contrary to

international law.

Clause 6: Application - International agreements for the protection of rights

9. This clause sets out that all actions and decisions made under this Act must be consistent with the

international agreements listed in subclauses 6(a)-(h). The purpose of this is to ensure the full

implementation of international refugee and human rights law into domestic legislation.

Clause 7: Severability

10. This clause sets out that this Act is constitutionally valid to the extent that it has a constitutional head of

power, specifically the Commonwealth external affairs and aliens powers as outlined under subclauses (3)

to (6).

Clause 8: Principle of family unity

11. This clause sets out that the principle of family unity should be paramount in all actions and decisions

under this Act. It recognises the obligation to protect and respect family life and follows the principle, set in

international law, that family unity is inherent to the right to family life and this right is entitled to

protection by society and the State.' Maintaining refugee family life is essential to protection and a key to

success of refugees restoring their lives. 2

12. Subclause 8(2) directs that actions which would disrupt an intact family unit or prevent family

reunification should be avoided.

13. Subclause 8(3) outlines that not only should a country refrain from splitting up an intact family unit, it

must also take action to allow a dispersed family to reunite without being forced to return to the country

from which they have fled. This clause is in line with the fundamental principle, within the UNHCR

'See Article 16 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights of 10 December 1948. See also Article 23 of the  International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights of 16 December 1966; Article 10 of the International Covenant on  Social, Economic and Cultural Rights of 16 December 1966; the Preamble of the Convention on the Rights of the Child  of November 1989; Article 16 of the European Social Charter of 18 October 1961; Article 18 of the African Charter on  Human and Peoples' Rights of 26 June 1981; and Article 17 of the American Convention on Human Rights of 22  November 1969. A useful summary of all relevant international instruments is found in Annex 2 of the UNHCR  Resettlement Handbook.  2

See '9.1 Family unity and refugee protection' at http://www.unhcr.org/publications/legal/419dbf664/refugee-protection-international-law-family-u  nity-refugee-protection-91.html

4

guidelines and under international human rights law, that as a fundamental unit of society the family is

entitled to respect and protection .3

Clause 8A: Principle of the rights and best interests of the child

14. This clause sets out that the principle of the rights and best interests of the child should be paramount

in all actions and decisions under this Act that affects a child.

15. Subclause 8A(2)(a) re-emphasises the principle of family unity as a priority in decisions relating to a

child.

16. Subclause 8A(2)(b) re-iterates that when an APASS country is responsible for a child they must ensure

that the child has full access to education, health and mental health services, phone and internet and free

legal services. They must also be housed, clothed and fed and provided with other necessary financial

assistance.

17. Subclause 8A(2)(c) states that children must be part of the decision making process about their future

under APASS and that their views must be fully considered when their future is being determined.

PART 2— ENABLING OF APASS

18. Part 2 enables APASS but the negotiation, development and implementation of the APASS framework

must be led by the executive as it is unconstitutional for the Parliament to direct the executive arm of

government.

19. The APASS regional framework is a long-term, sustainable policy that will be complex to negotiate and

implement. It is intended that this process will respect the sovereignty of each member country and strictly

adhere to international refugee and human rights law.

20. Negotiations regarding the APASS regional framework should be alert to the difficulties and priorities of

refugee protection for each country involved as outlined by the Expert Roundtable on regional cooperation

and refugee protection in the Asia Pacific. 4

21. The negotiation and implementation of APASS can build on existing forums such as the Bali Process, the

Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) and the Asia Dialogue on Forced Migration.

22. It is important that Australia initiates negotiations for APASS. Australia's current deterrence-based

policies have placed pressure on neighbouring countries and Australia must act first to amend its own

domestic laws to fit with APASS in order to gain trust from the region.

Clause 9: Intention that parties to APASS be legally bound

23. This clause sets out that parties to APASS must be legally bound to provide effective protection for

asylum seekers and refugees as outlined under international human rights law. Although Parliament has

As above.  4See Kaldor Centre for International Refugee Law, Where to from here? Report from the Expert Roundtable on regional  cooperation and refugee  protection in the Asia-Pacific. 12-13 September 2016. At  http://www. ka  Ido rcentre. u nsw.edu.au/sites/defau  lt/files/Where_to_from_h ere. pdf.

5

since amended legislation, it is important to recognise the decision of the majority of the Full Bench of the

High Court that the 'Malaysian Solution' was unlawful because Malaysia was not signatory to the UN

Refugee Conventions and so adequate human rights protections could not be guaranteed. It is essential

that all member countries of APASS act consistently with the international agreements outlined in section 6

of this Act.

Clause 10: APASS centres

24. This clause defines an APASS centre as it is envisaged to exist under the APASS regional agreement.

25. Subclause 10(a) reiterates the need for regional cooperation between countries and shared

responsibility in terms of protection and cost. This follows the key commitment in the New York Declaration

for Refugees and Migrants for a more equitable sharing of the burden and responsibility for hosting and

supporting refugees instead of shifting responsibilities to countries less well-equipped to carry them, which

is Australia's practise.

26. Subclause 10(b) reiterates that APASS centres should be developed in accordance with international

refugee and human rights law.

27. Subclause 10(c) reiterates that the APASS centre should be strategically located in source countries,

meaning countries from which asylum seekers are fleeing, or transit countries, meaning countries through

which asylum seekers are routinely travelling. This is to enable ease of access for asylum seekers and to

provide a safe alternative to obtaining the service of people smugglers or other illegal and dangerous

means of seeking asylum.

Clause 11: APASS applicants

28. This clause sets out the criteria a person must meet in order to become an APASS applicant, as well as

the criteria for a person to become an APASS applicant to Australia.

29. Subclause 11(1)(b) states that the person must have registered as an asylum seeker at an APASS centre.

The intention is that there will be a formal registration process for a person when they first attend an APASS

centre.

30. APASS centre registration may also include pre-screening that aims to identify and differentiate

between categories of arrivals (eg. persons who are seeking international protection, victims of trafficking,

unaccompanied children, irregular economic migrants). This could improve efficiency and effectiveness by

identifying any vulnerability, such as trauma, unaccompanied children etc, as well as identifying claims that

are manifestly unfounded. This process would require independent monitoring. 5

31. Subclause 11(2)(a) states that a person can only be an APASS applicant to Australia if they have selected

Australia as host country. This refers to the intention that upon registration an applicant selects three

preferred host countries. It is a common misconception that asylum seekers would always choose Australia

first. Many would prioritise countries where family is located or countries with familiar religion and culture.

32. Subclause 11(2)(b) refers to section 12 of this Act and the requirement that each year the Minister will

"See Kaldor Centre for International Refugee Law, Where to from here? Report from the Expert Roundtable on regional  cooperation and refugee  protection in the Asia-Pacific. 12-13 September 2016. At  http://www. ka  Ido rcentre. u nsw.edu.au/sites/defau  lt/files/Where_to_from_h ere. pdf.18-19

6

announce the quota of APASS applicants that will be considered for permanent visas in Australia. If the

number of APASS applicants to Australia exceeds this quota then applicants will be directed to their

alternative countries of choice. Under international law there is no unfettered right for asylum seekers to

choose the country of asylum. However asylum seeker's preferences ought to be taken into account when

possible, as should other primary considerations such as family reunification and non-refoulement

obligations.

33. Subclause 11(2)(c) refers to the intention that APASS applicants will only be referred to the Secretary by

APASS once subclause 10(a) to (c) has been fulfilled.

34. Subclause 11(3) is based on the principal of shared responsibility between member countries of APASS

(see paragraph 25 above). Australia is currently a host country but due to geographical isolation it is

generally not a transit country. This subclause ensures Australia has the ability to share responsibility with

source and transit countries by directing Australia take responsibility for specified APASS applicants. This

includes responsibility for ensuring that the legally binding provision of this Act, challengeable and

enforceable in a court of law by the asylum seeker, is fully applied.

Clause 12: Australian quota of APASS applicants

35. Subclause 12(1) specifies that the number of APASS applicants accepted by Australia each year must be

determined by the Minister and made publicly available. It is expected that Australia's quota would match

or exceed other parties to APASS due to Australia's wealth, established visa processes and social security

system.

36. Subclause 12(2) refers to the intention that all parties to APASS will determine the recommended quota

for each state to ensure shared responsibility between all.

Clause 13: Determination of transfer arrangements of APASS applicants

37. This clause addresses the principle that the primary responsibility for providing protection to asylum

seekers and refugees rests with the country in which asylum is sought. As outlined in paragraph 34 of this

Explanatory Memorandum, due to the geographical location of Australia and the need to prevent asylum

seekers and refugees from risking their lives by travelling to Australia by boat, it is important that Australia's

responsibility to provide protection is established through APASS centres located in other member

countries.

38. Subclause 13(1) sets a time frame of 60 working days for the Secretary to determine whether the APASS

applicant is to be transferred to Australia for the duration of time it takes for the APASS applicant's claim for

asylum is to be processed. This is to ensure that applicants are not subject to arbitrary or mandatory

detention in offshore facilities or remain unassisted for long periods of time.

39. Subclause 13(2) ensures that groups or categories of people, such as "illegal maritime arrivals", are not

subjected to different rules or discrimination. Each person's application and circumstances will be

individually assessed and a decision will be made according to the merits of their case as well as the factors

listed under section 13(4) of the Act.

40. Subclause 13(4) reiterates Australia's responsibilities under refugee and international human rights law

and provides that the Secretary must take these into consideration when determining transfer

arrangements.

7

41. Subclause 13(4)(c) states that the capacity of individual APASS centres must be taken into account when

registering applicants in order to avoid situations of overcrowding and inadequate conditions and services.

42. Subclause 13(4) (g) reinforces the need to ensure that Australia is sharing the responsibility of asylum

seeker and refugee protection under APASS and not burden shifting to other countries.

43. Subclause 13(6) provides for procedural and legal safeguards to protect APASS applicants when being

transferred to Australia. The provision of documentation to ensure the legal status of a refugee is a

minimum standard of the Refugees Convention. It also prevents an APASS applicant from being transferred

to Australia only to be returned to the transit or source country, which would add to trauma and incur

unnecessary cost.

44. Subclause 13(6)(b) protects the health of the APASS applicant.

45. Subclause 13(6)(c) allows for regulations which can be made to ensure refugee and international human

rights law is fully adhered to throughout the transfer process.

Clause 14— APASS case officers

46. Clause 14 sets out the role of an APASS case officer, which is to both advocate for the APASS applicant

and provide them with information on an ongoing basis. The purpose of this role is to prevent the visa

process from stagnating and to protect the legal rights and mental health of APASS applicants. The APASS

case officer will work with their assigned APASS applicant to ensure that the applicant is supported while

waiting for visa approval, including the provision of immediate humanitarian needs. This will involve

coordinating and communicating with APASS services both in the host country and immigration services

within Australia. The deterioration of asylum seeker and refugees mental and physical health when faced

with uncertainty and reduced control over their future, as well as limited access to legal resources, is well

documented.

47. Subclause 14(1) specifies seven days as the time frame which an APASS applicant is to be assigned an

APASS case officer. This occurs once an APASS applicant is Australia's responsibility as determined under

section 11 of this Act.

48. Subclause 14(2) sets out that APASS applicants are to be given information on their legal rights and

processing conditions, as well as free and independent legal advice. The aim is to ensure that the APASS

applicants understand their situation, their legal rights and the APASS and immigration procedures and are

assisted to dispute decisions through merits and judicial review.

49. Subclause 14(2)(a) refers to processing conditions, which is defined under section 5 of this Act to

include: the timeframe and details of any visa application; specific rights regarding freedom of movement;

the APASS applicant's rights such as work rights, income, health care and housing; and any specific

protection concerns such as women at risk, victims of trauma or other vulnerable groups such as children.

50. Subclause 14(3) reiterates the role of the APASS officer as an advocate for APASS applicants. It is

intended that the APASS officer would have direct contact with Australian migration on behalf of APASS

applicants.

51. Subclause 14(3)(b) gives the timeframe of 180 days. It is recognised that processing complex cases

8

within this timeframe may be difficult but it is important that applications are completed in a tight time

frame.

52. Subclause 14(4) aims to support the mental health of APASS applicants by ensuring they are regularly

updated on the progress of their application.

PART 3—IMMIGRATION DETENTION

53. This part dismantles Australia's current offshore immigration detention policies as they are abhorrent,

cruel and in clear breach of refugee and international human rights law.

54. This part inserts into domestic law the fundamental principle that people have a legal right to seek

asylum and any restriction on liberty imposed on persons exercising this right need to be provided for in

law, carefully circumscribed, and subject to independent oversight and prompt review.

55. This part specifies that, under certain conditions, APASS applicants can live in the community while

being processed.

Clause 16 - Immigration detention

56. This clause outlines the Parliament's objective that this section on immigration detention will adhere to

the fundamental human right of liberty and security, the right to freedom of movement and the

international prohibition on arbitrary detention.

57. Subclause 16(1) prescribes that detention must be in Australia and can only be applied where it pursues

a legitimate purpose and has been determined to be both necessary and proportionate in each individual

case.6

58. Subclause 16(2) specifies that it is the intention of Parliament that alternatives to immigration is the

preferred option for APASS applicants.

Clause 17 - Alternatives to immigration detention

59. This clause outlines the alternatives to immigration detention that take various forms depending on the

particular circumstances of the individual. All alternatives are based on the APASS applicant living in the

community with various restrictions imposed.

60. Subclause 17(1) specifies that if a reason for immigration detention, as listed under clause 21, cannot be

found then the Secretary must determine alternatives to immigration detention. This is done by legislative

instrument and is specific to individual cases.

61. Subclause 17(2) lists restrictions that may be determined by the Secretary and applied to an APASS

applicant who is living in the community rather than in immigration detention. The listed restrictions have

6 See UNHCR Detention Guidelines: Guidelines on the Applicable Criteria and Standards relating to the Detention of

Asylum-Seekers and Alternatives to Detention, Guideline 4.2 at http://www.unhcr.org/en-  au/pu bl ications/lega l/505b lOee9/u n hcr-detentio n-guidelines html.

9

been taken from the UNHCR detention guidelines and it is expected that the intent of these guidelines are

taken into consideration by the Secretary when making a determination .7

62. Subclause 17(3) ensures that an APASS applicant remains in Australia legally and is easily identified by

authorities when necessary.

63. Subclause 17(4) specifies a written determination must be given to the APASS applicant to ensure

transparency and accountability.

Clause 18—Access to assistance in alternatives to immigration detention

64. This clause outlines the assistance that is to be made available to an APASS applicant living in the

community while being processed. These are consistent with international refugee and human rights law.

65. Subclause 18(1) incorporates Article 24 of the Refugee Convention, which states that Government

should provide social security to refugees in a similar manner that is accorded to its citizens. This subclause

also includes the provision of housing as specified under Article 21 of the Refugees Convention."

66. Subclause 18(1)(b) confirms the right for APASS applicants to work as specified under Article 17 of the

Refugees Convention. 9

67. Subclause 18(1)(c) specifies that an APASS applicant in alternative detention should have the same

access to services that they would if in immigration detention under this Act. This includes health and

mental health services, education, counselling, government services and legal services.

Clause 19 - Timeframes for the determination of alternatives to immigration detention

68. This clause sets out the timeframe of six months for a determination to be made for an APASS

applicant's alternative to detention. This is to ensure that APASS applicants are not given restrictions within

the community for an indefinite time frame.

69. Subclause 19(b) ensures that any time frame outside of the 6 month period must be decided by the

Federal Circuit Court and is not left to the discretion of the Minister or Secretary.

Clause 20— Revocation or variation of restrictions

70. This clause sets out that if an APASS applicant breaches the condition of their determination specified

under subclause 17(1) then the Secretary can revoke or change the conditions. It is intended that such a

decision would follow the principles of international human rights law.

71. A decision under this clause can be reviewed by the Administrative Appeals Tribunal as outlined under

subclause 29(b) of this bill.

bid, Annex A at http://www. unhcr.org/en-au/publications/legal/505b10ee9/unhcr-detention-guidelines.html   8

See The 1951 Convention relating to the Status of Refugees, Resolution 2198 (XXI) adopted by the United Nations  General Assembly at http://www.unhcr.org/en-au/3b66c2aalO   Ibid.

10

Clause 21 - Reasons for immigration detention

72. Subclause 21(1) sets out that detention must not be arbitrary, and any decision to detain a person must

be based on an assessment of the individual's particular circumstances as outlined in subclauses 21(1)(a) to

(h). Detention is an exceptional measure and can only be identified for a legitimate purpose. These

conditions for detention have been taken from UNHCR detention guidelines or when detention is

considered necessary.1Â°

73. Subclause 21(2) ensures that detention can only be resorted to when it is determined to be necessary,

reasonable in all circumstances, and proportionate.

74. Subclause 21(2)(a) sets out that detention must not be discriminatory based on the mode of a person's

arrival.

75. Subclause 21(2)(b) recognises that seeking asylum is not unlawful. Article 31 of the Refugee Convention

specifically provides for the non-penalisation of asylum seekers and refugees having entered or stayed

irregularly if they present themselves without delay and show good cause for their entry or stay.

76. Subclause 21(2)(c) aims to ensure that the Secretary's power is restricted and that all decision-making is

subject to independent review.

77. Subclause 21(3) outlines that people who have committed a crime should not be held in immigration

detention facilities. If they pose a risk to public safety they should be prosecuted under the relevant Act and

dealt with through the courts in the same way as Australian residents/citizens.

78. Subclause 21(4) prevents the arbitrary or mandatory detention of asylum seekers. Such detention policy

is in clear breach of international law and has a catastrophic impact on a person's physical and mental

health.

Clause 22 - Time frames for immigration detention

79. This clause sets out timeframes for immigration detention with the intention of ensuring that an

individual's detention period is regularly reviewed.

80. Subclause 22(1) outlines the preferred time frame. Any extension of that time frame must be decided

by the Federal Circuit Court and is not left to the discretion of the Secretary.

81. Subclause 22(1)(b) ensures that following the initial review of detention, regular periodic reviews of the

necessity for the continuation of detention must go before a court.

82. Subclause 22(2) outlines what the Federal Circuit Court must take into consideration if it is to lawfully

extend an asylum seeker or refugee's immigration detention. Explicitly identifying the grounds for detention

in legislation gives both the public and asylum seekers legal certainty in regards to the reasons and time

10   See UNHCR Detention Guidelines: Guidelines on the Applicable Criteria and Standards relating to the Detention of  Asylum-Seekers and Alternatives to Detention, Guideline 4.2 at http://www.unhcr.org/en-  au/pu bl ications/lega l/505b lOee9/u n hcr-detentio n-guidelines html.

11

frames for migration detention.

83. Subclause 22(3)(a) sets out the fundamental right to liberty as outlined in all major international and

human rights instruments meaning that the detention of asylum seekers should be a measure of last resort,

with liberty being the default position.

84. Subclause 22(3)(b) refers to alternatives to detention that would allow APASS applicants to reside in the

community subject to a number of conditions or restriction on their freedom of movements, which would

still be subject to refugee and international human rights law as outlined in clause 6.

85. Subclause22(3)(c) outlines that the Federal Circuit Court, if considering alternatives to detention, must

balance the appropriateness of placement in the community with any risks to the public. Matching an

individual and family to the appropriate community should also be part of any assessment, including the

level of support services needed and available.

Clause 23 - Information provided to detainees

86. Clause 23 sets out that if a decision is made that an APASS applicant is to be detained then they must be

informed of the reasons for their detention, and their right in connection with the order, including review

procedures, in a language and in terms which they understand.

Clause 24—Access to services in detention

87. Clause 24 outlines that if a person is detained then subclause 24(1) (a) to (g) are the services to which

they are entitled while detained. This is in accordance with accepted international standards and it is

intended that, under the regulations, specific needs are identified and met.

88. Subsection 24(1)(a) lists health and mental health services. Detainees needing medical attention should

be transferred to appropriate facilities or treated on site where such facilities exist. A medical and mental

health examination should be offered to detainees immediately upon arrival, and conducted by medical

practitioners. While in detention, detainees would receive periodic assessment of their physical and mental

well-being. Many asylum seekers suffer psychological and physical effects as a result of their detention, and

thus a regular assessment should also be undertaken regardless of whether they presented symptoms upon

arrival. All detainees need to be provided with appropriate medical care and treatment.

89. Subclause 24(1)(b) sets out that counselling and trauma services are to be provided by qualified medical

professionals. An initial trauma assessment should be made upon entering the facility and periodic

assessment should be made during the period of detention. Victims of torture and other serious physical,

psychological or sexual violence need special attention and services.

90. Subclause 24(1)(c) sets out that detainees should be able to make regular contact with friends, relatives,

international and non-government organisations at all times.

91. Subclause 24(1)(d) lists education. This includes vocational training and should be offered as

appropriate for the length of detention. Children have the right to access primary or secondary education,

which would be offered off-site at local schools when possible.

12

92. Subclauses 24(1)(e) to (g) set out that detainees should be allowed to receive visits from families and

friends, government and non-government services and legal services when they desire.

Clause 25 - Communication for the purpose of obtaining immigration assistance and immigration legal

assistance.

93. Clause 25 sets out that a person in immigration detention is entitled to seek immigration assistance and

immigration legal assistance whenever they need to during business hours.

94. Subclauses 25(3) and (4) provide that appropriate space and privacy must available to detainees for the

purpose of such meetings and/or phone conversations.

Clause 26 - Children in detention

95. This clause sets out the fundamental principle that children should not be detained, as outlined in the

United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC). This clause sets out the very specific conditions

and time frames for when a child can be detained.

96. Subclause 26(1) paraphrases Article 37 of the CRC which requires that the detention of children be used

as a measure of last resort and for the shortest appropriate time.

97. Subclause 26(2) paraphrases Article 22 of the CRC which is that the best interests of the child shall be a

primary consideration in all decisions made under this Act.

98. Subclause 26(4) paraphrases Article 22 of the CRC which requires that appropriate measures are taken

to ensure that children who are seeking refugee status, whether accompanied by a parent or guardian or

not, receive appropriate protection and assistance. As a general rule, unaccompanied children should not

be detained and this subclause ensures that the matter goes before the Federal court as a priority and in

the shortest time frame possible.

Clause 27 - Independent monitoring

99. This clause sets out the need to ensure that detention centres comply with international human rights

law, as well as the provisions of this Act, through scrutiny and monitoring by an independent body. It is

recognised that Australia recently ratified the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture (OPCAT)

and this will require Australia to create a regime of independent inspections for all places of detention,

including immigration detention. The details of how this will work in Australia are still being determined but

it is expected that this process will be incorporated for the purpose of this Act.

100. Subclause 27(1) specifies an external inspection by an independent body every six months. Such

regular inspections are necessary to ensure compliance and transparency.

101. Subsection 27(3) outlines the scrutiny and monitoring, as identified by the UNHCR Detention

Guidelines, necessary to ensure compliance with international principles.

13

102. Subclause 27(4) sets out that Clause 27 does not impact on other visitation rights set out in this Act

under subclause 24 and 25.

PART 4—ADVERSE SECURITY ASSESSMENTS

103. This Part allows judicial review of adverse security assessments for APASS applicants. As directed under

international law, all decision making in regards to an APASS applicant must be reviewable.

Clause 28 - Adverse security assessments

104. Clause 28 confirms the primacy of this Act over contrary legislation.

105. Subclause 28(2) identifies the Inspector-General of Intelligence and Security as an independent body

that can investigate complaints concerning security assessments. The IGIS can investigate a matter

pertaining to the legality or propriety of all assessments made in regards to APASS applicants.

106. Subclause 28(3) specifies the need to consider alternatives to detention if an adverse security

assessment is made. It is the intention that all decisions would be made with the Australian public safety a

priority. However, alternatives to detention as suggested by UNHCR guidelines, include the deposit or

surrender of documentation; reporting conditions; directed residence; provision of a guarantor; community

supervision arrangements or release on bail/bond.

107. Subclause 28(4) refers to the general principles relating to the detention of children and to the United

National Convention on the Rights of the Child, primarily in the best interest of the child.

PART 5 - REVIEW OF DECISIONS

Clause 29 - Review of decisions

108. Subclause 29(a) ensures merits review of adverse decisions regarding the transfer of an APASS

applicant under subclause 13(1) in accordance with principles of procedural fairness, transparency and

accountability.

109. Subclause 29(b) ensures merits review of a decision by the Secretary to revoke a determination of

alternative detention under subclause 17(1) if an APASS applicant is seen to breach a requirement of the

determination.

110. Subclause 29(c) ensures merits review of a decision by the Secretary to vary the restrictions specified

in a determination under clause 20.

PART 6 —JURSIDICTION OF COURTS

111. This Part affords APASS applicants with judicial review of adverse decision in accordance with

principles of procedural fairness, transparency and accountability.

14

STATEMENT OF COMPATIBILITY WITH HUMAN RIGHTS

Prepared in accordance with Part 3 of the Human Rights (Parliamentary Scrutiny) Act 2011

Refugee Protection Bill 2018

This bill is compatible with the human rights and freedoms recognised or declared in the international

instruments listed in section 3 of the Human Rights (Parliamentary Scrutiny) Act 2011.

Overview of the bill

This bill enables the establishment of a network of centres, located in and run by Asia Pacific countries in-cluding Australia, where asylum seekers can go to be registered, have their immediate humanitarian needs

met and lodge a preference for country of re-settlement. If the asylum seeker selects Australia, and is

within the specified quota, this bill establishes a process for assessing their claim in Australia with appro-priate oversight, limited timeframes and judicial review. The bill does not allow mandatory detention and

prioritises the applicant's immediate needs and refugee and international human rights law.

Human rights implications

The bill is necessary to ensure that Australian law is compliant with refugee and international law. It

implements into domestic law components of: Convention and Protocol relating to the Status of Refugees;

International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights; Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman

and Degrading Treatment or Punishment; International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights;

Convention on the Rights of the Child; Convention on the Elimination of all Forms of Discrimination against

Women; and Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities.

Conclusion

This bill is compatible with the human rights and freedoms recognised in the international instruments

listed above. It provides asylum seeker and refugee protection through a regional framework that complies

with refugee and international human rights law and the guidelines of the UNHCR. It provides a long term

solution to refugee protection and it protects and strengthens human rights for asylum seekers and

refugees while ensuring that Australia upholds its responsibilities under international law.

Andrew Wilkie MP

15

2016-2017-2018

The Parliament of the  Commonwealth of Australia

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Presented and read a first time

Refugee Protection Bill 2018

No. ,2018

(Mr Wilkie)

A Bill for an Act to provide a legislative response to  all people seeking asylum in Australia, and for  related purposes



Contents  Part 1—Preliminary  Short title  2 Commencement 2

3 Simplified outline and object of this Act 2

4 Act binds the Crown 3

5 Definitions 3

6 Application—international agreements for the protection of  rights 4

7 Severability 5

8 Principle of family unity 6

8A Principle of the rights and best interests of the child 6

Part 2—Enabling of APASS 8

9 Intention that parties to APASS be legally bound 8

10 APASS centres 8

11 Meaning of APASS applicant and APASS applicant to  Australia 8

12 Australian quota of APASS applicants 9

13 Determination of transfer arrangements of APASS applicants  to Australia 9

14 APASS case officers 10

Part 3—Immigration detention 12

15 Relationship with other laws 12

16 Immigration detention 12

17 Alternatives to immigration detention 12

18 Access to assistance in alternatives to immigration detention 13  19 Timeframes for the determination of alternatives to  immigration detention 13

20 Revocation or variation of restrictions 14

21 Reasons for immigration detention 14

22 Time frames for immigration detention 15

23 Information provided to detainees 16

24 Access to services in detention 16

25 Communication for the purpose of obtaining immigration  assistance and immigration legal assistance 16

26 Children in detention 17

27 Independent monitoring 18

Part 4—Adverse security assessments 20

No. 2018 Refugee Protection Bill 2018

28 Adverse security assessments 20

Part 5—Review of decisions 21

29 Review of decisions 21

Part 6—Jurisdiction of courts 22

30 Jurisdiction of the Federal Circuit Court 22

Part 7—Miscellaneous 23

31 Regulations 23

ii Refugee Protection Bill 2018 No. 2018

A Bill for an Act to provide a legislative response to  - all people seeking asylum in Australia, and for

related purposes

The Parliament of Australia enacts:

5 Part 1—Preliminary

1 Short title

This Act is the Refugee Protection Act 2018.

Re/ligee Pro tection Bill 2018 1

Part 1 Preliminary

Section 2

1 2 Commencement

2 (1) Each provision of this Act specified in column 1 of the table

3 commences, or is taken to have commenced, in accordance with

4 column 2 of the table. Any other statement in column 2 has effect

5 according to its terms.

6

Commencement information  Column 1 Column 2 Column 3

Provisions Commencement Date/Details

1. The whole of The day after this Act receives the Royal  this Act Assent.

7 Note: This table relates only to the provisions of this Act as originally

8 enacted. It will not be amended to deal with any later amendments of

9 this Act.

10 (2) Any information in column 3 of the table is not part of this Act.

ii Information may be inserted in this column, or information in it

12 may be edited, in any published version of this Act.

13 3 Simplified outline and object of this Act

14 Simplified outline

15 (1) This Act enables the establishment of a network of centres, located

16 in and run by Asia Pacific countries including Australia, where

17 asylum seekers can go to be registered, have their immediate

18 humanitarian needs met and lodge a preference for country of

19 re-settlement. If the asylum seeker selects Australia, and is within

20 the specified quota, this Act establishes a process for assessing

21 their claim in Australia with appropriate oversight, limited

22 timeframes and judicial review.

23 (2) This Act does not allow mandatory detention and prioritises the

24 applicant's immediate needs and refugee and international human

25 rights law.

2 Refugee Protection Bill 2018 No. 2018

Preliminary Part 1

Section 4

Object of this Act

2 (3) The object of this Act is to provide a legislative response to people

3 seeking asylum in Australia, through the Asia Pacific Region, that

4 is sustainable, equitable and humane, and subject to appropriate

5 oversight and review;

6 (4) To advance its object, this Act:

7 (a) enables a regional framework initiated by the Australian

8 Government in partnership with one or more other countries

9 within the Asia Pacific region; and

10 (b) upholds Australia's obligations under international law,

ii specifically the Refugees Convention and other international

12 human rights law.

13 4 Act binds the Crown

14 This Act binds the Crown in each of its capacities.

15 5 Definitions

16 (1) In this Act:

17 adverse security assessment has the same meaning as in Part IV of

18 the Australian Security Intelligence Organisation Act 1979.

19 APASS (short for Asia Pacific Asylum Seeker Solution) means the

20 regional framework to manage movements of asylum seekers

21 within the Asia Pacific region:

22 (a) that is consistent with the Refugees Convention, the Refugees

23 Protocol, the New York Declaration and other international

24 human rights law; and

25 (b) to which Australia and one or more other countries within the

26 Asia Pacific region are parties.

27 APASS applicant: see subsection 11(1).

28 APASS applicant to Australia: see subsection 11(2).

29 APASS Australian quota for a year means the quota for the year

30 determined under section 12.

No. , 2018 Refugee Protection Bill 2018 3

Part 1 Preliminary

Section 6

APASS case officer means an APASS case officer appointed in  2 accordance with APASS.

3 APASS centre: see section 10.

4 APASS processing conditions has the same meaning as in APASS.

5 Note: The APASS processing conditions under APASS include (but are not

6 limited to) the following:

7 (a) the timeframes and details of a visa application (including the

8 process of triage, security and health checks and required

9 documentation);

10 (b) specific rights regarding freedom of movement;

11 (c) specific assistance needs (including but not limited to, housing,

12 income, work rights and health);

13 (d) any specific protection concerns (such as women at risk, persons

14 with disabilities, unaccompanied minors, victims of trafficking,

15 victims of trauma and survivors of sexual violence, as well as

16 older persons).

17 IGIS means the Inspector-General of Intelligence and Security.

18 international human rights law means the international

19 agreements referred to in section 6.

20 Migration Act means the Migration Act 1958.

21 New York Declaration means the New York Declaration for

22 Refugees and Migrants, done at New York on 19 September 2016.

23 principle offamily unity has a meaning affected by section 8.

24 principle of the rights and best interests of the child has a

25 meaning affected by section 8A.

26 Secretary means the Secretary of the Department.

27 (2) An expression used in this Act that is defined for the purposes of

28 the Migration Act has the same meaning in this Act as it has in the

29 Migration Act.

30 6 Application—international agreements for the protection of rights

31 This Act does not apply to the extent (if any) to which it is

32 inconsistent with any of the following international agreements:

4 Refugee Protection Bill 2018 No. , 2018

Preliminary Part 1

Section 7

1 (a) the Refugees Convention;

2 (b) the Refugees Protocol;

3 (c) the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, done

4 at New York on 16 December 1966 ([1980] ATS 23);

5 (d) the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman

6 and Degrading Treatment or Punishment, done at New York

7 on 10 December 1984 ([1989] ATS 21);

8 (e) the Convention on the Rights of the Child, done at New York

9 on 20 November 1989 ([1991] ATS 4);

10 (f) the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural

ii Rights, done at New York on 16 December 1966 ([1976]

12 ATS 5);

13 (g) the Convention on the Elimination of all Forms of

14 Discrimination against Women, done at New York on

15 18 December 1979 ([1983] ATS 9);

16 (h) the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities,

17 done at New York on 13 December 2006 ([2008] ATS 12).

18 Note: The text of an international agreement in the Australian Treaty Series

19 (ATS) could in 2018 be viewed in the Australian Treaties Library on

20 the AustLil website (http://www.austlii.edu.au ).

21 7 Severability

22 (1) Without limiting the effect of this Act apart from this section, this

23 Act also has effect as provided by this section.

24 (2) To avoid doubt, no subsection of this section limits the operation of

25 any other subsection of this section.

26 External affairs power

27 (3) This Act has the effect it would have if its operation were expressly

28 confined to give effect to Australia's rights and obligations under

29 an agreement with one or more countries.

30 (4) This Act has the effect it would have if its operation were expressly

31 confined to acts or omissions that occur beyond the limits of the

32 States and Territories.

No. 2018 Refugee Protection Bill 2018 5

Part 1 Preliminary

Section 8

(5) This Act has the effect it would have if its operation were expressly  2 confined to matters that are of international concern.

3 Aliens power

4 (6) This Act has the effect it would have if its operation were expressly

5 confined to:

6 (a) exercising a power or performing a function that affects an

7 alien (within the meaning of paragraph 51(xix) of the

8 Constitution); or

9 (b) conferring a right or imposing an obligation on such an alien.

10 8 Principle of family unity

11 (1) The Parliament affirms that the principle of family unity should be

12 adopted in conformity with the obligation to protect the family and

13 respect family life, subject to the best interests of the child, as

14 enshrined in many instruments of international law.

15 (2) The principle of family unity must be a paramount consideration in

16 any decision or other action taken for the purposes of this Act.

17 (3) The principle offamily unity includes the principles that:

18 (a) a country should refrain from taking actions that would

19 disrupt members of a family unit of a person; and

20 (b) a country should take action to allow members of a family

21 unit of a person that are dispersed to be reunited without

22 returning them to a country where they would face danger.

23 Note: The expression member of the family unit of a person is defined for

24 the purposes of the Migration Act.

25 8A Principle of the rights and best interests of the child

26 (1) The principle of the rights and best interests of the child must be a

27 paramount consideration in any decision or other action:

28 (a) taken for the purposes of this Act; and

29 (b) that affects a child.

30 (2) The principle of the rights and best interests of the child includes:

31 (a) the principle of family unity; and

6 Refugee Protection Bill 2018 No. 2018

Preliminary Part 1

Section 8A

1 (b) the principle that a country should recognise and provide for

2 every child's inherent right to life and ensure to the

3 maximum extent possible the survival and development of

4 the child (including health and mental health services,

5 counselling and trauma services, phone and internet,

6 education, legal services and accommodation and financial

7 assistance); and

8 (c) the principle that a country should ensure that throughout the

9 APASS process children will be assured the right to express

io their views freely in all matters affecting them, their views

ii being given due weight in accordance with the child's age

12 and level of maturity.

No. 2018 Refugee Protection Bill 2018 7

Part 2 Enabling of APASS

Section 9

Part 2—Enabling of APASS

9 Intention that parties to APASS be legally bound

4 Parliament recognises that it is the intention of APASS that each

5 party to APASS must be legally bound, either under international

6 law or domestic law, to provide effective protection for asylum

7 seekers and refugees.

8 10 APASS centres

9 An APASS centre is a centre established under APASS that

io satisfies the following conditions:

ii (a) the centre is developed in cooperation with, and funded by,

12 the parties to APASS;

13 (b) the centre is developed in accordance with the Refugees

14 Convention and the other international instruments referred

15 to in section 6;

16 (c) the centre is located strategically to enable ease of access,

17 making it a preferred alternative to seeking the service of

18 people smugglers.

19 11 Meaning of APASS applicant and APASS applicant to Australia

20 (1) A person is an APASS applicant if:

21 (a) the person is an asylum seeker or refugee; and

22 (b) the person is registered as an asylum seeker at an APASS

23 centre.

24 (2) An APASS applicant is an APASS applicant to Australia if:

25 (a) upon registration, the person selected Australia as a host

26 country; and

27 (b) the person has been deemed, in accordance with APASS, to

28 fit within the APASS Australian quota for the year during

29 which the person was registered; and

30 (c) the person has been recommended, in accordance with

31 APASS, to the Minister.

8 Refugee Protection Bill 2018 No. 2018

Enabling of APASS Part 2

Section 12

1 (3) If a person is an APASS applicant to Australia, the Minister is

2 responsible for that person and must ensure that the provisions of

3 this Act are fully applied to the APASS applicant, subject to

4 APASS and associated in-country agreements.

12 Australian quota of APASS applicants

6 (1) The Minister must, before the start of each year, declare by

7 legislative instrument the quota of APASS applicants for that year

8 that will be considered for permanent visas in Australia.

9 (2) The quota must be determined in accordance with APASS and with

io the principles of genuine responsibility and cost sharing between  ii the parties to APASS.

12 13 Determination of transfer arrangements of APASS applicants to

13 Australia

14 (1) Within 60 working days after the day a person becomes an APASS

15 applicant to Australia, the Secretary must determine:

16 (a) that the APASS applicant will remain for processing at the

17 APASS centre where the APASS applicant was registered as

18 an asylum seeker; or

19 (b) that the APASS applicant may enter Australia while their

20 visa claim is being processed.

21 (2) A determination under subsection (1):

22 (a) may relate to more than one APASS applicant; and

23 (b) must specify each APASS applicant covered by the

24 determination by name, not by description of a class of

25 persons.

26 (3) A determination under subsection (1) is a legislative instrument.

27 (4) The Secretary must, in making a determination under

28 subsection (1), consider the following:

29 (a) Australia's non-refoulement obligations;

30 (b) the principle of family unity;

31 (c) whether the APASS centre where the APASS applicant was

32 registered is at capacity;

No. 2018 Refugee Protection Bill 2018 9

Part 2 Enabling of APASS

Section 14

1 (d) whether the APASS applicant is facing personal danger;

2 (e) whether the APASS applicant is an unaccompanied minor,

3 and the principle of the rights and best interests of the child;

4 (f) whether the APASS applicant has any health needs that

s indicate the transfer to Australia is necessary;

6 (g) whether the transfer to Australia is necessary in regards to

7 enhancing burden and responsibility-sharing and regional

8 cooperation, and not burden shifting.

9 (5) Subsection (4) does not limit the matters that the Secretary may

10 consider in making a determination under subsection (1), However,

11 Australia's obligations under international human rights law are to

12 be the Secretary's paramount consideration.

13 (6) If the Secretary determines, under subsection (1), that an APASS

14 applicant to Australia may enter Australia while their visa claim is

is being processed, the APASS applicant must be individually  16 assessed as to the appropriateness of the conditions of transfer

17 (subject to procedural safeguards) prior to transfer. The procedural

18 safeguards include, but are not limited to, the following:

19 (a) that the APASS applicant will be legally admitted to

20 Australia;

21 (b) that the APASS applicant is both mentally and physically fit

22 for travel;

23 (c) any other safeguards prescribed by the regulations.

24 14 APASS case officers

25 (1) If it is determined under subsection 13(1) that an APASS applicant

26 will remain for processing at the APASS centre where the APASS

27 applicant was registered as an asylum seeker, an APASS case

28 officer must be allocated to the APASS applicant within 7 days.

29 (2) As soon as reasonably practicable after the allocation, the APASS

30 case officer must ensure that the APASS applicant is given:

31 (a) free and independent legal assistance and advice; and

32 (b) information regarding the APASS processing conditions.

10 Refugee Protection Bill 2018 No. 2018

Enabling of APASS Part 2

Section 14

1 (3) The APASS case officer must take all reasonable steps (including

2 liaising with Australian authorities):

3 (a) to ensure that a decision can be made on the APASS

4 applicant's visa application; and

5 (b) to assist the decision being made within 180 days from the

6 date of the application.

7 (4) The APASS case officer must ensure that the APASS applicant is

8 regularly informed about the process and status of the visa

9 application. The information must be given in a language and

10 format that the APASS applicant understands.

No. 2018 Refugee Protection Bill 2018 11

Part 3 Immigration detention

Section 15

Part 3—Immigration detention

4 15 Relationship with other laws

5 This Part applies in relation to all immigration detention in

6 Australia, including detention in an APASS centre in Australia,

7 despite any other law of the Commonwealth, a State or a Territory

(whether written or unwritten).

16 Immigration detention

10 (1) The Parliament intends that immigration detention be:

ii (a) lawful, under both international law and domestic law; and

12 (b) necessary and proportionate; and

13 (c) for the shortest time possible; and

14 (d) in Australia.

15 (2) The Parliament also intends that alternatives to detention are the

16 preferred option to immigration detention for APASS applicants.

17 17 Alternatives to immigration detention

18 (1) If there is no reason under section 21 for one or more APASS

19 applicants to be taken into, or kept in, immigration detention, the

20 Secretary must, by legislative instrument, determine alternatives to

21 immigration detention that are to apply in relation to the APASS

22 applicant or applicants covered by the determination.

23 (2) A determination under subsection (1) must permit the APASS

24 applicant or applicants covered by the determination to live in the

25 community in accordance with the restriction (if any) specified in

26 the determination. The restriction may be any one of the following:

27 (a) a requirement to deposit or surrender documentation such as

28 passports;

29 (b) reporting conditions, such as periodic reporting to an

30 authority or organisation of a kind prescribed by the

12 Refugee Protection Bill 2018 No. 2018

Immigration detention Part 3

Section 18

1 regulations (which may include, for example, an immigration

2 authority or a non-government organisation);

3 (c) a requirement that the APASS applicant must reside at a

4 specific address or within a particular suburb or area;

5 (d) a requirement to provide a guarantor or surety who would be

6 responsible for ensuring the APASS applicant's attendance at

7 official appointments and hearings and for ensuring that the

8 APASS applicant otherwise reports as specified in any

9 condition of release.

10 (3) If a determination under subsection (1) includes a requirement that

ii an APASS applicant deposit or surrender identification

12 documentation, the Secretary must ensure that the APASS

13 applicant is issued with alternative forms of identification.

14 (4) A copy of a determination under subsection (1) must be given to

is the APASS applicant or applicants covered by the determination.

16 18 Access to assistance in alternatives to immigration detention

17 (1) If a determination under subsection 17(1) is in force that covers an

18 APASS applicant:

19 (a) adequate material support, accommodation and access to

20 means of self-sufficiency (including any necessary financial

21 support) must be provided to the APASS applicant; and

22 (b) the APASS applicant must have the right to work if the

23 APASS applicant is aged 16 or over; and

24 (c) the APASS applicant must have access to each service

25 prescribed for the purposes of subsection 24(1).

26 (2) Paragraphs (1)(b) and (c) have effect despite any other law of the

27 Commonwealth, a State or a Territory (whether written or

28 unwritten).

29 19 Timeframes for the determination of alternatives to immigration

30 detention

31 A determination under subsection 17(1) remains in force for:

32 (a) 6 months; or

No. , 2018 Refugee Protection Bill 2018 13

Part 3 Immigration detention

Section 20

1 (b) if, on application, the Federal Circuit Court makes an order

2 fixing a longer period—that period.

3 20 Revocation or variation of restrictions

4 If a determination under subsection 17(1) is in force that covers an

5 APASS applicant, and the APASS applicant fails to comply with

6 the restriction specified in the determination, the Secretary may:

7 (a) revoke the determination; or

8 (b) vary the restriction.

9 21 Reasons for immigration detention

10 (1) An APASS applicant may be taken into, or kept in, immigration

ii detention only for one or more of the following reasons:

12 (a) to document the APASS applicant's entry;

13 (b) to record the APASS applicant's claims for asylum;

14 (c) to determine the APASS applicant's identity;

15 (d) to await health clearance so as to protect public health;

16 (e) to await security clearance;

17 (0 to prevent the APASS applicant from absconding if there is

18 evidence of a risk of the APASS applicant absconding;

19 (g) if there is risk that the APASS applicant might destroy

20 evidence or influence witnesses;

21 (h) if an adverse security assessment has been made in respect of

22 the APASS applicant.

23 (2) An APASS applicant must not be taken into, or kept in,

24 immigration detention for any of the following reasons:

25 (a) the APASS applicant's mode of arrival (for example by

26 boat);

27 (b) irregular entry or stay, provided that the APASS applicant

28 has presented themselves without delay to the authorities and

29 shown good cause for their irregular entry or stay;

30 (c) executive order.

31 (3) An APASS applicant must not be held in prison, with prisoners or

32 in prison-like facilities unless the APASS applicant has been

14 Refugee Protection Bill 2018 No. 2018

Immigration detention Part 3

Section 22

convicted of, or is being held in custody on remand in relation to,  2 an offence against a law of the Commonwealth, a State or a

3 Territory that is punishable by imprisonment.

4 (4) No APASS applicant may be subjected to arbitrary or mandatory

5 detention.

6 22 Time frames for immigration detention

7 (1) An APASS applicant (other than an APASS applicant referred to in

8 subsection 26(2)) must not be kept in immigration detention for

9 more than 3 months.

10 Note: Subsection 26(2) is about the detention of children.

11 (2) On application, the Federal Circuit Court of Australia may extend,

12 or further extend, that period by up to 6 months. The court may do

13 SO only if that period, or that period as last extended, has not yet

14 ended.

15 (3) In determining whether to make an order under subsection (2), the

16 Federal Circuit Court of Australia must take into account the

17 following:

18 (a) that detention of APASS applicants should only occur as a

19 measure of last resort and that there should be a general

20 presumption against the detention;

21 (b) whether there are any non-custodial measures available (for

22 example the imposition of reporting obligations, sureties or

23 other conditions);

24 (c) the balancing of the rights to liberty, security and freedom of

25 movement of the APASS applicant with the public policy

26 initiatives of detention.

27 (4) If the Federal Circuit Court of Australia makes an order under

28 subsection (2), the court may also make any other order the court

29 considers appropriate to facilitate the APASS applicant not being

30 kept in immigration detention for longer than the extended, or

31 further extended, period.

No. 2018 Refugee Protection Bill 2018 15

Part 3 Immigration detention

Section 23

1 23 Information provided to detainees

2 Each APASS applicant that is taken into immigration detention

3 must be immediately informed (orally and in writing, and in a

4 language the APASS applicant understands) of the following:

5 (a) the reason for the APASS applicant's detention;

6 (b) the APASS applicant's legal rights in regards to the detention

7 (including the process of judicial review and the contact

8 information for legal aid and consular assistance);

9 (c) the proposed time frame for the APASS applicant's

io detention.

ii 24 Access to services in detention

12 (1) The regulations may prescribe any or all of the following services

13 for APASS applicants in immigration detention:

14 (a) health and mental health services;

15 (b) counselling and trauma services;

16 (c) phone and internet;

17 (d) education;

18 (e) visiting services (including daily access to visitors, whether

19 they are known to the APASS applicant or part of a broader

20 community or non-government service);

21 (0 government services (including immigration, housing and

22 Centrelink services);

23 (g) free and independent legal services.

24 (2) An APASS applicant in immigration detention must have access to

25 each service prescribed for the purposes of subsection (1).

26 25 Communication for the purpose of obtaining immigration

27 assistance and immigration legal assistance

28 (1) In this section, immigration assistance and immigration legal

29 assistance have the same meaning as in Part 3 of the Migration

30 Act.

16 Refugee Protection Bill 2018 No. 2018

Immigration detention Part 3

Section 26

1 (2) An APASS applicant in immigration detention is entitled, at any

2 time during business hours, to communicate and consult regarding

3 immigration assistance or immigration legal assistance.

4 (3) All reasonable efforts are to be made to facilitate an APASS

5 applicant to communicate or consult, outside business hours,

6 regarding immigration assistance or immigration legal assistance if

7 the need to communicate or consult is urgent.

8 (4) Adequate time and facilities are to be made available to an APASS

9 applicant in detention for the purpose of receiving immigration

io assistance or immigration legal assistance.

ii (5) Without limiting subsection (4), an APASS applicant who is

12 receiving immigration assistance or immigration legal assistance,

13 or the APASS applicant's legal counsel, may be required to be

14 within sight, but must not be required to be within hearing, of

is others (including immigration detention staff).

16 26 Children in detention

17 (1) It is the intention of Parliament that APASS applicants who are

18 children:

19 (a) should not be deprived of liberty, except as a measure of last

20 resort; and

21 (b) should be deprived of liberty only for the shortest appropriate

22 period of time, taking into account the extreme vulnerability

23 and need for care of children (particularly of unaccompanied

24 minors).

25 (2) Without limiting subsection (1) or section 8A, an APASS applicant

26 who is 18 years old or less, or who is reasonably suspected to be 18

27 years old or less, must not be kept in immigration detention for

28 more than 7 days.

29 Note: Section 8A requires the principle of the rights and best interests of the

30 child to be a paramount consideration in any decision or other action:

31 (a) taken for the purposes of this Act; and

32 (b) that affects a child.

33 (3) On application, the Federal Circuit Court of Australia may extend,

34 or further extend, that period by up to 3 months. The court may do

No. 2018 Refugee Protection Bill 2018 17

2

Part 3 Immigration detention

Section 27

so only if that period, or that period as last extended, has not yet  ended.

3 (4) If the APASS applicant is an unaccompanied minor, the first order

4 under subsection (3) in relation to the APASS applicant must be

5 obtained within 24 hours of the APASS applicant being taken into

6 immigration detention or as close as possible to that time.

7 (5) In determining whether to make an order under subsection (3), the

s Federal Circuit Court must take into account the following:

9 (a) the effect of subsection (1) and section 8A;

10 (b) that detention of APASS applicants should only occur as a

ii measure of last resort and for the shortest possible time, and

12 that there should be a general presumption against the

13 detention;

14 (c) whether there are any non-custodial measures available (for

15 example the imposition of reporting obligations, sureties or

16 other conditions);

17 (d) the balancing of the rights to liberty, security and freedom of

18 movement of the APASS applicant with the public policy

19 initiatives of detention.

20 (6) If the Federal Circuit Court of Australia makes an order under

21 subsection (3), the court may also make any other order the court

22 considers appropriate to facilitate the APASS applicant not being

23 kept in immigration detention for longer than the extended, or

24 further extended, period.

25 27 Independent monitoring

26 (1) Immigration detention facilities must be subject to external

27 inspections every 6 months independent of the administration of

28 the facility.

29 (2) An inspection under subsection (1) must be conducted by an

30 independent organisation determined, by legislative instrument, by

31 the President of the Australian Human Rights Commission.

18 Refugee Protection Bill 2018 No. 2018

Immigration detention Part 3

Section 27

1 (3) For the purposes of carrying out an inspection under

2 subsection (1), an organisation determined under subsection (2)

3 may:

4 (a) access all information on the numbers of detainees and

5 locations of detention, as well as all information relevant to

6 the treatment of detainees (including their records and

7 conditions of detention); and

8 (b) freely choose which immigration detention facilities to visit

9 (including by making unannounced visits at their own

10 initiative, and which detainees to interview); and

11 (c) conduct private and fully confidential interviews with

12 detainees and staff or contractors (including medical staff or

13 contractors) working at the immigration detention facility in

14 the course of their visits; and

15 (d) make recommendations to the immigration detention

16 facilities administration and other competent authorities.

17 (4) This section does not limit any other right or power of an

18 organisation or individual to access an immigration detention

19 facility that exists apart from this section.

No. 2018 Refugee Protection Bill 2018 19

Part 4 Adverse security assessments

Section 28

Part 4—Adverse security assessments

3 28 Adverse security assessments

4 (1) Despite paragraph 36(1)(b) of the Australian Security Intelligence

5 Organisation Act 1979, Part IV of that Act applies to a security

6 assessment in respect of an APASS applicant to Australia.

7 (2) The functions of the IGIS include inquiring, on the IGIS ' s own

8 initiative, into any adverse security assessments furnished in

9 respect of an APASS applicant to Australia.

10 (3) The IGIS may, despite any other law, communicate directly with

11 an APASS applicant to Australia for the purposes of an inquiry

12 referred to in subsection (2) in relation to the APASS applicant.

13 (4) To avoid doubt, subsection (3) of this section does not limit the

14 powers of the IGIS under subsection 17(2) of the

15 Inspector-General of Intelligence and Security Act 1986 in relation

16 to an inquiry referred to in subsection (2) of this section.

17 (5) Alternatives to detention that are appropriate in light of the specific

18 security risk posed must be identified and considered.

19 (6) Special consideration should be given to the wellbeing of the

20 children or other dependents of any asylum seekers against whom

21 an adverse security assessment is made.

20 Refugee Protection Bill 2018 No. 2018

Review of decisions Part 5

Section 29

Part 5—Review of decisions

29 Review of decisions

4 Applications may be made to the Administrative Appeals Tribunal

5 for review of any of the following decisions:

6 (a) a decision of the Secretary under subsection 13(1) that an

7 APASS applicant to Australia will remain for processing at

8 the APASS centre where the APASS applicant was registered

9 as an asylum seeker;

10 (b) a decision of the Secretary under section 20 to revoke a

11 determination under subsection 17(1);

12 (c) a decision of the Secretary under section 20 to vary the

13 restriction specified in a determination under

14 subsection 17(1).

No. 2018 Refugee Protection Bill 2018 21

Part 6 Jurisdiction of courts

Section 30

Part 6—Jurisdiction of courts - I  30 Jurisdiction of the Federal Circuit Court

4 Jurisdiction is conferred on the Federal Circuit Court in relation to

5 any civil matter arising under this Act.

22 Refugee Protection Bill 2018 No. 2018

Miscellaneous Part 7

Section 31

Part 7—Miscellaneous

31 Regulations

4 The Governor-General may make regulations prescribing matters:

5 (a) required or permitted by this Act to be prescribed by the

6 regulations; or

7 (b) necessary or convenient to be prescribed for carrying out or

8 giving effect to this Act.

No. 2018 Refugee Protection Bill 2018 23

Fact sheet for Refugee Protection Bill 2018

What will this bill do?

The Refugee Protection Bill provides for a sustainable, equitable and humane response to the

protection and processing of asylum seekers and refugees in the Asia Pacific region. It enables the

Asia Pacific Asylum Seeker Solution (APASS), a regional framework that has been developed in

accordance with United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) guidelines, the Refugees

Convention and international human rights law. These laws, the principles of family unity and the

best interests of the child are paramount to all decisions made under this Act.

This Act enables the establishment of a network of centres, located in and run by Asia Pacific

countries including Australia, where asylum seekers can go to be registered, have their immediate

humanitarian needs met and lodge a preference for country of re-settlement. If the asylum seeker

selects Australia, and is within the specified quota, this Act establishes a process for assessing their

claim in Australia with appropriate oversight, limited timeframes and judicial review. The Act does

not allow mandatory detention and prioritises the applicant's immediate needs and refugee and

international human rights law.

How will the APASS process work?

APASS centres will be strategically located across the Asia Pacific region, generally in countries of

first asylum or through which asylum seekers and refugees are transiting. The APASS centres are to

be clearly marked and asylum seekers and refugees will be encouraged to register.

New arrivals to an APASS centre will be screened and registered and a person's immediate

humanitarian needs will be met, even if only on a temporary basis. Upon registration, asylum seekers

will be asked to select three preferred host countries. If Australia is selected, and other specified

criteria are met, then the applicant will become an Australian APASS applicant. An APASS applicant

may remain at the APASS centre where the APASS applicant was registered or be transferred to

another APASS centre. A transfer arrangement for an APASS applicant must prioritise the applicant's

immediate needs, the principle of family unity, international human rights law and responsibility

sharing between APASS member states as a priority. Each APASS applicant will be assigned an APASS

case officer who will be responsible for the processing conditions of the applicant, including access

to free independent legal advice, accommodation and financial support, as well as working with

authorities to ensure an applicant's visa is processed within the statutory time frame. Each step of

this process will have restricted time frames, appropriate oversight and review. Australia will take a

specified quota of APASS applicants each year who will be considered for permanent visas in

Australia based on their refugee status.

How does this bill impact on Australia's humanitarian intake?

Australia will take a specified quota of APASS applicants each year who will be considered for

permanent visas in Australia based on their refugee status. Australia's quota would match or exceed

other member states of APASS to ensure shared responsibility across the region.

Will this bill result in more people arriving by boat?

No. APASS centres will reduce the need for people to travel to Australia by sea because registration

at an APASS centre would be preferable to engaging the service of people smugglers. There would

be no cost, the process is equitable and transparent, and each step of the process has specific time

frames and appropriate oversight and review.

It is important to acknowledge that people may still choose to arrive by boat and APASS countries,

including Australia, would register such people at one of their APASS centres. The current

deterrence-based policy implemented by Australia has not reduced the number of refugees in the

region but has instead placed greater pressure on neighbouring countries to provide protection. The

preoccupation with sea journeys by the Government and Opposition, when people arrive more

commonly by plane and face harm while travelling on land, is misleading. Australia needs to share

the regional responsibility for the protection of asylum seekers and refugees and adhere to

international law that prohibits discrimination against certain groups based on their method of

arrival.

Will this cost more than our current offshore processing policy?

No. Australia's current offshore detention policy has been estimated to cost $573,100 per asylum-seeker, per year. In 2014-15 Australia spent more than $1 billion on offshore detention where 1577

asylum seekers and refugees were detained. This is more than five times the UNHCR budget, which

was estimated to be $U5157 million for 2015 that covered over 200,000 refugees, half a million

internally displaced people and nearly 1.4 million stateless persons in the South East Asian region.

A fundamental principle of APASS is cost sharing between member states. Under the APASS regional

framework it is expected that Australia will contribute its fair share, which would assist many more

asylum seekers and refugees than under current policy.

Will this bill become law?

For APASS to implemented and successful it will need government and ideally bipartisan support.

This bill is a platform for the Australian community to demand that the Government and Opposition

discard Australia's current asylum seeker policy, which is illegal and abhorrent, and instead establish

a mechanism to respond effectively to the movement of asylum seekers and refugees as well as

provide safe entry for people seeking protection in Australia.

