

CHRIS BOWEN MP

SHADOW TREASURER

SHADOW MINISTER FOR SMALL BUISNESS

MEMBER FOR MCMAHON



JUSTINE KEAY

LABOR CANDIDATE FOR BRADDON





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

DOORSTOP

DEVONPORT, TASMANIA

THURSDAY, 12 JULY 2018



SUBJECTS: Banking Royal Commission; Labor’s bigger, better and fairer

income tax cuts; GST distribution; tax; energy; National Energy Guarantee;

ACCC’s Electricity Prices report; AFL in Tasmania; Braddon.



JUSTINE KEAY, LABOR CANDIDATE FOR BRADDON: Thank you very much

for coming to Devonport today and I'd like to welcome Chris Bowen, our Shadow

Treasurer here at our Banking Forum that we've held here with people from across

the coast.  This is the first Banking Forum that has been held and that's because

the Royal Commission into the banks is not coming to Tasmania.



I've always said that Tasmanians have not been immune from the bad behaviour

of the banks and today really cemented that that's actually the case.  We heard

some stories of people that have been treated quite poorly by the banks, a lot of

really bad behaviour, from farmers, from people in their home loans, from getting

credit cards that they did not want and have put them into a lot of financial

problems.



So we want to send a message to the Royal Commission that: 'please come to

Tasmania.'  There is a lot more evidence that they could gain from coming here

and speaking to Tasmanians and I'll hand over to Chris to say a few more

words.  Thanks Chris.



CHRIS BOWEN, SHADOW TREASURER:  Thanks Justine and thanks for having

me here today.  The initiative that Justine's taken in convening this Banking Royal

Commission Forum is a very worthwhile one.



More than two years ago, Bill Shorten and I and the Labor Party called for the

Royal Commission into Banking and Financial Services Industry.  Not a decision

we took lightly.  We took that decision because we knew it was justified.  And

frankly, that decision has been vindicated.  With the Government eventually back

flipping and agreeing to a Royal Commission, and now the evidence before that

Royal Commission day after day showing that the Royal Commission was

necessary and justified and should have been held, frankly, two years ago.



So it’s unfortunate that the Royal Commission is not coming to Tasmania, that is a

matter for the Royal Commissioner, but I do congratulate Justine for convening this

forum.  Some of the stories we heard today were nothing short of harrowing, it's

fair to say.  The Royal Commission should hear them, and I know Justine will

collate it into a submission to the Royal Commission so that at least those views

are heard.



While I'm here in Braddon, it's useful to point out that of course, the people of

Braddon and indeed the people across Australia have a choice when it comes to

the competing priorities of the Labor Party and the Liberal party.  The people of

Braddon get to make that choice earlier than others, but that choice will be there

for all Australians.  Here in Braddon for example, 39,000, or 76 per cent of

personal income taxpayers are better off under Labor's fairer, better tax plans.  Mr

Turnbull's electorate is the biggest beneficiary of his tax plan.  Here in Braddon, it's

way down the list, almost at the bottom of the list of electorates that are better off

under the Liberal's plan.  Whereas here in Braddon, 76 per cent of the taxpayers

are better off under Labor's bigger, better, fairer tax cuts, which are focused and

targeted on those Australians earning less than $125,000 a year.



So we have the superior plans, we've done the work when it comes to policy

development, and of course here in Braddon, just as in other places of the country

but particularly here in Braddon, we have the better candidate as well, with Justine

and the experience and energy that she has brought to her service as the Member

for Braddon and of course, she's working very hard to earn the votes of the people

of Braddon to return as the Member on July 28th, and she has our full support as

she does so in the excellent campaign that she's running.



Happy to take questions.



JOURNALIST:  Would you commit to giving Tasmania additional GST like the

Prime Minister has guaranteed?



BOWEN: Well I can't accept the premise of your question that the Prime Minister's

committed or guaranteed very much at all.  Now what we've said is that Tasmania

and the other states and territories that are worse off, and they are worse off,

under the changed GST distribution arrangements, should get that firm guarantee,

and that is what we are prosecuting in terms of our position, which we will develop

our position in response to the Government's position.  So we've said all along that

there are legitimate issues that need to be addressed, but we don't think the

answer is to take money off the people of Tasmania, or South Australia, or

anywhere else.



Now the Government says ‘it's ok, we'll change the distribution but we'll top it

up’.  But where's the certainty?  Where's the certainty that that will continue?  And

where's the certainty, most particularly with this Government's track record and

form that they won't just take the money off Tasmania in a different way, by cutting

health and education like they did in 2014?  We know that's what they want to

do.  That's their form.  So I think the Tasmanian State Government should be

getting those guarantees.  I think Tasmanians are entitled to those guarantees,

and that's the case that I'm prosecuting as Shadow Treasurer as well to say 'where

is the guarantee that the top-ups will continue and they won't be taken back

through some slight of hand by cuts to other funding?'



JOURNALIST: What would Tasmania receive if you were in power?



BOWEN: Well what we've done is say that we understand the Government's

response to the Productivity Commission.  We, likewise, reject the Productivity

Commission's recommendations.  We think that the Government has done the

right thing there.  We would have rejected them as well.  We said all along that

money should not come off Tasmania.  So we've said, and we say the same in

Perth as we say in Hobart.  The people of Western Australia have a legitimate

beef.  That's why we came up with the Fair Share for WA Fund, which would top-up their GST allocations off the Commonwealth budget and not take a cent off

Tasmania, not one single cent.



Now, if the Government's now proposing, as they are, a change to the formula,

we've said we will be constructive about that but we want to see that guarantee

that Tasmanians and South Australians and others are not one dollar worse off,

not one dollar worse off.  So certainly, in terms of what we go to the election

saying, we won't support a plan which would see Tasmanians worse off.  We want

to see those guarantees locked in.  We want to see some sort of commitment from

the Government that it won't be taken back through health and education cuts

elsewhere.



JOURNALIST: What are some of the stories that you've heard today, how do they

compare to other stories across the country?



BOWEN: Well, in many ways, they're very similar to the stories we've heard

elsewhere across the country and that have been shown to the Royal

Commission.  We heard stories about people who, went guarantor for a loan which

didn't work and lost their house; we've heard stories about people who've been,

had their lives dramatically affected, marriage breakups, financial distress going

forward.  Now Justine's taken all those details and they'll be collated into a

submission for the Royal Commission.  Nobody's suggesting there are easy

answers here.  Nobody suggests that just a magic wand will fix all these problems

but the Royal Commission is the right place for these problems to be aired. It’s a

pity that we have had to waste two years waiting for this Royal Commission. If the

government had listened to Bill and myself and the Labor Party the Royal

Commission would be over, the report would be being implemented and the people

would be getting on with the greater security and protection’s they should have on

the advice of the Royal Commission’s recommendations.



JOURNALIST: The Tax Office says that the Federal Government could be losing

out on $8.7 billion in revenue from people over-claiming on their tax returns. Are

you surprised by how high that figure is?



BOWEN: It is a very high figure. It’s a lot of revenue and obviously I haven’t been

through the Tax Office’s workings but I have no reasons to doubt it. Of course

nobody should claim more than they are entitled to, no accountant should advise

anybody to claim more than they are entitled to and the Tax Office can and should

be properly resourced to undertake the necessary and appropriate audits to ensure

that people aren’t claiming more than they are entitled to. We will have a good look

at this Tax Office work and obviously if we win the election we work with them on

making sure they are appropriately resourced. We’ve made other announcements

about the ATO. Obviously we think that big corporations should be paying their tax

and we think that a tax rate which is fair and is paid by people equally is the way to

go and that means not claiming more than people are entitled to.



JOURNALIST: How would Labor implement a crackdown on individuals in this

case?



BOWEN: I didn’t say we would crackdown to be fair, I said we would look at the

report and see what the Tax Office is talking about but it is incumbent on people

and incumbent on accountants not to advise people not to make inappropriate

claims and an individual might think it is in their short-term best interest to make an

individual claim but if you do get caught develop occasions are pretty substantial

so you do need to be very careful.



JOURNALIST: The ATO suggests professional accounts and tax agents are more

likely to have made errors or falsified their clients returns. Is there a cultural issue

within the industry?



BOWEN: We’ll I’m sure the vast majority of accountants around the country do the

right thing. I’m sure the vast majority of accountants act in the best interests of their

clients and give them the best advice possible. Advise them to claim as much as is

legal and appropriate and not a dollar more. If there are accountants, as the Tax

Office is suggesting there and again we have no reason to dispute the Tax Office's

work, if an accountant is not doing that, then they need to be held to the very high

standards that they should be by the accounting regulatory bodies, et cetera.



JOURNALIST: Justine, last week you talked about how the Liberal’s proposed

National Energy Guarantee plan would potentially freeze all investment in

renewable energy and obviously today we’ve got the announcement about the

Granville wind project. What are your thought on that given your previous

(inaudible)?



KEAY: Well I’ve been to Granville and met with the proponents there a little while

ago. They’ve been waiting for some time to get an agreement with Hydro, with

Aurora to take their energy. So this Government at a State level has been acting

very slowly on that, but the funding for this proposal, while we welcome that, it has

come from the Clean Energy Finance Corporation which my opponent voted

several times to actually abolish, so we've got a Government in place that

its members cannot even agree on their energy policy, and we know that

the National Energy Guarantee that they are proposing would strangle renewable

energy investment in the decade of 2020, which does not bode well for Tasmania

at all, when we have such a rich renewable energy resource.



Labor will set the Renewable Energy Target, but we will also ensure that the North

West of Tasmania  is deemed a renewable energy zone. My opponent is not

proposing that, he is actually allegedly supporting a project that has received

funding from the actual mechanism that he tried to abolish.



JOURNALIST: The State Government had previously said that set specific targets

of achieving 1000 megawatt hours of renewable on island generation by 2022, do

you think that that’s achievable given how long this project took to get off the

ground?



KEAY: Well if they are serious about it then they haven’t actually demonstrated

that very well in the past. Certainly what we want to see is some certainty in the

energy policy nationally to try and bring down power prices. And to do that I think

they’re definitely needs to be a change of Government because we’ve got the

internals of the Coalition just cannot agree with their policy at all. It actually has

stagnated renewable energy investment nationally. We have lost many thousands

of jobs in the renewable energy in this country. The sector needs some certainty

and it needs stability and only a Labor Government will deliver that.



JOURNALIST: During the week Mr Shorten came out and said he was going to

put $25 million towards an AFL team for Tasmania. Is that something that you

knew was going to happen and is that something that you can guarantee?



BOWEN: Absolutely I knew it was going to happen. It was a Labor policy which

went through all our normal processes including the Expenditure

Review Committee which I chair and the Shadow Cabinet which I am a member of

and not only did I know about it, I strongly support it. Tasmania should have an

AFL team. I think that as a non-Tasmanian. I think that footy would be better with a

Tasmanian team. I'm a foundation member of the Greater Western Sydney Giants,

I joined on the day it was formed. I go to every home game that I can get to. I know

what a new team does for a community. It’s a great thing and the fact that we in

the Labor Party is prepared to put money behind this, I think is a good thing for

Tasmania, we make no apologies for it. It's about grass roots, it’s about getting that

team set up.



Now obviously at the end of the day it’s a matter for the AFL Commissioners. We

can’t force it but that support is there and I look forward to the day that the

Tasmanian AFL team valiantly loses to the Greater Western Sydney Giants in the

Grand Final.



JOURNALIST: Mr Bowen if the Government was to adopt an ACCC

recommendation to underwrite or subsidise new dispatchable power plants would

you still be open to supporting it?



BOWEN: Well the ACCC came out with this report very recently, yesterday. We

have not had the opportunity to go through it in a huge amount of detail yet.

Obviously it is a very substantial report, it is not provided to us in advance so we

do it the credit of actually taking some time to work through it. The concerning thing

though, the concerning thing is that Justine referred to the Liberal National party

internal dynamics straight away, not the sort of considered and reflected response

we are giving, the National Party and elements of the Liberal Party straight away,

not the sort of, considered and reflective response that we are giving.



The National Party and elements of the Liberal Party saying “ah huh”, we need

taxpayers dollars for coal fired power. That’s not what the report says. The report

doesn’t say taxpayer’s dollars for coal fired power station. The report doesn’t say

that. The report makes a range of recommendations across a whole number of

issues, and for that rump of the Liberal and National parties just to latch on to that

issue just goes to show just how desperate they are, and how this policy will

continue to be driven by Liberal Party and National Party disunity. Now part of the

problem as the report showed is the lack of policy certainty and stability. Now that’s

why the Labor party has been prepared to be more than constructive. It’s why

we’re prepared to support the Finkel Review, for example, even though it wasn’t

even our review or our idea, to provide that policy certainty and stability. It’s what

Mark Butler said going forward that we’ll try and do. But what we won’t do is sing to

the tune of elements of the Liberal and National Party to say the only answer to

any problem ever, is coal. That’s not the case.



JOURNALIST: If coal fired power is the best and quickest way to bring down

power prices why shouldn’t the Federal Government consider underwriting that

investment?



BOWEN: Well, the cheapest form of new energy is renewable energy. That’s a

fact. Now, again, the report actually says lets be technology agnostic. That’s what

the report says. It doesn’t say coal fired power. It says, let’s be technology

agnostic. It’s Minister Canavan, of all people, who’s not technology agnostic, who’s

saying it’s only coal that we need. Well that’s just a pretty simplistic and short

sighted view on his behalf.



JOURNALIST: Could that provision jeopardise the support of Labor State

Premiers in regard to power prices?



BOWEN: Well I mean at the end of the day, how Labor State Premiers reply to the

NEG is a matter for them. And they are quite separate matters in relation to the

report. I think Labor State Premiers will be as constructive as the Labor Party

federally is, but we won’t be signing blank cheques, and I don’t expect they will be

for the sort of ideological approach which is being driven by Minister Canavan and

others inside the Coalition.



JOURNALIST: Do you agree with Anthony Albanese that the Coalition’s policies

have effectively stopped the boats?



BOWEN: Well what Anthony was talking about was turning boats back. Labor

policy reflects that. It was changed some time ago. It’s not a recent development in

terms of what Labor voted at last national conference. Not the one coming up this

year. That was debated at our last national conference. He’s reflecting the policy

that Labor will implement and so yes I do agree with that.



JOURNALIST: And should there be a time limit on offshore detention of asylum

seekers?



BOWEN: Well, what we’ve indicated is we’ll work with the UNHCR and New

Zealand in particular, to try and get those people re-settled as quickly as possible.

They have been there a long time. Anthony was making the point that you don’t

need to give up on humanity to have tough policies on our borders. We will have

tough policies on our borders. But we’ll actually also do what this government has

failed to do which is work to get those people resettled at offshore locations

through UNHCR and take up sensible offers from countries that are prepared to

help.



JOURNALIST: As for a time limit though, do you think there should be a set limit?



BOWEN: Well, no, our policy is to resettle them as quickly as is possible, but that

can take some time to work through, but we’ll be actually doing it, whereas this

Government appears to have made very few efforts to resettle people off those

islands.



JOURNALIST: Just one more on coal fired power, how do you…



BOWEN: It’s hard to say it in the cold isn’t it…



JOURNALIST: How do you justify to families doing it tough that the option of coal

fired power shouldn’t be followed?



BOWEN: Look, all around the world, the sensible debate is saying that renewable

energy is the cheapest way to add to new power generation. That’s the fact of the

matter. And as I said before, the ACCC report doesn’t say put taxpayers money

behind coal. It says despatchable power can be underwritten by the taxpayer. Now

that is something the Government has indicated their considering. Mark Butler has

indicated our view. But our concern is yet again, I mean we’ve seen this movie

before, haven’t we?! As soon as somebody says something sensible on energy

policy, the Tony Abbott’s, the Craig Kelly’s,  the Matt Canavan’s, I mean, we’re

talking about a former Prime Minister here and Cabinet Minister, you know, you

latch on to it, and say ‘aha, we told you, coal was the only answer’. Well that’s not

how we see it. We think there’s a future in Australia with renewable energy. We

think there’s a future for Australia with proper sensible policies being implemented

in a bipartisan and sustainable way if at all humanly possible. The trouble is,

Malcolm Turnbull has had more support from the Labor Party on his energy policy

than he has from his own party. I mean we’ve offered more bipartisan support

Malcolm Turnbull on his energy policy than he has received from his own party

room because we are the sensible ones trying to get something done, and trying to

get policy certainty. He’s got to deal with these climate sceptics in his own party

room. Some of them don’t believe climate change is real and caused by human

activity. And you’ve got a former Prime Minister saying we should welch on the

deal he did, which just goes to show how far the debate has fallen inside the

Liberal-National Party.



JOURNALIST: Justine, how was the candidate’s forum last night and what is your

focus for the last two weeks?



KEAY: Great question. Well the candidate’s forum that we had here in Devonport

was well attended and I actually enjoyed it, could have had a lot more questions,

but it gave I think both candidates an opportunity to set their vision for Braddon and

to convince votes why each candidate should be elected. I have to say though that

there was a question for each of us on our economic policies and not once did my

opponent Brett Whiteley talk about banks. I had to pull him up on that because a

key measure of the Turnbull Government’s economic policies is giving banks $17

billion. We’ve come to an event today where you hear these sorts of stories and I

think it’s absolutely astonishing that my opponent would give the banks $17 billion

when they’ve treated people so poorly.





BOWEN: Okay, we done? Thanks for coming.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: JAMES CULLEN 0409 719 879



