











THE HON ALAN TUDGE MP  MINISTER FOR CITIZENSHIP AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS

TRANSCRIPT

ABC RADIO MELBOURNE  INTERVIEW WITH JON FAINE







7 February 2018



Subjects: ‘Culture wars’, the economy, law and order, Multicultural Affairs, cashless card

EO&E...........................................................................................................................................



JON FAINE  We are also engaged, now in something that is being universally described as the culture  wars. That puts Alan Tudge right in the thick of things.

He is the Minister for Multicultural Affairs and Citizenship in the Turnbull Federal Coalition  Government and represents outer eastern suburban electorate in Melbourne here.

Alan Tudge, good morning to you.

ALAN TUDGE  Good morning Jon.

JON FAINE  To the cashless card in a moment, first up, the culture wars. Is the federal election going to  be fought on cultural issues or economic ones?

ALAN TUDGE  I think the federal election will be largely fought on who is better at managing the economy  and who is better at keeping the community safe. We have certainly got a strong record on  both of those things.

On the economic front, we have had record jobs growth, we have got economic growth  which is amongst leaders in the pack globally and certainly we are working very hard to  keep the community safe through our national security settings.

JON FAINE  And yet, over and over again the so-called culture wars, things to do with Australia Day for  instance, or settlement programs, refugees, asylum seekers, all of these things. Over and  over again, it seems to be that is where the focus seems to fall.







2

www.minister.homeaffairs.gov.au/alantudge

ALAN TUDGE  I do not agree with that. Inevitably those things come up from time to time and people are  interested in those topics and we debate them forthrightly, as we do many other topics.

I think the most important thing which everyday Australians think about and are concerned  about is their job security, their wages, the cost of living and making sure their community is  safe. That is firmly our focus.

JON FAINE  I suspect that, well we are certainly seeing that there is a state election and undoubtedly it  is fixed for November. We are seeing that there is an attempt, perhaps successful, to try to  characterise Australian society as deeply divided.

Do you think we are a deeply divided society?

ALAN TUDGE  Again, I do not agree with your assessment there in terms of trying to characterise  Australian society like that…

JON FAINE  I didn’t say you. I said, there are attempts.

ALAN TUDGE  I am not convinced there even are attempts to categorise Australian society as deeply  divided. I do not believe we are, in fact I think we are largely a very harmonious society,  relative to many other countries in the world.

We are the most successful modern multicultural country in the world, in my view and we  are trying to continue down that path.

I think what the State Opposition, particularly, is going to be focused on leading up to the  state election is going to be in relation to crime in the state.

Everybody know that is a problem. We have had a criminal justice system set up by the  Labor Government which has been too soft. The bail laws have been too soft, some of the  sentences have been too weak and the police have not always been as empowered as they  should be.

Consequently, we have crime rates which are higher in Victoria and in Melbourne  particularly, than in other states. I think that Matthew Guy is absolutely focused on that and  will make a difference should he become Premier, later this year.

JON FAINE  Wow. I thought you were a Federal Minister.

ALAN TUDGE  You started referring to, in Victoria, some of the things which we were discussing. That is  absolutely one of the things which we are discussing in Melbourne.







3

www.minister.homeaffairs.gov.au/alantudge

I am a Melbournian, I live out in the Knox area and it is one of the top issues which people  are concerned about.

We have a federal dimension to this, in terms of national security and also booting out  people that are on temporary visas who are criminals. We do not want them being in the  country if they are conducting serious criminal activity.

That is one of our roles, but it is largely up to the state of course, to ensure that the police  are empowered, to ensure sentences are proper, to ensure the bail laws are adequate.

JON FAINE  Hang on, let me just check, it says here you are the Minister for Multicultural Affairs.

ALAN TUDGE  Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs, that is right.

JON FAINE  Every other Minister for Multicultural Affairs has been more than willing and keen to talk  about all the bridge building they are doing, the re-settlement programs, language  programs, job assistance, mentoring for youths who are struggling to find their way in a  different society than the one they grew up in. All that sort of stuff.

But you have kind of gone the opposite direction.

ALAN TUDGE  Jon, you started asking about what is on people’s minds. You talked about the culture wars.  What I think is on people’s minds - it was a broad political question you were asking me - is  cost of living pressures.

It is job security and wages. They are the things which I think are most pertinent to people  today, as well as the community safety, particularly in Melbourne.

I will talk all morning to you about what we are doing broadly in the multicultural space,  absolutely. We have been a tremendously successful country integrating people from  around the world.

I think we are the most successful country in the world and we need to make sure that that  continues. Some of our reforms which we have got already tabled to ensure that continues.

JON FAINE  Okay, and just finally also, the cashless card, are you going to expand it or just wait and see  whether it works?

ALAN TUDGE  We have already seen that it is working. We have had an independent evaluation and it has  absolutely had an impact on the ground, particularly in reducing alcohol consumption in  some of the more remote communities where alcohol is the poison that runs through them.







4

www.minister.homeaffairs.gov.au/alantudge

We have announced, which I announced last year, that we will expand into the Goldfields in  WA, and over into Bundaberg and Hervey Bay up in Queensland.

That is still on track. Dan Tehan is now in charge of that particular program and I am sure  that he will be following through on that.

JON FAINE  When Parliament is not sitting and you are back in Melbourne, can we get you to come in  and have a longer discussion about these issues? The text messages have gone completely  nuts.

In between those saying, Dave says “Alan Tudge for Prime Minister”. Another saying “what a  disgrace, fear mongering and sowing seeds of concern”.  Others saying “absolute rubbish  about crime rates, Queensland crime up much more than in Victoria”.

Anyway, we need to have a longer discussion. Are you up for it?

ALAN TUDGE  Happy to discuss those anytime Jon.

JON FAINE  I will get my people to talk to your people. Thank you Alan Tudge, Minister for Citizenship  and Multicultural Affairs in the federal Coalition Government of Malcolm Turnbull.

[ENDS]



