

SHAYNE NEUMANN MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION  FEDERAL MEMBER FOR BLAIR

LABOR’S ASYLUM SEEKER POLICY



Labor’s policy on asylum seekers is clear - we will never let the people smugglers back  in business.

Every time Peter Dutton lies about Labor’s strong position on border protection, he is a  walking, talking billboard for the people smugglers and is encouraging them to restart  their vile trade.

If Malcolm Turnbull and Peter Dutton really cared about saving lives at sea they  wouldn’t be deliberately misrepresenting Labor’s strong border protection policies.

Labor believes in strong borders, offshore processing, regional resettlement, and  turnbacks when safe to do so because we know it saves lives at sea.

This is the policy Labor took to the last election and remains our policy. Labor’s resolve  on this issue is absolute - the way to Australia through irregular means by boat is  closed, and it will remain so under Labor.

Manus Island and Nauru were set up as temporary regional processing centres but  have become places of indefinite detention because of the out-of-touch Turnbull  Government’s failure to negotiate other third country resettlement options.

Peter Dutton’s failure to negotiate other third country resettlement options and his  continued incompetence in managing his portfolio has meant genuine refugees have  languished in indefinite detention.

Labor has called on the Turnbull Government to accept New Zealand's offer to resettle  eligible refugees from Manus and Nauru and negotiate conditions similar to the US  refugee resettlement agreement to prevent people smugglers exploiting vulnerable  people.

If the Government was able to negotiate conditions for the US deal, they should be able  to negotiate them for any deal with NZ.

By his own admission, Peter Dutton knows he is playing into the hands of the people

smugglers and criminal syndicates who prey on the lives of vulnerable people when he  lies about Labor’s strong border protection policies. He should be ashamed of himself.

FRIDAY, 20 JULY 2018

MEDIA CONTACTS: TIMOTHY DUNLOP 0428 043 110

