SPEECH WE'LL PUT PEOPLE FIRST

ANDREW LEIGH MP  SHADOW ASSISTANT TREASURER  SHADOW MINISTER FOR COMPETITION AND PRODUCTIVITY  SHADOW MINISTER FOR TRADE IN SERVICES  SHADOW MINISTER FOR CHARITIES AND NOT-FOR-PROFITS

MEMBER FOR FENNER

LAUNCHING LUCKY BOY IN THE LUCKY COUNTRY  THE AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF MAX CORDEN, ECONOMIST  AUSTRALIAN NATIONAL UNIVERSITY  MONDAY, 19 FEBRUARY 2018

I acknowledge the Ngunnawal people, the traditional owners of the lands on which we  meet today, and recognise Vice Chancellor Brian Schmidt, Professor Hal Hill, Professor  Bob Gregory, and the extraordinary Max Corden.

As an empirical economist, I naturally prepared for today's book launch by looking at the  relevant datasets. Two big themes of this book are Max's passion for migration and his  research on reducing tariffs. So I opened up Stata, and looked through various  datasets, hoping to find one on Australian attitudes to both questions.

Eventually, I struck digital gold. The 1998 Australian Election Study asked whether  tariffs should be used to protect industry. Eleven percent disagreed, a view with which I  imagine Max would broadly share. It also asked about the number of migrants that  Australia should take, and 11 percent said Australia should take more migrants. Max  holds both views, something that is true of 2 percent of Australians. So Max, I'm afraid  that your Australian sales are unlikely to ever exceed half a million.

As well as being among the 2 percent tonight, I'm also pleased to be launching this  book because of Max's connection with my late grandfather, Keith Leigh. Keith was  fifteen years older than Max, and they were friends at Queen's College. Keith died two  years before I was born, so I loved hearing from Max about what my grandfather was  like when he was in his prime at the University of Melbourne.

I'm also pleased to be speaking at a book launch for an economist that I admire so  deeply not only for his ideas, but also for his style. When I read this book, I'm struck first

of all, by the lack of dogmatism. There's a moment there when Max says that  Kristallnacht was 'almost universally unpopular in Germany, even among the generals',  because it offended against the sense of social order. It's an astute observation but also  an extraordinarily generous one, from a Jewish person who fled from Germany.

Max talks about the moment where he might have seen Hitler passing by at the age of  nine, and says that although he's not quite sure, he thinks that along with the rest of the  crowd, he might have given a Heil Hitler salute. How many people would admit that? He  discusses his Uncle Willy, whose wife and their three and nine year old daughters were  shot in 1941 by the Nazis. In one of the most beautiful passages of the book, Max  ponders why Uncle Willy didn't leave Germany and observes that perhaps an obstacle  was his pride. It's that 'crooked timber' view of humanity - the lack of dogmatism and  fixedness, the determination to avoid stereotypes - that makes the early  autobiographical part of the book so absorbing.

Then there's the love of research. Max talks about how the Australian National  University laid the groundwork for his academic career to come. It's appropriate that  we're here today, in a room filled with eminent Australian economists. Returning from  Oxford to ANU, Max writes that he was struck by the blue skies and felt like he had  arrived at 'Majorca with a university'. Vice-Chancellor, can you put that on a billboard?

Max writes generously about his Nuffield experience, about his mentors and those he  admired, of visiting John Hicks in his home in the Cotswolds. Discussing Jim Mirrlees,  Max admits that he didn't understand most of what Mirrlees was saying. Back at ANU  he writes about the Indonesia Project, the students, his time as President of the  Economic Society of Australia and his policy engagement. He talks about the joys of  being a travelling international economist. I was reminded while reading Max of the  observation that Brian Schmidt made when he won his Nobel Prize, that nowhere else  but in ANU could he have engaged so richly with the best thinkers in the world to do the  best work in the world.

Max Corden pays tribute appropriately to Trevor Swan, who taught us that reputation  does not always equal published output. He refers to the importance of John Crawford's  work, who Max calls 'one of the world's most useful economists' -  a description that  reminds you of Keynes's aspiration for economists to be more like dentists. Crawford  exemplifies the value of focusing on big topics. Small advances in agricultural  economics in India have huge social welfare gains to the world.

Max is generous towards others. Of Fred Gruen, he says, 'I don't think I've met anybody  else in my life whom I have admired so much for his personality and balanced  judgement.' It is an apt description of Fred Gruen, but a description that easily be given  of Max himself. When I visited the University of Melbourne in the early 2000s, I  remember Max being a stalwart of the tea rooms, somebody who was always interested  in what you were doing, willing to push you a little further on your research agenda and  your methodology.

Max's approach is always to be modest about his own achievements. It's the opposite  of the way in which so many people become later in life where they want to pontificate  and fill the air with their own voice. But for Max, it's the silences, the interest, the ability  to listen, the deftness and the curiosity. He did me the honour of coming to the launch of  a book I wrote last year, Choosing Openness, and received loud applause when I  introduced him to the room. And he acknowledges his luck: as a refugee, in his choice  of studies, in the colleagues with whom he worked.

Now this is a blokey tale. Partly that's the era, partly that is the discipline of economics,  partly that's the field of macroeconomics. Here in this room tonight, men outnumber  women. But I was struck by the findings of a recent study by Ann Mari May, Mary  McGarvey and David Kucera looking at the attitudes of male and female economists on  a number of public policy issues. They ask economists whether market solutions are  typically superior to government intervention and find that male economists are more  likely to favour market solutions. But I think in our discipline, Max would be more  towards the government intervention side of the spectrum.

Male economists tend to favour austerity over redistribution, but again I suspect that  Max would be more on the redistribution end of the spectrum. Male economists say that  environmental protection is less important than do female economists. But I know from  speaking to Max the importance that he places on smart solutions to climate change.

And male economists are less likely to worry than female economists about inequality in  the labour market, an issue which I know concerns Max deeply. I think it's fair to say  that Warner Max Corden has a notably feminine touch to his economic style.

The story of Australian economic performance is very much one of migration and trade,  of engagement with the world and of recognising one's comparative advantage. And  that's Max's story too. A story of somebody who brought great luck to Australia when he  came here as a refugee. A story of one who continued to travel internationally to  engage with the best in the world, drawing home their wisdom.

In this room, adjacent to the world's most intellectual beer garden, Max reminds us that  life is best lived with a sense of fun, of camaraderie, of collegiality, in which the ideas  and the friendships intermingle. Max, congratulations on your extraordinary career. It is  an honour and a privilege to help launch your autobiography.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: STEPHANIE ANDERSON 0431 344 056

