1













THE HON ALAN TUDGE MP  MINISTER FOR CITIZENSHIP AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS

TRANSCRIPT

2GB SYDNEY

INTERVIEW WITH STEVE PRICE



17 April 2018

Subjects: South African farmers; Labor fundraiser; Greens plan to legalise cannabis

EO&E...........................................................................................................................................



STEVE PRICE  Well, listeners to this program will know we have been talking, for the past week, about the  situation that's unfolding in South Africa in relation to some horrific violence toward farmers  in that country.

Figures from local police reveal up to 74 farmers were murdered last year. There's an  ongoing debate in Australia about whether there should be a special visa created for some  of these people to be able to come to Australia.

Now, last week I spoke to a farmer's wife, Nikki. She doesn't want her surname used. We'll  hear a little of that in a moment. She described the night that she was shot at and raped in  her own home.

And last night, we spoke with Arno Nel. Now, he's a South African who has migrated to  Australia. His parents are still back in South Africa. His father passed away sadly last week.  He's been trying to get the debate in this country up and running. Here's a little bit of what  Arno told me.

[Excerpt]

ARNO NEL  They came in and hit my dad over the head with a steel pipe. He immediately gave them the  car keys. They're both pensioners, over 65 years old. They were renting a house. They're not  rich. They were just white. Gave them the keys, gave them the bit of money that was in the  house, and they still proceeded to torture them for three hours. They still proceeded. They  put the pistol against his head. Three times they actually pulled the trigger and the pistol  was fired. I guess God was looking after them on that day in that sense.

2



[End of excerpt]

STEVE PRICE  I think it's the violence that most upsets people. Nikki told us about the rape and the  shooting, and then made this plea to Australia.

[Excerpt]

NIKKI  We need help and you are our only hope because I think that we - it's not going to get  better. If this can happen to us then it can happen to everybody around us and we're not  looking for charity. We just need support and we need help because we are so helpless  where we are and in our [indistinct].

[End of excerpt]

STEVE PRICE  As you know, we spoke to Andrew Hastie about this situation last weekend. Alan Tudge is  the Federal Minister for Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs. He attended a forum in Perth  last week and heard these stories first hand.

Minister, thanks for your time.

ALAN TUDGE  G'day, Steve.

STEVE PRICE  Can we help?

ALAN TUDGE  I think we can. As you said, I was over in Perth last week and attended a forum organised by  Andrew Hastie and was the Government representative there.

I heard story after story after story similar to those ones that you were just describing. Of  horrific examples of torture, of rape, of murder and sometimes all three, occurring to loved  ones of Australian South Africans now.

We are a generous country to those who are in need and I think that we could be generous  to those South Africans in need as well.

STEVE PRICE  Were you surprised at the stories that you heard, at the level of violence?

ALAN TUDGE  I probably was, to be honest. It is one thing to read about these things in the newspapers,  and it has been pretty broadly covered here in Australia.

3

But when you go to a forum with 600 largely South Africans, or now Australians, in Perth,  and person after person gets up and tells these stories; they are harrowing stories and you  cannot help but feel for those people whose loved ones have been persecuted, or  murdered, or raped, or tortured.

It was a bracing experience to listen to them, let alone for those poor people whose family  members had gone through it.

STEVE PRICE  I know it's very difficult for people like yourself and Peter Dutton because they're - I mean,  you could talk to dozens of countries around the world where there are people being badly  treated, tortured, suffering violence who could tell stories and say we have a special case.  So, I realise the emotion of it has to be taken out. What is the official line on our  humanitarian visa intake?

ALAN TUDGE  So, in relation to that we have quite a flexible program now for our humanitarian intake and  it does not discriminate on the basis of which country you are from, or what your race or  religion or creed might be.

It simply says that if you are being persecuted you have the opportunity to apply for a  humanitarian visa and have it properly assessed on its merits.

I went through this with the South Africans in this forum last week in Perth; outlined all  options under the humanitarian intake.

Also importantly though, Steve, did point out that many South Africans have fantastic skills,  and so they have the opportunity to come here too, under our skilled migration program.  Indeed, about 60,000 South Africans have come to Australia over the last decade under that  program.

I pointed out the options which are available there as well for them to come here and make  a contribution, just as so many others have in the last decade.

STEVE PRICE  So, the humanitarian intake, as I understand it, minister, is capped at 18,750 for the year  2018-19.

ALAN TUDGE  That is right.

STEVE PRICE  And that's 5,000 because the Coalition decided to increase it. Is that correct?

ALAN TUDGE  Yes, that is right. Last year we had an extra high intake because we had the Syrians who  came in on top of that figure.

4

STEVE PRICE  So, that was the Abbott Government announced that 12,000 displaced Syrians and Iraqis  were able to come. Has that been filled, that 12,000, are they all here?

ALAN TUDGE  I believe that they are now and certainly we would be very, very close to completing that.  So, we were close to 21,000 people who came in under the humanitarian intake last year. As  you said, next year we will level out at 18,750 on an ongoing basis.

STEVE PRICE  So, if you're a South African farmer sitting back listening to this, as you can now online. If  you were Nikki, who I spoke to the other night, who- her husband leaves the family for the  first time ever and her children are shot at. She's raped. She's now too scared to go back to  her property. What are those people's options if they think Australia is the answer to their  problem?

ALAN TUDGE  So they have got a number of options available to them. One is the humanitarian program  which we have just discussed, whereby they can apply.

If they can show that they are being persecuted then they will have a good opportunity of  getting into the country under that program. And we have already had many people who  have applied for humanitarian visas.

Second, they have got the skilled migration program whereby typically you need a company  who might or a business who might sponsor you into a position if you bring skills.

Thirdly, there is a family reunion program whereby if you have family members here in  Australia already, a family member might be able to sponsor you as a spouse, a sister, a  mother or et cetera to be able to come into the program.

There’s also other sort of smaller programs as well, for example, if you've got a bit of money  and you want to establish a business or invest here in Australia then there are special  classes of visa.

So there are multiple options and many of those South African farmers or other South  Africans may well satisfy one the skilled migrations streams as much as have the  opportunity to apply for and potentially satisfy the humanitarian criteria.

STEVE PRICE  I think it was Home Affairs Minister Peter Dutton who first called on us to look at this. Have  you been a little dismayed - as I must say I have been - of some of the comments that, oh  well you can't discriminate in our migration policy based on colour?

ALAN TUDGE  We don't discriminate based on colour. And anybody who applies from whatever country  will be treated on their merits.

5

I have been pretty disgusted with some of the commentary suggesting that it is  inappropriate for us to be discussing the plight of South African farmers or South Africans  themselves who may have been persecuted.

Indeed on the night that we held this very large South African farmers forum in Perth  organised by Andrew Hastie, the Labor Party had a fundraiser off the back of it.  Calling for  donations because they were so disgusted that we would actually take the opportunity to  listen in to the concerns of the South Africans.

Honestly, I have never known such grubby politics to be honest, trying to fundraise off the  back of the tragedies of South Africans. I have called for Mr Shorten to apologise for that.  And if they did raise any money out of it to actually give it to a proper humanitarian cause  rather than keep it for their own pockets.

STEVE PRICE  Yeah, that's just pathetic. And I note today that the Canberra representative of the UNHCR  said that the Australian Government should be allowing the refugee boat people who are  currently on Manus Island and Nauru to come here before we even contemplate allowing  any white South African farmers to come here. I mean that's a completely different  question.

ALAN TUDGE  That is a different question. I mean they know what our very clear policy is in relation to  people who arrive unlawfully by boat and that is that they won't get to settle in Australia.

Our policy is clear on that. It works. It has stopped hundreds of people drowning at sea. In  the meantime…

STEVE PRICE  And I presume, Minister, if 200 white South African farmers with their wives and children  and dogs hired a boat and set sail from Western Australia and managed to get to the coast,  they'd be treated the same.

ALAN TUDGE  They would be treated exactly the same. They wouldn't be able to settle in Australia. That is  what our policy is.

I know it is a firm policy but it has the intended impact which is to break the people  smugglers’ trade and in doing so save hundreds of lives.

And also enables us to be more generous in relation to our broader humanitarian program  for people who come from refugee camps or potentially for people who come from South  Africa or other countries who are indeed facing persecution.

STEVE PRICE  So just finally, will there be some announcement on the way you will treat these  applications or do you just expect as the Minister, in consultation with Peter Dutton, that  you will let the process work as it's designed to work?

6



ALAN TUDGE  At this stage we have already had many applications from South Africans. I do not know  whether they are South African farmers or what their occupation may be.

But we absolutely have had applications to the humanitarian visa class and they will be  processed according to the criteria of the humanitarian visas.

It will be up to Peter Dutton should there be any announcement as such. But I simply re-emphasise that we have a flexible program which can accommodate anybody who is facing  persecution regardless of which country they may be based in.

Consequently those people who do apply will be assessed fairly on their merits and if they  do satisfy the criteria then they will be granted a humanitarian visa.

STEVE PRICE  Appreciate your time. Just before you go. Can you believe the madness of the Greens calling  for the decriminalisation and in fact legalisation of marijuana?

ALAN TUDGE  I actually can believe that madness because it seems that, you know, I have watched the  Greens this year and they started off with their number one priority being to abolish  Australia Day.

Their number two priority being to have welfare for every single person in Australia and  now their number three priority being to legalise marijuana.

I don't know what planet the Greens are on but they certainly don't seem to be on the same  planet as most other Australians.

STEVE PRICE  Appreciate your time. Thanks very much.

ALAN TUDGE  Thanks Steve.

STEVE PRICE  Alan Tudge there, the Federal Minister for Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs.

[ENDS]



The Hon Alan Tudge MP, Minister for Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs  WANTIRNA SOUTH, VICTORIA

