

BRENDAN O’CONNOR MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR EMPLOYMENT AND WORKPLACE RELATIONS  MEMBER FOR GORTON



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  SKY SUNDAY SPEERS  SUNDAY, 22 JULY 2018

SUBJECTS: Regional Migration; Migrant workers; Unemployment figures;  Casualisation of the workforce; Sham contracting; Labour hire exploitation;  Penalty rates; Wages growth; By elections.

DAVID SPEERS:Brendan O’Connor is the Shadow Minister for Employment and  Workplace Relations and joins me now. Thanks very much for joining me this morning.

BRENDAN O’CONNOR, SHADOW MINISTER FOR EMPLOYMENT AND  WORKPLACE  RELATIONS: Good morning David.

SPEERS: There are already various schemes to attract new migrants to regional areas.  There’s the four year skilled regional visa for example. Is there more though do you  think that can be done to require or force new migrants to go to regional areas?

O’CONNOR: Well, I think we need to examine this because the labour markets vary  across the country. So if there’s a requirement to supply labour given shortages in  certain sections or sectors of our country we should examine that.

There’s no doubt I think we are overusing certain temporary visas at the moment. We  need to have a student visa, David, because we need to let students have limited work  rights as we do need to have people on working holiday visas, but there’s too many  examples where those visas are being used in areas where there is no shortage, and  that is displacing or preventing locals getting work. So I think-

SPEERS: We’ll come back to that. Just on this idea, it’s still being formulated by the  government, so we are yet to see where we land on this, but new migrants and  presumably not just skilled migrants, but family reunion and maybe refugee visas that  are granted each year, would actually require as part of the visa that you have to live in  a regional area. Is that a good idea?



O’CONNOR: I think it’s worth examining and see if it’s workable, because as I say there  are needs in certain areas of this country which are different. And of course the  overwhelming number of migrants are attracted to the big cities, Sydney and Melbourne  in particular. And there are communities crying out for skills and labour in other areas.  So it’s a very uneven situation and I think therefore it is worthy of examination.

SPEERS: Alright, you mention there the student visa problem. Too many on student  visas are taking jobs in Australia that Australians you would argue should get. What  would you actually do about that?

O’CONNOR: I’m a supporter of the student visa, don’t get me wrong, and indeed there  are Australians studying overseas that also get access to limited work rights so of  course we need to be sensitive to that. But when you have an uncapped student visa  scheme that is not always used appropriately - I’ll make a point of course if you are here  to primarily study you should be given access to work. But if your purpose here is not  primarily to study and you are here on a student visa and you are here primarily to work  I think we need to examine that.

What’s happened is we’ve seen a 200,000 increase in applications since the election of  this government federally. And therefore I think we need to see whether we could either  cap the scheme or make sure it’s being used properly for the purpose it was intended.  It’s the same with the holiday maker visas. Of course we can allow backpackers to  work, and they are very important labour particularly in agriculture and other areas of  our economy. But if they come here and work seven days a week and are not taking a  holiday, and in many cases too often exploited, then we need to examine the use of  that. I mean if it is not being used for the purpose it was intended then we’ve got a real  problem with the system-

SPEERS: Ok, just to be clear, you are talking about capping students visa numbers and  holiday maker visa numbers?

O’CONNOR: Well, that’s a very sort of blunt instrument. I’m not sure that’s the best  approach. We need to examine that because at the moment-

SPEERS: When you say it’s worth looking at a cap what visa categories are you talking  about?

O’CONNOR: Well, they are not capped at the moment, so two things, you either don’t  cap but you make sure you are much more vigilant in making sure that they are here  primarily for the purpose, in the case of students, for study. Because if they are not-

SPEERS: How do you do that?

O’CONNOR: Well firstly you make sure that the study that they are engaged in is  genuine. I mean one of the problems we’ve had is we’ve had people coming to

Australia, signing up to Mickey Mouse courses and one of the reasons they weren’t  complaining about the lack of good courses is because they weren’t here to undertake  those courses, they had to sign up to the cheapest Mickey Mouse courses so they could  come here to work. Now I don’t blame-

SPEERS: So a stronger vetting of the courses they are studying, a lot more regulation  around what they are studying to make sure that it’s-

O’CONNOR: I think so. For two reasons, the efficacy and the reputation of our  education sector is critical and it undermines that when people are here not to engage  properly in real study.

Secondly, the abuse of the immigration system where we’ve got 13 per cent youth  unemployment and in regions of Australia where people are struggling, we’ve got up to  20 per cent youth unemployment and then we can get an overuse. Now we need these  visas, but we have to get them right.

SPEERS: Just to be clear though, you mentioned a cap. Is that something you’d look at  capping these visas?

O’CONNOR: It happens in other countries. I think it may be more difficult to do. I would  start, as a former Immigration Minister, I would start by ensuring the integrity of the  system works. I would have to say, capping is a last resort, but we certainly should be  looking at the way in which it applies now because in some areas, not a problem. In  other areas there is no doubt overuse, misuse and abuse.

SPEERS: Let’s turn to the jobs figures that were out on Thursday. They show more  than 50,000 more people found work last month. 80 per cent of those were full time  positions. The youth unemployment rate fell. As the Prime Minister pointed out over the  past 12 months, the strongest year of jobs growth since 2005. Do you agree they are  some pretty good numbers?

O’CONNOR: Yeah. I mean last year was very good insofar as jobs numbers. I think the  last 12 months it’s fallen off. Over the last 12 months, as opposed to last year, we’ve  seen two thirds of the growth being from part time work.

Indeed we’ve still got some real issues here. We’ve got population growth as you know,  David, which is the reason predominantly why we are seeing jobs numbers, otherwise  the unemployment rate would be falling far more. The unemployment rate is only two  points different from 2013, underemployment is still 1.1 million Australians. There are  still issues because if you just use the statistic one hour’s work, then of course they look  rosy. You have to drill down a bit further and look at underemployment, under-utilisation  generally, and of course you see a different picture - that is people are getting work, but  not finding enough work and, of course they are precariously employed. Too many  people are saying -

SPEERS: So what would you do about that? You’ve been talking about  underemployment for a while and it’s true, people aren’t getting as many hours as they  would like.  What’s one thing Labor would do to help people get more work?

O’CONNOR: Well the first thing you should do is make sure that people are not as  precariously employed. Now the Government and Malcolm Turnbull likes people to  believe there is no change to precarious work, that’s not true. QLD now, even according  to the ABS, has 29 per cent that are casual. That’s a significant increase in say the last  ten years, and we are seeing other forms of employment that do not connect people to  the labour market, where there are no guaranteed hours. Whether it’s the new gig work,  which is where you buy and sell your labour on social media platforms.

You are seeing people now working in sham independent contracting arrangements  getting $7 an hour. Now if they were employees, of course they would have to be paid  three times that almost, so you do see firstly some real exploitative situations for  workers and what I would say -

SPEERS: To go through some of those - casualisation -

O’CONNOR: In turn I would say firstly we need to define casual in a more narrow  sense. It’s been widely applied. It’s almost a subjective test now - if an employer tells  you that you are casual, you feel that you are casual even if you work years on end.  Now I think we need to define casual and enact a definition in the statute books that  narrows -

SPEERS: How would you define casual?

O’CONNOR: I would firstly say you cannot have people working as their primary job,  years on end and not have any sense of permanent work. Now we’ve made a  commitment -

SPEERS: So after 12 months you have to be made permanent? Would that make  sense?

O’CONNOR: We haven’t put down a timeline. That’s certainly the ACTU’s position, the  employers have a different view. We are open to examining exactly the way in which  casuals should operate, but what it shouldn’t be is the mainstay of employment, where  people are working for a decade, as their primary job, and have no sense of security.  And it’s not just what you’re called, it’s waiting by your mobile phone to get a text as to  whether you get any work the next day.

SPEERS: OK - you’re right about all of that but you haven’t landed on a policy?

O’CONNOR: So what I’ve said is, David, I’m saying we are going to narrow the  definition and its application, but yes we are still in ongoing consultation with state  colleagues about that. Let’s go to a few others. There’s too much sham contracting,

where people are deemed not to be employees, as in the case of Deliveroo riders and  Uber Eats workers, where they have been getting a third of the minimum wage - that  has to stop. You can’t continue to argue that someone is a contractor so you can avoid  paying them even the minimum wage - we would actually crack down on that -

SPEERS: How do you stop that?

O’CONNOR: Well you actually have to ensure that the definition of worker is sufficient  to prevent people pretending that someone is a contractor when in fact they’re under  your control and they’re your employee. You need to redefine the independent  contracting arrangements to stamp out sham contracting.

There are genuine independent contractors in this country, of course there are, and they  make their own decisions and they have an array of customers and clients. That’s a  genuine situation. But when you have -

SPEERS: So Deliveroo and Uber Eats and maybe Uber Drivers as well -

O’CONNOR: I think Uber Drivers is even a bigger question and, you know, I think we  need to examine that. But I certainly look at some of those other examples and say, on  the face of that, how can you be paid less than the minimum wage -

SPEERS: Customers quite like the fact that they get a much cheaper Uber than a taxi,  for example, that would come to an end?

O’CONNOR: Well I would put Uber aside. I think that’s a much more complicated issue.  You can you can see around the world there are decisions being made now as to the  status of Uber drivers. Recently in London they’ve actually determined an Uber driver to  be an employee. So, I’m looking at other jurisdictions to see what happens there. But I’ll  put that aside, you’re right, I think that’s very much entrenched. But there are other  forms of employment where people have been deemed to be contractors and they’re  being paid well below the minimum wage and that is exploitation. It doesn’t matter how  you seek to dress it up. We are seeing no efforts by the government to redress that.

We have already said we will crack down on sham contracting and, of course, there’s  labour hire as well. So these are all - where we are saying now - if you work in a  workplace you should be paid the same if you work the same job as a direct employee.  So you need to tackle this by tackling forms of employment in the labour market and we  are seeking to do that if we are elected.

SPEERS: OK, but getting back on this question of how you tackle underemployment,  give people more hours if they’re currently working. Labor does plan to boost penalty  rates on Sundays, take them back to where they were two years ago. Do you accept  that it is going to make it harder for a shop owner to offer someone more hours on a  Sunday, or indeed hire someone new, if they do have to pay higher rates?

O’CONNOR: No, look I don’t support the proposition that you starve workers of wages  and somehow our economy benefits. I’ve never believed the proposition that by cutting  wages you improve the economy and improve employment opportunities. In fact, you  actually take money out of -

SPEERS: But do you accept putting up wages requiring shop owners to pay more is  going to make it harder for them to give someone more hours on a Sunday?

O’CONNOR: I think that if you affect aggregate demand, if you actually affect  consumption by cutting real wages, you’ll hurt the economy. And once you start hurting  the economy, you actually affect a business of consumer confidence and, in doing so,  you affect employment opportunities. It’s not the case for an employer - of course there  are labour cost pressures, there is no doubt about that David. But, of course, if the  economy is in decline because you take away money from those that will spend in the  economy and pass that money over to shareholders. -

SPEERS:  Is the economy declining though, over the last two years while penalty rates  have been coming down, employment has been growing.

O'CONNOR: Well employment as I say, the unemployment rate is not much different  from that which was the case in 2013, and underemployment has grown.  So I do think  it's an overstatement to say things are rosy when you see the amount of people  underemployed and when you see people precariously employed.  And, when we see  wages growth has been at their lowest, I mean it's the lowest wages growth in 25 years,  we've got a government that wants to cut penalty rates which means wages will fall  further, they are happy to see exploitation, underpayment, wage theft, not really  addressing those issues in the economy.

At the same time of course we are seeing record increases in CEO salaries.  I mean,  the CEO salary of, Domino pizza's CEO getting $37 million is obscene when it's the  same company that's been involved in underpayment of their staff, and that's what  sickens people when you see these outrageous contrasts in hiking up CEO salaries and  cutting workers wages. And it's the workers who spend it in the economy, it's working  class and middle class people who spend in the economy, usually every dollar they  have.

SPEERS: OK, just finally Brendan O'Connor, the super Saturday by-elections less  than a week away.  How confident are you in the final days now of Labor holding on to  all of its seats?

O'CONNOR: I think it’s a very tough tussle. It always has been because in particular in  Tasmania and Queensland they are very, very marginal seats and in Queensland, in  Longman, we've rarely held that seat. So it's a tough contest, but I'm confident we'll do  very well. We've got I believe the best candidates the best policies. Today we've  announced -

SPEERS: Confident you will win?

O'CONNOR: Well I think, we're not going to cut $14 off pensioners or $21 off pensioner  couples, Malcolm Turnbull is. I think that in Queensland obviously Pauline Hanson has  reprised her role as a  Liberal supporter, which of course she won her first seat in '98  as  a Liberal candidate.  And of course her directing preferences to quite frankly a  disgraced and discredited Liberal candidate for misrepresenting his military service...

SPEERS: Could those One Nation preferences cost you Longman?

O'CONNOR: Well, we will have to wait and see what happens there.  But let's be very  clear, that One Nation is acting as a subsidiary of the Liberal party.  It is true to say that  they preferenced differently in the past, that's when they preferenced all over the place  in the last Federal election, here they are directing their preferences.  But I think the  Liberal candidate in Longman has got questions to answer which he has failed to  answer, and I think that will mark him down.

SPEERS: OK, I was just going to say quickly, if Labor does become the first opposition  in nearly 100 years to lose a by-election seat to a government, what happens to Bill  Shorten?

O'CONNOR: Well, Bill Shorten will be leader at the next Federal election. The last  Federal election campaign, the full contest, he won 14 seats and took us within a  whisker of winning the election, and I believe that's the case.  You haven't mentioned  Mayo I noticed, David.  Mayo had a problem last time because of the Liberal member, it  doesn't have a problem this time but looks like it isn't going to get anywhere near  winning back what is really a blue ribbon safe Liberal seat.  So, when you talk about  Labor, there are tests for Malcolm Turnbull.  Mayo is a test for him and we will see what  happens.

SPEERS: There are tests all around, no doubt about it.  Brendan O'Connor  appreciate your time this morning, thanks for joining us.

O'CONNOR: Thanks, David

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: ERIN SMITH 0458 050 010



