Labor



. j ff•I•• I •- r



MARK BUTLER MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR CLIMATE CHANGE AND ENERGY

MEMBER FOR PORT ADELAIDE

E&OE TRANSCRIPT

TV INTERVIEW  SKY NEWS WITH SAMANTHA MAIDEN  FRIDAY, 23 MARCH 2018

SUB JECTIS: AEMO report, Liddell closure, Turnbull's tax plan for big  business, ALP National Conference

SAMANTHA MAIDEN: Now you've had a chance to look at this report from this  morning, do you think it tells you that we should have fought harder to keep the  Liddell plant open?

MARK BUTLER, SHADOW MINISTER FOR CLIMATE CHANGE AND ENERGY: I  think it's important to be clear exactly what AEMO does in these reports. What they  do is they forecast a supply gap that will emerge when a generator closes, sending a  signal to the market of an expectation that that gap be filled. The only way in which  this becomes a problem is if nothing happens between now and the time Liddell  closes. So no new entrant, either AGL or another company builds any new  generation infrastructure in New South Wales to replace the loss of generation after  the, what will then be a 50 year old plant, exists the system. Now that's not really  realistic. What is going to happen is either AGL is going to proceed with their  investment plan or, I imagine, other companies are going to come in to fill the gap. It  is important that AEMO project exactly what the shortfall is going to be so that the  market understands what sort of gap it needs to fill.

What concerns me about these reports, and we saw this last year when AEMO  issued a report about Liddell, is that the Prime Minister and Minister Frydenberg  frankly have a tendency to misrepresent this and misrepresent it as AEMO saying  there will be a supply gap. Now they're identifying a gap that they expect the market  to fill and if there are any problems with filling that gap it really reflects that the  Government, for 4 or 5 years now, has been incapable of putting in place a national

energy policy that sends an investment signal to electricity companies for the period

beyond 2020. They were very happy to demolish our energy policy when they came  to government after 2013 but they've been incapable of putting a replacement policy  in place and that's really the driver of the energy crisis we currently face.

MAIDEN: To be fair, what the report actually says is that for there not to be a  problem that essentially Andy Vesey needs to follow through with all 3 phases of  their replacement for this. Now that leaves us, does it not, with an energy security  problem? We are putting in our hands with private business, whether we are going to  have power blackouts, surely that's pretty risky?

BUTLER: Well at the end of the day that is the consequence of the very big range of  privatisations that were undertaken by state governments, mainly state Liberal  governments, over the course of the 1990s. This is a private market, dominated by  private companies. Now of course everyone hopes that AGL will proceed with its  investment plan but if there's a proper energy policy put in place, finally, by this  government, then you'd expect other companies instead to fill that gap. Exacerbating  this uncertainty is the fact that the New South Wales government doesn't have any  energy policy designed to pull through investment in their state. If this was  happening in Victoria or Queensland where there are energy targets, then I don't  think there would be an issue. There was not a particular complaint made by Mr  Frydenberg, as I recall it, when Engie gave only 5 months' notice of closing the  Hazelwood power station. AGL has given 7 years notice of the closure of Liddell  compared to 5 months' notice given on the closure of the Hazelwood power station  in Victoria.

MAIDEN: It also, in the report, makes some mention of, that the risk of climate  change is a particular issue in terms of this becoming a problem because of extreme  temperatures and so on. Did you take anything from that? And also the reference to  how the solar power situation is plugging into the issues that it mentions in the  report.

BUTLER: The solar power question is not a particularly new piece of commentary, I  think everyone in the industry has been watching the change in the sort of peaks of  demands and supply in the system that reflect the fact that we now have about 1.8  million households in Australia with rooftop solar. That is more households than in

America has with rooftop solar; a country with 320 million-odd people. So that's not a  particularly new piece of commentary and I know AEMO and other agencies are  working hard on what that means.

The other issue about climate change and increased temperatures is something that  the industry and other stakeholders have been watching over the course of this  summer because it's been particularly affecting some of the older, increasingly un-reliable coal-fired generators in New South Wales and Victoria. At last count I think  there were more than 50 unplanned outages in those coal-fired generators. That is

units that just drop out of the system with no notice because of the impact of extreme

heat and the fact that they're getting very old. The Liddell power station is operating  beyond its design life and by the time of the closure that AGL has announced comes  to pass, it will be 50 years old, which is quite an age for an old coal-fired generator.  Some of these heat issues are interacting with the old fleet that was built in the  1960s and 70s and is itself creating reliability and security concerns as we saw over  the course of this summer.

MAIDEN: I wanted to ask you about the tax cuts. The government says it's getting  closer, but they're still short of course. Derryn Hinch, for example, has floated this  idea of carving out the banks from the tax. Would you be able to support company  tax cuts for big business if they carved out the banks? The suggestion is that it's  about $9 billion out of the $65 billion going to banks.

BUTLER: No, we're opposed to this more broadly than just the banks. Obviously I  think the Australian community is particularly aggrieved at the idea that banks would  be getting this sort of windfall but we have a general opposition to this. This is the  biggest fiscal hit on the budget, spending or tax-wise, by any major party and the  Government has been completely incapable of demonstrating any economic benefit.  The budget can't just deal with a $65 billion hit but particularly not when there's such  limited economic benefit that the Government has been able to demonstrate. If you  go to Australian shareholders, there's no real benefit. Dividend imputation means a  change in the company tax rate does not flow to Australian shareholders. Now it

flows to foreign shareholders who'll get, on our estimate, about 60% of the benefit  but no to mum and dad shareholders here in Australia. It won't drive investment in  the way that our policy on accelerated depreciation, dependent on actual investment  decisions, will and it won't flow down to workers' wages. We know that from decades  and decades of experience. The only way that workers get wage increases is  through the wage system rather than crossing their fingers and hoping that a windfall  tax cut for companies will flow into their pocket. We've never seen that happen.

MAIDEN: The ALP conference is set to debate a push to increase the immigration  intake and the refugee intake to 50,000 a year, do you support that and will you be,  once again, fighting to end the policy of turn backs to asylum-seeker boats?

BUTLER: Well as the party President, I'm not going to get into a range of different  hypothetical debates that might happen at the national conference. We're still at a  very early stage in preparing the draft platform that will be presented to the  conference and I suspect that between now and July there will be any number of  proposals that are floated publicly, within the membership or through the media  about a whole range of policy areas and it's not helpful for me as the party President  to speculate on that. We did decide at the last conference on a substantial lift in the  humanitarian intake to 27,000 that would take us to the highest, if not second  highest, intake anywhere in the world; certainly in per capita terms we would then be

the country taking the largest number of refugees in a formal re-settlement plan

anywhere on the face of the planet, but we've still got a way to go.

MAIDEN: Anthony Albanese has actually said that he now supports boat turn backs.  He said that in an interview with Miranda Devine recently, quite a significant change  given his position at the last ALP conference where essentially the numbers were  there on the floor to oppose turn backs and the CFMEU had to step in to save Bill  Shorten. You are a member of Shadow Cabinet, do you support boat turn backs or  not?

BUTLER: Well of course I do. I'm a member of the Shadow Cabinet and that is the  Labor party policy. I was in the chair at the Labor conference on the vote that you  talked about Samantha and there was a majority on the floor that supported the  position presented by Bill Shorten and that is now Labor party policy.

MAIDEN: Well is there anything else you could do, for example, to end the policy of  offshore detention?

BUTLER: Well again I think that the broad parameters of our asylum-seeker policy  and our border protection policy have been established over a number of  conferences, including the debate that you just mentioned we had at the 2015  conference. Now that doesn't mean that there won't be party members through the  platform process that want to raise questions about the number of our humanitarian  intake and there will be a debate through the platform development process and  maybe even a debate at conference, but that's all very hypothetical at the moment  and I don't think it's useful for me as the party President to respond to every  possibility or every proposal that's floated in the media.

MAIDEN: Okay, Mark Butler, thank you very much for your time today.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: LUCY CARUSO - 0408 803 428

Authorised by Noah Carroll ALP Canberra

