

THE HON RICHARD MARLES MP

DEPUTY LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY

SHADOW MINISTER FOR DEFENCE

MEMBER FOR CORIO



E&OE TRANSCRIPT

TELEVISION INTERVIEW

TODAY SHOW

FRIDAY, 6 DECEMBER 2019



SUBJECTS: Medevac; Bushfires.



TOM STEINFORT: Parliament is done and dusted for another year, it’s been a big year, a

pretty big final day yesterday as well. The nation still in the dark to a certain extent over

what deal exactly the Government has done with Jacqui Lambie in terms of repealing

Medevac. Speculation is certainly growing it could have involved sending refugees to New

Zealand, joining me this morning as they do each week is Deputy Opposition Leader

Richard Marles in Canberra and Home Affairs Minister Peter Dutton. Good morning to you

both men.



RICHARD MARLES, Deputy Leader of the Australian Labor Party: Good morning.



PETER DUTTON: Morning.



STEINFOFT: Minister, for starters, let's put this out there straight away, what deal has

been done with Jacqui Lambie?



DUTTON: Tom, we haven't done any deal. We went through pretty methodically and gave

Jacqui a classified briefing about exactly what we already had in train, what we were doing.

TRANSCRIPT I 1G1~Ri[f:

I think when we explained to her, look cut aside all the rhetoric you read in some of the

newspapers and the left-wing websites, we don't want anyone on Manus or Nauru, I

didn't put them there. We want to get people off as quickly as possible. We’ve sent 650 or

more now to United States, we want to get that number down to zero; we’ve abolished the

regional processing centre on Manus, there are no kids there. We’ll slowly reduce the

number down to zero, I want to do it overnight, but I need to do it in a way we don't see

boats restarting. At the moment in Sri Lanka for example we are seeing a lot of activity,

people smugglers trying to get people to pay money to hop on boats.



STEINFOFT: Richard, what is your read on what Jacqui Lambie has had to say? Did it

sound like a deal has been done to you?



MARLES: A deal has obviously been done and I think the Australian people are entitled to

understand exactly what that deal is. The Government is telling us this is very important

legislation, this is very important policy, we need to understand exactly what the

arrangement they now have with Jacqui Lambie which resulted in her changing her views.

This is just a simple matter ultimately of transparency, from the very moment that they

came to office transparency has been a real problem for this government when it comes

both to Border Protection and actually the way in which they governed generally.

This should be a simple matter of coming clean about what exactly has been done here

and to hide behind national security in relation to this is ridiculous. The Australian people

are entitled to understand exactly what has gone on.



STEINFORT: What do you say to the suggestion that you are hiding behind the cloak here,

effectively saying it is a national security briefing so we can’t talk about what’s being said?



DUTTON: I just think that it is rhetoric and these lines, with all due respect to Richard, he

is speaking to the talking points that comes out of Mr Albanese' office, right, he's a trusted

deputy, we get that. We didn't put them here, what Richard should be saying mea culpa,

sorry, we lost control of our borders when in government and we were the ones that put

people on Manus and Nauru. Kevin Rudd signed the agreements Julia Gillard failed as

well. We have stopped deaths at sea, got every child out of detention, closed detention

centres we haven’t got any new boat arrivals and getting people off. So I think when you

look at the contrast now, given the Labor Party voted with the Greens again this week to

weaken our borders, Richard should be apologising not giving us a lecturer from the talking

points.



MARLES: But Tom, that’s just talking points tight there; let’s be clear, there is essentially

bi-partisanship right now in relation to boarder protection policy. Peter supports a system of

offshore processing, he will say that right now, and that is ultimately al that Manus and

Nauru is. Labor supports turning back boats so the critical ingredients to making sure our

borders are safe is supported across the board. The idea that medevac legislation had any

impact upon our national security is patently ridiculous; when you consider almost a

thousand people came under medical transfers  from Manus and Nauru to Australia via

Peter prior to medevac coming into place. It is not like the sky fell in with this legislation,

but at the end of the day, a deal has been done, that’s what Jacqui Lambie herself is

saying, it's important to understand the deal, transparency ought to be central to the way

governments govern.



STEINFORT: NSW is in the grip of another bushfire disaster, we’ve seen some really

apocalyptic pictures this morning, does there come a point where the Federal Government

will step in here and declare an emergency so the army can be brought in to help?



DUTTON: Well Tom, we’ve obviously got a great collaboration with all of those firefighters

in NSW,  Queensland, predominantly at the moment, but problems elsewhere around the

country as well. Already when  you speak to the emergency management Australian

officials, when you hear the advice from the fire Commissioners, there's already a very

close collaboration, I don't think this is an issue of politics, the Federal Government will do

whatever they have to, to protect people to protect property and life. There's a lot of

money, support, agreement, arrangements for aircraft, all sorts of payments to families in

distress, I think Australians should be proud of the fact that in the darkest hour for a lot of

people, State Governments, councils, volunteers, the Federal  Government, everybody is

putting in whatever we can, to make sure that we help people and the threat, as  you say,

is here with us right now. People who think this is being  downgraded or going to be

dealt  with, or something that's happened last week or the week before it's not, it's here -

now. People really need to listen to the warnings.



STEINFORT: Just quickly Richard do you see the Government is doing enough on this?



MARLES: Well look, I think Peter's answer to that is absolutely right. This is not a moment



for politics. There's a well worn arrangement between the states and the Commonwealth

about how emergency services are put in place and the arrangements around that and

that's  what is going on here. The focus has to be on the moment, on making sure we are

doing everything to protect life and property. Peter is right when he says the warnings that

our agencies put out which are among the very best in the world in dealing with this,

people need to be listening to.



STEINFORT: Well to see you two agreeing on something it must be some Christmas spirit

in the air. Quickly what are you doing for Christmas?



DUTTON: We just go to the beach, a bit of sand and water - boardies no DT's, just to

reassure the other swimmers on the beach, it's all good. Richard can give the same

assurance, no doubt.



MARLES: Well the idea that Peter is going to be in boardies, I want to see it -



DUTTON: I promise you won't.



MARLES: That's as scary as me putting them on, Tom. But no same with me, beach, golf

and family, that's my holiday.



STEINFORT: Very good routine gents, great to see you both and hopefully a happy

Christmas ahead for all.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: KATE HANNS 0423 974 363



