

Media Release  Human Rights Law Centre | For immediate release: Wednesday 4 December 2019

Morrison Government votes to deny sick people medical care

Today the Australian Government has stripped away a humane, transparent and doctor-led  process for the refugees in its care on PNG and Nauru to access essential medical care.

This morning the Morrison Government passed the Migration Amendment (Repairing Medical  Transfers) Bill 2019 to repeal the Medevac laws.

David Burke, Legal Director with the Human Rights Law Centre, said this was a dark day in  Australian politics.

“This is a shameful day for the Morrison Government and all of the Members of Parliament who  voted to repeal these lifesaving laws. Fear and lies have dominated at the expense of men and  women who need medical care.”

“Peter Dutton and the Morrison Government have today played cruel, bloody-minded politics with  peoples’ lives. The Morrison Government has stripped away the basic shred of humanity that  meant that when someone was sick they could get the care they needed.

“Before the Medevac laws, the Morrison Government failed over and over in their duty to provide  proper medical care to children, women and men in offshore detention. The Government  repeatedly ignored medical advice, including from its own doctors on the islands.

“Now we have seen our politicians once again disregard the safety of the women and men it has  deliberately kept trapped in offshore detention for more than six years.

Since the Medevac laws came into effect in March 2019 almost 200 people have been  evacuated to Australia to get the medical care they need. However over 500 people remain  languishing in offshore detention in the Morrison Government's care in PNG and Nauru.

“Now that the Government has robbed these people of the Medevac laws, it is more urgent than  ever that they ensure every single person is resettled to safety. We will continue to challenge  these cruel policies.”

Media contact:

Michelle Bennett, Communications Director, Human Rights Law Centre, 0419 100 519

