THE HON DAVID COLEMAN MP

MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION, CITIZENSHIP, MIGRANT SERVICES AND  MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS

MEDIA RELEASE

22 November 2019

Supporting Refugees to Settle in Australia

The Morrison Government is implementing a package of new measures to better support  refugees and humanitarian entrants to settle in Australia.

Minister for Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services and Multicultural Affairs David  Coleman said the reforms would ensure better outcomes for refugees and the communities  they settle in, while delivering efficiency and value for money.

"We want to ensure all refugees and humanitarian entrants have the best possible  opportunity to settle into Australian life, gain employment and contribute to their new  communities," Mr Coleman said.

"Financial independence, English language skills and personal connections allow  humanitarian entrants to more easily transition into the community, put down roots and  contribute to our economy.

"Successful settlement is in the interests not only of the refugees themselves, but also of  the broader Australian community."

The new measures include:

• Appointing a Commonwealth Coordinator-General for Migrant Services within the

Department of Home Affairs. The Coordinator-General will work closely with federal,

state and territory departments, industry and the community to oversee the policy

and delivery of these important services.

• Increasing the proportion of new refugees and humanitarian entrants settled outside

Sydney, Melbourne and Brisbane, with a target of 50 per cent by 2022. This is

consistent with the Government's broader focus on regional migration.

• Establishing a trial program for skilled refugees under the existing skilled visa

framework.

• Changing the Humanitarian Settlement Program to an outcomes-based model with a

strengthened performance management framework for contractors.

• Developing new approaches to improve the economic participation of humanitarian

entrants. This includes employment strategies for young people, parents, older

refugees and at-risk women.

• Harnessing the goodwill of Australians by better connecting refugees with volunteer

and grassroots organisations that form the backbone of so many Australian

communities

• In addition, from 1 July 2020 a new trial will commence in the Adult Migrant English

Program (AMEP) to encourage more innovative and flexible approaches to tuition.

The trial will allow English tuition to occur outside institutional classroom settings to

best meet client needs and facilitate employment opportunities.

These measures address the recommendations of the independent Review into integration,  employment andsettlement outcomes for refugees and humanitarian entrants, carried out  by Professor Peter Shergold AC, Kerrin Benson and Margaret Piper.

The review found that migrant services in Australia are of a high standard, and respected  internationally. The Government has accepted, fully or in part, all of the seven  recommendations made in the review.

The report from the Review into integration, employment and settlement outcomes for  refugees and humanitarian entrants and the Government's response is available on the  Department of Home Affairs website.

For further information: Steve Kidner 0466 385 097

