





STEPHEN JONES MP

SHADOW ASSISTANT TREASURER

SHADOW MINISTER FOR FINANCIAL SERVICES

MEMBER FOR WHITLAM



E&OE TRANSCRIPT

TELEVISION INTERVIEW

ABC AFTERNOON LIVE

WEDNESDAY, 4 DECEMBER 2019



SUBJECTS:  MEDEVAC BILL; ANGUS TAYLOR; NATIONAL ACCOUNTS; ISRAEL

FOLAU; FREEDOM OF SPEECH.



PATRICIA KARVELAS: I want to bring in my first guest today, the Shadow Assistant

Treasurer, Stephen Jones. These figures are out this afternoon, or little earlier today, the

Government maintains let's start with this deal on Medevac, or non-deal, that it has not

struck this deal with Jacqui Lambie. She’d said there was, but now her office is not really

elaborating, they're not commenting. What do you make of all of this?



STEPHEN JONES: It really does beggar belief. If I think the Government and the Prime

Minister are just being tricky with words. Clearly a deal has been done. Jacqui Lambie said

so in the Senate today. The Government is denying it for whatever reason, but it isclear a

deal has been done. Tomorrow morning, presumably we in the House of Representatives

are going to be asked to vote on this deal and we're going to be doing it blind. We know on

the one hand we’re being asked to scrap a set of laws that were working, that were

providing necessary medical treatment to people in need of that treatment. We know that

they were working. We're being asked to scrap them but we don't know the basis on which

this deal, that has been done with Jacqui Lambie, is going to work and it's actually more

alarming not less. If it's true, as Senator Lambie suggests, that the deal has national

security implications, that's exactly the sort of thing that Senators and Members should

know about before they're being asked to vote on a piece of legislation.



KARVELAS: If the Government has agreed to accept New Zealand's offer to take asylum

seekers would that justify the need for secrecy?



JONES: I'm not sure because we don't know the details of the deal. I've got to say this, if

the Government has agreed to do, as Labor as being asking it to do for in excess of 12

months now, to accept New Zealand's offer and all of those people on Manus and Nauru

resettled then that's a good outcome, but we don't know that. I’d also say, if that happens,

then the Medevac laws no longer have any work to do because they sunset the day the

last person leaves either Manus or Nauru. You've got to ask yourself, against all this

background, if that's the deal that's been done, that's how the laws work, why all the

secrecy? Why is the Government being so tricky over this? It just doesn't add up.



KARVELAS: There are reports this afternoon naming a staffer in the office of the Minister

Energy and Emissions Reduction Angus Taylor as the person who received these incorrect

figures about the City of Sydney’s travel figures. What do you make of this revelation

naming a staffer in the Australian?



JONES: There's been a rumour getting around this place for quite some time now that

maybe it wasn't Angus Taylor, maybe it was one of his employees that was responsible for

doctoring this document. I think it's going to be in the interest of Angus Taylor and

democracy at large if he just comes clean. He’s been invited time and time and time and

time again. Clearly, he knows the source of the document, clearly knows that the

document they put out to the world, to the Daily Telegraph, that was the centre of his letter

to Clover Moore, was not true. I think he owes it to himself, I think he owes it to the

Australian Parliament, to just come clean. It just looks dodgy.



KARVELAS: Where’s the evidence he knew it wasn’t true?



JONES: He's admitted it. He has come forward and he has apologised. Let me clarify, he

has apologised. He knows now that the document wasn’t true. He must also know what the

source of the document that he has received has been. Wouldn't it be the easiest thing for

Angus Taylor to stand up in Parliament tomorrow and say this is where I got the document

from? Then the inquiry, whether it's the police inquiry or other inquiries, can move on to

focus on that. What is he covering up? What's he got to hide?



KARVELAS: The Australian newspaper has named the staffer in his office and also

reported that the staffer will remain in the office. Do you think that's acceptable?



JONES: Well again, if it is true that this is the person who doctored the documents…



KARVELAS: I need to be very clear about this, the Australian is not reporting that this

person doctored the document but obtained the figures. It is an important distinction to

make.



JONES: I understand the distinction you're making. This is all the more reason why Angus

Taylor needs to come clean. This is eventually going to come out. There's a police

investigation underway at the moment. This is all eventually going to get underway. Angus

Taylor can put himself and the Australian people out of all of this agony by just coming

clean and saying this is what happened. He should’ve done it weeks and weeks and

weeks ago. I think he's dug himself a deeper and deeper hole every day that this drags on.

If the Australian’s reporting is true, I think it is in everybody's interest that Angus just comes

clean.



KARVELAS: Do you think the staffer should go? Should that the staff will be reprimanded,

because sometimes there's a critique of that that the staffer shouldn't be left to take

responsibility?



JONES: Two things should happen. Firstly, there's the conversation between Mr Taylor

and he staffer, that frankly is a matter for the employment relationship between Mr Taylor

and his staffer. But there's a long tradition in this place that you take responsibility for

things that go on in your office. If indeed it is true, that the information was somehow

concocted in Mr Taylor’s office, then Mr Taylor has misled Parliament, because he's said

the opposite in Parliament, on numerous occasions. So if that is true, there are two

grounds on which Mr Taylor should resign, the first is that he misled Parliament and

continued to mislead Parliament. And the second is that he and his office have been

responsible for what amounts to potentially a crime under the New South Wales Crimes

Act. All of this is unacceptable for a Minister of the Crown.



KARVELAS: Let's talk about the economy because we've got new figures out today and

the latest GDP figures show growth in the September quarter came in at 0.4%, which is

slightly below expectations, but year-on-year growth is forecast at 1.7 percent. Is this as

bad as you're suggesting, because we're still a significant positive territory, aren't we?



JONES:  It is bad. The economy is growing at the slowest rate since the Global Financial

Crisis.



: But given global situation, I mean, that's the context I'm asking the question in, are you

just talking down the economy? We haven't seen negative figures. This is a positive figure.



JONES: If these figures stood alone you might go, okay maybe there is some broader

story here. But the fact is they come the day after we got the trade figures which showed

there was continued strong demand for Australia's commodities. The prices for Australian

commodities are holding up. So that's the external, that's the global factors. People still

want to buy our goods in other parts of the world and they still want to pay a good price for

our goods in the other part of the world. That's the global situation. So our problems are

home-grown. The problems that we’re facing are not to do with the fact that our trading

partners don't want to buy our goods, because clearly they do. Our problems are not

because our trading partners don't want to pay a good price for our goods, because clearly

they do. Our problem is that we've got sluggish growth. We've got sluggish wages growth.

We've got two million people who are either out of work or looking for more work. Most

worryingly of all, productivity has gone backwards over this quarter and over the year as a

whole, but the drivers of future productivity growth aren't there as well. I'm talking about

business investment dropped by nearly one percent over the quarter, one percent over the

year. And that is the thing that is going to drive future productivity growth That is the thing

that is businesses investing start-ups, in new technology and new equipment, the stuff

that's going to drive productivity and growth into the future and it's simply not there. So

what we see is not just a bad set of figures for this quarter, but we see the drivers of things

that are going to change it down the track simply aren't there. So, once again we call on

the Government to get out of the grandstand and start putting in place a plan that is going

to get us out of this malaise.



: The IMF is predicting growth next year will rebound to 2.3%. Economists are talking

about a soft turning point in the economy. Do you accept that additional stimulus might not

be needed?



JONES:  First thing, can I say we hope growth happens. We are not here cheering for the

economy to stall or cheering for the economy to go backwards, because that is not in the

interest of everyday Australians and workers looking for a job, or looking for a pay rise. We

do expect there to be a bit of a kick up over Christmas. That's normally what happens,

people go to the shops, they buy their family and friends presents. You normally would

expect to see a bit of a pickup over Christmas and if we don't see that growth coming

through in the next quarter, there is significant reason for concern. You would expect in the

normal course of things for the things to pick up over the Christmas period. I actually think

the Reserve Bank is right, I think the Business Council of Australia is right, and I think

every economist and every state Premier is right when they say we actually need the

Government to play a part. If you actually decompose those figures that were released

today, It's Government consumption and Government spending, which is holding up

growth in this country. We need a planned trajectory for how it is going to occur over the

next 12 months and next two years. So that can give confidence to the business sector,

that there's a plan on foot from the Federal Government and from the State Governments,

it's worth our while investing in the in new plant and equipment as well.



: There's a huge story that's broken this afternoon that I must ask you about. Rugby

Australian and Israel Folau have both issued an apology after a confidential settlement

was reached and both parties have apologised for any hurt this incredibly damaging saga

has caused. Just a quote from Rugby Australia, “New South Wales Rugby and Israel Folau

have today settled their legal dispute following the dismissal of Israel Folau”. Interestingly,

they actually reflect on this saying that the social media post “reflected Mr Folau’s

genuinely held religious beliefs and Mr Folau did not intend to harm or offend any person

when he uploaded the social media post”. What do you make of that concession from

Rugby Australia?



JONES: I think it was on your program when I said I think the sacking of Israel Folau was

regrettable. I think the whole handling of the affair was regrettable. I think his tweets were

regrettable. I fundamentally disagree with everything he said in those tweets, in his public

and private comments on this matter as well. But I do believe in freedom of religion and

freedom of religious expression. I'm glad that has been settled out of court because I think



both our courts and our Parliaments are sometimes the very worst places to be dealing

with these complex issues of freedom of speech and freedom of religious expression and

how the rights of one person, on the one hand, who has genuinely held religious beliefs

clash up against another person's right not to be discriminated against, not be to be subject

against hate speech and not to have the gender or their sexual identity subject to these

sort of hurtful comments. I think the best place for these debates to be occurring and these

problems and conflicts to be sorted is in the private sphere and not in the Parliament,

because as we've seen through the attempt of this Government to clumsily introduce

a Freedom of Religion Bill, all of the levers that we pull here are very, very blunt and they

end up pleasing nobody. I'd really like this event, the settling of the Folau dispute, together

with the obvious failure of the initial draft of the Government's religious freedom bill, to be a

moment where we step back and say maybe we should be doing this another way. Let's

use the Christmas period is a period of reflection where we can say, maybe the path we're

going down here is wrong. In Australia it's not so bad, we do have plenty of religious

freedom, people aren't hung, they're not crucified either figuratively or literally in this

country for their religious beliefs. We actually have a fair deal of religious freedom here.

Let's get the debate a lot more civil than it has been over the last 12 months.



KARVELAS: Just for some clarity, do you think the Government should withdraw its bill

and not legislate on this religious question?



JONES: Well, I genuinely do for this reason, if this was easy to do it would have been

done decades ago, it would have been done in the 1970s and 1980s when we moved a

whole raft of anti-discrimination legislation. We would have done it then if it was easy, but

there are conflicts. There are obvious conflicts that come up. Conflicts between various

rights, equally legitimate, and our ways of dealing with them are awkward, they're not

subtle. I think it would be far better if we could use this as an opportunity to say introducing

more laws into this area is not the answer, improving the discourse, improving the way that

we deal with each other between faiths and between different rights groups is something

that we should do within the civil sphere and not in the legal sphere.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: AMY SMITH 0459 846 926





Authorised by Paul Erickson, ALP, Canberra.











