

TANYA PLIBERSEK MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR EDUCATION AND TRAINING  MEMBER FOR SYDNEY



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP INTERVIEW  CANBERRA  THURSDAY, 5 DECEMBER 2019

SUBJECTS: Australia’s reading, maths, and science scores plummet; Ensuring  Integrity bill; Medevac.

TANYA PLIBERSEK, SHADOW MINISTER FOR EDUCATION AND TRAINING:  Well,  let’s start with a very important piece of analysis that we saw today. Yesterday, we had  reports that show that Australia has gone from being around the top of the world in  reading, maths and science to just barely hanging in the middle. Our analysis today shows  that if this trend continues, that we'll go from being around the top of the world to around  the bottom of developed countries for reading, maths and science. Taking maths just as  one example, at the beginning of testing we we're fifth in the world for maths and on this  trend, by 2030 we will be the fifth worst in the developed world in maths. This is alarming  and it needs a national government to show national leadership to fix the problem. We  need to make sure that our kids have the basics under their belt in the early years of  schooling. We need to make sure we are attracting the best and brightest into teaching,  and of course, we need to make sure our schools and properly funded.

JOURNALIST: Dan Tehan spoke about needing to declutter the curriculum. What do you  think the problem is?

PLIBERSEK: Well, I think it's simplistic of the Minister to choose one thing. But, of course,  we need to make sure that our young people have the basics when they start school. The  early years of needs based funding allowed principals to make decisions like getting  literacy specialists in to work with kindy kids, year 1 and year 2 to make sure they had the  foundation skills of reading before they went on to do more complex work. They needed to  learn to read before they could read to learn. That's what needs based funding allowed and  that is why it is so sad that the Government has turned its back on proper needs based  funding. More importantly, the Federal Government agreed with the states and territories a  program for school improvement. We did that when we were last in government. When the  Liberals came in they turned their back on that program for school improvement, they said  it was just red tape. Now the Minister is saying that he wants to meet with State Ministers  next week - 6 years later. I mean, we are in the seventh year of a Liberal Government, they  have had no program for school improvement over that seven years. That's long enough  for a child to start and finish high school. This Government has let children down and  frankly, it has turned its back on the importance of education for the productivity of our  nation.





JOURNALIST: Is Labor ready for a new fight on the union bill?

PLIBERSEK: Well, we will continue to make sure that working Australians have the right to  organise to increase their pay and conditions - improve their pay and their conditions.  That's what unions are about. Nurses, teachers, firies, ambos, police - they have all got  strong union membership, these people provide a vital service, why shouldn't they  organise collectively to improve their pay and conditions? That's the Australian way. That’s  the reason why we've got the eight hour day and holiday pay and sick leave and maternity  leave. It's disappointing in the extreme that the Government is not listening to the  Parliament on this bill and trying to portray a union movement as something that it’s not.

JOURNALIST: There was a lot of anger and disappointment after the repeal of Medevac  yesterday from advocates in the space. What is your reaction?

PLIBERSEK: Well, let's go back to basics. What's the Medevac bill about? It is about  getting sick people who can't receive treatment on Manus and Nauru to Australia for  medical treatment. The Minister always had the ability to reject people on character  grounds. He has used that ability in a number of cases. So what we had yesterday is a  Parliament voting to deny sick people medical treatment - that's pretty sad.

JOURNALIST: Does Jacqui Lambie need to come clean on the deal that she made with  the Government?

PLIBERSEK: Well, of course. I mean, how outrageous is it that the Senate should be  expected to vote on a deal that they don't know the details of. I mean, people are saying  that this is about allowing refugees on Manus and Nauru to be resettled in New Zealand.  This Government could have allowed that years ago. Why hasn’t it? It was just  stubbornness.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: DANIEL DORAN 0427 464 350









