Media inquiries | Aaron Langmaid | 0456 889 018  Authorised by Senator Richard Colbeck, Tasmania









Senator the Hon Richard Colbeck  Minister for Aged Care and Senior Australians  Minister for Youth and Sport



14 December 2020



Grants to strengthen youth advocacy across Australia

Young people will have more say on the issues that matter to them under a significant funding package  today unveiled by the Morrison Government.

The Australian Youth Affairs Coalition (AYAC) will be strengthened in its role as a national peak body  advocating to the Commonwealth to ensure the needs of young people are on the national agenda.

Minister for Youth and Sport, Richard Colbeck said eight youth organisations will share in an  investment of $900,000 to give Australian youth a greater voice.

“The Australian Government is working hard to ensure young people have a platform to voice their  concerns about the issues that affect them,” Minister Colbeck said.

“Prime Minister Scott Morrison said it would be my role to provide a strong voice for issues facing  young Australians.

“These funding measures are ensuring we deliver on that promise.

AYAC will receive a $150,000 injection to boost its efforts to underline the issues affecting youth and  to encourage wider participation.

In addition to funding the national peak, another seven organisations will receive grants totalling  $750,000.

The funded groups will also act as a youth advocacy network with projects spanning a variety of youth  demographics across vast geographic areas from the city to regional, rural and remote communities.

The projects will have a strong focus on supporting marginalised young Australians including those  with a disability, those from culturally and linguistically diverse backgrounds, Aboriginal and Torres  Strait Islanders, young carers, young people with mental illness and the gender diverse.

Leadership and advocacy skills will be a key feature of a number of funded projects with a strong focus  on empowerment and development.

Media inquiries | Aaron Langmaid | 0456 889 018  Authorised by Senator Richard Colbeck, Tasmania





Minister Colbeck said the grants mark an important milestone after a difficult year.

“These grants will ensure the voices of young Australians from all walks of life, are heard in the  policymaking process,” he said.

“The Australian Government seeks to develop policies that will make a difference to young lives  regardless of their background.

“This is vital. Young people are our future.”

Grant recipients have welcomed the funding.

Australian Youth Affairs Coalition co-chair James McDougall said: “(This funding) will help to ensure  young people's views and interests are taken into account in developing national youth policy.

“Young people want to be part of building solutions particularly as we emerge from the impacts of  COVID-19. Their diverse lived experiences will enrich our understanding and they will guide us to  build a fairer and more inclusive Australian society.”

Little Dreamers Australia chief executive officer Madeleine Buchner OAM said: "We're super excited  to receive funding for the Young Carer Advocacy Project. This funding will change the landscape for  young carer support and will give vulnerable young people a voice on a national platform.”

NT Council of Social Service policy manager Sarah Holder said: “For the first time young people  experiencing disadvantage and marginalisation in the Northern Territory will have a direct voice to  Government.

“This project will enrich the national conversation and is a major indication that the Australian  Government is committed to hearing from young Territorians.”

Multicultural Youth Advocacy Network Australia national manager Nadine Liddy said: “(This  funding) recognises the importance of a targeted approach to facilitate the participation of young  people from refugee and migrant backgrounds in Federal Government policy making processes.

“Through a range of capacity building activities, Amplifying CALD Youth Voices will ensure that  CALD youth across Australia have their voices heard on issues affecting them and their future. We  are excited to be working with the Australian government in this exciting work.”

CREATE Foundation influence manager Noelle Hudson said: “This investment allows the voices of  young people with a care experience to directly inform key policy development and decision making  processes.

“We look forward bringing young people from across Australia together to form the National Youth  Advisory Group that will provide a streamlined gateway for the views of young people to be heard,  and inform decisions made by the Australian Government and key decision makers.

Children and Young People with a Disability Australia chief executive officer Mary Sayers said:    “We are delighted to receive funding from the Australian Government for the Our voices our visions:  a bright future for young people with disability project.

Media inquiries | Aaron Langmaid | 0456 889 018  Authorised by Senator Richard Colbeck, Tasmania







“This funding will mean young people with disability can be at the centre of policy and reform about  the issues that matter most to them.”

yourtown head of advocacy and research Kathryn Mandla said:  “(We) look forward to engaging with  young people across Australia in 2021 via a range of digital and face to face channels to gain their  views and insights.

“The Youth Advocacy Support Grant will enable yourtown to elevate the voices of young people to  inform Government policy on issues that affect or concern them. 2020 has been a tough year for many  young people and this grant will provide them with an opportunity to share their experiences to help  us meet their needs into the future.”

YMCA chief executive Melinda Crole said: “After a year that has impacted the lives of young  Australians so significantly, this grant will enable us at the Y to elevate the voice of young people and  ensure their views and experiences directly inform the policy decisions that will shape their future  career opportunities.

“Young people are the experts in their own lives and this grant will help us to ensure young people are  at the centre of our economic recovery.”

The funding will commence in late 2020 and be complete by mid-2021.







Youth Advocacy Support Grant recipients



Organisation Project Name  Funding

Multicultural Youth  Advocacy Network Australia  Amplifying CALD Youth Voices $100,000  Children and Young People  with Disability Australia

Our voices our visions: a bright future for  young people with disability  $100,000

YMCA Australia Empowering youth voice - economic  participation and employment pathways  $98,312

CREATE Foundation  Limited  National Youth Advisory Group $110,000

yourtown Your voice $100,000

Little Dreamers Australia Young Carer Advocacy Project $100,000  NT Council of Social  Services  Youth Voice NT $140,000

Australian Youth Affairs  Coalition  National Youth Policy Project

$150,000











