

MATT THISTLETHWAITE MP

SHADOW ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR FINANCIAL SERVICES  SHADOW ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR THE REPUBLIC  MEMBER FOR KINGSFORD SMITH



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  SKY NEWS  THURSDAY, 26 NOVEMBER 2020  SUBJECTS: Stranded Australians; Superannuation

TOM CONNELL: Let's thrash this out with our political panel, Andrew Bragg from the  Liberal Party and Matt Thistlethwaite from the Labor Party, gentlemen thanks both for your  time. In September, Andrew, the PM said he wanted 24,000 stranded Australians home by  Christmas. The queue is 30,000 now and growing, this is a failure to keep up with this  demand isn't it?

ANDREW BRAGG, SENATOR FOR NSW: Well over the last few months there has been  30 or 40,000 people returned to Australia and there is a list at this stage of about 35,000  and so it does fluctuate somewhat. But we have had success in bringing people home, uh,  Qantas are putting on additional flights and ultimately, uh, the chokepoint here is hotel  quarantine and so expanding that I think has been a good move in the past few months.

CONNELL: So if we look though at the government's approach for example on asylum  seekers arriving by boat, the Federal government decided it was worth opening up facilities  in Australia, even overseas, to hold them in detention but it's not worth opening up similar  facilities to get people here and in quarantine? Why not?

BRAGG: Well the hotel quarantine system is the model that we have deployed and I think  you have to remember here Tom that we have performed on an economic and health basis  better than almost any other country, so we're going to stick with our plan to get Australia  through this pandemic. And that includes using hotel quarantine as a primary source of  bringing Australians home and of course, uh, that is, uh, that has been undermined  somewhat by the events in Victoria some months ago that...

CONNELL: Look that's true but shouldn't there be a plan B now we're supposed to be  getting people home by Christmas? The list is growing as I said we've seen a different  approach from the Australian Federal government taking charge of the situation previously  on asylum seekers opening up facilities that's possible now isn't it? Why not? Is it just too  expensive, not worth it?

BRAGG: Well our plan is to get people home by Christmas, we've been able to bring  40,000 home over the past few months and that is the plan that we have so I'm confident…

CONNELL: The plan's failing isn't it?

BRAGG: That's the plan, we've just we've brought 40,000 home in the past two months…

CONNELL: Something happened then, sorry Andrew, keep talking, I think we're having a  little issue with Matt Thistlethwaite’s audio, but I know what you're saying with the plan you,  we're not going to get everyone home by Christmas, the queue will be bigger, isn't it time  for putting on more flights?

BRAGG: We've asked Qantas to put on more flights and that is the stated target, so that is  our, that is our agenda and so far we've been able to get a lot of people back home to  Australia, uh, in the most difficult of circumstances and I remind you again that we have  performed better than almost any other country on earth during this pandemic. So our  systems have proven to work well for the most part.

CONNELL: So if there are 40,000 plus people still waiting to get home by Christmas was  that just, will you say, will the government say well that's as well as we could have  managed, sorry about that?

BRAGG: Our plan is to get everyone home by Christmas, that is our plan.

CONNELL: Is that going to happen?

BRAGG: Well we've been successful in getting 40,000 home as I say over the past two  months, so our record I think it's been as good as it could be given the difficulties we've  faced with, uh, limited amounts of hotel quarantine capacity, certainly, uh, because of the  Victorian fiasco for example.

CONNELL: All right, we'll see, um, you seem to have some confidence, we might revisit  that closer to Christmas. I think Matt Thistlethwaite is back after some gremlins there in the  system, Matt the states are a big part of the picture, if the Victorian government hadn't  failed in its COVID approach on hotel quarantine, thousands and thousands of more  people would be back here by now wouldn't they? That's not the Federal government's  fault?

MATT THISTLETHWAITE, SHADOW ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR FINANCIAL  SERVICES: Well it's a matter of the Prime Minister showing some leadership on this issue,  Tom, it's the responsibility of the Australian government to provide safe passage to  Australian citizens back home in situations such as this and it's the Prime Minister that  made the commitment to get these Australians home by Christmas and we believe he's  going to fail in that commitment. I've spoken to constituents in my area who have children  that are stranded overseas and it's heartbreaking and some of them are telling me they  can't book flights before Christmas. So if the Prime Minister could show some leadership,  sit down with the states, work through the hotel quarantine issue but also sit down with the  airlines and stop them charging ridiculous prices for tickets to get people home, particularly  when they've been backed by JobKeeper subsidies and they've got subsidies from the  government around airport taxes as well, there's got to be a bit of quid pro quo about this. I  think some of the airlines need to step up and do something for Australia and that's a  matter of the government showing some leadership and sitting down with them and getting  them to bring some of those Australians home.

CONNELL: When you say sit down with the states, the government keeps saying can we

get more, can we get more through hotel quarantine, the states are doing as much as they  are willing to do and Victoria's offline, there's nothing more you can do. Are you saying the  states should take more?

THISTLETHWAITE: Well there's no doubt that there's capacity in hotels, I think that the  states should work with the Commonwealth on trying to free up some of that capacity. But  also as you mentioned earlier the government should be looking at using some other  facilities that are available to get people home as quickly as possible. The final point to  make, Tom, on this is Matthias Cormann's jetting around Europe at the moment at  taxpayers’ expense on an RAF jet seeking to get himself his next job. This fails the test for  the average Australian when that's going on and Australians are stranded overseas.

CONNELL: Well I just want to move on to another topic because we're a bit limited on  time, superannuation changes, I know you're big in this area Andrew Bragg, that are  coming, forget the ones that are debated at the moment, on best financial interests, it could  in effect ban advertising for industry super funds, so would that apply only to industry super  funds not for example retail funds?

BRAGG: We don't make laws for any particular type of superannuation fund, the laws are  made for all the superannuation funds and they would have to comply with this new best  financial interest test. One example that I don't want to see in the future is Greg Combet  putting his face on TV using workers money, uh, to spruik a brand that people can't even  invest in. So I think that is a good example of something that we don't want to see in the  new world.

CONNELL: How will it work though, I mean a super fund has one purpose and it's  superannuation, so it would seem as though they wouldn't be able to advertise if the  interpretation of this is correct. If you've got a retail fund and a bank well that's a big  organisation with lots of different pools of money if you like, are you saying your  understanding is retail funds would not have any way to get around this? They wouldn't be  able to advertise where industry super funds couldn't, it will be a level playing field?

BRAGG: One important example of what we don't want to see is political style advertising,  I mean how could be in the members, it can't possibly be in the members interest, to see  Greg Combet’s head on TV, um, making political statements paid for by workers super, so  that's what we don't want to say see. But if organisations can make an economic basis for  undertaking advertising for whatever type of fund they are running, then, then I imagine  that would be okay under these new laws. But there is so much political advertising  polluting the airwaves, uh, paid for by workers super, it has to stop, I mean it's ridiculous.

CONNELL: Yeah okay so if it's a level playing field here, Matt Thistlethwaite, applying to  industry and retail funds and we avoid things such as what Andrew says are political  statements but maybe also sporting sponsorship and stuff like that I mean it does seem  like a strange use of members money?

THISTLETHWAITE: The industry super funds act in the best interests of members, the  evidence of that is that they perform better than the retail funds and SMSFs. Their fees are  lower and their returns are higher, so they get they're getting better outcomes for the  average Australian worker. Now the banks and their retail funds, they've been able to  advertise particularly in the context of a choice situation where a new worker has the  choice of which fund they’ll pick. So if the banks are going to be able to advertise, why  shouldn't industry super funds be able to advertise as well particularly when economies of

scale is very important in the management of these funds and getting better returns for  members. So we just think that…

CONNELL: Okay but what Andrew was suggesting was yes they can both advertise and  get more members and that is in their interest as you say economy of scale the more  members the better, but they couldn't for example have politically based advertising. So  would that be fair enough?

THISTLETHWAITE: I believe that their advertising is politically based, if there are changes  to legislation that the government introduces then industry super funds have an obligation  to inform their members of those changes and that's what they've done in the past through  advertising. You know it's a very socialist thing to do to ban advertising from industry super  funds and I don't think it's in the best interest of Australian consumers, super fund  members, and ultimately I just think it's part of this government's ideological crusade  against unions and employers coming together and managing members within that  industry's funds and getting better returns. And we've seen it in the choice the proposal to  delay or stop the increasing compulsory rate of superannuation it's all part of his  ideological crusade nearly out of time.

CONNELL: Can I just ask you this, Andrew, on this superannuation increase do you think  the right action would be delaying it or just scrapping it? If you delay it now you just kick the  can down the road, if this report's talking about what happens until 2050 this is not just  about COVID right do you think it should be scrapped all together?

BRAGG: I mean Labor has become the party of organised superannuation as you just  heard from Matt. I mean on the question of the super guarantee we think it's more  important that people have access to a home a first home deposit for example rather than  sending endless money off to super funds to charge high fees on it and then waste it on  advertising. So my judgment is that until the super industry is acting in people's best  interests and he's charging lower fees and doing a better job that the case for more  compulsory super has not been made.

CONNELL: A pretty direct question though I know you're a straight shooter, so are you  saying it hasn't been made for now or just scrap it, we'll stop?

BRAGG: I wouldn't proceed with it. Tom.

CONNELL: Yeah but what does that mean, now or you know get rid of it, delay it or get rid  of it all together?

BRAGG: Well as you know I'm not an idiot, so if someone can present a case for there to  be a system where more super could get a better outcome in terms of you know fewer  people on the pension or better retirement outcomes then I have an open mind about it.  But I think for now when the industry is charging such high fees and wasting money on ads  for Greg Combet, why would you give them more money.

CONNELL: We'll have to leave it there, Matt, apologies for the issues with your line but I'm  sure we'll be thrashing out this issue on another day particularly if that becomes  government policy. Matt, Andrew, thank you.

THISTLETHWAITE: Thanks Tom.



ENDS

THURSDAY, 26 NOVEMBER 2020

MEDIA CONTACT: BEN LEESON 0404 648 275









