1







The Hon Alan Tudge MP

Minister for Population, Cities and Urban Infrastructure

Acting Minister for Immigration, Citizenship,

Migrant Services and Multicultural Affairs



Transcript

Interview with Tom Connell, Sky News AM Agenda

12 October 2020



Subjects:  Population, migration, infrastructure, humanitarian program

TOM CONNELL: Well huge impacts, of course, of COVID will be on our immigration system.  It's set for a shake up as well as COVID-19 contributes to the country's biggest population  drop since World War One. The Morrison government has slashed Australia's skilled migrant  intake, closing its doors to many international students possibly, and prospective arrivals as  well.

The Acting Immigration and Population Minister, Alan Tudge, says the new system will  emphasise innovators, investors and job creators. He joins me live now. Thanks very much  for your time.

Just broadly, to begin with immigration, as I mentioned there, this huge reduction that's  coming, it's coupled with low fertility as well. And those predictions have just changed. Is  there a plan to counter this in the Budget or is it about adjusting to it?

ALAN TUDGE: You're right. So we'll have the slowest population growth this financial year  since World War One at 0.2 per cent, where normally we track it about 1.6 per annum of  population growth. Now, we need to therefore make up for that lower demand from  population through other mechanisms. And that's exactly what the Budget does. It creates  those incentives for investments. It creates those incentives for workforce participation and  in further employment. And consequently, we are forecasting, despite the low population  growth for GDP growth to nevertheless pick up to over four per cent next year and about  2.75 per cent the year after.

TOM CONNELL: So how does that work, though, in the longer term? I mean, when will  immigration, with any sort of certainty return to those levels? And does that mean that  spending has to stay until then?

ALAN TUDGE: We're forecasting for immigration levels to return to somewhere  approximating normal in about year four or year five. It's still going to be at very, very low

2



levels, though, for two or three years. In fact, we'll have negative migration this year and  next year. What I mean by that is more people will be leaving the country than coming into  the country on an immigration basis, again, the first time that's happened for 75 years. So it  does have very serious economic impacts when you don't have strong population growth  and you have negative net migration. And consequently, that's why we have had to put in  place these other measures. But knowing that, in the medium term migration will come  back at some of those numbers that we've been used to in the past.

TOM CONNELL: Well you spoke as well about during this time - you've spoken there about  aggregate demand. You said during this time we can catch up on infrastructure and that's  great for people working in these big infrastructure projects. Not so much, though, if you  relied on building houses for a living. So one million fewer people even by 2022, and that  gap between previous estimations and reality is going to continue to grow. How many

people from the housing sector will have to get new jobs and how many will just be out of  work?

ALAN TUDGE: You're absolutely right, Tom, that the housing construction industry is  particularly impacted by slow population growth, and it's why we've leant so heavily into  supporting that industry, first through the HomeBuilder Program and then in the budget  where we've increased the funding available for the first home buyers deposit scheme  again. So both of those things have the impact of stimulating the residential construction  industry. Then we also are boosting up the expenditure in the civil construction industry.  While there's not complete fluidity in the workforce between those two, there is some  fluidity. So while there might be down in the residential construction, they can take some  more workers in the civil construction sector as well. So, we've got a number of things which  are working on the residential construction sector to support those jobs and get them going  as quickly as they can.

TOM CONNELL: Right. So in your words, some but not all. So some of the workers can go off  and make the so-called civil infrastructure. But the other aspect of the plans you were just  talking about including HomeBuilder, in Treasury's own words, they pulled demand forward.  So demand is coming right now, perhaps over the next year, net migration is going to be  well down for years to come. So, in fact, you're creating a bigger drop in demand in a year or  two. So what happens then? It seems like we're approaching a cliff of sorts.

ALAN TUDGE: Well, it pulls forward some of the demand, but we're also generating demand  through the first home buyers deposit scheme. So whereas that demand may not have been  there because we know we've actually had a reduction in the number of people buying their  houses for the first time. So if we can create further demand there, that boosts it, but in

addition as I said, we're creating more demand on the civil construction sector to be able to  mop up some of that latent supply in the residential construction sector.

3



TOM CONNELL: I understand that, but that won't mop it all up. But on housing, as I said,  you're pulling forward demand and you say you'll create more, but you can't build houses  for people that are not here.

ALAN TUDGE: No, but you're creating demand for those people who are buying houses for  the first time, for example. And that has been slowing down. If people are leaving home and  taking the opportunity to buy their first home, which they otherwise wouldn't have, that will  generate those construction opportunities as well.

TOM CONNELL: [Interrupts] So that would mean empty - sorry to jump in. But that would  mean current homes that are being rented out by these people that become first home  buyers, they become empty then.

ALAN TUDGE: Or it might mean that they're just people living at home, though, and they're  25 years old and all of a sudden they're taking advantage of the opportunities where they  can get additional funding to purchase their first home. There is that creation of demand for  first home buyers as well.

TOM CONNELL: [Talks over] Yeah. Yeah. Sure. Maybe some are at home but not all of them  will be. Is that what's going to happen? Are we going to have an advent of empty rental  homes around the country?

ALAN TUDGE: I hope that's not the case. And as I said, this is a very important sector and  we're doing an awful lot to support that sector. But your initial point about the impact of  the slowdown of population, generally on the economy, is a very significant one, and it does  impact on the construction sector, and that is why we've put so much time and effort into  supporting it right now.

TOM CONNELL: And does that mean there - right now there are tradies out there, that in  three or four years will just be have to be doing something else, and that's just an impact of  COVID?

ALAN TUDGE: Well, in three or four years we have forecast for migration to come back very  strongly. In year four, for example, we're forecasting for net overseas migration to be  200,000. Now, it has been sitting on about 230,000, 240,000 for the last few years, so we're  forecasting it getting very close to back to normal by year four.

TOM CONNELL: Alright. But the question remains, I mean, by then perhaps the demand's  beginning to come back - you can't sit there waiting for a job for a couple of years, can you?

ALAN TUDGE: And it's precisely why we have these other measures in place, which we have  gone through, in terms of HomeBuilder program, which, yes, it may pull forward some new  construction, but additionally, people might not have also chosen to do that large-scale  renovation without having this additional stimulus. So, it's creating that demand, as is  creating the demand for the new home buyers, which I articulated, plus putting additional

4



resources into the civil construction side. So, it's a bunch of different measures which are all  going to that same objective of supporting the construction industry overall.

TOM CONNELL: So just on immigration then, so you spoke about the numbers coming back  very strongly in three or four years, humanitarian places, refugee places, this cap's been  brought down 5000 people, right off throughout forward estimates. So, why is that  happening every year? Why can't that begin to be increased as immigration, the rest of  immigration, comes back?

ALAN TUDGE: It may do. The permanent migration system is set every single year, and the  humanitarian intake is a permanent residency visa. And we do set it each and every year, so  we may well increase it down the track. But at this stage, we've decided to keep it at 13,750.

Now that makes us, still, the third most generous country in the world on an absolute basis  in terms of our humanitarian intake.

TOM CONNELL: Right. But there was previously that pledge to take it up to 18,750. So, that  will be reviewed each year, and that will just be reliant on overall intake and logistics, this is  not some sort of long-term saving or change in policy you're seeking to make?

ALAN TUDGE: It certainly does save money by having a lower humanitarian intake. I just  point out that all migration is down this year, across the board. The skills migration is down,  the family section onshore is up, but overall is not as great, and additionally, the  humanitarian cap is lower than the cap has been in the past few years, at least, and back to  the levels it was four or five years ago.

TOM CONNELL: [Talks over] Yeah. But I guess, just in a very simple sense, once the rest of  immigration goes up, we can expect this cap on refugee places to go up as well?

ALAN TUDGE: Well, that'll be the decision for Government on a yearly basis, just as it is for  all the permanent residency visas. So, we outlined the program for 12 months, and each  year we make adjustments to that permanent residency program. This year, the overall cap  is, once again, was at set 160,000, but next year we may set that cap differently. And this  year we've set the humanitarian intake at 13,750.

TOM CONNELL: [Talks over] No, I understand. But this is a policy also, that's a humanitarian  one, and this has been previously cast in those terms. I'm just seeing if there's going to be  any wriggle room for the Government to reset policy, have fewer places, fewer refugees  coming here, and using COVID as the cover?

ALAN TUDGE: We've made a decision, and it's outlined in the Budget. We, as I point out, are  still the third most generous country in the world from a humanitarian intake perspective,  and that's on an absolute figures perspective, behind the United States and Canada. And  we'll continue to do our fair share in terms of our humanitarian intake. In the meantime,  we'll also work strongly in terms of, on the settlement programs, where I've got a review

5



underway there to try to get better outcomes from a settlement perspective, as well as of  course improve people's English language capabilities while they're here as well.

TOM CONNELL: Alan Tudge, appreciate your time today. Thank you.

ALAN TUDGE: Thanks very much, Tom.

[ENDS]



