1







The Hon Alan Tudge MP

Minister for Population, Cities and Urban Infrastructure

Acting Minister for Immigration, Citizenship,

Migrant Services and Multicultural Affairs



Transcript

Doorstop, Melbourne

7 February 2020



Subjects: Improving employment and English language outcomes for refugees, Xiao Li, coronavirus

ALAN TUDGE: It’s been great to speak at the Menzies Research Centre here in Melbourne, and to  address what is a really important topic - that is, how well we resettle refugees who come into  Australia.

Australia, as you know, has been a very welcoming country for refugees over the decades. Over  900,000 people have sought refuge in Australia and, indeed, many of those people have gone on to  shape Australia, including becoming captains of industry or leaders in government.

We should be very proud of our record of accepting and welcoming people from across the world,  providing them refuge and having great settlement services in place. The real challenge though that  we have, is that we still have an unacceptably high level of unemployment with our refugee intake.

At the end of a year of being in Australia, still 77 per cent of people are unemployed. After three  years, still 38 per cent are unemployed and after ten years, it is still 20 per cent of people who are  unemployed. These are unacceptably high figures for all of us.

We’ll always expect that the unemployment rate for our humanitarian intake will be higher than the  average, because after all, people have often suffered immense trauma and at least five per cent of  people come here without any literacy skills at all, let alone any English language skills.

But we have to do better collectively in this regard.

Today I have announced that the Government will have a renewed effort in this area. We are doing  this through a number of areas.

Number one: we need to improve the English language provision that we provide to our refugee  intake. Because at the moment, people can access up to a thousand hours of free English language  classes. But the outcomes from when people who leave those English language classes is frankly not  good enough, because only 21 per cent of people speak functional English having undertaken some  English language classes. Part of that is that, on average, people only attend 300 hours rather than  all the hours which are freely available, and there’s reasons why they aren’t attending. That’s to do

2



with the structure of the classes and the flexibility. What we are going to do is offer much greater  flexibility in relation to English language classes. We’re going trial a number of methodologies,  including for example having English language classes and childcare centres co-located so that  mothers, and sometimes fathers, can more easily undertake those English language classes.

English is absolutely critical to being able to be employed in today’s day and age. Particularly with  occupational health and safety standards, which means that you must have at least a basic level of  English to be able to be employed. The data shows, the better your English, the better the chance of  being employed. We have to work on that and we’re going to be doing more in that regard.

Secondly, we’re going to be reaching out to the business community as well. We know that there’s  enormous good will out there to support refugees into jobs. There’s companies like Allianz and  Woolworths who have done great work, and we’d like to see other companies also replicate those  types of activities. Equally, we’d like to see whether or not we can scale up some of those brilliant  community organisations, such as Thrive in Melbourne and Sydney, which do such great work in  terms of providing opportunities for refugees as well. Can we scale them up? Can we replicate those  to get better outcomes?

And thirdly, we need to coordinate our services better. To that end, we're putting in place a  coordinator-general to better manage that. That coordinator-general will report directly to the  Minister and the Secretary and ensure that we don't have services which are siloed but rather  coordinated together to provide that full support which a person needs.

I’ll finally mention, of course, that we also want to ensure that we get more people into the regional  areas where it is possible to do so and we're setting a new target of 50 per cent of refugees to be  located into regional areas, rather than just into certain pockets of Melbourne, Sydney and Brisbane.  And we think in that end it can assist in terms of fulfilling some of the workforce shortages in those  regional areas, but also provide refugees a welcoming environment to work and settle there as well.  We’re already doing well in that regard, with a 50 per cent target. We want to work on that.

Let me make if I may just two other comment.

Firstly in relation to the case of Xiao Li and his mother. As you probably know, Xiao Li faced a tragic  accident a week or so ago here in Melbourne - a car accident - which was a very serious accident and  he has since passed away. Xiao Li was on a Working Holiday Maker visa and tragically, he passed  away not long ago. Our thoughts, of course, are with him and his family. His mother, in hearing of  the accident, immediately applied for a tourist visa to come to Australia. His mother still resides in  China. She, of course, had her visa rejected on the basis that we have an overall ban of people  travelling from China into Australia. However, we did put in place a mechanism, which is authorised  by the National Security Committee of cabinet, for the Australian Border Force Commissioner to be  able to exercise discretion when there are overwhelming compassionate and other considerations  which need to be taken into account. Now, the Commissioner still needs to exercise that discretion  taking into account the broader health consequences of Australia.

When I was informed of this particular case about 36 hours ago, we did inform the Australian Border  Force Commissioner and I can announce today that Xiao Li’s mother has been granted that tourist  visa. And so she will be coming to Australia. Typically, we ask people to quarantine themselves for 14

3



days after arriving in Australia. In this instance we 're going to work very closely with her to ensure  that she can nevertheless see her son and properly take care of the funeral arrangements - the  funeral arrangements and other issues which she needs to deal with. So I'm pleased with that result.  I think it's a compassionate outcome for her. She will no doubt be very seriously grieving. Certainly  our thoughts are with her.

Finally, let me make a comment as the acting Multicultural Affairs Minister in relation to the  coronavirus and the broader Australian-Chinese community of which there are 1.2 million people.  The broader Australian-Chinese community I think are feeling it particularly hard to coronavirus.  Now is a time for all Australians to wrap our arms around the Australian-Chinese community and to  support them in whatever way we can. It is certainly never a time for discrimination of any type. To  that end, I think that includes continuing to go to some of the areas which you may frequently shop  or go to the restaurants at.

In Melbourne that includes places like Glen Waverley, or Box Hill or Doncaster or anywhere else  which might have a high Chinese-Australian population. The risks have not changed in those areas.  That is the official advice we get from the Chief Medical Officer. So we simply ask all Australians to  continue to go about your daily business. If you typically go to The Glen to do the shopping, continue  to do so. That's one of my local shopping areas. If you go to Box Hill or Doncaster or anywhere else,  then continue to do that. By doing that, you'll be supporting those local businesses and you'll be  saying to the broader Australian-Chinese community that “we support you, we understand that  you're going through a difficult period of time but we’re there as fellow Australians in this together.”

JOURNALIST: Now she has been granted a visa, how's it going to work on her coming over here? Will  she be given a public flight, will it be a charter, will she join other people?



ALAN TUDGE: We're going to work quite closely with her on all of these types of arrangements. From  now, the Department of Home Affairs is working closely with her. We'll have to work with the  airlines in that regard as well. Now, obviously the balance here, and this is what the balance which  the Australian Border Force Commissioner had to take into account was, the desire for her to be  able to come out here to see her son and to cater for his funeral arrangements while at the same  time not jeopardising the broader health of the Australian population. We can manage this though.   We'll work with the airlines, we’ll work with her sensitively and carefully, and make sure that we can  put the appropriate arrangements in place.

JOURNALIST: So has your department made contact with her directly? Have you had any feedback as  to how she’s feeling?

ALAN TUDGE: I haven't had that advice yet. The Australian Border Force Commissioner has only just  made his decision to grant that visa. We'll be working with her immediately so that she can come  out here as quickly as possible.

JOURNALIST: Obviously it's great news from her perspective. Some Australians may say “you're  telling everyone else to wait 14 days.” Coronavirus symptoms don't show sometimes for 14 days.

4



How are you going to manage that possible risk?

ALAN TUDGE: That will have to be very carefully done and obviously we'll be guided by medical  evidence in relation to this, so that there isn't risk to the Australian people. There are very  exceptional circumstances here. You know, her son, out here on holiday enjoying himself, suffers a  tragic car accident and has passed away. So we feel for her. We want to do whatever we can to  support her, but also take into account the health of the broader Australian public.

JOURNALIST: So you’re not worried it’s going to set a precedent, or open the floodgates, or anything  like that? [inaudible]

ALAN TUDGE: Every individual case will be dealt with on their merits. The National Security  Committee of Cabinet specifically authorised the Australian Border Force Commissioner to have that  discretion, precisely for exceptional cases like this one. Every individual case needs to be worked  through. I think the Australian public would understand that this is an exceptional case. We will  manage it carefully so the Australian public is nevertheless safe as well.

JOURNALIST: Have any other cases been referred to the Commission for that?

ALAN TUDGE: I've not been advised as such.

JOURNALIST: She's not a rich woman. She paid her extra thousand dollars for the fast-tracking, for a  two-day response and it’s been longer than that. Do you think she'll get that money back.

ALAN TUDGE: I've not I've not been advised of those facts that you’ve put to me. Our main focus at  the moment is getting her the visa and getting her into Australia in a safe manner.

Okay. Thanks everybody.

[ENDS]





