



MEDIA RELEASE

AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT MUST ACT TO ADDRESS HUMANITARIAN  CRISIS IN ETHIOPIA

11/27/2020

The Australian Greens support calls for an immediate ceasefire in Ethiopia.  International development assistance must be provided urgently to address the  rapidly escalating crisis, and the Australian Government must do everything it can  to address the crisis and protect Australians at risk.

Quotes attributable to Senator Janet Rice, Greens foreign affairs  spokesperson:



“The situation in Ethiopia is a quickly worsening humanitarian crisis. We are  incredibly concerned at the ethnic violence and civilian massacres that have  occurred, demanding immediate international attention. Dozens of Australians are  stranded, many in areas where communications have been cut.

“We’ve already seen tens of thousands of refugees displaced by the conflict, with  potentially hundreds of thousands more to be impacted in the coming months.  Additional military escalation could have a further destabilising impact on the

country and entire region.

“We call for an immediate ceasefire, including protection for civilians. The  international community must provide support to negotiate a political solution to  this conflict. We welcome the appointment of envoys by the African Union, but  more must be done to address the crisis and work towards supporting Ethiopia on  a path to stable and representative government that enables multiple cultures and



communities to flourish. The United Nations must have full access to provide  humanitarian support and address this crisis.

“The Australian Government must do everything it can to address this crisis,  including supporting a peaceful resolution and humanitarian aid, and providing  assistance to bring home Australians who are stranded in the conflict zone. It  should urge the Ethiopian government to lift the telecommunications blackout,  which has had devastating impacts on many seeking news of their loved ones.”





Media Contacts:  RICE - Shani Flynn; 0400 352 935



