Media Release  | For immediate release: Thursday 2 April 2020

Federal Government must act urgently to avoid COVID-19  catastrophe in immigration detention

A coalition of human rights lawyers have today called on the Morrison Government to act urgently to  ensure the safety of the women and men held in its care in onshore immigration detention centres.

There are approximately 1,400 people held in detention centres and alternative places of detention  throughout Australia. Medical experts - including the Australasian Society for Infectious Diseases  and the Australasian College for Infection and Prevention Control - have already called for the  release of people held in detention to protect against the risks from COVID-19 for people held there,  for staff moving in and out of the centres and for the broader community.

As public health experts urge that physical distancing is essential, the women and men in  immigration centres are often sleeping four to six people in a room, eating in crowded food halls, and  interacting constantly with staff and other people in the centres. The Commonwealth Department of  Health’s own advice states that people in detention are one of several groups most at risk of  contracting the virus.

Prime Minister Morrison has heard in an open letter from the men and women detained that they are  “sitting ducks for Covid-19”.

Human rights lawyers have highlighted the Federal Government’s duty of care owed to people held  in immigration detention centres and called for urgent action to allow these

David Burke, Legal Director at the Human Rights Law Centre:

“Everyone deserves to be safe in this public health crisis. The only way to protect the women and  men held in immigration detention is to immediately reduce the number of people trapped inside  these crammed centres. The Morrison Government must allow people to return to their families or  support them in other safe housing. Failing to act puts lives at risk.”

Jane Leibowitz, Public Interest Advocacy Centre's Asylum Seeker Health Rights Project:

“Many asylum seekers in detention are already in poor health and struggle to access the health care  and medical treatment they need. The Australian Government has a duty of care to those it detains  and must act immediately to get asylum seekers out of overcrowded centres.”

Sarah Dale, Centre Director and Principal Solicitor, Refugee Advice & Casework Service:

“If the immigration detention environment does not allow people to follow critical medical advice then  it becomes a health risk, not only to the people held there but also to staff members and therefore  the wider Australian public. It is well documented that any kind of detention facility is at increased  risk of COVID-19 infection and we have a duty to protect the people in our care. We must ensure all  people can access their rights - irrespective of how far along the protection process they are and  especially at the time of a global pandemic.”

Dr Carolyn Graydon, Principal Solicitor and Manager of Human Rights Law Program, Asylum  Seeker Resource Centre:

“We have no oversight or transparency of how people held in detention centres and alternative  places of detention are being protected from transmission of COVID19. They are in cramped  conditions and it is a huge public health concern.

“The government must move to release people urgently with enough support to survive COVID19.”

David Manne, Executive Director and Principal Solicitor, Refugee Legal:

“Every person in this country deserves to be protected during this public health emergency. This  must include the many vulnerable women and men currently held in immigration detention. Health  experts continue to highlight the dire risks to these people who are at immediate risk and unable to  take the necessary steps to safeguard their health and those of others. Protecting these vulnerable  people protects us all. The government must immediately heed the advice of experts to avoid a  catastrophe by urgently releasing people from detention into safer places.”

Media contacts:  Michelle Bennett, Communications Director, Human Rights Law Centre: 0419 100 519



Gemma Pearce, Media and Communications Manager, PIAC: 0478 739 280





