



LUKE GOSLING OAM MP

MEMBER FOR SOLOMON

CHAIR, INDO-PACIFIC TRADE TASKFORCE





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

RADIO INTERVIEW

ABC RADIO DARWIN

TUESDAY, 9 FEBRUARY 2021



SUBJECT: Families in immigration detention in Darwin.



LIZ TREVASKIS, HOST: I was just sharing some of your texts in response to the

ongoing saga of the 15 refugees in detention in a hotel in Darwin. They have been

there for 12 months. I would hazard that most of you had not heard of their plight. I

had not until last weekend. But in that time, we've heard from a lot of people

showing their support. Luke Gosling is one of them. He is the Federal Member for

Solomon and has called in with an update for us. Luke, what can you tell us?



LUKE GOSLING, MEMBER FOR SOLOMON: G’day Liz. Last week in Canberra I

met with the Canadian High Commissioner because that's the third country option

available to, in particular, the Iranian refugees who are out at the airport at the

moment. And they talked through the fact that these Australian expats living in

Canada have raised this money and about how the process works where refugees

are supported to fly to Canada, live in a community, get supported by that

community and get on with life. I guess for those listening, what we're

endeavouring to do — and thanks to people who turned up on Saturday to the to

the protest at the airport — is to say, like Melbourne and Brisbane, where refugees

have been released into the community, so they can have a degree of freedom

and humanity, we are obviously wanting that to happen for those here in Darwin.



TREVASKIS: And what was the feedback from the Canadian High Commissioner

there? Is there anything in motion to make that happen?



GOSLING: The process has slowed a little bit due to COVID, but it hasn't stopped,

so the process is still continuing. There's a fair bit to the process, but essentially

the individuals and the families are registered through this program that the

Canadian Government runs. It's not the Canadian Government that actually brings

them over, it's the people in the community that have raised the funds and have

committed to supporting them in the community. Obviously, the Canadian

Government has a role in vetting that process, but that process hasn't stopped. It

continues. Obviously, they didn't talk about individuals because of privacy reasons.

But I know that the advocates working with those that are in the Darwin airport are

aware of the program and are communicating and assisting those here with us in

Darwin to continue through that process.



TREVASKIS: OK, so the wheels are still in motion for possible resettlement in

Canada through that program?



GOSLING: Yeah, they are. But we don't know how long that's going to take, which

is why so many in the community are saying that like Melbourne and Brisbane,

those here in Darwin, they're not a threat to the community, they've been deemed

legitimate refugees or genuine refugees, as the saying goes. So they should be

able to live in the community until such time as that resettlement in Canada can

occur.





TREVASKIS: Luke Gosling Federal Member for Solomon, thank you for your

call.  A lot of texts coming through. I'll just share a couple more of those.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: JESS EVANS 0425 234 265





