

JOEL FITZGIBBON MP

MEMBER FOR HUNTER



SPEECH

FEDERATION CHAMBER



Di Sneddon - Upper Hunter NSW Woman of the Year



In every regional community you will find several people who might be  described as “community leaders”; people who go above and beyond what  might be expected of them. People who work tirelessly in the interests of their  local community.

Singleton’s Di Sneddon is one of those people and I was pleased to learn last  week that she’d become the Upper Hunter NSW Woman of the Year.  It’s not Di’s first award, far from it. In fact, in 2013 she was named Singleton  Citizen of the Year.

Di is involved in just about everything. Everywhere I go in support of a good  cause, Di is there too.

There are many examples but her work with the Red Cross - where she has  been the recipient of a Humanitarian Partner Award - stands out.

But Di is possibly best known for her many years at the Singleton Argus where  she first worked after leaving Singleton High School in 1980. Yes, Di is a fully-fledged local.

Di went on to become a long-serving Editor of the paper. There can be no  doubt, Di was not fully remunerated for the hours she dedicated to her role  there.

Both as a journalist and editor, Di used her position for the common good. She  didn’t just report on and oversee the news, she helped shape it.

Her work with the Red Cross and the newspaper came together in 1999 when  the Government decided Singleton’s army camp would become host to 500  displaced people from war-torn Kosovo.





Di was quick to realise that the men, women, and children being given safe  haven would need the support of the local community and that it would be  important to ensure they had all the facts.

Di knew that misinformation or even a dearth of information would fuel  community suspicion of, and opposition to the safe haven arrangement.

She fought for special access to the camp for her local paper to ensure all the  facts were known in the community and to foster local sympathy and support  for the refugees.

Di’s efforts met with spectacular success and history now records how warmly  the Kosovars were received in the local community and indeed, how generous  Singleton residents quickly became.

They donated toys and other goods and volunteered to provide English  lessons. Local sporting clubs organised coaching clinics for the new arrivals  and local musicians provided entertainment.

The response of residents made us all proud, the plight of the Kosovars  brought the best out in us all.

Di Sneddon made sure the community response was the right response.  Without her leadership, it could have been a different one. Misinformation, even  poor information, breeds suspicion and anger.

Again, showing great courage, Di recently became part of a new community  newspaper venture where she continues to lead and shape community  attitudes.

Di Sneddon is a local legend and is deserving of every accolade and award she  has received.



ENDS

MONDAY, 15 MARCH 2021



MEDIA CONTACT: DAVID BULLOCK 0405 408 871





Authorised by Joel Fitzgibbon, ALP, Cessnock, NSW.









