

22 February 2021

ASYLUM SEEKERS AND REFUGEES ARE NOT CRIMINALS  THEIR DETENTION IS IMMORAL AND ILLEGAL



Independent Member for Clark, Andrew Wilkie, will today introduce a Private Members Bill  to end the unlawful mandatory detention of asylum seekers, refugees and non-citizens. The  Ending Indefinite and Arbitrary Immigration Detention Bill would also have the effect of  abolishing the inhumane practice of offshore detention, which costs Australia more than $1  billion a year.

WHEN: Approx. 10.20am TODAY 22 February 2021  WHERE: House of Representatives Parliament House CANBERRA (watch live at   https://www.aph.gov.au/News_and_Events/Watch_Parliament)

“This Bill provides alternatives to immigration detention by moving asylum seekers, refugees  and other non-citizens into the community almost always in preference to being behind bars,”  Mr Wilkie said. “It will also ensure that those in community alternatives to immigration  detention have full access to housing and financial support, as well as the right to work. They  will have access to education, health care and other government services, as is required under  international law.

“Importantly, the Bill also outlines specific conditions on how and why a person can be  detained. This will rule out long-term and arbitrary detention by setting limited time frames to  ensure that an individual’s detention period is as short as possible.

“It costs about $346,000 per year to hold someone in immigration detention in Australia,  compared to $10,221 for a refugee or asylum seeker to live in the community. As at December  2020, there were about 1,500 people being held in Australian detention facilities and another  282 effectively in detention in PNG and Nauru. Why do we persist in keeping these people,  many of whom have already suffered great trauma, in abhorrent and torturous conditions when  they should be allowed to walk free?

“Priya and Nades Murugappan and their daughters, Kopika and Tharnicaa, for example, were  taken from the regional Queensland town of Biloela into detention in Melbourne more than

1,000 days ago. The family was moved to Christmas Island in August 2019, where it remains  in legal limbo. The cost of keeping this family in detention is estimated at about $6 million.

“The bottom line is that Australia’s bipartisan policy of mandatory detention is immoral and  illegal under numerous international agreements. It should have been abolished years ago and  this Bill promises to do so now.”

For more information: 0427 291 785

Authorised by Andrew Wilkie MP 188 Collins St Hobart



