

SENATOR KRISTINA KENEALLY

DEPUTY LABOR LEADER IN THE SENATE

SHADOW MINISTER FOR HOME AFFAIRS

SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTABILITY

SENATOR FOR NEW SOUTH WALES





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

RADIO INTERVIEW

6PR MORNINGS WITH LIAM BARTLETT

TUESDAY, 13 APRIL 2021



SUBJECT: Department of Home Affairs contract in Nauru.



LIAM BARTLETT, HOST: We are joined by the Shadow Home Affairs Minister from Canberra,

Senator Kristina Keneally. Senator Keneally, good morning.



SENATOR KRISTINA KENEALLY, DEPUTY LABOR LEADER IN THE SENATE, SHADOW

MINISTER FOR HOME AFFAIRS: Oh, good morning Liam and good morning to your

listeners.



BARTLETT: Senator, how do we get to the stage where we're paying $10,000 per day for

every one of the 115 people on Nauru?



KENEALLY: Liam, this is an outrageous waste of taxpayer money. And just to put it in context

for your listeners, we are talking here about $10,000 per person, per day. Now I think all of us

can imagine if we had $10,000 per day for accommodation and food, how we might spend

that.



This is the our federal government using our taxpayer dollars in what is an extraordinarily

expensive contract, as you say, given out to a Liberal Party donor with limited competitive

tender. The government had been criticized by the Auditor General for this arrangement.



And sadly, Liam, just sadly, this is a pattern of behaviour, not just for this government, but

particularly for the Department of Home Affairs. And frankly, it's one of the messes that the

former Minister Peter Dutton has left now for the new Minister Karen Andrews to try and clean

up.



BARTLETT: Clean up. That money, Senator, let's just go back to it, because I just cannot

believe it. I mean, you couldn't spend $100 on Nauru, every day, if you tried, you'd be

drowning in coconuts. I mean, what can you get for $10,000? For everybody!



KENEALLY: And the fact is, this contract was awarded, and then it has gone up and up and

up. I think you use the figure there, some 17,600%. And yet, we have had no new people

arrive on on Nauru, since 2014. So it also beggars belief, why are their, why the payments are

going up, when their costs are staying the same or coming down. It is an extraordinary waste

of taxpayer money.



And the government has now spent some over over $2 billion propping up regional processing

centres on Nauru, and Manus Island and Papua New Guinea. Now, frankly, we need those

centres. But they have been emptying out and they could be empty now, if the government had

gone on, taken up the New Zealand offer, moved these people on to New Zealand. We would

actually have not just resolved some things for those poor people who are, who've been stuck

waiting for a durable solution. But we also would have saved the taxpayer a heck of a lot of

money.



BARTLETT: A lot of money. In fact, I'll go one step further. We could have flown these people

first class in a chartered A380 to New Zealand, we could put them up in a five star hotel and

feed them three meals a day with room service every single day, and we'd still get change.



KENEALLY: Yeah, absolutely right, that would have been better value for money for the

Australian taxpayer.



BARTLETT: But but senator, look, just can we go back a little bit, this this limited, tender

process the company talks about, can you explain how that works? Are you familiar with that

with in terms of government?



KENEALLY: Well, the government will say - and they really are the ones that need to explain

this, by the way, I'm disappointed you can't get anyone from the government to come on and

explain this, this shocking waste of taxpayer money. The government will say...



BARTLETT: But you're not surprised?



KENEALLY: I'm not surprised. I mean, this is a government when we ask questions in Senate

Estimates takes it on notice, never has an answer, you know, tries to say 'oh, well, you know,

we were going for a simpler…,' and this will be their argument, 'we were going for a quick and

simple solution. We already had an arrangement with these people. So we we just continued it

on.'



Now the Auditor General in Australia has looked at this and said, in fact, there's no reason why

you wouldn't have gotten a better deal if he'd gone to an open tender and allowed companies

who had expertise and capacity to bid for this.



I mentioned before how much we've spent both on Nauru and in Papua New Guinea, the

government has form here. This is the same government, this eight year old tired Liberal

Government gave a similar contract to a company called Paladin to provide similar services for

for asylum seekers and refugees in Papua New Guinea. And that was a half a billion dollar

contract given to a small company run out of the beach shack on Kangaroo Island down in

South Australia. You know, a company that had almost no experience doing this work.



BARTLETT: Incredible.



KENEALLY: It's incredible. You know, and frankly, I think there are some serious questions to

be asked here. And we've got Senate Estimates coming up. Where we will be, we will be

pushing hard to figure out and try to flesh out why this limited tender approach was taken. It

doesn't provide value for money. It's hard to believe it's providing a reasonable service. And as

you say, I mean we could have resolved the issue by flying all these people first class to New

Zealand and still save some cash.



BARTLETT: I can understand a limited tender if you're talking about for example, the very first

contract $8 million. And you need it enacted almost immediately. So you have to do the week

after next and then you have a limited tender because you need the action but after more than

six amendments have a contract of $1.4 billion. Surely, if you don't have an open tender you

are opening yourself up to all sorts of allegations accusations and and suggestions.



KENEALLY: Well this is what happened, this happened in Nauru and it's happened in Papua

New Guinea, where the government signs up to an initial contract and then decides it can't be

bothered to go out and seek competitive bids and just keeps renewing and renewing and

adding amendments and boosting up the value of the contract. Until we get to the point we

spent billions of dollars here of Australian taxpayer money - money that by the way, could have

been spent on the NDIS, or on health services or in any other of needed ways here in

Australia. And it is simply because the government has been, one, stubborn in refusing to take

up the New Zealand offer to move these people out of Nauru and Papua New Guinea. And

two, has been negligent in its contracting arrangements, and not ensuring that it's providing

value for money. And you know, these aren't, this isn't just my view, as I said, the Auditor

General has looked at both of these contracts and given scathing assessments.



BARTLETT: Alright, well, we'll be following closely or questions the next time they come up

and Senate estimates because I'd dearly love to know as I'm sure my listeners would, where

all that money is going.



KENEALLY: Absolutely. And you know, it's one of the great things about Australian

democracy that were able to pursue the questions and Senate estimates. The frustration is

that under this government so much is taken on notice, so much is never fully answered. But I

can assure your listeners, we're going to keep asking the questions. Thank you for the

opportunity to discuss it this morning.



BARTLETT: Thank you Senator.



ENDS





MEDIA CONTACT: LUCY BRADLOW 0427 280 390



