MEDIA RELEASE

AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT MUST SUSPEND ALL MILITARY TIES WITH MYANMAR

02/02/2021

Greens Senators Janet Rice and Jordon Steele-John have called on the Australian Government to immediately suspend all military ties with Myanmar, and impose targeted sanctions on General Min Aung Hlaing and others involved in yesterday’s coup.

The Australian Greens also urge the Myanmar military to respect democratic norms and immediately release Aung San Suu Kyi and others who have been unlawfully detained.

Senator Janet Rice, Australian Greens Foreign Affairs spokesperson said:

“The Australian Greens are incredibly concerned at the declaration of emergency law by the Myanmar military, and the unlawful detention of Aung San Suu Kyi, President U Win Myint, and other individuals.

“The November 2020 general elections reflect the will of the people of Myanmar to keep building democratic traditions and norms, and must be respected. The Greens urge the Myanmar military to release those that have been detained, and to cease interference with election outcomes and democratic transition.

“The Australian Government must turn their concern into action. Australia must scrap all military ties with Myanmar until democratic processes have been restored, and impose targeted sanctions on General Min Aung Hlaing and all others involved in this action by the military.

“The Australian Government should also accept any political refugees from Myanmar seeking protection in Australia.”

Senator Jordon Steele-John, Australian Greens Peace spokesperson said:

“Given the Military Coup that has taken place over the last 48 hours, Australian Defence Forces must immediately suspend their military relationship with Myanmar.

“Since Myanmar began its transition to fragile democracy a little over a decade ago, Australian Defence forces have been strengthening ties with Myanmar’s military by providing training in non-combat areas, humanitarian and disaster relief and english-language services.

“The deadly crackdown on the Rohingya in 2017 has stretched this relationship to breaking point and with the events of the last 48 hours, it is clear there can be no more military cooperation until the situation in Myanmar is resolved."

Media Contacts:

RICE - Shani Flynn; 0400 352 935 STEELE-JOHN - Tim Oliver; 0448 316 387

