

LUKE GOSLING OAM MP  MEMBER FOR SOLOMON  CHAIR, INDO-PACIFIC TRADE TASKFORCE



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW  ABC RADIO DARWIN  TUESDAY, 2 FEBRUARY 2021

SUBJECT: Golmohammadian family in immigration detention in Darwin.

LIZ TREVASKIS, HOST: Luke can you tell me about what happened to daughter Farnaz on  her birthday, the story that you shared in parliament just a little bit earlier today?

LUKE GOSLING, MEMBER FOR SOLOMON: Hi Liz. I met with Farnaz at the detention  facility at the airport last week, and it was an example of some of the unnecessarily cruel  treatment. Usually on a birthday they would give a birthday cake to the detainees, but she was  told she wouldn't be getting a birthday cake because it was December 28 and it was a Public  Holiday. I just thought that incident and a couple of the other incidents that they raised really  saddened me because we are good hosts here in the Northern Territory and we’ve shown that  through Howard Springs and trying to get repatriated Australians back home. But that's two  weeks isolated in a small room. What we're talking about with these families is almost a year in  those small rooms. And what really saddened me as well was the unnecessary meanness of  not giving the mother and the father of this one particular family a double bed. They gave them  bunks and the father has a sore knee and it's hard to get up and down the bunks. And it's just  not decent behaviour and it's not behaviour I think a lot of Territorians would be happy with.  What we've seen in Melbourne and Brisbane is that some of these really long-term detainees,  who are genuine refugees, have been released into community detention. And I think we  should be looking at that. And that's what I'll call for today, because we shouldn't be doing  more harm to these people who are in our country.

TREVASKIS: You also spoke about another measure of cruelty around a request to go to a  church service at Christmas time?

GOSLING: I was pushing for this family in particular, who are committed Christians, to be  allowed to go to a church service on Christmas Day. Australian Border Force wrote back to me  and said that wasn't possible because everyone then would need to be able to go to some sort  of service. But again, it's costing Australia a great deal of money for a company, Serco, to  provide these services. So whether it be a birthday cake on someone's birthday or outings,  they should be occurring. But we've really got a question why when the Minister Mr Dutton has  said this detention is too expensive in Melbourne and Brisbane, so we're going to release  some people into the community - why that's not happening in Darwin as well? That's what  we're calling for. We think it's a reasonable thing to do. And we think some of the treatment of  people that are staying in our beautiful city, Darwin, has been unnecessary and we're asking



for it to stop immediately.

TREVASKIS: Do you want them released to live in Darwin or would you like their resettlement  sped up? That's also an issue at the moment. They are genuine refugees awaiting  resettlement in a third country. If that were to happen, would that be a sufficient outcome?

GOSLING: Because most of them from Persia or Iran, they aren't able to be settled in a third  country being in the United States. So a group of Australians have raised about  $50,000.  These are Australians living in Canada. So I'm speaking with the Canadian High  Commissioner here in Canberra. We're meeting in a couple of days’ time.

TREVASKIS: Why can't they be resettled in the United States?

GOSLING: Because they're from Iran and the United States won't accept genuine refugees  from Iran.

TREVASKIS: So they are in absolute limbo in terms of resettlement?

GOSLING: They are in limbo. And I think in COVID times, the process of getting them to  Canada to be resettled has been slowed down. But that is why the Minister has identified the  need to transfer people into community detention in Melbourne and Brisbane. We're simply  asking for that to occur here whilst they wait for this process of being resettled in Canada.

TREVASKIS: All right. Luke Gosling. Thanks for your time this afternoon.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: JESS EVANS 0425 234 265



