

ANTHONY ALBANESE MP  LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY  MEMBER FOR GRAYNDLER



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW  ABC RN BREAKFAST WITH SALLY SARA  THURSDAY, 21 JANUARY 2021

SUBJECTS: Donald Trump as US President; Australia’s relationship with the US;  Scott Morrison’s lack of condemnation towards Donald Trump and the insurrection;  Labor leadership; next Federal Election.

SALLY SARA, HOST: Opposition Leader, Anthony Albanese, welcome back to RN  Breakfast.

ANTHONY ALBANESE, LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY: Good to be  with you, Sally.

SARA: Mr Albanese, you've accused Scott Morrison of pandering to Donald Trump. What  evidence do you have that it's damaged the relationship between Australia and the US?

ALBANESE: Well, it is unfortunate that Scott Morrison didn't look after the relationship  appropriately. The attendance at a partisan political rally in Ohio during a one week visit to  the United States, where he didn't meet any senior Democrat leaders at all, stands in stark  contrast to the way that the relationship normally works. When Defense Secretary Esper  visited Australia, or Mike Pompeo, the Secretary of State, or indeed Vice President Pence,  they met with senior members from both sides of the political spectrum. And that's normally  what occurs. I've certainly met with senior Republicans as well as Democrats when I visited  the United States. But that didn't happen. And then, of course, the failure of Scott Morrison  to call out people who have engaged in the sort of conspiracy theories that led to the  insurrection on January 7 at the Capitol building in the US, I think, is a failure of leadership.  Other world leaders such as Boris Johnson and Angela Merkel and others who stand on  the conservative spectrum, or his near neighbour, Mr Trudeau, all called out the actions  that we saw, which were an assault on democracy.

SARA: Anthony Albanese, the President's National Security Adviser, Jake Sullivan, says  that Joe Biden is eager to develop a really strong relationship with Scott Morrison, he thinks  the two leaders will get off to a strong start. Haven't you misjudged the very nature of the  alliance and the respect that there is in Washington for Australia as a trusted ally?

ALBANESE: Not at all. And indeed, in my speech, I quoted not just Jack Sullivan, but Kurt

Campbell, who will also play a critical role in the Biden administration in the region. They  have a perspective, which is reflected by Joe Biden's perspective himself when he's spoken  about diplomacy being the first instrument of American power. And I expect that Australia's  relationship with the United States will continue to be very strong.

SARA: So, that doesn't sound like a damaged relationship.

ALBANESE: It's a relationship based upon values. And it is appropriate that Scott Morrison  be called out for his failure to call out President Trump's incitement of the insurrection. I'm  not quite sure what it takes either for Scott Morrison to haul George Christensen and others  into line who have continued to peddle the conspiracy theories that Joe Biden was not  elected legitimately by the American people. I make no apologies for standing up  unconditionally, unequivocally, as world leaders have, for the democratic values. The  relationship with the United States is one which is based upon our shared values, our  common interests. And I have said that the US alliance is our most important relationship.

SARA: But we don't get to choose the President. So, a Prime Minister has to work with  whoever's in the Oval Office. If you were Prime Minister, and you were serving it up to  Donald Trump, isn't there a chance we could have lost the battle over steel tariffs and the  refugee resettlement deal could have been dumped?

ALBANESE: But no one suggested any criticism of that, Sally. So, let's not play Scott  Morrison's game of having a straw man so as to blow it down. What we have said is that  the relationship is important. I've never been critical of Scott Morrison, for example, for  meeting with President Trump, for having a respectful relationship. I think that Malcolm  Turnbull did an excellent job on the refugee deal for getting on to the new President and  ensuring that the deal that was struck with President Obama be continued. That's  important. I met with people like the Secretary of State Pompeo, and we had a long and  respectful meeting with my leadership team. That's important. The distinction that I've  drawn here is that when the President at the time, just a couple of weeks ago, incited  people to the insurrection that occurred at the Capitol building, those scenes that we saw  that shocked all of us, then it shouldn't have been beyond the wit for Scott Morrison to call  out President Trump's actions. We need to be the US ally that the United States needs, and  what that means is that friends are prepared to call out issues where they need to be called  out.

SARA: Let's move forward. What chance do you give Joe Biden of healing the wounds and  uniting the country?

ALBANESE: Well, look, America is a divided country. And the last four years have been  characterised by a President who often made decisions based upon Twitter. We have seen  a mishandling of the pandemic in the United States. And Joe Biden will have a difficult task  ahead, but I know Joe Biden and I have met with Joe Biden. He is perhaps the most  experienced President to take office with more than four decades in public life. He has an  experienced team around him. I think that the rise of Kamala Harris to the vice presidency,  a woman of colour, reflects modern America, as does Joe Biden's cabinet, people like Pete  Buttigieg, I've shared a platform with at the Australian American Leadership Dialogue. I  think he will lead a very good government. It will take time, the challenges are there with the  domestic economy, with the pandemic, it has to be the first priority. But he's determined as  well to restore America's role in the world rather than the retreat from global leadership that  we've seen in recent years. And that's a good thing. That's in Australia's interests and it's in



the world's interests to have a strong America.

SARA: Let's finish up on home soil. With a primary vote languishing at around 36 per cent,  how can you be sure that your job is safe?

ALBANESE: That's a 3 per cent increase on the last election where we lost the election by  under 2 per cent.

SARA: So, you're confident of maintaining your position?

ALBANESE: Absolutely.

SARA: Do you think someone like Tanya Plibersek has a future as a Labor Leader in your  place?

ALBANESE: Tanya Plibersek has the job that she wants, which is the Shadow Education  Minister, and she's doing a terrific job, as is the rest of my team.

SARA: Joel Fitzgibbon has said that the Party has gone backwards since the last election  and the clock is ticking. Does he have an understanding of the situation?

ALBANESE: Well, he's wrong, isn't he? And he sits on the backbench. He's just wrong.  The fact is, we've gone forward since the last election, as all the figures show. And at the  last election, we were very close. The Government has a very slim majority in the House of  Representatives. The one time that was put to a test last year at the height of the  pandemic, we won Eden-Monaro, which on its current boundaries, we would not have won  at any time during the Hawke or Keating Governments. I'm very confident that this year,  continuing to hold the Government to account whilst putting forward an alternative plan for  a better and stronger recovery, the plans that we have put forward already for a Future  Made in Australia, for our childcare reform, for assisting to improve the standard of living by  making work more secure, by taking action on climate change, on all of these policies we  will have a very strong alternative to the Government. And I'm very confident that we'll be  successful whenever the election is called.

SARA: Anthony Albanese, thank you for joining us again on RN Breakfast.

ALBANESE: Thanks, Sally.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: LEADER’S PRESS OFFICE 02 6277 4053











