Media inquiries | Ainsley Koch | 0437 327 127  Authorised by Senator Richard Colbeck, Tasmania









Senator the Hon Richard Colbeck  Minister for Senior Australians and Aged Care Services   Minister for Sport



26 January 2020



2021 Senior Australian of the Year

Congratulations Dr Miriam-Rose Ungunmerr Baumann AM from the Northern Territory, who  has been named the Senior Australian of the year for 2021.

Dr Ungunmerr Baumann was recognised for her contribution to children’s education,  demonstrating an admirable commitment to making Australia a better place.

Minister for Senior Australians and Aged Care Services, Richard Colbeck, said Dr Ungunmerr  Baumann had gone above and beyond in her service to education in the Top End.

“Miriam-Rose became the first fully qualified Aboriginal teacher in the Northern Territory in  1975, and later served as the principal of the Catholic school in her home community,” Minister  Colbeck said.

“She is a renowned artist and a strong advocate for visual art to be a part of every child’s  education.

“The Miriam Rose Foundation, which she began, is driving reconciliation at the grassroots  level by bridging the divide between Aboriginal culture and wider Australian society.

“The Senior Australian of the Year award is recognition of significant achievement over many  years, but it also highlights that dedicated Australians working for their communities come  from all walks of life and background.”

Minister Colbeck also paid tribute to the other nominees from across Australia and the winners  in each state and territory.

“It must be a difficult task narrowing down the nominees each year, looking through those  shortlisted for this honour shows that you can always make a difference.

“While there is only one Senior Australian of the Year, I am continually impressed by all of  those Australians who are nominated - they should all be rightly proud of their achievements.”

Congratulations to each of the 2021 Senior Australian of the Year finalists, who continue to  inspire and contribute to their communities.

Media inquiries | Ainsley Koch | 0437 327 127  Authorised by Senator Richard Colbeck, Tasmania





New South Wales Aunty Isabel Reid Elder, survivor and advocate for

the Stolen Generation

Victoria Bich Cam Nguyen Refugee and migrant advocate,

multicultural leader, CEO of the  Australian Vietnamese  Women’s Association

Queensland Aunty McRose Elu Advocate for Torres Strait

communities and climate change

Tasmania Brian Williams Scout leader and mentor

South Australia Professor Richard Bruggemann Disability advocate

Western Australia Dr Richard Walley OAM Aboriginal cultural champion,  musician, performer and artist

Australian Capital  Territory  Patricia Anderson AO  Writer and advocate for the  health of Australia’s First

Peoples









