Authorised by Greg Hunt MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Somerville, Victoria.





The Hon Greg Hunt MP  Minister for Health and Aged Care

MEDIA RELEASE



4 February 2021



Vaccine campaign to support culturally and linguistically diverse audiences

The Australian Government’s $31 million COVID-19 vaccination public information  campaign is now rolling out across the country, with an additional $1.3 million provided for  peak multicultural organsations to help reach culturally and linguistically diverse (CALD)  communities.

Making safe and effective COVID-19 vaccines available to everyone in Australia is a key  priority for the Australia Government. That is why we are extending free access to  COVID-19 vaccines to all visa-holders in Australia.

This will include refugees, asylum seekers, temporary protection visa holders and those on  bridging visas. People currently residing in detention facilities will also be eligible, including  those whose visas have been cancelled.

We know that Australia is a vaccination nation, and we trust this campaign will provide the  assurance and motivation for everyone in Australia to have the COVID-19 vaccination.

A major roundtable was held today involving more than 50 community leaders to discuss  how we can partner together in supporting the vaccination rollout.

A comprehensive plan, including communication activities and community engagement  strategies, has been developed in partnership with multicultural specialist agencies and, with  advice from the national CALD Communities COVID-19 Health Advisory Group, to reach  people from culturally and linguistically diverse backgrounds.

The campaign will reach Australians through a range of channels including regular website  updates, social media, health professionals and community and grass roots organisations,  networks, and the media. It includes advertising in 32 languages across radio, print and social  media, and will extend to communities that are harder to reach through traditional channels.

Messages will target specific multicultural groups to ensure everyone in Australia has a full  understanding of the vaccination program. Many people working in sectors such as aged care  will be in the first groups to be vaccinated and are from CALD communities, and it is critical  that they receive translated information that is culturally appropriate.

Translated resources have been developed for multicultural communities, including radio and  print editorials, a video development guide for community leaders to film their own videos,

Authorised by Greg Hunt MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Somerville, Victoria.



in-language web content, social media posts, posters, and newsletter articles. The Department  of Health’s vaccine hub also has a translation button for 63 languages available on its website  and on mobile devices.

The Government is working with SBS to finalise short videos explaining the vaccine rollout  in more than 60 languages, and with the Migration Council of Australia to produce an  animated vaccine explainer in 29 languages. These products will be provided to multicultural  peak bodies and networks and available online.

As more information becomes available through expert medical advice and complete data  sets from clinical trials, the Department will provide timely updates through its multicultural  channels.

The Australian Government is confident, given Australia's current high vaccination rates,  everyone able to take up the vaccine will do so in high numbers.

-ENDS-

