News Release

16/68

FROM THE MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION

EMBARGO

For ^release after 1.30 p.m. A.E. .l. Monday 25 March 1968

PRESS STATEI ENT BY THE MINISTER FOR IIGRATI0N THB OI^ T . B.M. SNEDDEIIN^Q.C., M.P.

The occupational structure of the migrant intake would be

of crucial importance in future years, the Minister for Immigration,

Mr. Snedden, said today.

The migration programme was not solely a question of

obtaining a specified number of migrants.

"We must be certain that our development is not held back

because of shortages of key workers," he said.

Mr. Snedden, who was addressing the annual conference of the

Associated Chambers of Commerce of Australia in Hobart, said that

by the end of 1975 Australia could have a work force of six million.

A large part of the increase already was built into our

existing population through youngsters who would be leaving school

in the next seven years.

"But we will require experienced migrant workers -professionals and trades_icn - to provide a balanced work force," he said.

Migration posts in Britain and Europe had handled 70,689 applications in the three months ended February, 1968, compared

with 49,709 in the same period the previous year. In Britain alone, last month's applications had totalled 20,250 compared with 11,732 in February, 1967.

These figures showed that there were substantial numbers of

potential migrants stimulated by new assisted passage arrangements and other measures which made it Possible for them to come to Australia.

"But these alone are not enough," Mr. Snedden said.

"Australia must move progressively towards increased employer participation in the migration programme."

Of 39,702 workers in the assisted migrant intake for the 12 months to September, 1967, 17,118 were skilled workers.

/2..

2.

Of these skilled workers, ranging from professionals to tradesmen, 12,498 were from Britain. Thirty per cent came without sponsorship and without pre--arranged jobs. The remainder were nominated by employers, relatives or friends.

Mr. Snedden said. IrW'e are relying heavily on British migration to augment the output of our own training institutios,

We have an opportunity to increase substantially our intake of skilled T-uzropean workers provided we can make firm offers of employment before they leave their homelands."

The movement of workers within Europe had grown rapidly in

recent years under increasingly sophisticated arrangements. Before

leaving; his home tovm, the worker knew his employer and had precise information on vrag es, accommodation and other conditions. He would normally have met a representative of his employer,

"Many prospective migrants now expect the same service from Australian employers,', T-r. Snedden said. "This applies particularly to the types of migrants Australia most needs, who enjoy a seller's market for their skills."

ldr. Snedden said that following his recent announcement that an employer nomination scheme would be introduced for Europe, Immigration Department offices in Australia and overseas were now fully geared to counsel and assist employers with direct

recruitment

In addition, it was important to expand the system of direct recruitment which had been in operation in Britain for some time.

Department of Immigrations CANBERRA. A.C.T.

25 March 1968.

