News Release,

1 __ 14,68

FROM THE DEPARTMENT OF IMMIGRATION CANBERRA A.C.T.

PRESS STATEMENT  BY THE D PARTP ,i1T OP IL JIGRATiON

More than 10,000 people are expected to see a

free six day showing of Australian films in Sweden which

will end tomorrow (March 9).

The film showing started last Monday and

attendances have been high.

The films have been shown for six hours every

day in Sorgelteatern, the leading cinema in central

Stockholm..

..bout 1 ,700 people attended the first screening .

including representatives of the Swedish Government, the

press, the travel industry, secondary school teachers and

students.

The flu wee py has been arranged by the Australian -Embassy in Stockholm.

The films in the programme are 'Melbourne', '`:Weekend Fishing', 'Australia Now 'Surf Beach', 'Shades of Pu!fing Billy' and 'The Seekers Down Under',

The films 'Melbourne' and 'Weekend Fishing'

were made for the Department of imaigr^tion by. the Commonwealth Film Unit.

The Commonwealth Film Unit also made 'Australia

Now', 'Surf Beach' and 'Shades of Puffing Billy'.

'Australia Now' is the. Commonwealth Film Unit's latest comprehensive film about Australia and 'Shades of Puffing

Billy' won a film award in Australia and another in Brussels, Belgium, late last year.

'The Seekers Down Under' is a colour film about

an internationally known Australian singing group touring, part of Australia.

A print of the film was ecjuirec1 from tkie

producers, Melbourne television station HSV7, for use at

the film week.

Over the past nine months Australian films have

been widely shown in Swedish cinemas,

Since May last year, nearly two million people

have seen most of the 12 films in the Department of

/2...

2.

I i raticn's TLifo in Austrclio' film series, showing life and conuitions in each of the State capital cities

and a provincial centre in each State.

These ',ilras already have boon shown in about

200 cinemas and will eventually be shown in 800 throughout

Sweden.

Department of Innigrati on,

0ANB1RR&. A.C.T.

8 March 1968

