POLITICS AND THE ECONOMY

A brief review and outlook

By the Leader of the National Country Party of Australia,

Rt. Hon. J.D. Anthony

June, 1975

The crisis in the Government which marked the end of the autumn parliamentary  session last week exposed again something well known to experienced observers  of the political scene; the Labor Party's built-in incapacity to manage the  economy. This incapacity will bring about the destruction of the Government.

The socialist approach of the Labor Party, involving big government spending,  is inherently inflationary. So long as Labor pursues its dream of a utopian  welfare state while weakening the productive base which is the only source  of growing national income and rising living standards, its economic

incompetence will continue to bring it closer to downfall. So long as Labor  persists in undermining incentive and in discouraging self-reliance and  enterprise, it will carry itself and the nation closer to breakdown.

The events of the last few weeks have seen history repeating itself as a  Labor Government has floundered in the mire of inflation and unemployment,  not knowing how to cope. Lacking the political courage and resolution to  tell the people what can and cannot be done when times are difficult, Labor  begins, under the stress of a worsening economic situation, to tear itself

apart. And the brutality of the Prime Minister's methods in achieving  his ends does nothing to help the Labor Party's stability.

Economic attack diverted

Perhaps the most obvious thing about the parliamentary session just ended was  the way in which the Opposition was unable to pursue as vigorously as it wanted >   to, and should have, the basic questions of inflation and unemployment. The  Opposition was diverted from the attack by a string of other issues which it was  obliged to deal with, even though it was itching to turn the attention of  the Parliament and the nation more urgently towards the serious economic

situation.

Some of these other issues were -

. the Cope affair, which saw the then Speaker stripped of his  authority and forced by the Prime Minister to resign

. the continuing breach of convention by the Prime Minister, which  had to be exposed

.. ./2

2.

.  the distraction caused by a matter involving the staff of the  Treasurer - a matter which cried out for the intervention of the  Prime Minister....  intervention which did not occur

.  the question of Senator Webster's elegibility to sit in the Senate

. the Vietnam cables, which exposed the Prime Minister's deception  of the Parliament

. the Government's shabby handling of the South Vietnamese refugee  situation -

. the Fraser Island debacle, which saw the Government ignore its own  environmental policy

. the Cabinet decision - later overturned - to cut the wool floor  price

. the$2 ,000 million loan scandal, which is yet to be fully exposed

. the Barnard resignation and the Cairns sacking

. the doctoring of the Cairns letter with its implication of a frameup

. the Cameron sacking and drastic Cabinet reshuffle.

All these things took the attention of the Opposition, the Parliament and the  people away from the central continuing economic problems of the nation. It  is easy for people to suggest that the Opposition should ignore what some  would claim to be unimportant side-issues. But integrity and honesty in  government must be central and fundamental to the trust which the people need  to have if they are to respect their political leaders and co-operate with

them in meeting the nation's problems.  That is why the Opposition must  fulfil its duty in drawing attention to the Government's shortcomings.

The shortcomings of the Whitlam Government come to light in such a torrent,  however, that one sometimes wonders whether the Government is not deliberately  acting in ways that will divert attention from its incompetence in the economic  area. On the other hand, it is hard to imagine any Government having such an  apparently inexhaustible fund of ineptitude as the Whitlam Government has  shown itself to possess over the last two and a half years. From now on, if  the stream of Government - inspired 'crises' abates sufficiently, the  Opposition must concentrate much more of its attention, and the Parliament's  attention, on the deteriorating economic situation.

Inflation central issue in worrying outlook

We must seek to establish a clear understanding of the fact that inflation is  central to virtually all our problems in Australia. The signs for the future  are not good. The indications are that the Australian economy will decline  further in the next 12 months, in contrast with the general economic improvement  in other countries.  The money supply, fuelled by a growing budget deficit,

continues to increase at a rate of above 20% in annual terms. This means that,  with little prospect for real growth in the economy in the coming year,  inflation will increase above its present high level. The prospects are  for an even higher budget deficit next year. The Government faces widespread  demands for tax cuts, and there has been little sign of real determination

to restrain the spending of Government departments.  In addition, there are hundreds of millions of dollars in new schemes to be introduced next  financial year such as Medibank.

One of the reasons for the present lack of business confidence is the erosion  of profits by excessive wage increases. Throughout the 1960s, wages and  profits were approximately 60% and 15% of GNP. Since 1974 this has changed  to 70% and 10% of GNP. As long as wages take a disproportionate amount of

GNP there will be little hope of economic recovery.

. ,./3

3.

There are no signs that business profits are rising and the proportion  of wages in the GNP falling back to more normal levels. Wage indexation  means that inflation has now been built into the economic system. It  must be remembered that the C.O.L. index on which wage increases will be  based has been kept artificially low by the collapse in the beef industry  and by low prices for vegetables. If there is any improvement in these

industries, a wage explosion could occur.

Investment fell last month by a record amount, reflecting the low  profitability of business and industry. With little prospect for any  improvement in investment, it would seem that unemployment will get even  worse in the next 12 months. The real depth of the unemployment crisis

is at present masked by the 63,000 people engaged in government-financed,  temporary, often unproductive tasks -- people who would otherwise be  counted as out of work.

With declining investment, productivity will also suffer because new  plant and equipment isnot replacing old machinery. Interest rates look  as if they will have to rise further, following the failure of the May  Government loan. This will mean fewer people able to purchase homes and

great pressure on businesses as the cost of financing stocks increase.

The prospects for real economic growth this year are not good. In the  12 months to last September, the GNP fell by 1.7%, and although it is  expected to rise this year by about 2%, this will only take us back  to the position we were in before 1973. There will have been no real  growth in the Austraian economy in the last 2 years.

Part of the reason for falling profits and the demand for higher w a ^ s   is a taxation system which does not respond to changes in the value of  money, but only to changes in the amount of money. Inflation boosts wage  earners into higher tax brackets, so that their take-home pay does not

increase as quickly as wage rises designed to cover C.O.L. increases. With companies, taxaton is paid on profits made from previous transactions,  but it does not take account of increased costs of replacing stock and

equipment, with the result that profits are only paper profits, yet real  tax is paid on them. This is driving the business sector further into  bankruptcy.

The boost to revenue as a result of the consequent decrease in the private  sector as funds are transferred to the Government in taxes is the method  by which socialisation on a large scale is being brought about in Australia.

Reform of the taxation system is essential if we are to prevent this  solialism by stealth. The need for tax reform will also force the  Government into greater budgetary discipline.

Measures to help economic recovery

This worrying prospect underlines the importance of much greater attention  being directed in the coming weeks and months to the deterioration of the  economy, the worsening of the real living standards of the community, and

to the need for implementation of measures which will assist in economic  recovery. Measures to which the Government needs to give urgent  consideration include -

GENERAL

.  reduction in the rate of government spending

. lowering of the budget deficit

. freeing the Australian dollar and allowing it to find its own level internationally - so that export and import competing  industries have at least some chance of coping with inflation.

. ../4

4.

. reform of the taxation system to take account not simply  of changes in the amount of money, but in the value of  money.

. continuing explanation of the inflationary consequences of  excessive wage rises and shorter working hours.

. encouragement of increased productivity

. restoration of business confidence and profitability

. changes in the taxation system to take account of the effect of taxes paid on 'paper profits'

. stimulation of investment in productive enterprises.

SPECIFIC

. provision of a 40% investment allowance

. abolition of the Prices Justification Tribunal to remove its  depressing and damaging effect on the private sector, on  profitability on investment, and on employment

. abolition of the unearned-income tax

RURAL

. honouring of repeated promises to provide finance on sensible  terms to facilitate renewed investment

. introduction, as specifically promised in April 1974 by the  Minister for Agriculture, of an income-stabilisation scheme

. restoration of the superphosphate bounty to avoid serious  long-term damage to fertility, production and productivity  - - an investment which will bring real rewards to government.

ENDS

R 18675/ 246

Canberra 18 June, 1975

