N E W S  R E L E A S E  FRO M  THE M INISTER FOR

Im n in ritio n  a id  [tic A ffa irsTH E  HO N . M . J . R .  M A C K E L L A R M .P .25 November 1977 IEA91/77LABOR ATTITUDE TO REFUGEES INHUMANE"If the Labor Party's attitude to the refugees was adopted and these people were set adrift in their small boats, Australia would be a pariah in the international community", the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, the Hon. M.J.R. M a c K e f l a r , M.P., s a i d .t o d a y .The heartlessness of Mr Whitlam's personal decision in 1975 to prevent the entry of persons from Vietnam should not be forgotten by the Australian community - a denial of entry which took place at the time when the Labor Government were admitting refugeefe from Chile, following the overthrow of the Allende Government, Mr MacKellar said."The reported statements of Senator Mulvihill in today's press bring into the open the continuing prejudice of Mr Whitlam and the Labor Party against Indo-Chinese refugees ", Mr MacKellar said. '"It would seem that the Labor Party forgets that Australia is a signatory to the United Nations Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees, and in so b e i n g , that Australia has a firm obligation to provide refuge for those people seeking a country of first asylum."Mr MacKellar said, "In administering our refugee and immigration p o licies, our first responsibility is of course to Australia and the Australian, people. For this reason instructions have been given that our control standards for health and character are maintained at all times.""Exhaustive precautions are being taken to prevent the introduction of plant and animal diseases. In-depth interviews are conducted to ensure that there are no security risks, and that the people, concerned are genuine refugees and of good character", Mr MacKellar added..  . . / 2 .

Mr MacKellar said, that Australia's handling of the

Indo-Chinese refugee situation combines deep compassion

and sensible control. The Minister said the despatch of

an additional task force to the Malaysian Singapore area

next week and the strengthening of the task force already

in Thailand, would assist the orderly processing of

refugees in the region. It would also avoid the need for

refugees to make the hazardous voyage to Australia in small

boats. .

"The Labor Party attitude towards this matter is

unrealistic, outrageous and inhumane in signalling through

their spokesman t h a t , if elected, they would not accept

r e f u g e e s ."

