Under embargo until 7.00 p.m. 6.3.77 3HA 6 March

3YB 10 March

Jx. AUSTRALIA,,^

PRIME MINISTER

FOR PRESS 6 MARCH 1977

ELECTORATE TALK

I want to briefly talk with you about the Federal Government*  1s  commitment to enhancing the position of Australians as individuals.   The Government has made a number of significant - and often little  noticed - reforms to improve the position of individual men and  women. Although the attention of the public and the media has

generally focused on economic matters, our reforms in these areas  are of"equal importance to this Government.

We have a basic commitment to creating the kind of situation where  Australians can realise their own capacities and potential to the  full. Our approach differs greatly from our political opponents. We seek to increase the capacity of people to make their own

decisions - to choose. Vie do not seek to increase the power of  Government. We seek to give meaningful and effective assistance  to the disadvantaged in the community - and not just to throw  money at a problem and hope for some instant solution. Society

simply does not work that way. In the final analysis, it is  individual people who require help and care.

Our record in these matters stands up well under scrutiny. Let us  first look at the question of civil liberty. We have acted on a  number of fronts. A Human Rights Commission will be established  by 1 July this year. Its broad purpose is to promote individual  rights and to make sure that our laws are in line with the United  Nations international covenant on civil and political rights.

We will introduce a Freedom of Information Bill that will give - as  a basic and fundamental right - access to certain categories of  Government information. It is designed to loosen up the flow of  information from Government to the people.

The Federal Government has also decided to implement the report  of the Law Reform Commission on criminal investigation. This is a  particularly important advance in civil liberties for people  detained for questioning or arrested and charged with a federal  criminal offence.

The Government is currently negotiating with the States so that  legal aid is provided in the most effective manner possible. We  believe this to be a fundamental right. In these times of budgetary  restraint, the funds we made available to this serviced increased by  nearly $4 .million.

/Aboriginal

2

Aboriginal lari Pi.gh.i3 legislation to the Northern Territory has been ' passed - a mosm significant advance for the aborigi nal people. Our  predecessors spoke about Aboriginal Land Rights, but we acted.

There have also been references to the Law Reform Commission on the f protection of pri'racy; the law of defamation; and investigation into  the possibility of applying aboriginal customary law in criminal matters  to aborigines living in the traditional manner.

All in all, this is an impressive list that demonstrates our commitment  to maintaining the freedom and dignity of the individual. It also  demonstrates, of course, our capacity to act effectively in carrying  out our policies-.

Let me now talk about our approach and our actions in assisting the  disadvantaged. As I mentioned earlier, we are determined to provide  assistance to those most in need in a way that does not make people  more dependent on government. Our wish is to make people more independent-

to enhance their self-respect and dignity, and not to destroy it. We  realise that quite often Government bureaucracies are unable to provide  the kind of personal aid necessary. We therefore place great emphasis  on the work of voluntary organisations. There is no doubt that they can  bring a personal and highly effective approach to the formidable task of  dispensing social welfare programmes. They frequently become aware of

the need for assistance long before a Government Department itself. That  is one important reason why we want close association with voluntary  organisations - so we can quickly know of emerging needs and changes in  direction that may be required. Our actions in this area reflect our  commitment.

The indexation of pensions, for instance, automatically retains their  real value.  The family allowance scheme is of incalculable benefit to  300,000 Australian familities who got virtually no benefit from the old  system of tax deductions merely because their incomes were too low. There has been a re-orientation of child care programmes to give children  of working mothers and single parent children adequate care. In this  often controversial area, what we are seeking to do is simply provide

the circumstances in which children are properly cared for. Also, Senator Guilfoyle, as Minister for Social Security, has been reviewing  the administration of her Department to improve its capacity to assist <   individuals. We have set up a committee of experts from various Government  Departments that provide over-the-counter service to see if improvements

can be made in the effectiveness of this service. This is not a criticism  of public servants, but a genuine desire to make sure that welfare  services are dispensed with the greatest possible degree of concern  and sensitivity.

The Government has also initiated two significant experimental programmes  within migrant communities. Migrant resource centres have been set up in  Sydney and Melbourne to see if we can get a more effective contact with  migrants and can get a better delivery of Government services to migrants.

I emphasise the programmes are experimental, but I believe they are well  worth while and I am sure we will learn much from them.

Our Housing Voucher· experiment scheme - that enables people eligible for  assistance to chc-cse their own housing - is another example of our concern  for individual freedom and choice. Throughout this year, the Government  will continue to apply this approach to individual liberty and to those

in need.  We will cor.rfr.ue to seek to enhance the potential of  Australians as people.

