From the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, the Hon. M.J.R. MacKellar, M.P.

6 November 1978 106/78

VIETNAMESE ABOARD THE "HI HONG"

"We now have the first clear indications that unscrupulous

people are attempting to profiteer in the present Indo-Chinese

refugee situation," the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic

Affairs, the Hon. M.J.R. MacKellar said today.

Mr MacKellar was commenting on reports that the motor vessel

"Hi Hong", now in Indonesian waters with some 2,000 Vietnamese on

board, was engaged in an attempted subterfuge.

The reports indicated that the "Hi Hong" had been acquired

recently by a group of businessmen from Hong Kong who, for a very

substantial per capita fee, had arranged a rendezvous with several

parties of Vietnamese. The reported circumstances of the rendezvous

strongly suggested an attempt to convey the impression that the

passengers were genuine refugees.

For some time, Australian officials had been paying close

attention to the circumstances under which Indo-Chinese claiming

to be refugees had left their home countries. This was the first

situation where there had been strong reason to doubt the bona fides

of a group. Australian officials were continuing to investigate

circumstances of the "Hi Hong" very carefully, Mr MacKellar said.

Mr MacKellar also drew attention to a recent statement by

Mr R. Sampatkumar, Regional Representative in Kuala Lumpur of the

Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.

Mr Sampatkumar indicated that UNHCR would be continuing to examine

the circumstances of the "Hi Hong". A copy of his statement is

attached.

2/

2

€

"Australia has played a major part in accepting many thousands

of genuine refugees but I give strong warning that we shall not

accept cases involving subterfuge. I include here situations where

people falsely represent themselves as refugees in order to gain

admission to Australia," Mr MacKellar said.

"Such ruses will make it more difficult for the large

numbers of genuine refugees from Indo-China to gain acceptance for

permanent resettlement elsewhere."

Mr MacKellar stressed that Australia would continue to play a

significant part in providing resettlement opportunities in genuine

cases.

STATEMENT BY MR R. 'SAMPATKUMAR, REGIONAL REPRESENTATIVE

OFFICE OF THE UNITED NATIONS HIGH COMMISSIONER FOR

REFUGEES/ KUALA LUMPUR. 3 NOVEMBER 1978

"A ship called "Hi Hong" ("Fong"), which departed

on 15 October is presently anchored off Siantan Island in

the South China Sea with over 2,000 Vietnamese. UNHCR

does not know what the exact itinerary of the ship was when

it left Singapore on 15 October nor how many passengers

went on board.

UNHCR will examine all available facts in order to

determine whether UNHCR intervention or assistance is

warranted.

In this connection I wish to point out that the

activities of unscrupulous elements would only jeopardise

offering of UNHCR assistance and working out durable

solutions in favour of genuine refugees. It is not clear

to me who the agents or the owners of the ship are.

Piecemeal information indicates that the ownership of the

ship had changed hands very recently and that present

registration of the ship is valid for a very short period

of time.

These factors, if proved correct, lead one to

question 1he motive of the owners, agents and the captain

of the ship concerned." :

