Ju AUSTRALIA.,^

PRIME MINISTER

FOR PRESS .  1 OCTOBER 1978

ELECTORATE TALK

Australians understand that unemployment - a problem which  concerns governments throughout the world - is complex and  not given to simple or instant solutions.

The Government has. made it plain that we regard unemployment  as one of the greatest social problems in Australia. Unemployment can and does cause disillusionment, frustration,  family anxieties and hardship. It's a cruel waste of  community resources - a waste Australia cannot afford.

Our concern about unemployment is more than words in Parliamentary  debate. It's more than images.  Long before the current debate,  the Government looked ahead and set a number of significant  actions in train.

In October 1976 we set up the Williams Inquiry into the  relationship between education and training and re-training  programmes. This wide-ranging inquiry - the first of its kind  for more than a decade - followed our concern to make sure

that our education system met the special needs of individuals  and the requirements of the labour market.

The results should be available shortly. It's a report that  should provide the basis for the States and the community to be  involved in its implementation.

More than a year ago, the Government initiated an inquiry under  the chairmanship of Sir John Crawford, to suggest ways in which  Australian industry might best adapt to structural change.

When that important report becomes available, it will merit the  closest study by governments, employers, unions and other groups . . .   in the community.

Just two years ago, the Government set up a separate Department,  of Productivity. We wanted to assist Australian industry  improve productivity and adapt to technological change.

Time and events have shown we acted with foresight.

That Department, under the active leadership of Ian Macphee, is  carrying out valuable work. It has been successful in

.. ./2

2

developing joint programmes involving management, unions and  State governments in finding ways to increase productivity -  particularly through new technology - in highly protected  industries.

Such close consultations are now underway in the footwear,  clothing, textiles, forging, tyre, tanning and whitegoods  industries.

In 1976, the Government also commissioned a detailed examination  of the Commonwealth Employment Service. That inquiry reported  late last year. We acted on the report to upgrade the C.E.S.  to make it a modern, efficient employment and counselling service.

The recent decision to establish a top-level Cabinet committee  under Tony Street's chairmanship to review thoroughly the  basis of industrial relations in Australia and their relationship  to employment is also closely related to this whole issue.

Is the Government meanwhile doing enough to alleviate the hard­ ship of unemployment while our other objectives fall into place?

The Government offers help to those who do not have jobs - and is  providing particular assistance to young unemployed. The N.E.A.T.  Scheme, the Special Youth Employment Training Programme, and  other programmes, are designed to do just this. The programmes

are adapted, changed and improved as we gain further experience  with them. .

More than 60,000 young people have already been helped by the  Special Youth Employment Training Programme since its introduction  in October 1976. There are another 40,000 people now in  training under the Scheme..

A further 45,000 young Australians have been helped under the  Community Youth Support Programme. Also, the Experimental  Programme for Unemployed Young People provides special remedial  education to those young people who have never had a fair go

in their lives.

These are on-going programmes - on-going commitments - that will  not be stifled by any lack of Government funds.

I have made it clear that in the months ahead the Government will  be virorously seeking to involve the community in the challenge  of unemployment. The Government cannot work alone. We cannot  act in isolation in tackling the problem. We need community

involvement, community co-operation. Government, unions, managemen  social welfare groups, education authorities - all have a part  to play.

That is one reason Mr Hamer1s initiative in calling a working  conference to discuss the whole question of change and unemployment  deserves strong support.

The Minister for Productivity, and officers of that Department,  will attend the conference. The Department - which has been

.. ./3

working with the States on these issues - has particular knowledge  and expertise and will certainly make a constructive contribution.  It's work has been on a region by region, industry by industry,  company by company basis.

Ian Macphee's Department will also be closely involved in the  Steering committee in establishing the programme and guidelines  for the conference.

The Government earnestly hopes that other States will follow  Mr Hamer's lead. .

There is no question that working groups discussions at a State  level, with Federal Government support, can help us get to the  heart of the unemployment problem.

Governments, unions, management and the community can learn  from each other - at first hand - and build a constructive climate  for debate and policy-making.

This kind of working conference is away from the Canberra  environment where temptation for political grandstanding often  seems irresistable to some participants. People come to Canberra  and leave the problem on the steps of Parliament House, and then

they depart. But this kind of conference can add greatly to a  national resolve to overcome the problem.

The Government's commitment to overcoming unemployment is  absolute. Our concern for the unemployed remains a high priority.  We will continue to demonstrate that concern by our complete  determination to keep on with the fight against inflation.

There is no doubt whatsoever, this unrelenting course is in  the best long-term interests of Australia. .

For this, is the only way which will restore basic economic  health and growth to our nation - a growth so necessary to  providing more jobs for Australians.

