->jx AUSTRALIA >

PRIME MINISTER

FOR PRESS 27 AUGUST lb)78

ELECTORATE TALK

The rank and file members of the Australian Telecommunications  Employees Association are on the eve of a momentus decision. It’s a decision that will touch their own lives, and the lives  of their families.  It is a decision that will affect every  Australian. It must be weighed with care, calm and reason.

The members of this union have a serious responsibility to  Australia. They work in an utterly vital service industry  which is at the heart of this nation's life.

Australia needs their skills.  There is no denying that. But the men must remember that they need their employer, Telecom, for their jobs and their security.

It is clear they are unlikely to find other jobs as well  paid - and as secure - for which they are specially trained  and qualified. y

This point about job security is important. I suspect the general  public is not aware that Telecom has given a cast-iron 10-year  guarantee to the union membership against any retrenchment  as a result of technological change. What other industry, what  other employer has achieved that for its own employees.

The issues in this dispute have been widely canvassed. The  central issue about loss of jobs through technological advance  is important. It is of concern to this union, every other  union - and to the Government.

Commissioner Clarkson recognized this point in his six-point  peace proposal that the union rejected. His proposal involved  independent assessment, trial period and full and proper

consultation with the union. I would have thought that was  a fair deal - something reasonable and worth discussing.

This weekend, Mr. Street called the National Labour Consultative  Council to inform them of the Government's concern and advise  them of the state of the telecommunications network in Australia.

The Government wanted to leave no doubt that if the men were to  decide to continue the ban then the Government would be  compelled to use whatever powers it has under the law.

Following this briefing by Mr. Street, the National Labour  Consultative Council unanimously decided that the parties  - the ATEA and Telecom - together with the other peak councils,  should enter into discussions in an attempt to resolve the

dispute using Commissioner Clarkson's six-point formula as a basis

.. ./2

2

The fact,that tnese discussions are continuing is a  hopeful sign. All Australians hope it will lead to the  men eventually being able to return to work.

What seems to have been forgotten in this particular dispute  is that we would not have a telecommunications industry at  all without the advance of technology.

The men would not have had their skilled and secure jobs  without technology - a technology that will lead to improved  services and lower costs to the consumer.

The argument that this union has with its employer has been  heard before Australia’s arbitration system. Regrettably,  the union's executive has turned its back on the umpires  decision.

Commissioner Clarkson has proposed three separate settlements  to this dispute. Telecom accepted each of these proposals  in principle. But the Union Executive has blocked every  attempt to negotiate a settlement. The Federal Executive  has thumbed its nose at Australia's long-standing system of

arbitration - it has thumbed its nose at the Australian people.

I have made the Government's position plain. We fully support  the decisions taken by Telecom, which has been reasonable in  a most difficult situation. Telecom has fully supported  Commissioner Clarkson's proposals for settlement. We fully  support Telecom's policy of no work, no pay.

Some 3,500 employees are already off pay because they have  refused to do the work they are paid for. The number will  inevitably increase significantly. Wages are now being lost  at the rate of $1.6 million a fortnight. So the hardship  on ATEA members alone is considerable and is bound to increase. That pay is lost for all time. It will not be made good as  part of the settlement.

The Government also' endorses the decision of Telecom to  commence deregistration proceedings against the union.

In a statement to Parliament on Thursday night, I said the  Commonwealth had a range of legal powers available to it if members  of the union do not accept their responsibility to the

community. That position remains.

It is now time for the rank and file membership to take stock. It is time for the men to look ahead, seriously, at the  consequences of a continuation of this ban. It is time for  the men to think of the families in isolated areas cut off from  the cities, from suppliers, from essential services.

What would happen if a Cyclone Tracey struck a northern outpost,  or a flood or fire swept through a tiny country town or  settlement? How would the innocent residents call for help? How could they mobilise forces to save life and stock?

.../3

* 3

It's time for the men to think ot Australians cut off from  police services, from hospitals, from doctors ... cut off  from help. It's time to face these consequences ... because  this is what faces Australia.

I have made the point before about the fair-mindedness and  commonsense of Australia's working men and women.  Now is the  time for the rank and file members of this union to  demonstrate those qualities.

I am sure the wives and families of the men understand that  the longer the dispute goes on the more wages will be lost,  and the more their personal and family position will be  prejudiced. The Government has no option but to stand firm  in this matter. We are completely resolute.

Whatever the harm, whatever the difficulty the continued  deterioration of communication services causes in Australia  - the ultimate harm in caving in to minority blackmail would  be much greater.

I look to the men voting on their Executive's decision to  think of their families, to think of their friends and  to think of all Australians. I call on them to allow the  process of arbitration to work.

- - 000- -

