' P A R L I A M E N T  O F  A U S T R A L I A

H O U S E  O F  R E P R E S E N T A T I V E S

P A R L I A M E N T  H O U S E

C A N B E R R A .  A C T .  2 6 0 0

TEL. 7 2  1211

STATEMENT BY TOM UREN MP, OPPOSITION SPOKESMAN FOR URBAN AND REGIONAL  DEVELOPMENT - July 9, 1979 .

The Prime Minister, Mr Fraser, and the Australian Government deserve  to be condemned for the continuation of a cruel and inhumane approach  to the Vietnamese people. .

Mr Fraser's present attitude is a continuation of the line he and  and the Government he was associated with from 1962-72, that  involved Australia diirectly in an attempt to intervene militarily to  force Vietnamese people into submission. '  _ _

The only sensible and humane response to the problems in Indo-China  is for the Western nations,especially those that contributed to  the problems during their involvement in the American war, to give  substantial economic aid to Vietnam, Kampuchea and Laos immediately.

Indo-China is an area of great human and political tragedy. There  are millions of people in the Indo-China region close to starvation.  There are thousands of people risking their lives in attempts to  leave the region to the great profit of intrenational racketeers. . And there is a dangerous escalation of conflict in the region between

the powerful forces of the United States of America , the Soviet  Union, China and Vietnam. Â·

We need to respond wisely and humanely to these problems. They are .   complex problems. They cannot be solved by simplistic hard-line  stances on the part of governments in the Western World. .

But we are seeing the Fraser Government adopt an inhumane and . dangerous attitude that will not help.the people who are suffering  but which will intensify problems in the whole region. .  .  ' ' '  '

We are seeing the:-twisted logic of those who were a part of military  aggression in Vietnam, now calling the Vietnamese Government Nazis>

The attitudes of the Fraser Government are not only .  .  insensitive and politically foolish, but they are also stirring up racism in  Australia. The basic cause of the suffering in Indo-China is the  effect of the heavy American bombing of Vietnam and Kampuchea, together  with the distortion of the societies of Indo-China brought on by the

occupation by American, Australian and other foreign military troops.

The bombing destroyed total towns and villages, rail systems, bridges  and dams. It ruined the food producing areas and caused massive  displacement of the population away from the rural areas into the  cities. .

Saigon was played up artificially both before and during the war  by large amounts of American aid, much of it in the form of  consumer goods that placed the standard of living in the city way  beyond that expected of a developing country and destroyed the

traditional culture.

;  .../2

2

Saigon consequently developed a large merchant class and a large  number of people most of Chinese descent, who lived off this  artificial affluence.  These people now make up the bulk of those  leaving the country.  .

At the end of the war it was predicted by the Americans and some  in Australia that there would be a 'blood-bath'  in Vietnam. .  There  was no blood-bath. But the Saigon business community was reluctant  to enter into productive work for Vietnam's reconstruction and

in some cases set out to sabotage it.

We cannot ignore these effects. To forget that there were hundreds  and thousands, of people in Saigon alone left with venereal disease  and that there was massive over-crowding in the post-war capital  which created immense pressures is to put one's head in the sand.

The ability of the Vietnamese Government to reconstruct*the economy  and reunite the society was seriously undermined by several factors.   After the war, American aid was totally cut off. Vietnam was  excluded from the international finance and trade systems. No

recompense was made by the United States for the damage caused.

The severe floods in 1977, together with the long term effect of  defoliation and. toxic chemical pollution caused by the bombing  prevented an adequatd food supply. The continuing conflict on the  border with Kampuchea disrupted attempts to develop the resources

of the Mekong river, which even Western nations acknowledge as  crucial to Vietnam’s survival.

No-one can condone one country for invading another. But the threat  posed to Vietnam's reconstruction and independence by the continuing  conflicts on the Kampuchean border was a major one. And we cannot  discount that while Vietnam sought to negotiate a settlement on a .  /   number of occasions, the Western Powers were passive. .  ,

We now need to recognise that the war against the Pol Pot regime in  Kampuchea and the subsequent occupation by Vietnam, together with  the military defence required against the Chinese in the north, meant  'that a large number of personnel deployed in reconstruction work .

were diverted to defence activity. .

The situation on the border between Kampuchea and Thailand now looks  serious.  Yet we can see no evidence of attempts by the Western  Powers to negotiate a settlement there. Rather, some Western powers  are willing to inflame that situation.

We see no preparedness on the part of the Western powers who were  responsible for the present suffering to accept their responsibilities -   and come to the aid of the Indo-Chinese people. Rather, the Western  powers are continuing to isolate Vitenam and to cut off their

assistance that is essential to resolve the problems of starvation  and the problems of the boat people.

The call by Mr Fraser to isolate Vietnam even more can only lead to  a worsening of the problems in Indo-China. Even those who are  politically opposed to the Vietnamese Government should see that the  problems require a humanitarian response.

Unless substantial, immediate aid is given to Vietnam, Kampuchea  and Laos large-scale starvation will occur.

CANBERRA 9 July 1979

