Mo. M 5l Date 3 J u ly  1979 THE HON. ANDREW PEACOCK M.P.

ASEAN/AUSTRALIA TALKS

The following are the opening remarks by the  Minister for Foreign Affairs,  Mr Andrew Peacock,  at the  ASEAN/Australia meeting in Bali on 3 July 1.979 s

I would first like to thank Professor Mochtar  for his words of welcome in his opening remarks, 1 am most  appreciative of your joint invitation to attend this meeting  with the Foreign Ministers of ASEAN. I would like to make

some general and preliminary observations .on matters which  I think are of relevance to us.

Let me start by reiterating Australia's whole­ hearted support for ASEAN which Australians see as an out­ standing example of the strength and stability that can be  achieved through regional cooperation. Close cooperation  with ASEAN is, has been and will continue to be at the core  of Australia's foreign policy. We have strong mutual interests

in working together to promote the peaceful progress and  development of the region.

The most obvious problem which we face together  at the moment is that of Indo-Chinese refugees. It is a  political problem, an economic problem and above all a  human problem. It is clear that Australia is in a different  position from most of the other countries with whom you are .   meeting, beqause we are also part of the region and we can

no more sail away from it than you can.

I was therefore, greatly heartened to note the  solidarity and resolve of ASEAN in the face of a potentially  disruptive situation.

We are all concerned about the fate of the refugees  as human beings. They are the innocent victims of a deliberate  policy by Vietnam of exparting its domestic problems with  a cynical disregard of the effect on its neighbours, international

standards of behaviour and the basic rights of its own citizens.

. . . / 2

We have all done and will continue to do our utmost to help  these people = You are all aware that Australia has taken,   on a proportional basis, the highest number of resettlement  cases of any country. We will continue to set targets which  we will, as in the past,  fill or exceed.

But our concern for the immediate .needs of these  people must not blind us to the cause of the problem. It  is no use just dealing with the symptoms. Australia agrees  with ASEAN that we must also tackle ihe problem at its source

and make clear.to Vietnam in the strongest terms our concern  and resentment at its failure to live up to its responsibilities.  We must maintain pressure on the Government of Vietnam to  carry out its obligations to its citizens and we must do all  we can to encourage countries such as the Soviet Union which  have influence with Vietnam to persuade Vietnam to halt the

callous export of innocent Vietnamese.

In this context,  I would like to support the ASEAN  Foreign Ministers' call that Vietnam take prompt and effective  measures to halt the disorderly exodus of refugees .at its  source. While I hope that the ASEAN countries will continue

to exercise compassion in helping the refugees I also understand  and support the ASEAN Foreign Ministers1  request to the inter­ national community to use its influence on Vietnam and to  intensify its efforts to aid refugee relief and resettlement,   thus helping to relieve the burden upon the ASEAN countries  of first asyliim. I agree also with their positive approach

to the forthcoming international conference on Indo-Chinese  refugees.

2 .

While the plight of Vietnamese refugees is obvious,   we must not forget the problems being faced by Thailand in  dealing with refugees from Kampuchea. The aggression against  that country has caused many problems and I would like to

endorse the ASEAN Foreign Ministers' demands for the withdrawal  of foreign forces from Kampuchea and their support for Kampuchea's  right to self-determination and continued existence free from  interference, subversion or coercion. .

Because of their obvious importance these are . . . .   the main topics that we will consider this morning. Nevertheless,  I hope that we will also have some time to discuss generally  the steady and positive progress in ·relations between ASEAN  and Australia. :

In conclusion let me express my most sincere  thanks to Professor Mochtar and through him to the Indonesian  Government for the arrangements made for our meeting in these  delightful surroundings. In so doing, I wish to underline  my personal pleasure at being here and the importance my

Government attaches to the consultations here today.

