MINISTER FOR EMPLOYMENT  AND YOUTH AFFAIRS

The Hon. Ian Viner, MP

99/79

YOUTHLINE OUTSTANDING SUCCESS

The Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs, Mr Ian Viner, said today the National  Youthline Phone-in yesterday had been an outstanding success.

Mr Viner said that more than 1000 young people had called Youthiine in Canberra from  all over Australia during the day to express their interest in attending the first National  Youth Conference to be held in Canberra from 3-5 October.

Mr Viner said the bank of seven telephones installed for the day had run hot between  10.00 am and 10.00 pm.

"The quality of the young people who called was extremely high and selection of the 40  successful delegates will be very difficult," Mr Viner said.

"The wide range of subjects callers wanted to discuss give an indication of what can be  expected at the Conference, and underline its importance as a means of young Australians  expressing their views in a public forum." Mr Viner added.

Some of the issues raised included:

. Unemployment —  need for long term solutions —  work co-operative —  alternative work programs — current job and apprenticeship situation

. Education —  relationship between educational qualifications and the employment market —  lack of accurate career information —  need to reorganise school syllabus —  problems of school to work transition . —  tertiary allowances

. Rights and responsibilities of youth .

. Rural youth

. Aboriginal rights, land

. Drugs

. Suburbia and leisure, recreation problems

. Future of Australia

. Poverty

. Minority groups —  handicapped, homosexuals

. Immigration and refugees

. Racism

2

. Energy crisis, uranium

. Health funds

. Taxation

Mr Viner said the greatest number of calls had come from Queensland (24%). Other callers  came from: NSW 21.5%; South Australia 19%; Western Australia 12.7%; Victoria 10.3%;  ACT 6.2%; Tasmania 5%; NT 1.3%.

The Minister apologised to callers who had been unable to get through but urged them to  follow the proceedings of the Conference next month.

He said one caller from Perth had been unable to get through so had sent a telegram  requesting Youthline to call him. They had.

CANBERRA

6 September 1979

