24/80

FROM THE COMMONWEALTH MINISTER FOR HEALTH  THE HON. M. J. R. MACKELLAR

GRANTS FOR HEALTH SERVICES RESEARCH AND  DEVELOPMENT

Grants totalling $146 516 were announced today by the

Minister for Health, the Hon. Michael MacKellar, for research

and development into health services in Australia.

efficiency and effectiveness of health care systems,  and for the

development and demonstration of improved health services.

Projects to be funded include:

. $62 580 to Mrs D. Sargeant of the Social Biology

Resources Centre, Carlton, for an evaluation of a

pilot service which aims to improve human relation­

ships for the disabled and increase their autonomy.

. $23 545 to Dr D. Christie, of the Department of

Community Medicine at the University of Melbourne,

for the first year of a three-year study to assess

the effect of individualised counselling and support

given to patients suffering from the effects of stroke.

. $15 250 to Dr G. Olsen, of the New England Region of

the Health Commission of N.S.W., to evaluate a

training program for the management and care of

collapse victims requiring resuscitation.

. $11 800 to Dr J.G. Andrews, of the Prince Henry

Hospital, to complete a four-year study of the

effectiveness of problem oriented brief psychotherapy

for emotional disorders in patients presenting in

general practice.

. $9 246 to Dr R.G. Robinson and Dr G.D. Champion, at .

the Royal North Shore Hospital, to test the feasibility

of a major study of low back pain in the metropolitan

area of Sydney.

The grants are available for research into the

A full list of the grant awards is attached.

HEALTH SERVICE RESEARCH STUDIES

Assessment of the efficiency and effectiveness

of obstetric services, Dr A.I. Connon, '

University of Adelaide $2 500

Epilepsy within the Australian community,

Dr R. Reran, University of New South Wales $2 190

Future psychiatric manpower needs for Australia,

Professor P.W. Burvill, Royal Australian and

New Zealand College of Psychiatrists $3 405

Mental health of Indo-Chinese refugees,

Dr G. Burrows, University of Melbourne $6 000

Suffering disability and costs due to low

back pain, Dr R.G. Robinson and Dr G.D. Champion,

Royal North Shore Hospital .  $9 246

HEALTH SERVICE DEVELOPMENT PROJECTS

New management of emotional disorders in patients

presenting in general practice, Dr J.G. Andrews,

Prince Henry Hospital

Operation FRIEND - community C.P.R. training

program, Dr G. Olsen, Health Commission of

N.S.W.

Develop and evaluate methods of health promotion

in the work place, Dr R.M. Lazarus and

Dr M.S. Garvan, Collingwood Community

Health Centre

Secondary prevention in stroke :  A trial of the

effectiveness of a social worker.support

service, Dr D. Christie, University of

Melbourne

Study of human relationships and a counselling

service for disabled persons and those

responsible for their care, Mrs D. Sargeant,

Social Biology Resources Centre, Carlton

$11 800

$15 250

$5 000

$23 545

$62 580

2.

Care and support for mentally retarded people

by the local community, Ms E. Zoppa, South

Australian Health Commission

CANBERRA: 8 April 1980

$5 000

S .

