From the Department of Immigration  and Ethnic Affairs

THE HON. IAN MACPHEE,  M.P.

, 780/^3 30 July 1980

MIGRANT PROJECT SUBSIDY TO RED CROSS

The Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs,

Mr Ian Macphee,  today handed over a cheque for $5 000 to

NSW Division of the Australian Red Cross Society.

The money will be used to extend and consolidate the

information and orientation sessions available from migrants

in the Fairfield area of Sydney's western suburbs.

"The grant provides another example of the worthwhile

services that can be extended through the Migrant Project

Subsidy Scheme," Mr Macphee said. 5

I

"This grant will help migrants and refugees to settle

more successfully in their new country and eventually become

active members of the Australian community",  he said.

Fairfield had one of the highest concentrations of

migrants in Australia, Mr Macphee said. The Red Cross was already

doing valuable work in an area,  which included the Westbridge,

Cabramatta and East Hills Migrant Centres.

The Red Cross would work in conjunction with South East

Asian Community Assistance (SEACA) and.Fairfield municipality

to provide information sessions on a range of topics, including

family planning, tenants' rights, social security, employment

and social security.

The program would emphasise help for migrant women

who were particularly disadvantaged and who were experiencing

difficulties in adjusting to a new social environment.

2/...

2

Mr Macphee said SEACA had received a similar grant

earlier this year under the Migrant Project Subsidy Scheme,

a program to assist ethnic and other voluntary organisations

with migrant welfare or welfare-related projects. The Scheme

was one of the initiatives the Government had taken after accepting

the recommendations of the Galbally Report..

"This is the third year of operation of the Migrant

Project Subsidy Scheme,  Mr Macphee said. "During the last

two years,  $300 000 has already been committed, and a further

$150 000 is expected to be granted this financial year."

Media contacts:  Anna Marsden-Stewart,  Department of Immigration

and Ethnic Affairs 062.64 2726 or Rob Palfreyman,

Minister's Office 062 73 3446. '

