From the Minister for Immigration  and Ethnic Affairs. HON IAN MACPHEE,  MP -

23/80

MOUNT ST CANICE TO BECOME MIGRANT CENTRE

Part of Mount St Canice Convent at Sandy Bay, Hobart would be leased to  accommodate about sixty Indo-Chinese refugees, the Minister for Immigration  and Ethnic Affairs, Mr Macphee, said today.

This followed an approach to the Prime Minister some time ago by the then  Premier of Tasmania to provide assistance in developing the State's  population, including the settlement of refugees, he said.

Commonwealth Accommodation and Catering Services Limited would manage the  centre and Miss Elizabeth Fry, a British migrant, had been appointed  manageress. Sister. Marcelena Garcia, a Portuguese migrant who speaks  Chinese, would combine the roles of welfare officer and nursing sister.

The first refugees would not arrive at the centre until all arrangements  had been completed. This could take some months.

"The signing of the lease for the use of the Convent had been delayed by  some technical problems but these have now been resolved."

He added that the new migrant centre would be the only one of its kind  designed for self-catering. There would be four kitchen units which '   the refugees would use to cook their own meals from provisions supplied  by the centre. .

Mr Macphee said: "Similar refugee resettlement programs are being arranged  in other States. The results of those lead me to feel that the Tasmanian  project will prove rewarding for those members of Tasmania's society who  are able to form friendships with the refugees as well as being extremely  beneficial to the refugees themselves. I am delighted to know that so  many Australians wish to involve themselves in so many humanitarian ways

in the refugee resettlement program."

"The Indo-Chinese refugees have adjusted extremely well in Australia and  are quickly establishing themselves as energetic, creative and popular  members of the Australian community. They are welcomed by other members of  that community both at work and in leisure activities. Those members of

the wider Australian community who mix with them have found that contact  with Indo-Chinese cultures is enriching and the assistance which may be  rendered in individual circumstances provides pleasure for all concerned."

U, March 1980

Contacts: Don Lawler, Department of Immigration & Ethnic Affairs 64 2726 Rob Palfreyman, Minister's Office 73 3446

