PRESS RELEASE:

FROM: CHRIS HURFORD,  SHADOW MINISTER FOR INDUSTRY & COMMERCE

LEADERSHIP STYLE

"The need to heal a divided nation and to achieve more of a partnership  approach to our problems is an important issue with concerned Australians  at.this election.

Mr Chris Hurford made the statement today during a visit to the towns '   of Cooma,  Jindabyne and Queanbeyan with the ALP:candidate for Eden-Monaro,  Mr Jim Snow.

"Not only are we suffering an unsuccessful government in terms of higher  unemployment,  inflation, interest rates and taxes. We are also suffering  a leadership style which worsens the hate and cynicism in our society  through its arrogance and lack of sympathy.

"Part of the reason for the hate,  division and a resort to personal abuse  is the lack of compassion. Today is Social Justice Sunday for hundreds of  thousands of Australians. We should contemplate the past five years of  declining standards of welfare for those in due need.

"For instance,  the Catholic Commission for Justice and Peace,  in its  challenge last week to the leaders of political parties,  drew attention  to 'nearly two million poor in Australia today among the aged, single  parent families,  sick, handicapped, Aborigines,  migrants and refugees.1

"We need leaders who are in touch with the needs of ordinary Australians. We need a party in Government which is made up of people from a wide range  of backgrounds and whose leader has the capacity to weld a team together.

"Labor is such a Party and in Bill Hayden we have a leader who has achieved  the greatest unity since Ben Chifley.

"The characteristics of Bill Hayden's Party leadership have been teamwork,  unity, humour and a distinct lack of drama.  These are great characteristics  for the leadership of Australia at the present time.

"I believe that most Australians recognise that a middle of the road Labor  Government would administer our country with more compassion. Under  Hayden and with such people in the team as Lionel Bowen,  Ralph Willis, Paul Keating, Bob Hawke and Mick Young we also offer economic

responsibility. .

"The bitterness of November 1975 remains with us. So do such scandals  as the Robinson, Withers, Sinclair, Lynch,  Garland and other affairs. Let's have a change of style to tackle our grave problems.

September 28

