From the Minister for Immigration  and Ethnic Affairs.

THE HON IAN MACPHEE,  M.P.

.  /81\25Î´ Sydney 10 April

COMMUNITY SETTLEMENT AND EDUCATION CENTRE FOR FAIRFIELD

A new Community Education and Settlement Centre would

begin operating in Fairfield in August·.1  this year, the

Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, Mr Ian '

Macphee* said today,

Mr Macphee said that premises had been leased for the

new centre at 5 Barbara Street, Fairfield.

"The centre is one of a number being established by the

Commonwealth Government in metropolitan Sydney," he said.

"Work has started on a new centre at Belmore and facilities

are being upgraded and expanded at Blackfriars in

Chippendale and the main Adult Education Centre at Caltex

House, in the city", .

The new centre at Fairfield would provide English

language classes and orientation sessions for new arrivals

who moved directly into the Australian community, as well

as a range of on-going English classes for earlier

arrivals and for those who had recently moved into the

community from migrant centres, he said.

"A settlement officer will be permanently located at the

centre," Mr Macphee said.

"There will be facilities for welfare assistance and

individual counselling on a sessional basis,"

"A range of information, both printed and audio-visual,

will be provided in a variety of languages."

2 /...

2

Mr Macphee said the centre would complement the services

provided in the area by other Government departments,

voluntary bodies and the Fairfield City Council. It

was close to the centre of Fairfield, and easy for

residents to get to.

"The Commonwealth has provided over $28 million this

financial year for English language opportunities

throughout Australia," Mr Macphee said.

"This centre represents another step in the development

of opportunities for adult migrants and refugees to

learn English and to learn about living in Australia.

Media contacts :  Anna Marsden-Stewart,  Department of

.  Immigration and Ethnic Affairs 062 64 2726 or

Anne Simson,  Minister's Office 062 3446.

#

