ions regarding the Italian  community starting from newsÂ­ paper articles to the WoodÂ­ ward Report.

The Editorial in II Globo exÂ­ presses in no uncertain terms  the feeling of most Aus- .   tralians from an Italian  background. "Either Mr SilvÂ­

ester puts up some evidence  or he should shut up".

Somehow I have the feeling  that we haven’t heard the  last of it.

The. "Gneek Con&pvuxtote" As you might know, Mr Lanigan  the former Director General  of the Dep. of Soc. Security  has retired a fortnight ago  with a generous superannuation.  He is in private legal practÂ­

ice in Sydney. It was Mr  Lanigan that ordered the  cancellation of 580 pensions  to Australians from a Greek  background, including 138

pensioners living in Greece.

Mr Thomas, the Commonwealth  Police officer who ordered  the "Starsky and Hutch" style  arrest of 183 Greek invalid  pensioners has also retired

in January this year on grounÂ­ ds of invalidity. Like LanÂ­ igan, Mr Thomas also will be  in a private legal practice.

Whether or not Mr Thomas will  pass the same invalidity  tests required by the Greek

pensioners is not known. But,  one thing is for sure there

will be few Greeks asking for  Mr Thomas to defend them in  court.

Re.&ageeA Xn Canada In 1979 and 1980, over 7,000  Canadian organisations and  groups participated in the  refugee sponsorship program  which enabled Canada to accÂ­

ept some 60,000 Indochinese  refugees, of whom more than  half were privately sponÂ­ sored.

Privately sponsored refugees  in Canada are admitted over  and above the Federal GovernÂ­ ment's annual refugee plan.

The Federal Government's refÂ­ ugee plan for 1981 calls for  the acceptance of 16,000  government assisted refugees,  compared with 10,000 in 1979  and 15,000 in 1980.

It is planned that in 1981  some 8,000 refugees will be  from Indochina, 4,000 from  Eastern Europe, 1,000 from  Latin America, 200 from AfÂ­

rica, 300 from other areas,  and a contingency reserve of  2,500 which in past years  was filled by Cuban, East

European and Haitian refÂ­ ugees. As a comparison Australia  in 1979/80 has taken 19922

refugees.  Of those 15224  were from Asia, 23 from  South Africa, 65 from the  Middle East and some 4500

from East European countries.

4.

’IN OTHER W O R D S ’ From. MICK YOUNG Â» .

No 3., 11-16 May 1981.

Editorial

The infamous background briefing made by  the Prime Minister of Australia to selÂ­ ected journalists on Tuesday night last  was, I believe, an error on his part of

such magnitude that he can now be looked  upon as a Prime Minister living on borrÂ­ owed time. He will not lead the GovernÂ­ ment into the 1983 elections. Much of  the debate during the week has tended to submerge the imÂ­ portance of the event. It was not that the Commonwealth had  saved monies from the States after 10 hours of negotiation  at the Premiers' Conference, the point is that the Prime  Minister, irrespective of all his past misdemeanors now canÂ­ not be trusted in his dealings with his colleagues in the  Liberal Party, (for example, the Peacock affair) nor can he  be trusted in his dealings with the States.

His continued attempt to manipulate the press by selected  press conferences and his off-the-record briefings so that  he appears in the press the following day, not as the Prime  Minister, but as some hidden, devious, senior Government

spokesman, has made his position quite untenable.

.  The whole episode illustrates what a sham all this talk about  Liberal Party philosophy has been. Surrounding himself with

For information contact Emanuel Klein, Parliament House,   Canberra, 2600. Tel (062) 72-7463 / 72-6751 / 88-4136 (H)

academics and speech writers, the Prime Minister has emÂ­ braced their guidance in the use of the term philosophy,  like a frenzied schoolboy. But the shabby, behind-the-  scenes off-the-record briefings, could not in all genÂ­ erosity be described as a philosophy, more a bungled  use of power with which this Prime Minister has lived with  very dangerously for the past 5h years. It now, in my

opinion, has ultimately destroyed him within his Party  and certainly within the electorate.

A A A A

Apology I would like to apologise for  the Polish spelling errors  in our last issue - Strezl-

ecki, Kosciusko.

Raped re^ugeeA.

The demonstrations against  rape in war ,so misrepresÂ­ ented in our daily press ,   should also serve to reÂ­ mind us that approximately

40% of the women among the  Vietnamese refugees are subÂ­ ject to rape before they  reach the camps.

Only kmtrallan aitlzenl  eligible to vote.

I am happy to see that the  Minister for Immigration and  Ethnic Affairs, Mr Macphee,  like in the case of the trans  Tasman-travel, has embraced

a Labor initiative. From the 1.1.1982 only AusÂ­ tralian citizens will be  eligible to vote at the FedÂ­ eral elections. Which in

effect means that all "BritÂ­ ish subjects" arriving in  Australia after that date

will have to wait for 3  years - like all other immÂ­ igrants - before applying  for Australian citizenship  and the right to vote. The existing rights of peopÂ­

le already in Australia will  be maintained. Perhaps it's worth mentionÂ­ ing that although the largÂ­

est number of immigrants in  Australia is from the CommÂ­ onwealth countries, the lowÂ­ est rate of naturalisation

is found amongst immigrants  from Britain and New Zealand.  At a time when the faith of  major political parties can  be decided on a "swing" of  1% it is important that  those decisions be made by  Australian citizens with a  long term commitment to  this country and not by temÂ­ porary residents or tourists.

The Channel 0 4>aga There are persistent rumÂ­ ors that the present head

of Channel 0, Mr Bruce

2

Gyngell will not renew his  contract with the Special  Broadcasting Service. The  reason is that he is not earnÂ­ ing enough. According to the  same well informed sources  Mr Gyngell is very interested

in the job of Mr Sklowsky,  the present Chairman of S.B.  S., whose term of contract  will not be renewed.

But Mr Gyngell is not the  only one that's interested  in the job of the Chairman. A  close runner in the race is  Mr Galbally (remember the

Galbally Report?).

Given that Mr Gyngell and Mr  Galbally are good friends Mr  Gyngell is prepared to step  aisde if he is retained as an

"Executive Consultant" to the  S.B.S. That could give both  of them effective control of  the whole S.B.S. (radio inclÂ­ uded) and a budget of $30 milÂ­ lion.

truly reflect multiculturalism.  Designed by an Italian, living  in America and built in AusÂ­ tralia with Greek contractors

and Yugoslav tradesmen.

The "Capo del Capl" S ilver ten.

The Italian community is furÂ­ ious with the new Chief of  the Australian Bureau of CrimÂ­ inal Intelligence, Mr Fred  Silvester who stated that he  has a 2000 page file on profÂ­

essionals and businessmen of  Italian origin living in MelbÂ­ ourne and that the "Mafia" uses  "slaves" on Victorian and NSW  marihuana plantations.

The largest ethnic newspaper  in Australia "II Globo" sees  more than a simple coincidence  in the fact that the "story"  was broken by a certain Mr  John Silvester, a journalist  with the "Sun" who just happens

to be the son of Mr Fred SilÂ­ vester.

The Mew Parliament Home -  work o^ an Italian.

Not many people know, but the  person who actually designed  the new Parliament House was  an Italian now living in AmÂ­ erica. Indeed the architect  representing the American

firm and supervising the  work on the sight is also an  Italian. He will be in AusÂ­ tralia for the next two years.

As someone pointed out the  new Parliament House will

Apparently Mr Silvester's  allegations were also reported  in the "Herald" under the headÂ­ line 'The Growing Menace of the  Mafia1 2 .  They are based on the

Cusack Report commissioned in  1964 following the shooting in  the Victorian markets. AlthÂ­ ough that Report was never  accepted by the Victorian GovÂ­ ernment: and although it is a  libelous plagiarism of the  American "scene" applied to  Australia it continued to be

the basis of all investigat-3.

