PRIME MINISTER

FOR MEDIA TUESDAY, 15 DECEMBER, 19 81

POLAND

Cabinet today discussed recent developments., in Poland and  received a briefing from the Minister for Foreign Affairs, .   the Hon. Tony Street, M.P., on his recent visit to Warsaw.

The Prime Minister said that Cabinet was seriously concerned  at developments in Poland and the possible implications of  them, both within Poland and internationally. It was difficult  to obtain a clear picture of the situation because of the clamp  down on communications within Poland and from Poland to the

outside world. As a result, the Government believes that it is  too early to reach any hard assessment of the situation but  will continue to keep the issues under very close consideration.  "Certainly the Government remains convinced of the need for the

Polish people themselves to resolve their own problems without  outside interference or coercion", the Prime Minister said. No  country should presume to interfere in Poland's affairs at  this or aby other time.

The Prime Minister said that the Polish crisis, which had  developed since August 1980, continued to have the most serious  implications for international stability. The imposition of  martial law at the weekend by the Polish leadership would seem

to represent a serious new phase in the crisis.

Australia, with many other countries, sincerely hoped that these  extreme and repressive measures would soon end and that they  would not lead to the reversal of the main elements of reform  which had been achieved in Poland in the past 17 months.  In

these respects the Government noted the undertakings of the  Polish Leader, General Jaruzelski, undertakings which have  also been conveyed formally by the Polish Government to the  Australian Embassy in Warsaw. The Government also warned that

if martial law led to violence r it would arouse the indignation of  the international community and do much to negate the widespread  sympathy and appreciation of Poland's- political and economic  difficulties. The Prime Minister urged that there be an early  return to civil and trade union liberties and expressed the wish  that current developments should not impede the spirit of  conciliation and compromise which had hitherto characterised

the efforts of the Polish people to find their own solution to  their difficulties.

-  2

In regard to the Polish Government's request for further  Australian economic support which was made to the Minister  for Foreign Affairs in Warsaw, Cabinet decided that until  the situation in Poland was clearer, it could not take any

decisions on this request.

Nonetheless, Cabinet was mindful of the close interrelationship  between economic recovery and the achievement of political  stability through conciliation and consensus.

A further matter considered by the Government was the question  of Polish refugees and in this regard the Minister for Immigration  and Ethnic Affairs and the Minister for Foreign Affairs will  keep under review the implications of current developments in  Poland for Australia's policy towards Polish immigration and  refugee movement. The Government is aware of and sympathises  with the concerns of the Polish community in Australia over

the well-being of friends and relations in Poland at this -   difficult time. The Government will also engage in  consultations with other Governments and particularly those of  Canada and the United States on Polish refugee questions.

-------- 000 - —

1

