No. MSG Date 6 July 1982 THE HON. TONY STREET. M.

LEBANON

The Minister for Foreign Affairs,  the Hon. Tony Street MP,  expressed grave apprehension today about the situation in  Lebanon, and in particular his concern that the parties

involved should avoid an increase of violence in Beirut. He said that the immediate concern of the world community  must be to alleviate suffering and prevent further  hostilities.

The Minister said that the Australian Government had endorsed  Security Council Resolutions 508 and 509 (calling for a  ceasefire and the withdrawal of Israeli forces) and 512  (calling for humanitarian assistance).  He noted and commended  on behalf of the Government the latest Security Council  Resolution, adopted unanimously on 4 July, which called for  respect for the rights of Lebanon's civilian population,  repudiated all acts of violence against them, and called for  the restoration of vital facilities such as water,  electricity and medical services to Beirut.

Mr Street called on all parties involved to ensure that  relief assistance rapidly reached those in need. He said  that the situation on the ground made it difficult to be  certain about the precise extent of the damage in Lebanon.

It was still not clear how many displaced persons -and  refugees there were, or how much relief and reconstruction  assistance was required. The Minister welcomed the despatch  by the UN Secretary General of a UN Evaluation Mission to

Lebanon and hoped that the Mission would be able to provide  an early and comprehensive assessment of the situation. The Minister noted that Australia had announced contributions  totalling A $1.65 million to appeals for help for Lebanon.

The Minister said that all parties in Lebanon would have to  exercise restraint in Order to preserve the present ceasefire,  and urged all parties to continue their efforts to reach a  satisfactory resolution to the conflict. The Minister said  that the Australian Government strongly supported the aim of  the Government of Lebanon to restore its sovereignty over its  territory.

