ir~

Address by Bill Hayden, M.P., Leader of the Opposition  to a Parliamentary Luncheon in honour of His Excellency  President Karamaniis of the Hellenic Republic ______

10 March 1982

Your Excellencies, Prime Minister, Fellow Members of  Parliament, Ladies and Gentlemen:

The first visit to Australia of the Head of State of  Greece has a very special significance to us.

There are many reasons for this significance ..... We are all mindful of the contribution that succeeding  waves of Greek immigrants have made to the development  of this country; of the glorious heritage that Greek

civilization has given to mankind; and of the deep  affection which we feel for a country that has never  flinched from, the struggle against oppression,  whether imposed from outside or inside.

But the greatest significance for us is that in  President Karamaniis we have with us such a distinguished  statesman who has in his own life-time struggled against  tyranny, prised open the gates of democratic freedoms and  crafted a new Constitution for a nation that never fails  to inspire.

I mentioned that successive waves of Greek migrants  have made an invaluable contribution,to this country.

The first Greeks landed in this country in 1829.

It is often unkindly said about many of our early  settlers that they left their country for their  country's good, for they came as unfree men and women.

But they remained as free men and women to help build  a new world.

Over the years large numbers of Greeks joined that huge  flow of people from the old world to Australia Which  has transformed the face of this nation making it a new  Australia. Without that flow of people from the non-

British world, Australia would not only have a much smaller  population than now —  it would be the poorer in its  national spirit. For the arrival" of a wide variety of  cultures broke down much of the insularity and lack of

tolerance which was natural to an isolated continent  inhabited by a small and ethnically homogeneous population.

../2

2 .

There are now in Australia something like half a  million Australians of Greek ancestry. Their  contribution as workers, as families, as artists,   has enriched the life of this country.

The traditional Greek enthusiasm and passionate  involvement in politics has characterised those Greeks  who come to Australia. We now have four members of the  Australian national Parliament of Greek descent, all  of them, I might add, from the Apstralian Labor Party. Each of them has made a special contribution to our Party,

and to our Parliament, and through our Parliament, to  the nation..

There are other links, of course. Forty years ago, during the great conflict against Nazism, 17,000 Australian troops fought on mainland Greece, and in Crete, alongside their Greek brothers. Today more

than 600 Australians lie in Greek war cemeteries. These are  bonds which we should never forget. They are bonds which give a special quality to the relationship between our two countries.

But there is an even greater significance to your visit,  a significance which extends not just to Australians of  Greek ancestry but to all Australians. For it is a  reminder to us of something that we, 12,000 miles from  your country, can often forget, that is, the enduring

impact of Greece on Western civilization.

Along with Egypt, India and China, Greek civilization  is counted not in centuries but in millennia. The world  has drawn from Greece the great ideal of the democratic  state encapsulated in the golden age of Athens. Just  as important however, has been the wider influence of the  men of Ancient Greece. They laid the foundations of  Western philosophy, science, geography and medicine.

Their influence has come to us through Roman civilization  and continued on throughout the Medieval period in the  work of St Augustine, St Thomas Aquinas, and others.

The Italian Renaissance, whose cultural thinking, in the  widest sense of that word, spread its influence throughout  Europe, was deeply imbued with the spirit of -Hellenism.

What so dazzled the men of the Renaissance about the  Ancient Greeks was their sheer originality, their  energy and their underlying belief in the force and  power of the human intellect.

In these difficult times, when we seem to be beset by  daunting economic and social problems, it is salutary  to be reminded of that ancient confidence.

.. ./3

3 .

Your presence also reminds us that a steadfast  adherence to ideals such as these can overcome  implacable odds.

The last eight years have seen Greece return to a stable,  prosperous democracy in which human rights are respected  and about which there is an air of confidence and vigour.

You, Mr President, have given this re-emergence of  Greece direction and shape, since your return to Greece  in 1974 after the ignominious collapse of a failed and  brutal military regime.

The hopes of the huge crowd which greeted you on that  memorable day in 1974 have been fulfilled. You are one  of the few political leaders who can justifiably claim  to have left an enduring imprint on the history of their  nation in their own time.

We rejoice in your achievement and in that of your  countrymen and women.

It is of course a great matter of melancholy for us to  observe the continued difficulties in relation to the  Republic of Cyprus, and the fact that part of this

territory is still occupied by foreign forces.

That we deplore.

It is my belief that there should be demonstrated respect  for the.human rights of all Cypriots, and the institution  of urgent measures for the voluntary return of refugees  to their homes in safety. In that respect General Assembly  Resolution Net 33/15 should be fully implemented.

But let me move on ....

We saw late last year the democratic process work smoothly  in the election of a new Government under Prime Minister  Andreas Papandreou. We are following his progress with the  greatest of interest. Like the Australian Labor Party, his  party is a democratic socialist party. We are especially

interested in his efforts to continue your work of carving  out a view of the world which is distinctly Greek. The  efforts of your Government in seeking a more independent  stance within N.A.T.O. and in its relations with the  United States has a special relevance to Australia with

its long-standing alliance with that great country. .  I Â·

We are also watching with interest developing Greek  relations with the European Economic Community, which  itself is under some internal strain. Australia, like  Greece, has had an uneven relationship with the European

Community over the years and the progress you make in  defining your relationship with that powerful bloc will  have lessons for us.

Mr President and Mr Foreign Minister, we welcome your  presence. We express our delight at the new Greece which  is emerging from the difficult post-war years, and we  hope that your time in Australia is as stimulating to you  as your visit is to us.

* * * * * * * * *

