) 2k

ADDRESS GIVEN BY THE MINISTER FOR DEFENCE, AND MEMBER FOR NEW  ENGLAND,  IAN SINCLAIR AT THE WESTERN AUSTRALIAN NCR ON SATURDAY,  14 AUGUST 1982 .  '

On behalf of Doug Anthony and the Members of the Federal National  Country Party I extend to your President and Members,  Mr Dick Old,

Peter Jones and the State Parliamentarians our best wishes in the

pursuit of our common ideals.

Western Australia has always been a significant Country Party

State. Your Parliamentarians, like their counterparts elsewhere  in Australia represent the great export industries based in  Australia's rural hinterland.

These contribute importantly to our balance of payments and hence

to the economic growth so apparent throughout the nation.

Within the State coalition your Members have ensured adequate

consideration of the problems of these rural communities.

Many of these are akin to the problems of our biggest cities in

that they are effected by isolation, distance and a higher cost of  providing services.

More importantly - philosphically - they reflect our Party's

continued concern about the rights of the individual. .

This philosphic difference from the Socialist oriented Labor

Party is particularly important at the Federal level where the hard  idealogical commitment of the Labor left seems to hold increasing  sway in the economic and industrial policies of the Labor Opposition

The Party in Western Australia has had its difficulties;  yet I can

assure you that we all believe the contribution it can make to the

way of life of Western Australia is well worth the effort of all of

you who have contributed so much to restore its economic fortunes'  and its public image.

At a Federal level we look forward to the day when once more

there will be a National Country Party, at least one NCP Senator

and a Member of the House of Representatives.

- 2-

On a national basis you will all be aware that next Tuesday

night the Federal Treasurer, Mr John Howard, will introduce

the 1982/83 Budget.

_ _  It comes at a time when top.' many seemed"depressed by our nations  current economic prospects.

Certainly there are areas of difficulty.

The level of interest, rates, too high an inflation rate and a general  softness in the industry sector all of which contribute to the too

high level of unemployment.

Important though these factors are they are of course relative.

Only last week I visited a refugee camp on the Kampuchean/Thai

border where more than 30,OOOKhmer men,  women and children are  confined in an area about twice the size of the Perth Showground.

There they live, work and exist until the world can find a home

for them or they feel conditions are sufficiently safe in Kampuchea

for them to return.

Even more difficult is the position of those who have been maimed  or injured in the course of the conflict.

In the internationally manned hospital within the centre I spoke

to a Professor of Surgery of Montreal University who for the time

being is responsible for the Canadian team spending its three month

stint on humanity's behalf.  .  .

He said there were an-appalling number of amputations.resulting  from children and parents stepping on land mines placed around their  villages.

Others had frightening body disfigurement while one young man, who

not only suffered from bomb wounds but had been blinded as well.

For him at the age of 32 there is little if any future.

What a contrast there is with our own Australian environment.

- 3-

Here inspite of the intensity of management and union disputation'."

the greatest threat to each of us is on our roads or perhaps as a  spectator at a football match.

No way, however, does this comparison reject the necessity for

careful Government monitoring of our domestic economic situation.

As evidence of our economic difficulties the level of the domestic  inflation in Australia is now about 10.5%.

has

This/moved up sharply against the average of the inflation rates of  our six major trading partners - the United States, Japan, Germany,

France, the United Kingdom, Italy, Canada and New Zealand whose .

average is now down to 6.5%. .

Real labour costs too have significantly increased in Australia.

Average weekly earnings for male employees increased at a annual

rate of 17.8% in the six months up to March 1982.

Unfortunately these labour costs came in a period when there was  no growth in average labour productivity.

The inevitable result was.a passing on of those costs to the  public.

Additionally in this period 500,000 Australian fulltime adult

employees had a reduction in working hours "  .from "  40 to 38 hours a week.

Like many of you I find it incomprehensible to believe how such  increased costs and reduced working hours can be accepted as being  of real benefit in our society at this time.

They constrast markedly with the experience of the Chrysler Motor

Company in the United States which was in dire financial straits  about 18 months ago.

There, voluntary restraints by workers keeping their hourly rate

nearly $2.00 lower then their main competitor's,working full hours

with minimal industrial disputation enabled the Company to increase  its output.  '

- 4 -

The result has been an improved quality representation which has

won Chrysler a larger share of the market,  put the Company in the

black and guaranteed the jobs of the workers.

Such determination in the Australian workforce would certainly  guarantee an end to Australia's economic difficulties.

Many of you I know see tariff reduction as a catalyst to economic

recovery.

Certainly while average nominal rates of tariff assistance for  Australian industries fell in the 10 years to 1978/79 by about

40%, ineffective rates by almost 30%, there is still a natural

apprehension that many companies flourish under an excessively

high tariff wall.

While 20 product groups are cufcrently having their tariff  protection phased down and the Government has accepted by far the

majority of IAC recommendations, I share a concern that costs in

Australia are too high as a result of the remaining general level  of tariff protection.

The Government is conscious at this time of the relationship  between employment and the tariff and its introduction of the

package announced a few weeks ago to provide accelerated depreciation

across a wide range of new areas reflects its concern to stimulate  economic activity before considerating the general reduction  in protection.

Internationally our economy has been prejudiced by the very high

real level of interest rates particularly in the United States.

In spite of very much reduced Federal deficits in recent years

the relationship of the Australian economy to that the United

States has led to the inevitable parallel increase in interest rates

here.

At the same time prices for agricultural products and our minerals

have fallen significantly.

The combination of inflation, high interest rates and low prices

in rural communities lie at the crux of the concern of most rural  producers and certainly Members of the NCP at this time.

- 5 -

It is these factors which the Government has had very much, in  mind in the preparation of the Budget to be announced .on Tuesday.

As this is the first opportunity since my return from a number

of ASEAN countries to discuss defence and strategy issues,  let  me turn to some of the conclusions ,  I reached.

The external threats to Australia,  such as exist,  are either

across the oceans from the West, the south and the east, or through

those countries which I have visited.

Ten years ago there was an apprehension that the imminence of a

strategic, threat to Australia might well have been around  the corner.

Today,  inspite of the appalling difficulties of Indo China, Vietnam,

Laos, and particularly Kampuchea, the position is perceptively

better.

The four ASEAN Members where I have spent the last two weeks -Singapore,  The Philippines,  Thailand and Malaysia - all expressed  the

to me /l confidence that the internal communist insurgencies which  have dominated much of their defence activity, are now in control

and they are re-thinking their defence programs against possible

future external threat.

There force structure as a result is undergoing change.

In its development they are.most -appreciative of .the defence

Co-operative Program which this year contributed $40m to these

and other countries in our region.

The DCT as it is called enables training assistance, exchange of

personnel, and some spare parts and backup to Australian made

equipment such as the Nomad Aircraft and the DART Automatic

Training System.

At a defence level this has meant a real confidence in the friendship  between us. '

- 6 -

It has contributed in my view more than any other program with

which I have been associated towards a recognition that Australia

takes seriously its role in this part of the world.

One reason for the changed." defence perception of these ASEAN  countries is a continued aggression- of..Vietnam in Kampuchea and the Â·

increased domination by the Soviet of the Vietnamese economy.

Indeed in this respect one foreign Minister said that Vietnam

like Poland,  East Germany, Czechoslovakia and Afghanistan was now

part of the COMECON Block'.

They also expressed concern at the increased frequency and

capability of the Soviet naval and air presence in the former  American military bases of Cam Ranh Bay and Danang.

In the Phillipines.  *  concern was expressed at the frequency of unauthorised Soviet military encroachment into Phillipines air.space

Last time I was in WA I came on my first tour as Minister for  Defence.

Here I recognised there is continuing interest in defence matters  and a belief that our defence capability in WA should be enhanced.

As I mentioned on that occasion construction will start this year  on the new Derby Airbase.

I am hoping that"this will enable future greater use of the Yampi  Training Ground.

Additionally as a result of our recent visit some suggestion about  future extension of the Reserve Army unit known as NORFORCE,  bases  in Darwin, is being considered.

This may involve further extensionsin the north-west of WA.

Adjacent to Perth you have of course three magnificent facilities -

Pearce Airbase, Swanbourne Military facilities and HMAS Stirling.

- 7 -

Each are intrinsic to Australia's military effort in the west

and reflect our determination to provide adequately for the

defence requirements of WA.

I should mention too the Fifth Independent Rifle Company recently

raised in the Pilbara.

Although the Company Headquarters is now located in Perth  it is planned it will move to Port Hedland early next year.

No. 1 Platoon which I visited in June is located at Newman while

No. 2 Platoon is based at Mt Tom Price.

A further indication of the positive role adopted b^ the Coalition

WA State Government in defence matters is the fact/ there have been  many visits by US ships to HMAS Stirling.

In the past 12 months there have been port visits by 3 USN Attack . .

Carriers, 1 cruiser, 7 Destroyers or Frigates, 22 Support -  ships, 9 Nuclear Powered submarines and 2 Nuclear powered cruisers for  essential self maintenance and crew rest and recreation.

This Government's approach is in marked contrast to that of. the  Labor Government in the east.

There at the risk of prejudicing the ANZUS arrangment the ’   Victorian Labor .  -  .  Premier has already shown himself

willing to respond to the requirements of Labor's left by seeking  to deny access to such vessels.

Such irresponsible actions outside the sphere of their  responsibility cannot be condoled .  by the Federal Government.

For the future the Department of Defence does have plans for  future investment in WA. ,

A particularly important element of this is the proposal to

develop an amphibious training area at Exmourth Gulf.

- 8-

Before further development an environmental impact.study is to

be prepared by Commonwealth and WA State Government.

The decision to proceed will be taken after consideration of

this study to perceive a need for an amphibious training area,

the technical suitability of alternative areas, costs, competing

defence priorities, and the social, economic and ecological impact

of the proposals.

To you in this wonderful part of Australia I can in all confidence  say Australia is in a good state of defence preparedness given  the state of threat and the enormous cost of keeping up-to-date

with the increasing sophistication of defence equipment.

There are many other matters on which I could speak to you today.

Certainly I know Doug Anthony would very much liked to have been  with you.

I assure you the Party is strong nationally although concerned  about the economic wellbeing of those we represent.

It is this concern which I believe must be our prime consideration

in policy formulation over the next 12 months.

