£1

From the Minister for lm m igration_  and Ethnic Affairs.

THE HON S J WEST MP .

62/83 4 August 1983

INTERNATIONAL CONSULTATIVE CONFERENCE ON REFUGEES

Australian Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, Stewart West, today reaffirmed Australia's commitment to  a managed program of resettlement of Indochinese refugees  as part of a cooperative international effort.  Mr West  was attending an international consultative conference in  Hawaii involving four of the major resettlement and donor

countries (Australia, Canada, Japan and the United States).   Representatives of the United Nations High Commissioner for  Refugees also attended.  The conference discussed current'  South East Asian refugee situations.  "

Mr West said that the United States,  Canada and Japan had  stated they shared Australia's commitment to resettlement  programs.  The conference requested the UNHCR to assist in  developing·long term policies to control and resolve the

Indochinese refugee program. "These deliberations are  important to Australia. Commitments made reaffirmed that  Australia, as the only major resettlement nation in the  region, is not carrying the burden alone. The request to  UNHCR to promote broader burden sharing will ensure even  wider international participation".

Mr West also stressed the necessity for political progress  in Kampuchea to reduce the outflow of refugees. Further it  was essential that Vietnam continue with the orderly ·   departure program as an alternative to the uncontrolled  outflow of people.

It was important that ASEAN nations continued their current  humanitarian policies as nations of first refuge. Mr West  said there was a need to develop programs such as voluntary  repatriation to reduce the burden on countries of first

refuge. The voluntary repatriation option, although difficult,  should be pursued and every possible measure taken to contain  the outflow as resettlement continues.  The long term  solutions were as dependent upon these measures as upon  resettlement. He warned against the resettlement of those  without demonstrable claims to refugee status. Australia's

involvement in these international refugee measures  contributed significantly to continued development of  relations between Australia and ASEAN nations.

.  . / 2

.  . / 2

Mr West will visit Indonesia, Malaysia, -Singapore, and  Thailand to observe conditions in refugee camps and hold  discussions with relevant Ministers.

Conference communique is attached.. -

For further information:

Dario Gastello (062) 733 446 Dennis Atkins (062) 727 046

CONFERENCE COMMUNIQUE

Representatives.of the Governments of Australia, Canada, ,  " Japan and the United States, as well as representatives  of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees -  ; *UNHCR), held informal meetings in Honolulu,'Hawaii,  on  August 1, 2 and 3 to discuss the current refugee situation

in Southeast Asia. During the comprehensive discussions, " the participants gave their views on the situation in the  area and covered a wide range of subjects that included  current rates.of resettlement, refugee care and maintenance,  voluntary repatriation, the orderly departure program from  Vietnam, anti-piracy efforts, number of persons in first

asylum countries and the· need for a renewed effort to  broaden international participation in the Southeast Asian  refugee program effort.

In this last regard, the participants agreed to urge the  UNHCR, which was recognised by all parties as the key  coordinating agency in refugee relief, to maintain its  efforts to secure the broadest degree possible of

international participation in the resettlement and relief  program for Southeast Asian refugees. All participants  agreed that the long-term solution of the problem will

require implementation of a mix of policies. In this  context, the parties noted that voluntary repatriation  was an important goal.

Participants also restated their commitment to the nations  of first asylum to help solve the problem through the .   resettlement of, and provision of assistance to those refugees,

until such time as a humane and lasting solution to-their  plight was achieved. -

The countries represented believed it was important that  those contemplating departure understood that the limited  available resettlement opportunities were for refugees  only.

The meeting was mindful of the burden on the countries of  the region receiving the inflow. Their sustained  humanitarian response was appreciated.

The usefulness of, and need to continue, orderly departure  opportunities to contain the problem was acknowledged.

Finally, they agreed to continue the process of consultations  and to ask other interested countries to participate at  future meetings. .

