I k-

MINISTER FOR IM M IG R A TIO N  A N D  ETHNIC AFFAIRS

■I II I IMPS 10/85THE IMMIGRATION DEBATE"Australia's immigration debate should switch from the racial and geographic issues that have dominated it," the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, Mr. Hurford, told the NSW Labor Council today (Thursday)."But the debate should continue on other issues," he added.The economics of migration and the numbers to be allocated to migration categories, such as family reunion, refugees, skilled workers and businessmen, could usefully be discussed."The immigration debate should ideally be non-racial," he said. "And it should be based on correct information."Mr. Hurford was at the Labor Council to launch its anti-racist poster."One of Australia's greatest achievements is to have accepted and settled people from more than 100 countries," he said. "Two in every five people in Australia were born overseas or have one parent born overseas." (Mr. Hurford was born in India, to an English father and an Australian mother.)"This diversity is a fact and must be accepted if we are to have a strong and healthy society," he said."The Labor Council's poster says 'racism will destroy our national spirit and unity.'"It echoes the Prime Minister's words to Parliament in May, 1984: 'Racism and racial intolerance may be promoted tothe detriment of our national unity and our basic values.'"Our unity must not be jeopardised by a racist few," Mr. Hurford said.Although Federal governments had passed the Racial Discrimination Act and set up the Human Rights Commission, the law could only do so much."We cannot sit back hoping the law will solve our problems," he said.nP arliam ent H o u se, C a n b e rra

"It is greatly to the credit of the trade union movement  that it is in the forefront of the resistance to racialist  ideas and actions.

"It has been an important progressive leader of opinion  and shaper of attitudes.

"I hope this poster will be displayed widely in workplaces  and will help encourage informed discussion on racial  discrimination."

Canberra  28 February, 1985

Media contact: Mick Atkinson (062) 72 6635 John Macbean (02) 264 1691  (Secretary of NSW Labor Council)

