News Release Federal S ecretariat: P.O. Box E 13. Queen V ictoria Terrace. A C T . 2600 Tel .: (0 6 2 )7 3  2564

THE HON MICHAEL HODGMAN QC MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR HOUSING AND CONSTRUCTION

ADDRESS TO AFGHANISTAN NATIONAL DAY CEREMONY - SYDNEY - 21 MARCH 1985.

LIBERAL

"Australia must speak out against Soviet atrocities in  Afghanistan - the silence of the Hawke Socialist Government is an  absolute disgrace," Opposition Frontbencher, Mr Michael Hodgman QC,  said in Sydney today. ~  r

Mr Hodgman - who last year visited Afghan Refugee Camps  in Badabhair, Pakistan - collated evidence of Soviet War Crimes  in Afghanistan which he described as 1  equal to the Nazi atrocities  of World War I I '. ;  _  -  '  %

"When is this Moscow-oriented Hawke Socialist Government  going to raise its voice of protest against Soviet atrocities in  Afghanistan? The Soviet Union is the dirtiest, most cruel and most  cowardly fighter in the world today. I saw, with my own eyes, the

results of Soviet atrocities. I was both shocked and sickened," Mr Hodgman said.  '

Mr Hodgman said that Soviet atrocities against the people  of Afghanistan were War Crimes of immense proportions involving the  use of illegal Chemical Warfare, village massacres of innocent  civilians - and particularly children - the use of Internationally-  banned dum-dum ammunition and vicious Soviet booby traps being

deployed against the Afghan population.

"In the Afghan Refugee Camp Hospital in Peshawar, I saw  a small Afghan boy (aged about 9 years) who had been blown up by  a Soviet booby trap in his village. Both his legs had been  amputated. I spoke personally with two Doctors who had actually

seen - and treated - victims of illegal Soviet Chemical Warfare.

"The Doctors told me that the victims had atrociously  blistered,  discoloured and ulcerated skin. The Doctors had .   no doubt that these vile and gruesome injuries were the direct  result of Soviet Chemical Warfare," Mr Hodgman said.

. . . / 2

2.

Mr Hodgman said that it was significant that recent '

reports from Thailand confirmed the use of Chemical Warfare  by Soviet-armed Vietnamese troops who crossed the border into  Thailand in recent weeks.

"Wherever the Soviet is engaged in military activity -  whether it be in Afghanistan or Indo-China - there are authenticated  reports of the use of Internationally-banned Chemical Warfare. When is Australia going to summon-up some moral courage and protest

against these outrages?" Mr Hodgman said.

Mr Hodgman, who was Guest Speaker at the Afghanistan  National Day Ceremony in Sydney, said that the Mujahadeen  freedom fighters were 1  the most impressive people I have ever  seen in my life1.

"Despite the atrocities being perpetrated against them,  the Mujahadeen are thrashing the Soviet troops 'on the ground1.   Soviet Soldiers are becoming increasingly demoralised; Soviet  Commanders are resorting to dirty Warfare as they face failure  after failure in their attempts to subdue the Afghan Freedom  Fighters, and U.S.S.R. Soldiers have had their tour of duty

cut from one year to 180 days - because they cannot cope  emotionally with what they are being forced to do," Mr Hodgman said.

Mr Hodgman said that it was well known that the Soviets  were using conscripts in the Afghanistan War.

"In the early days of the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan,  bodies of Soviet Soldiers were sent back for burial, and official  lists of those killed were published.  Now, because of continuing  successes by the Afghan Freedom Fighters no bodies are repatriated

and no lists are published," Mr Hodgman said.

On the question of Internationally-banned dum-dum bullets  Mr Hodgman told the gathering that medical authorities in Peshawar  had conclusive evidence in their possession.

"I actually saw x-rays of an Afghan civilian whose  body had been riddled with the shrapnel from dum-dum bullets  used by Soviet troops who had attacked his village. In the most  cowardly manner Soviet troops usually attack Afghan villages when

they know that the menfolk will be away.  In short, they attack  unarmed women, children and grandparents," Mr Hodgman said. _

Mr Hodgman said that another example of Soviet cowardice  in Afghanistan was the use of high-level bombers against villages.

. . . / 3

3.

"The Soviet forces first send in reconnaissance planes  at low level. They drop a coloured toxic dye on villages to mark  them and then the bombers come in at high-level - out of range of  the poorly-equipped Freedom Fighters. These innocent villagers  simply have means of retaliating against this high-level  heavy-density saturation of bombing.  When is the Australian  Government going to utter one word of protest against these

atrocities?" Mr Hodgman asked,

Mr Hodgman said that he had no doubt the Soviet Union  had 'bitten off more than it could chew in Afghanistan1.

"The Afghan Freedom Fighters will win - they will drive  the Soviet out of their country. No matter how long it takes, those  responsible for Soviet atrocities in Afghanistan must be apprehended  tried for their War Crimes. The people of Afghanistan will never  give up their struggle - they will never forget what the Soviet  butchers have done to them and their country," Mr Hodgman said.

Mr Hodgman said that the Afghan Refugees were very  grateful for Australian Aid. "Personally, I would not have the  slightest objection to Australia providing military equipment to  the Afghan Freedom Fighters. Their cause is just - and Australia

should be prepared to support - both morally and materially -  just causes," Mr Hodgman told the gathering.

ENDS

Sydney, 25 March, 1985.

