MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION  AND ETHNIC AFFAIRS

Ό MPS 59/86

EMBARGOED UNTIL 2 PM WEDNESDAY 18 JUNE 1986

T R T A N  J A Y A N S ' S T A T U S  C L A R I F I E D

The Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, Chris Hurford, said today (Wednesday) that he had decided  to grant refugee status to two of the eleven Irian Jayans  currently living in Australia in the Torres Strait.

The decision followed detailed consideration of the  refugee claims of the eleven Irian Jayans by the  Determination of Refugee Status (DORS) Committee and by  the Minister.

"Examination of the refugee claims was a complex and  difficult undertaking",  Mr Hurford said. "In two cases  the facts were clear and, because of that, I decided to  grant refugee status only to those two individuals.

"But the other nine cases were not so clear. I remain of  the view that the best long term solution for those nine  is for them to return to their homes voluntarily."

At the same time, the Minister reaffirmed the decision  made by Cabinet last year that the Irian Jayans, including  any granted refugee status, would not be granted permanent  residence in Australia.

"In the interim I have decided to approve the issue of  Temporary Entry Permits (TEPs) to the eleven Irian Jayans"  said Mr Hurford. The Minister explained that this would  allow the Irian Jayans to move freely in Australia and to  gain employment for the duration of their TEPs, which  would be granted for six months and then be subject to

review. Mr Hurford said the decision to grant TEPs was a  practical and humanitarian response to the needs of the  Irian Jayans while all matters relating to their long term  future were further explored.

Parliament House, Canberra

2

"This will enable further consideration of all the issues  to be undertaken in the right atmosphere",  Mr Hurford said.

Canberra  18 June 1986

Media contact: Ian Porter, Minister's Office Parliament House  Tel: (062) 73 1385

or Godfrey Wiseman, Adelaide

Tel: (08) 213 2200

