MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION  AND ETHNIC AFFAIRS

* ΡΛ.ϊϋ/

c. ! .  5.

MPS 114/86 '

NEW CITIZENSHIP CERTIFICATES

The first copy of the new certificate of Australian citizenship  has been bestowed in a special ceremony by the Minister for  immigration and Ethnic Affairs, Mr Chris Hurford.

"The vastly improved certificate, with colourful artwork on  parchment paper, can hold pride of place in the homes of the  estimated 100,000 residents who become citizens each year," Mr Hurford said. "The certificates are very suitable for

framing."

Mr Hurford bestowed the first certificates on  Mr Choong Yee Tam, a 41-year-old malaysian-born company -   director, and Mr Marian Stelmach, a 32-year-old Polish refugee,  in a special ceremony in the Minister's office in Adelaide on

Thursday (October 30).

Mr Choong is married with three children and has been in Australia for three years. His eldest son,  Adrian, recently won a major prize in the Westpac National Award for Mathematics. .

He owns a computer hardware and software supply firm, Kalpine  Enterprises, and is now working on plans to export to  Malaysia. He employs five people part-time.

Mr Stelmach, married with two children, works as a panel  beater. He was an organiser for the banned trade union,  Solidarity, and left Poland under the guise of a holiday in  Germany, intending never to return.

"The redesigned certificate will amply reflect the achievement  of becoming an Australian citizen," Mr Hurford said.

"Citizenship is the culmination of meeting the challenge of  moving to this country, starting a new life and recognizing  that one belongs as part of Australian society.

Parliament House, Canberra

2

"The new certificate will be welcomed by mayors, shire  presidents and others who present them to new citizens on  behalf of the Minister. Space is provided for their  signatures."

The old-style certificates might still be issued until  January 31, 1987, because local councils still had some in the  name of recipients but had not yet arranged to confer them.

Mick Atkinson  Minister's Office  (08) 213 2200

Adelaide  30 October 1986

Contact: Nick Loudon DIEA (062) 64 2726

