V f f

Jj. AUSTRALIA,.^

PRIME MINISTER

PARLIAMENTARY STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER REPORTING  ON THE LONDON MEETING ON SOUTH AFRICA - 21 AUGUST 1986

MADAM SPEAKER,

I wish to report on the meeting in London from  3 to 5 August of Heads of Government of seven  Commonwealth countries on the issue of South Africa. I  seek leave to table the communique of the meeting.

The meeting brought together the Heads of Government of  Australia, the Bahamas, Britain, Canada, India, Zambia  and Zimbabwe.  It was a crucial meeting from three  points of view.

First, it came against the background of a rapidly  deteriorating situation in South Africa. That country  has been experiencing the most wide-spread and  destructive unrest in its post-war history. In the past

two years more than 2,200 people have lost their lives,  many in clashes with the security forces. Thousands  have been injured. Since the Government declared a new  State of Emergency in June at least 8,551 people have  been detained on a long term basis, according to the

Government's own figures. These include leaders of  political parties, trade unions, student groups, human  rights organisations, churches and many others opposed  to apartheid. Our meeting in London was therefore

required to formulate a firm response to the deepening  tragedy. -

Second, the meeting came at a time of heightened  tensions within the Commonwealth, tensions potentially  capable of fracturing this longstanding organisation.  The boycott of the Commonwealth Games and threats to

leave the Commonwealth were symptoms of deep concern and  frustration. The London meeting therefore had an . important role in preserving the credibility and  integrity of the Commonwealth. Southern African issues  have been a dominant theme in the Commonwealth over the

years and we should not forget that South Africa was a  founding member of the Commonwealth and that its  departure was decided by the white minority government.

Third, the meeting was timely in terms of consideration  of South Africa underway in other major countries. In  June the leaders of the European Community agreed to  consider measures against South Africa in three months

time if South Africa failed to take certain political  steps. In London we were therefore conscious of the  important decisions the European Community would be

2 .

taking in September.  We were also conscious of the  development in the United States Congress of new  measures against South Africa. The London meeting  provided the opportunity to give an important '

international lead.

This was no ad hoc gathering,  hastily convened as some  knee jerk response to the appalling situation in South  Africa. It was a step in a process already delineated  with great care by all Commonwealth Heads of Government.

The Commonwealth Accord on Southern Africa agreed at  Nassau in 1985 embodied a clear strategy. This involved  the Australian initiative to establish a Group of  Eminent Persons (EPG) to try to achieve negotiation and  peaceful change. It involved the definition of clear

benchmarks against which to judge the South African  Government's willingness or otherwise to initiate  change. It involved a graduated approach to measures  against South Africa comprising a first tranche of

measures to be taken immediately, consideration of a  second tranche six months after Nassau if adequate  progress had not been made, and possible further  measures should the first and second tranches fail to  produce results in a reasonable period. It involved the  pursuit of this program jointly.

What we had here, then, was not a strategy which gave  the South African Government no chance to change. It  was not a strategy of lashing out at South Africa in a  fit of pique. It was a strategy which very deliberately  gave South Africa time to show that it was prepared to  move towards a non-racial and representative government;   which would take advantage of the opportunity offered by

the EPG to facilitate negotiations with black South  African leaders; and which made the adoption of  sanctions totally contingent on the decisions of the  South African Government itself.

The Nassau Accord established the mandate for the  meeting in London.  The first part of our mandate was to  review the situation in South Africa and provide an  opinion whether adequate progress had been made towards  the objectives stated in the Accord. We .conducted this

review in London at length and in detail. We had the  benefit not only of the report of the EPG but of first  hand accounts by the two Co-chairmen of the Group -  Mr Malcolm Fraser of Australia and General Obasanjo of

Nigeria - and by the British Foreign Secretary, Sir Geoffrey Howe, who had undertaken a mission to South  Africa on behalf of the European Community.

The report of the EPG was crucial to our review. I wish  to repeat here that the group performed a very difficult  task with great determination and integrity. The role

3 .

played by Mr Fraser reflects great credit upon him. All  members have access to the report and I suggest that no  objective reader could find it other than a powerful and  compelling account of the daily agony of apartheid for

the majority of South Africans.

The EPG put forward a creative negotiating concept but  this was rejected by the South African Government. The  response revealed an unwillingness on the part of the  Government to make fundamental changes and to negotiate

the creation of a genuinely democratic system. The  Government remained wedded to the concept of political  rights being granted on a group rather than an

individual basis,  which implies that race classification  will remain in place, and to the retention of the so  called independent homelands. The Government has flatly  ruled out a political system based on one-person  one-vote in a unitary state. The EPG was left no  alternative but to conclude,  and I quote, "the  Government of South Africa at the end made it impossible

for us to proceed any further".  This was their  unanimous view.

It was striking at the London meeting that the  impressions conveyed by Sir Geoffrey Howe coincided in  essential respects with those of the two Co-chairmen of  the EPG. Moreover, in terms of the benchmarks specified

in the Commonwealth Accord, the facts spoke for  themselves. Not one of the benchmarks had been reached  by the South African Government. Specific and  meaningful action has not been taken to dismantle

apartheid.  A new State of Emergency has been  introduced. Nelson Mandela and other detainees are  still in gaol. Political freedom does not exist and the  bans on the African National Congress and other  political parties have not been lifted. No process of

dialogue for non-racial and representative government is  underway.

Worse than this, spiralling violence and repression in  South Africa, and military attacks by South Africa on  Harare, Lusaka and Gaborone in May, demonstrated to us  in London that the situation in South Africa had gone  backwards.  As the communique attests this was the

unanimous judgement of the seven Heads of Government.

The second part of our mandate under the Nassau Accord,  was to consider further measures against South Africa.  Here there was a division of opinion between Britain and  the other six participants. Perfectly properly, we did  not seek to camouflage or disguise this in the

communique.

Australia, the Bahamas, Canada, India, Zambia and  Zimbabwe adopted a range of further measures, including  those defined in the second tranche of the Nassau

4 .

Accord.  Britain was unwilling to take all these steps  and the six regarded this,  in the language of the  communique,  with both concern and regret. That having  been said,  the three undertakings the British Prime  Minister gave were, of course,  welcome as far as they

went and will help the prospects of action by the  European Community as a whole.

As I said to my colleagues in London, I wanted us if  possible to be united but above all I wanted us to be  credible and effective. Better that those of us ready  to act should do so than that we should settle for some

transparently ineffectual compromise. We can thank the  willingness of the six to adopt strong measures for the  fact that the Commonwealth and its international  leadership role on southern African issues have been

preserved.

I shall now briefly address the measures which Australia  has accepted and which are listed in the communique.  These measures will be brought into effect as soon as  possible.

(a) A ban on air links with South Africa. For  Australia this principally involves terminating  South African Airways services. The Government is  now giving further consideration to the means of

implementing this measure taking into account the  provisions of the Australia-South Africa Air  Services Agreement.

(b) A ban on new investment or reinvestment of profits  earned in South Africa. The reference to  reinvestment concerns reinvestment of repatriated  profits, given the problems of applying

extraterritorially a ban on reinvestment of profits  which remain in South Africa. The Government has  decided that in the first instance this measure  will be effected through a call on Australian

investors to refrain from such investment.

(c) A ban on the import of agricultural products from  South Africa.  The Government has decided that  provision will be made for prospective  implementation of this measure 180 days after the  necessary customs negotiations have been  promulgated. This will obviate problems for

importers who have existing commitments.  The  Government will shortly be considering certain  definitional matters related to this measures.

(d) The termination of double taxation agreements with  South Africa. Australia has no such agreement with  South Africa.

5 .

(e) The termination of all Government assistance to  investment in, and trade with, South Africa. The  Government has already taken substantial action in  this area. It has now decided to terminate all

remaining Commonwealth Government assistance  through the Export Market Development Grants  Scheme, the Export Finance Insurance Group and the  Overseas Projects Unit of Austrade to Australian

firms dealing with South Africa. This will be done  consistent with legislative requirements and the  honouring of insurance contracts entered into prior  to the date of implementation.

(f) A ban on all Government procurement in South  Africa. Australia has already introduced this  measure save for the procurement necessary to  maintain our diplomatic missions.

(g) A ban on Government contracts with majority-owned  South African companies.  This measure has also  already been introduced.

(h) A ban on the promotion of tourism to South Africa.  The Government will terminate the temporary  residence authority of South Africa based officials  of the South African Tourist Commission in Sydney.   The Minister for Sport, Recreation and Tourism will  be bringing forward proposals concerning other

means of implementing this ban.

These eight measures comprise the second tranche  identified in the Nassau Accord. The following three  additional measures decided upon in London take into  account the movement which has occurred on sanctions in  both the United States and the European Community since  Nassau.

(i) A ban on all new bank loans to South Africa,  whether to the public or private sectors. The  Government has already called on banks to refrain  from such loans.

(j) A ban on the import of uranium, coal, iron and  steel from South Africa. Again this will be  introduced prospectively 180 days after  introduction of regulations. The Government will  shortly be considering certain definitional matters '  related to this measure.

(k) The withdrawal of all consular facilities in South  Africa except for our own nationals and nationals  of those countries to whom we render consular  services. This relates principally to visa issuing

in South Africa. The Government is considering how

6 .

broadly the withdrawal of visa issuing facilities  should be applied and this matter will be the  subject of a separate announcement.

I wish to announce also that the Government has decided  to reduce South African representation in Australia  through withdrawal of temporary residence authority for  South African Trade Officers at the South African Trade  Commissioner's office in Melbourne and for the  Commercial Vice-Consul in Sydney. Australia withdrew

its Trade Commissioner from South Africa in 1985.

In addition I draw attention to the provision that has  been made in the budget for a new $5 million assistance  program for Southern Africa over a five year period. This will, in particular, provide humanitarian

assistance for black South Africans, Namibians and black  South African refugees in the areas of education and  training.

It is my purpose today to report on the London meeting  rather than engage in broad debate on the issue of  sanctions. But I do wish to reiterate several points  which are absolutely central.

First, it is a characteristic of the debate about  sanctions that those opposed to them prefer to set up  straw men rather than address the real rationale for  such measures. One such straw man is that negotiation  and dialogue are to be preferred to sanctions. In fact

it is a fundamental fallacy to see negotiation and  dialogue on the one hand and sanctions on the other as  somehow contradictory. The purpose of sanctions is  precisely to bring home to the South African Government

that its present posture, a repressive defence of the  status quo, entails costs and that a change of course  would bring benefits. The London communique is explicit  that if Pretoria responds positively we all stand ready  to review the situation and to rescind the measures  which have been adopted.

Those who oppose sanctions do so frequently on the  purported grounds that they will hurt the black  community. I reject this as patronising and offensive  to those representative black leaders such as Bishop .   Tutu, leaders of the African National Congress and the

United Democratic Front, leaders of the Front Line  States, and black trade union leaders such as those I  met in London, who have made it clear that the black  community of South Africa is already suffering

immeasurably under apartheid and believes the price of  sanctions is one it is prepared to pay.

7 .

Another straw man is that sanctions are ineffective  because they will not destroy the South African economy  or bring down the South African Government. Neither of  these things is the real rationale for sanctions and  people who argue this way are either too obtuse or

lacking the intellectual honesty to address the much  more complex calculations involved. The object, as  Mr Hayden has eloquently said, is not to bring South  Africa to its knees but to bring it to its senses. The

object is not to bring down a Government but to change  the political dynamics of South Africa in a more  progressive direction. The key point is that history  shows that to the extent South Africa has changed it has  done so in response to a changing internal dynamic which  has drawn support and encouragement from external

pressure. History also shows that in the absence of  such pressures South Africa will prevaricate and delay  indefinitely. Since inaction means delay and delay  means a downwards spiral into violence those opposed to  action bear a grave responsibility.

Third,  concrete measures are the only way to fulfil our  moral obligation as liberal democracies serious about  the values of individual liberty and democratic rights.  Apartheid is universally deplored but repugnance alone

is not sufficient for its elimination.  Vocal opposition  without tangible measures is hollow.

Fourth, and very importantly, the self-interest of the  West requires action. Make no mistake, change will come  about one day in South Africa and it is a question of  vital importance how it comes.  The political, economic

and strategic interests of the West will be dealt a  tremendous blow if the process is a violent one which  throws up a radical successor regime which regards the  West as hostile. The purpose of sanctions is to bring  home to the South African Government and its domestic

constituency the need for peaceful change, and to send a  signal to those moderate black leaders striving for  change by non-violent means that they are not alone.

In fact the cost of adopting measures now - whether to  Australia, Britain, Canada, the United States, the  European Community or Japan - will be nothing compared  to the cost if South Africa plunges into conflict. It

is for this reason, and also because a great moral issue  is involved, that Western countries cannot afford to  take decisions about sanctions on the basis of some  narrow short-term calculation in dollars and cents. I  did not do so in associating Australia with the measures

agreed at London.

Nor do I shirk from, or apologise for,  the fact that the  measures could be at some cost to Australia. This  depends upon many imponderables, including the extent to  which the measures are adopted by other countries,

including particularly South Africa's major economic  partners. No definitive tally can be given. Certainly  there is a potential cost given that our policy  deliberately constrains us from developing lucrative

commercial relations with the largest economy on the  African continent. Any costs would be harder to bear  should others stand by and perhaps benefit from the  principled stand now being taken by an ever-growing -

section of the world's community. The point, as stated  in the communique, is that such measures have become a  moral and political imperative which can no longer be  deferred.

The London decisions do not constitute only a  recommendation to the Commonwealth as a whole. They  usher in a period of intensive consultations within the  international community with emphasis on those countries  that presently sustain a significant level of economic

relations with South Africa.

I have sent messages to the Heads of Government of the  European Community countries conveying the Government's  views and urging that action be taken. I have written  in the same terms to President Reagan and to Prime  Minister Nakasone. The visit to Australia next week of

the Chairman of the Foreign Relations Committee of the  United States Senate, Richard Lugar,  will provide a  further valuable opportunity to follow up the London  decisions.

The Western world is beginning to move on this vital  international issue. On 15 August the United States  Senate voted 84 to 14 in favour of strong measures,  further evidence that there is solid bipartisan support

for action in the United States. As noted earlier, the  European Community will consider measures in September  and movement by Britain at the London meeting should  facilitate agreement.  The indications are that Japan  would be prepared to be part of a position concerted

with other major Western powers.

The Government,  in taking the decisions it has, has . . .   therefore aligned Australia with the emerging  international consensus.  But we have done more. We  have played a major part in helping to shape that

consensus. This is a role of which Australians can be  proud.

