V MINISTER FOR

FOREIGN AFFAIRS

Jt.  AUSTRALIA /4>

NEWS RELEASE

M190 27 N o v e m b e r  1986

ns

COMMONWEALTH   PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY  C. 1. S.

AUSTRALIA AND THE COLOMBO PLAN

A t t a c h e d  is th e  t e x t  of a s p e e c h  by t h e  M i n i s t e r  fo r  F o r e i g n

A f f a i r s ,  Mr  B i l l  H a y d e n ,  M . P . ,  at t h e  o p e n i n g  of t h e  31st

C o l o m b o  P l a n  C o n s u l t a t i v e  C o m m i t t e e  M e e t i n g ,  S y d n e y ,

T h u r s d a y ,  27 N o v e m b e r  1 9 8 6 .

SPEECH BY BILL HAYDEN,  MP,  MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS  AT THE OPENING OF THE 31ST COLOMBO PLAN  CONSULTATIVE COMMITTEE MEETING  SYDNEY, THURSDAY 27 NOVEMBER 1986

AUSTRALIA AND THE COLOMBO PLAN

The Colombo Plan has a special place in the

consciousness of the Australian people. In the aftermath of

World War II, Australians looked at their immediate

surroundings with altogether new eyes.  The war itself and its

disruptive effect on our traditional relationships had a lot to

do with this. It is also true,  though, that our political

attitudes were undergoing deliberate change. The Australian

Government under Ben Chifley was putting into place in this

period new external policies which were more realistic and more

progressive,  less hidebound by tradition and conservatism, than

at any time in our history as an independent nation. These

outward-looking policies under Prime Minister Chifley led to

Australia's donations of finance and foodstuffs to the UN

Relief and Rehabilitation Administration, for instance, and to

our support for refugees.

They also led to Australia's connection with the

Colombo Plan.  Back in 1948, Chifley sent a very senior mission

to 10 or so South and South East Asian countries to learn from

them their most pressing needs in education and technology and

to see if and how Australia might help with equipment, the

assistance of experts or scholarships to higher education

institutions. This was the beginning of the Australian

approach which culminated in our joining the Colombo Plan a

2 .

couple of years later.  It was directed at an aspect of the

process of development which is the hallmark of the Colombo

Plan: change and advance in economic and social relationships.

It was the start of a commitment to development assistance

programs which continues to this day.

Thirty five years after the Colombo Plan was born,

one of the manifestations of its significance is the fact that

the poorer nations of the world are over-represented among its

members. Those members who are "low income economies" (to use

the World Bank's classification) have a combined population

equal to nearly 44 percent of all the people who live in all

the countries placed by the World Bank in this category.

J.K. Galbraith's The Nature of Mass Poverty draws attention to

the tendency among poor people everywhere to "accommodate" to

their circumstances. Among richer people, there is broad

accommodation to the idea of increasing income. Galbraith

makes the point that we should not be surprised that poorer

people have the same accommodation to the idea of their

poverty. One of the great values of the Colombo Plan is that

so many of the human resource development activities which it

has sponsored have contributed to breaking down accommodation

to poverty in developing countries.

Support for human resource development activities

(sometimes referred to as "investing in people") is obviously

desirable in itself. It is also desirable and can be easily

justified on hard-headed economic grounds. Many careful

studies carried out in many developing countries have shown

3 .

that there are often high rates of economic return on

investment in human capital. The reason is clear. At both the

micro level of activity —  on the farm and in the factory -Â­

and at the macro level of policymaking,  the quality of people

involved and of the decisions that they make is crucial to the

development effort.

At the micro level,  the daily decisions taken by

farmers and businessmen directly affect the productivity of the

nation. At the macro level,  the importance of appropriate

policies can hardly be overestimated.  Recent research by the

World Bank has emphasised that perhaps the single most

significant determinant of the success of development

strategies is the way in which the policies which support these

strategies are formulated and implemented. But policies, of

course,  are formulated and implemented by people.  When any

country does not have an adequate supply of high and middle

level skills,  it is unlikely that the broad set of policies

needed to promote development -- in agriculture, industry,

trade,  education and so on —  will be forthcoming.

Human resource development is important at the macro

level from another point of view. Since the process of

development involves sweeping changes, broad social support is

needed for the range of policies being implemented.  Unless (to

take an example) a substantial proportion of people living in

rural areas are literate, it will be difficult to promote

4 .

projects which need widespread community involvement such as

agricultural extension programs,  child health and family

planning.

Education,  as one element of human resource

development, has rightly been given high priority within the

Colombo Plan.  More recently,  across the Third World, other

aspects of human resource development have been increased

emphasis. The four main aspects of this development about

which I would like to speak for a moment or two are the role of

women in development,  education and training, health and

nutrition and fertility and population issues.

The role of women in the development process has

been greatly neglected.  Policies (formulated and implemented

by men) have tended to overlook the place of women. To mention

one glaring example of bias in the way we have tended to look

at these things, it is now becoming clear that official labor

force statistics have excluded much of the work women do on

family farms and in family businesses. Their contributions

have simply not been considered worthy of reporting by those

who collect statistics,  by rural families and even the women

themselves.  In part,  this is the result of their work being

unpaid but the reason is also that their work is undervalued

socially. Unpaid and unrecognised it may be, but the work

women do is often critical to family livelihood and contributes

significantly to a country's economy.

5 .

The potential of women has been ignored to ap

outstanding degree.  Development workers have gone into the

field with the notion that the farmer is a "he". Thus,  male

farmers have obtained the clearest benefits from agricultural

programs.  Moreover, there have often been negative effects on

women farmers and women laborers when new programs have been

introduced. The list of past mistakes is long,  in almost every

area of development. Fortunately, there is growing reason for

optimism. Governments, international agencies and bilateral

donors are now allowing for the fact that the contribution of

women to development can be crucial. It is now more widely

appreciated that women produce as much as 60 or 80 percent of

the food in Africa and half (or more)  in all the "least

developed countries" as a group.  The work that women do in

maintaining their households is increasingly being recognised

as contributing to the economy of the family and the nation.

Education is another important area in which more

attention could be paid to the needs of women.  Higher

education for women is being recognised as the single most

important determinant of lower fertility, better infant and

child health care and increased self-confidence. Education, in

short, helps women better to realise their potential. It

conveys this benefit to men also, of course;  but women tend to

start from a handicapped position, and the change for them is

all the more dramatic.

6 .

Australia's foreign aid program tries to give

special priority to developing the potential of women.  Our

policy is gradually to increase the proportion of women in our

foreign aid training program so that 50 percent of all

participants will eventually be women.  This goal will become

easier to reach as the proportion of women receiving equal

access to education at primary and secondary levels rises in

developing countries.

Over the past decade or so, views about the

relationship between skills,  education and the pace of

development have changed substantially. In the early 1960s,

the view was widespread that human capital was the key to

development.  While lipservice was being paid to the ideal of

universal primary education, in practice priority was given in

many countries to education at secondary and higher levels.

The hope was that an educated elite could be created fairly

quickly and that it would provide leadership to promote

far-reaching, rapid progress.  More recently, policymakers have

begun to give more emphasis to primary and technical

education. The reason for this is that the social benefits of

investment in universal primary education which can result,  and

across the social spectrum,  are now more commonly appreciated.

Research into the costs and benefits of investment

in education has been instrumental in changing our views about

the best policies to adopt. Naturally, circumstances vary from

country to country but many careful studies suggest that some

important generalisations can be made with confidence.

7 .

First, both the direct and indirect effects of

education are important. Schooling certainly imparts specific

knowledge and skills but the broader and less tangible

side-effects on attitudes, values and beliefs are also

crucial.  Among other things, these less tangible side-effects

help counteract the tendency (described by Galbraith) of the

poor to accommodate to their oppressed circumstances.

Second, the social rates of return on investment in

education often prove to be surprisingly high. They tend,

moreover,  to be higher for investment in primary education than

in secondary and higher education (if I may emphasise my

earlier point). It is not uncommon for the rate of return on

spending at the primary level to be well over 20 percent per

year.  In fact,  in some countries in Africa and South America

it is much higher.  At higher levels of education, on the other

hand, rates of return vary widely. Average social rates at the

secondary level are often around 15 percent,  and perhaps about

12 percent in tertiary institutions. There are some countries

where the rate of return is very low.

Third, rates of return are sensitive to the cost

levels and prices set for the education sector.  When costs are

high (as they sometimes are, depending on the technologies used

in the education sector), social rates of return tend to be

low. And when higher education, especially, is heavily

subsidised with little or no attempt at cost recovery, private

rates of return can be high while social rates are low.

8 .

Experience during the past few decades teaches this most

general and important lesson: that spending on education is

often very worthwhile but that it is easy to waste money unless

programs are carefully managed.  Large subsidies to education

often yield high social dividends. But we need to make sure

that the subsidies are directed into the right areas.

The health and nutrition aspects of human resource

development have been attracting greater attention in recent

decades. More resources are needed to deal with basic health

and nutrition problems,  or course,  but finance alone is not the

answer. Better management is just as important as greater

resources.  In general terms,  the determinants of health have

long been well known.  They are,  first,  socioeconomic status;

second,  the health environment (that is, factors such as

climate, public sanitation and prevalence of disease vectors);

and,  third,  public knowledge of nutrition, health and hygiene.

Health development efforts are more effective when they consist

of programs aimed at these determinants,  rather than

concentrated on a few expensive special schemes. It is

particularly distressing that many of the people who die each

year in developing nations are the very young.  Babies are

doubly lucky if they make it through their first year.  When

they do, their chances of living until they are 50 or 60 are

relatively good.  Yet,  in many developing countries, 10 to 15

percent of babies die before reaching their first birthday.

Public campaigns targeted to save infants' lives can, in the

right circumstances,  be very effective.

9 .

Non-fatal illness is common too.  Put simply, many

people in many countries are only half well much of the time

because of nutritional deficiency or the lack of simple health

facilities. This is tragic, whether from the economic or

humanitarian viewpoint. The cost to a nation, through lost

productivity by its workers, is often higher than is generally

realised. But children are victims of nutritional deficiency

too, through their inhibited capacity to learn as well as the

obvious consequences for their health. An example is iodine

deficiency, commonly found in upland areas with few resources

of sea salt which contains iodine. Even mild iodine deficiency

can cause lethargy and apathy, undermine physical and mental

development and hold back individuals and communities. Iodine

deficiency disorders affect more than 600 million people in

world. It is a shocking fact that poor people in rural areas

are often regarded as stupid or lazy when they have really been

suffering from iodine deficiency. Proven techniques which are

simple and compatible with an emphasis on primary health care,

are now available to treat and prevent these disorders and thus

assist the development effort in particular areas. Through its

aid program, the Australian Government is spending $1.7 million

over five years to support an iodine deficiency control program

in China.

Another example of the impact of ill health on

productivity was investigated by the World Bank in Indonesia in

the early 1970s. Studies revealed a high incidence of hookworm

Infestation in workers there.  One result was that iron

deficiency anemia was common. On rubber plantations,  according

to the World Bank

"this prevalence of iron deficiency anemia is the

highest ever recorded in any adult male population

during non-famine conditions. Eighty-five percent

of the population study suffered from hookworm

infestation. This was largely responsible for

finding that 45 percent of the adult male laborers

suffered from an iron deficiency anemia."

The report found that the productivity of non-anemic

laborers was about 20 percent higher than that of affected

workers and that the benefit-cost ratio of correcting this

deficiency —  in terms of latex production alone -- could be as

high as 260:1. It is because these kinds of problems exist,  as

well as the opportunities to lift productivity,  that the

Indonesian Government has given a great deal of attention over

the past decade to public health problems.  As recently as a

few weeks ago,  President Soeharto announced an expanded program

of support for community health centres in rural areas.

The appropriate responses to health problems vary

from country to country,  naturally. But there are several key

elements which have generally been found to be important in

preparing a health strategy in many developing countries.

First, the emphasis should be on public health, and especially

on preventive measures.  Second, programs intended to deal with

10 .

11 .

specific health problems should be reinforced by efforts to

improve general living conditions, including in nutrition and

housing. Third,  providing clean water is vital,  since so many

diseases are water-borne. Finally, a health program is likely

to be much more effective if it is supported by public

education.

Issues concerning fertility and family planning are

central to a strategy of human resource development. It is now

almost universally recognised that high population growth rates

are a major constraint on the achievement of educational and

health targets in developing countries, and indirectly on the

realisation of broader development goals.  During the past 20

years,  a good deal has been learned about the causes and

consequences of high fertility rates.  There was much debate

early in the 1970s between those who argued that family

planning programs alone could reduce birth rates and those who

responded that social and economic improvements were needed;

that "development is the best contraceptive". It has become

clear through research in fact that both family planning and

socioeconomic development are important in affecting birth

rates.  Neither approach is especially effective in isolation;

both are effective when they are implemented together so that

they reinforce each other.

It is clear also that community health services

which reduce infant mortality reinforce community support for

family programs.  To put it simply, if parents are confident

that their babies will live, they are more likely to be happy

1 2 .

with two or three children rather than plan for seven or

eight. Conversely, when parents realise there is a fair chance

that their babies will die, they are more likely to plan for a

large family in the hope that at least three or four will

survive. The circle works the other way as well. Effective

family planning is an important determinant of health. The

risks of both infant and maternal death increases as the

numbers of children born in each family increase. Infant

health and chances of survival are impaired also when births

are spaced too closely together.

A couple of examples will illustrate these general

principles. Care has been taken in Indonesia to involve local

communities in organising family planning arrangements.

Participants in the programs are formed into local clubs which

then become involved in other activities as well, including

nutrition and such non-health projects as rural credit and

income-generating programs. The result is that family planning

becomes institutionalised at the village level. It becomes

tied into a set of activities which reinforce the overall

objective: to have small, healthy, prosperous families. This

approach has been very successful. In the decade to the late

1970s, fertility rates fell by one quarter in Indonesia as a

while and by one third or more in East Java and Bali. The

Japanese Organisation for International Cooperation in Family

Planning combines a program or parasite control and family

planning. People in a target community are taught the details

of basic hygiene, nutrition and other preventive health

measures along with treatment for parasites. After delivering

13 .

these services, during which they gain the trust of the local

community, project staff introduce family planning techniques

in a much more receptive atmosphere.

Recent developments in the Third World in the field

of population control,  then, are encouraging.  Progress has

been made. It continues to be made. Pessimism about the

prospects for success in this area has been misplaced. Indeed,

birth rates are now falling quite rapidly in many developing

countries. For the first time in history,  it is reasonable to

expect that -- as a result of population planning policies -Â­

the level of population will stabilise in many countries within

the next four or five decades.

I believe that, after each of these different

elements of human resource development strategy have been

considered, it will be clear that all of them act to reinforce

the others during the development process.  Twenty years ago,

the theory of the Big Push was popular among development

specialists. Supporters of the theory argued that a frontal

assault across many sectors at once was necessary to stimulate

development and change. Nibbling at the edges would not work,

they said. In a sense, I am arguing the case for a Big Push of

sorts in the area of human resource development.  All the

elements of the human resource development strategy I have

discussed today -- the role of women, education and training,

health and nutrition, fertility and population —  are so

closely interlinked that they form almost a seamless web.

14 .

Yet,  as I have also maintained,  priorities need to

be set in the most rational way. We cannot do everything at

once. Resources are limited, in Australia as well as among our

colleagues in the Colombo Plan.  The Australian Government has

raised the current annual level of aid expenditure to more than

$1 billion —  a reflection of the support for development aid

which extends to all areas of the Australian community. Like

the other nations represented at this conference,  however,  we

live in a fiercely challenging, complex and difficult world

economic environment. Australians understand that their

economy in general,  and their aid programs in particular, must

be managed in a realistic way.  Our goals must be clear.  Our

programs must be designed so that they have a good chance of

achieving these goals.  Investment in human resource

development will not automatically yield high social returns.

It will achieve high returns,  provided that all of us who are

in the business of spending public money scrutinise our

programs closely.  If we do that,  wide support will follow for

programs of human resource development in Colombo Plan

countries for years to come.

Let me close by wishing all our guests —  on behalf

of a people who are generous and willing supporters of programs

to help our friends and neighbours —  a stay in Australia which

will be very pleasant as well as very productive.

