MEDIA RELEASE THE SENATE

Media Release by S-ena-^^J|im^Short  r**F-itn’ a^T^e

WHERE HAS THE MONEY GONE?

It is now evident that the big spending policies of the four  Hawke/Keating years have resulting in the squandering of billions  of dollars of taxpayers' money.

The Hawke Government's most extravagant job creation programme  (C.E.P.) has involved more than $1,000 million of wasted money.  After four years, it has been revealed that the cost of providing  long term employment for CEP participants has cost taxpayers

$150,00O f o r  each job.

Another vast area of wastage has been the ALP Government's use of  taxpayers' funds to buy off more than 90 trade unions and  affiliated organisations such as the A.C.T.U.

Fringe groups have also been on the receiving end of Labor's  handouts. Millions of dollars have gone to groups such as the  PND, Women for Survival and other communist peace groups. The  Government even provided funds to representatives of the

terrorist group, the Palestinian Liberation Organisation.

This has resulted in the ridiculous situation of the ALP  Government openly undermining several of its own key foreign  policies such as the United States Alliance and the Pine Gap

Base.

'  y

Much of Australia's foreign aid has gone to Soviet proxy states.  Not only is such aid an insult to the thousands of refugees who  have fled communism to live in Australia, including the  Vietnamese, it also makes Australia a laughing stock in the eyes

of the Western world.

Senator Short said Australians should be aware of the Hawke  Government's silence on this issue. Despite a commitment which  was forced from the Prime Minister last year, the misallocation  and waste of taxpayers' funds has continued totally unabated.

If the ALP Government is re-elected, it is absolutely certain  that Australians will witness more of the same - more and more of  their taxes being diverted towards extravagant and wasteful  purposes. "

MELBOURNE 25 JUNE 1987

For further information, please contact: (03) 387 4177

