15ο

Leader of the Opposition

Parliament House, Canberra, A.C.T. 2600  Tel. (062) 77 4022

Australian Government Centre  Chifley Square. Sydney. N.S.W 2000  Tel. (02) 221 4944

TRANSCRIPT OF ADDRESS BY THE HON JOHN HOWARD MP  LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  TO THE STATE COUNCIL MEETING OF THE TASMANIAN DIVISION

OF THE LIBERAL PARTY  LAUNCESTON, SATURDAY 13 AUGUST 1988

Mr State President, Brian Mantach, Robin Gray, the longest  serving Liberal Premier in Australia, my Federal and State  Parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentlemen, it is a  great pleasure to be back in Launceston and back in Tasmania  and addressing this 1988 State Council of the Tasmanian  Division of our Party.

This is the fourth State conference of the Liberal Party I  have addressed in the past two months and at every one of  those conferences starting in Queensland then to Victoria,  to Western Australia at Esperance two weeks ago, and here in  Launceston I have stressed a number of common themes.

One of the themes I have expressed is the vision I have of  what I call One Australia. Any doubts that I had that that  theme and that vision had struck a responsive chord within  the Australian people were completely removed yesterday when

I heard the Prime Minister interviewed on the subject.  He  said 'I thought of One Australia first'.  What the Prime  Minister was of course proclaiming by that was his  recognition that above everything else what the Australian

people want from their political leaders is a declaration  that the most important things are those things that unite  all of us as Australians, rather than those things that  divide u s .

To proclaim a commitment to One Australia is not to proclaim  any kind of outdated notion of what Australia may have been  in the past and very much a notion of what Australia is now  and Australia can be in the future.

When I talk about One Australia I don't just talk about  immigration policy which has been in the news lately. My  objection to an Aboriginal Treaty is not based on any  insensitivity to the conditions of Australian Aborigines.  They are as a group the most disadvantaged of all  Australians - but I reject a treaty because it is divisive

and because it is repugnant to the notion of one united  Australia.

It is a broad concept that recognises utter and complete  equality of treatment of all Australians irrespective of  whether they were born in this country or they have chosen  this country and have come here in their millions over the

last 40 or 50 years.

2 .

When I talk of One Australia I also mean in the area of  industrial relations that everybody should be equal before  the law. That the trade union movement should not have  legal immunities that are unavailable to the rest of the  community. I mean that if I destroy your business you have  the right to sue me and that if a trade union destroys your  business you also ought to have the right to sue that trade  union. That of course doesn't exist at present.

In Mr Hawke's disunited Australia, where people are not  treated equally, some have privileges that others don't  have.  When I talk about One Australia I also mean making  available to all Australians equality of opportunity of  refurbishing that great thing that we had that virtually no  other country in the world had, and that was for the ability  of anybody who was prepared to work hard and to commit  themselves to a goal in life to succeed and to share their  reward with their families. That was also part of the  Australian dream and sadly over the last five years despite

the rhetoric, despite the ringing speeches and the ringing  declarations, over the last five years this country has  become a more unequal, a more vulnerable and a less fair  society under the Hawke Government.

Over the last five years the gap between rich and poor in  this country has widened. I, as a Liberal Leader, do not  apologise for saying that.  That is no pot-shot at wealth  accumulation. I defend the right of people to accumulate  wealth because it is only through wealth accumulation does a

nation accumulate the capacity to help its less fortunate.   What has happened in the process is that many who had  opportunities ten, fifteen years or twenty years ago no  longer have the same opportunities.  The fall in the living

standards of average families in Mr Hawke's Australia has  been quite dramatic over the last five years.

Mr Chairman, over the past couple of weeks there has been a  debate about the immigration policies of this country. Some  observations I made have had something to do with starting  that debate. I hold the view that as a community we should  be willing to debate issues and to debate them frankly. I  want to say to all of you and to all of my colleagues, let

us have a debate on this issue which is honest, courageous  but at all times tolerant and sensitive. Let us have none  of the McCarthy!st smears that have been flung around by  some of my critics, particularly in the media, over the past

two weeks.

Since when has it been racist to assert that at the end of  the day this country has the right to determine who will  populate it?

Since when has it been racist to ask that we have an  interest in the capacity of our country to absorb change in  this area?

3 .

Since when has it been racist to say that, at the end of the  day, commitment to the fundamental values of our Australian  society, to which successive waves of immigration have  played a crucial part in shaping, since when has it been  racist to say the commitment to those values and those

institutions must take priority over any other set of values  and institutions?

I find some of the reaction bordering on the hysterical -  certainly dishonest - and deliberately designed to enforce a  conspiracy of silence on an issue that people do want  discussed.

I find the most sickening element is the attempt by the  Prime Minister to take the moral high ground. You clapped a  moment ago when X asserted the right of this country to  determine who will populate it. Ladies and gentlemen, they  were not my original words.  They were words used by

R J L Hawke in 1977. They enunciate on that issue, and on  that occasion, a fair statement of what ought to be the  position. He parades himself as occupying the moral high  ground. Well, any of us who were around in 1977 when the  Vietnamese boat people, the refugees of one of the great

human tragedies in our region in the last twenty years, were  coming in their numbers to our shores and we were trying in  an honest, compassionate and tolerant way to cope with that  problem, what was Bob Hawke, the President of the ACTU,  doing then? He was hectoring on the sidelines and trying to

grab every vote he could by stirring up resentment.  He made  irresponsible remarks. He displayed no leadership and he  showed no consideration for the enormous human, social and

political problem that the Fraser Government was rappelling  with at that particular time. I would say to the Prime  Minister, your attempt to occupy the moral high ground on  this issue is empty rhetoric given your blatantly

opportunist posturing back in 1977.

Mr President, a very important event for the future of your  State has occurred in recent weeks. That is the decision of  the Federal Government regarding the Lemonthyme in Tasmania.

I want to say on behalf of the Federal Opposition that your  Government has not only our sympathy but also our active  support in pursuing as it is at present the rights and the  interests of the people of Tasmania.

We stand for a balanced approach towards the development of  our country and the preservation of this country's  environment. I will never support a policy by anybody in  Australia that adopts the approach of development at any  price - no matter what the cost. Such an approach should  not earn the support or the respect of the Australian  people. What we have seen from the Hawke Government,  particularly from Senator Richardson, and from those who

support his view or are knee-capped into supporting his  view, what we have seen from them is an imbalance, a  distorted approach to conservation and development and one  that ignores the manifest importance of the forest

industries to the economy of the State of Tasmania.

4 .

It is frequently said that the Prime Minister of Australia  is out of touch and so he is. How anybody could be so

insensitive and so out of touch with the needs of the people  of Tasmania as to take a decision that would directly affect  the employment future of one in seven of the Tasmanian  population is a dramatic illustration of how out of touch he

is with the rights and the interests of this State.

I believe that Ray Groom, as your Minister in this area,  negotiated well and faithfully with Senator Cook. I think  he pursued a balanced and legitimate approach recognising  that in all of these great environmental issues there is an

interest that goes immediately beyond the economic  requirements of individual States and it is never possible  to completely quarantine an issue and say that is entirely a  matter for an individual State. I think the conclusions

that Ray reached were fair and reasonable. We remain  resolutely opposed, and when our policy comes out it will  say it in unmistakable terms, we remain resolutely opposed  to the unilateral listing by the Federal Government of this

country of any part of Australia on the world heritage list.

We will continue to support and pursue, and in Government  implement, a policy which says there should be no world  heritage listing which does not proceed with the consent and  the participation of the individual States that may be  affected by that listing. It follows from that that any  heritage listing which is made without the consent of

individual State Governments will liable for rescission by a  future Federal Government.

There has been another decision yesterday which is very  important to the future of Tasmania and indeed to the  Constitutional future of the whole country. And that was  the great decision, and I call it a great decision because  it has finally highlighted in very clear terms the  dishonesty and the deceit of the Government's referendum

campaign, the decision of the High Court to strike down as  illegal the advertisements being run by the Federal  Government in support of their referendum proposals.

These four referendum proposals all sound beguilingly  simple. They are all motherhood propositions. How could  you possibly oppose having four year parliaments - so  Mr Hawke says.  Tasmania has four year parliaments.

New South Wales has them. Victoria has them. Everybody  says you ought to have four year parliaments. John Howard  says you ought to have four year parliaments and I do. So  they say why don't we have four year parliaments. But what  they don't tell you is that the price of having four year  parliaments is to completely annihilate the effective

independent power of the Senate. This is of enormous  significance to the smaller states.  Anybody having an  elementary understanding of Australian history knows that we  would never have had a Federal compact in this country if we  had not a Federal Senate providing for equality of

representation from all of the States. That was an  essential ingredient in the Federal compact in 1901 and it  remains an essential ingredient of the Federal compact in  1988.

5 .

We are against Question No 1 because it would destroy the  effective independent power of action of the Senate. If the  Prime Minister had put up a proposal for four year  parliaments which had not destroyed the power of the Senate  we would have supported it. It is his fault and not mine,

it is the Labor Party's fault not the Liberal Party's that  there is not a bipartisan approach on that issue.

Question No 2: Lionel Bowen gave you a good reason why you  shouldn't vote for Question No 2. He couldn't even tell you  what would happen to your upper house if Question No 2 were  carried. The Attorney-General, the first law officer of the

country, promising you constitutional chaos if you vote yes  - and with a straight face he expects you to vote y es.

Question No 3: I can understand why people in local government want a reference to local government in the  Federal Constitution. There are many in the Liberal Party,  probably many in this auditorium who might think that. I  have many friends who have said that to me. My reply to  them is that if we are to preserve the balance of our  Federal structure we must adhere to a principle which says  that those things that are within the authority of State  governments should be in State constitutions and those  things within the authority of the Federal government should  be in the Federal Constitution. You don't refer to the  Supreme Court of Tasmania or the Supreme Court of NSW in the  Federal Constitution because they only operate in their  respective states.  You refer to the High Court in the  Federal Constitution because that covers the entire nation  and is a court of appeal from every court in Australia.  Likewise, local government units do not operate across State  borders - they should operate within the jurisdiction of  State Governments.

Our objection to that is not an insensitive rejection of the  importance of local government. It is just a desire to  preserve the essential balance of the Federal structure.

In many ways my friends, Question No 4 is the most dangerous  of all. It really sounds almost undeniable - freedom of  religion, trial by jury, just compensation - how could  anybody, so the argument runs, possibly oppose those. Let  me just deal with freedom of religion. Does anybody believe

that freedom of religion in Australia is under threat? Does  anybody seriously believe that we are about to lose our  rights to be Catholics, to be Protestant, to be Buddhist, to  be Jewish, to be atheist, to be whatever we choose to be? Of course not. This is one of the most religiously tolerant  harmonious countries in the world. You must therefore say  to yourself, why on earth has this proposition been put up  and does it have any hidden dangers? It does have hidden  dangers and it ought to be roundly defeated.

I hold the strongest possible view that when you seek to  write down fundamental rights you run the enormous risk of  limiting those rights - rather than expanding them - because  you might leave some of them out.

6 .

We fought, and many of my Tasmanian colleagues, and I see  Shirley Walters and many other who fought with her, a great  grass roots campaign to defeat the Bill of Rights. Question  No 4 is a bill of rights through the back door. Don't let  anybody be mistaken. We made a decision in 1901 to reject  the American Constitution model.  Our Constitution has never  been a document which has purported to enshrine fundamental  rights because we have quite rightly decided that the best  protection of human liberty in Australia is to have a strong  parliamentary system, to have free press and to have an

incorruptible judiciary. When you have those three things  your society is never at risk of losing its liberty. All  the fine flowing words under the sun in a Constitution won't  prevent the deterioration of human rights if those three

institutions are undermined.

When I was as school I read about the Weimar Republic in  Germany in the 1920s. They had a beautiful clause in their  Constitution that said religious independence and freedom is  absolutely guaranteed in Germany.  That meant nothing when  the democratic institutions of that country crumbled.  There

is even greater Australian danger in voting yes to No 4 and  that is the possibility that it may, if it is carried,  revive the divisive bigoted debate on State Aid to  independent schools. Because in 1981 the High Court of  Australia rejected the attempt by the defence of government

schools organisation, the DOGS - who weren't really  interested in defending government schools, but were  interested in destroying independent schools - that that  organisation when to the High Court and they said we want  you to declare State aid unconstitutional under Section 116  of the Constitution. The High Court decided against it and  the three crucial words of the Constitution on which the  High Court's decision was based, will be omitted from  Section 116 if the Bowen amendment is supported on

3 September.  Thereby we will run the risk of reopening  something that most generations of Australians would have  thought was completely behind u s .

They are some of the reasons, ladies and gentlemen, why I  ask you to mobilise even more, all of you, to make sure that  these referendum proposals are being defeated. The success  that Peter Reith, our Shadow ATtorney-General, who has done  an outstanding job in organising at a national level our  campaign on this issue, the success that he achieved in the  High Court yesterday was quite remarkable.

Mr President, it is now a little over a year since the  election of July 1987. I pick up my newspapers, I listen  to the experts of the Canberra press gallery, and they all  tell me that it has been a dreadful year for the Liberal  Party. It is all doom and gloom and despondency. I just  want to take you through the score card of the last

12 months - and that score card is pretty impressive.

7 .

We won the Adelaide by-election with the second largest  successful swing in a by-election since all of you know when  - better than any other audience in Australia. We almost  won the Port Adelaide by-election with an 11.5% swing.

Nick Greiner inflicted the biggest defeat on the Labor Party  in New South Wales for 50 years - we won seats in the coal  fields around Newcastle and in the western suburbs of  Sydney. We have won by-elections in Western Australia and  in Victoria. We are in terrific shape here in Tasmania. We  are shaping up for elections in Victoria and Western  Australia.  At a Federal Parliamentary level we have almost

completed the policy review process that I set in train a  year ago.

In October or November of this year we will be releasing an  overall manifesto or statement of philosophic direction  which will form the blue-print, not only for a campaign that  will go on from then until the time of the election, but a  blue print for our actions in government.  All of that is  not a bad achievement 12 months after the last election.

We have in power a government that is increasingly and  overwhelmingly out of touch. Not only with its own basic  constituency, as evidenced by the revolt of such groups as  the Miners' Federation, and their insensitivity to the needs  and interests of ordinary trade unionists here in the State  of Tasmania, but also out of touch overwhelmingly with the  aspirations and the hopes of people in middle Australia.

Their electoral strategy is clear and cynical. They won't  give you any tax relief now. They will tax the hide off the  Australian people for the next 12 months and out of that  increased taxation collection they will give some of it  back, smile at you and say 'aren't we nice - please vote for  us again'.

Their strategy is to tax you heavily by the automatic effect  of higher taxation on inflation, store up that pot of money  and then hand a lot of it back immediately before the  election.

I have no doubt that Mr Keating, before the next election,  will introduce a taxation scale - wait for it - almost  identical to what I proposed in the last election. I can  remember going around the country hearing Mr Keating say 'oh  you can't vote for Mr Howard, because his taxation policy is

irresponsible'.  It is so irresponsible that Paul Keating  will implement it - I promise you - on the eve of the next  election.

Yet again a lead set by the Liberal Party will be followed  by the Labor Party. I sometimes hear liberals saying to me  gee it is difficult - they keep stealing our policies. Well  they do from time to time steal some of our policies. I  don't regard that as a cause of pessimism. I don't get  upset about that. I don't get concerned about it. I regard  that as an vindication of what we have done and what we have

stood for and yet another example that it is the Liberal  Party, even in Opposition at a Federal level, that is  setting the pace, fixing the agenda and giving the lead in  Australian politics.

8

May I conclude, Mr President, by first of all thanking all  of my Federal Parliamentary colleagues, Senators and  Members, for their support, for their loyalty and for their  commitment to the Liberal Party and to our cause over the

last 12 months.  Can I again express my admiration for  Robin Gray and his team for the sensible, steady,  free-enterprise Government that they have given the State of  Tasmania since 1982. Can I thank all of you in the Party  organisation for your help and for your hard work. I am

immensely enthusiastic about the Liberal Party's prospects  over the next 12 - 18 months all around Australia.

We have one thing to remember to ensure that we translate  that hope and that aspiration into a reality. It is  ultimately whether we are in Tasmania or in New South Wales  or anywhere else in our great country that we are all first  and foremost in a political sense we are all liberals.  Robin's success is my success. My success is Robin's

success. If we work together we preserve our unity and we  keep our basic principles we will once again see an  uninterrupted stretch of liberal governments all over  Australia.

ooOOOoo

