7

5

V'

PRIME MINISTER

CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY EMBARGOED UNTIL DELIVERY

SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER  FEDERATION OF ETHNIC COMMUNITIES' COUNCILS OF AUSTRALIA  CANBERRA - 30 NOVEMBER 1988

In the early days of this year of our Bicentenary, on 26  January, I launched the nation's Australia Day celebrations  with these words about the Australian identity:

"We are,  and essentially we remain,  a nation of  immigrants - a nation drawn from 130 nationalities.... In Australia there is no hierarchy of descent;  there  must be no privilege of origin.  The commitment is all.

The commitment to Australia is the only thing needful to  be a true Australian."

Today, as we approach the end of this year of Bicentennial  celebrations,  you have given me the pleasure of addressing  this conference which has adopted as its theme my words of  Australia Day.

Multiculturalism is indeed all about commitment to  Australia.

So I congratulate today not only the Federation of Ethnic  Communities' Councils of Australia for devoting your efforts  at this conference to analysing the nature of that  commitment; I congratulate also the efforts,  over many  years,  by your constituent councils throughout Australia to

help those millions of Australians they represent to realise  that commitment.

Above all else, our Bicentenary has been a celebration of  our identity as a nation of diverse ethnic origins -  Aboriginal,  immigrant and Australian-born - sharing a common  commitment to Australia.

Australia's national identity has been shaped by our convict  and colonial origins, by the often tragic relationship over  the last two hundred years between the Aboriginal people and  the European newcomers,  by successive waves of immigrants

from all over the world,  and by the hard work of generations  of Australian-born men and women.

COMMONWEALTH !

PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY  MIC AH

V

2.

Over two hundred years,  and through extraordinary effort and  commitment,  we have together built a wealthy and prosperous  nation; young,  strong, dynamic and vibrant; a nation capable  of addressing those economic and social challenges that

confront us and willing to protect and enhance our  democratic freedoms and our individual liberties.

Within this Australia, four out of ten Australians are  immigrants or the children of immigrants. Half of them are  from non-English speaking backgrounds.  Two million

Australians speak a language other than English at home. Less than half the population is of pure Anglo-Celtic  ancestry. Almost one in four Australians has no such  ancestry.

So let us proclaim from this Congress the demographic fact  that we are a multicultural nation. But let us proclaim too  that we are multicultural not only in character but in  outlook; multicultural not only by fact of demography but by

virtue of philosophical choice.

It is to express that choice that this Government  implements,  across a broad range of areas,  its policies of  multi culturalism. These policies celebrate our cultural  diversity and harness it in the interest of individuals and  of the broader community - they are policies to ensure that  our diversity is accompanied by social cohesion, a fair go  and a fair share for all. In other words, they are  multicultural policies for all Australians.

Over the post war years, support for Government policies on  the selection and settlement of new migrants in Australia  has been proudly and consistently bipartisan.

More recently, bipartisan support for a completely  non-discriminatory immigration policy has been one of the  great achievements of modern Australian political  leadership; a triumph of principle over populism, reason

over fear, statesmanship over politics.

That achievement has been accompanied, also on a bipartisan  basis, by the development and articulation of a rich and  unique multicultural ethos. Diversity has increasingly been  seen as a national resource, offering substantial cultural,

social and economic benefits for all Australians.

But if there is one regret that I will take from this  Bicentennial year, it is the collapse - I hope it will be  only a temporary collapse - of bipartisan support for the  principles of multiculturalism and of a truly  non-discriminatory immigration policy. These two great

features of our contemporary nationhood have,  most  regrettably, been undermined, in a year and at a time when  they deserved our greatest affirmation.

3.

The web of consensus that protected and fostered these  principles for so long, has been tragically and dramatically  ruptured by some members of the Opposition parties who  should have had the wisdom to avoid that rupture.  The

Opposition parties have allowed the extreme views of a  minority to fuel the same groundless fears and prejudices  that spawned the White Australia policy so many decades ago.

In doing so they have,  directly or indirectly, fuelled the  latent racism of a hostile minority in the community. There  has been, during the period of this debate, a disturbing  increase in the occurrence of racist incidents :  abuse,

graffiti,  broken windows, slashed tyres.  I know of these  ugly incidents, and you know of them even more directly than  I do - because some of you have been on the receiving end of  the hatred of this abhorrent minority.

We may regret these developments but we will not be  intimidated by them. On the contrary, they have steeled our  determination to continue a non-discriminatory immigration  program. They have made more absolute our commitment to  multicultural policies. I pledge to you that there will be  no return to the past.

At the commencement of the current Parliamentary session I  moved a resolution in the House of Representatives in which,  among other points, the House gave "its unambiguous and  unqualified commitment to the principle that, whatever

criteria are applied by Australian Governments in exercising  their sovereign right to determine the composition of the  immigration intake,  race or ethnic origin shall never,

explicitly or implicitly, be among them."

I have noticed recently that the Opposition Leader,  Mr  Howard, has attempted to deny the racist overtones of his  intervention in the immigration debate.  He was reported  recently as regretting that - to use his words - his  political, media and other enemies had linked him with some

kind of discriminatory attack on Australians of Asian  descent.

Of course I have never believed that Mr Howard was  personally motivated by any calculation darker than a grab  for votes. '

But at its most charitable,  it appears Mr Howard has  suffered a major memory loss.

Back in August, he was explicit. Asked about the rate of  Asian immigration, he said: "I wouldn't like to see it  greater... I do believe that in the eyes of some in the  community, it's too great,  it would be in our immediate term

interest and supportive of social cohesion if it were slowed  down a little, so that the capacity of the community to  absorb was greater."

4.

Following those comments the Opposition changed its policy  on immigration. And John Stone,  when he was asked whether  that new policy would mean fewer Asians entering Australia,

said:

"If we've gone through this four or five weeks of  absolute turmoil in order to have nothing changed,  what  a lot of goats we'd look,  wouldn't we."

Interviewer:  "So you think that the bottom line is, fewer Asians?

Stone: "That is so."

But despite all this,  if Mr Howard now genuinely seeks to  reassure the Australian community that his policy in  immigration is non-discriminatory,  I would welcome such a  statement as a major step towards the restoration of  bipartisanship on this crucial area.

In particular I would welcome his support,  belated though it  would be, for the August Parliamentary resolution.  I note  in passing that it is clear from what Malcolm Fraser said  again on this issue on the radio this morning that, were he

still leading the Liberal Party, he would have given that  support whole-heartedly.

Ladies and Gentlemen,

My Government will continue our development of multicultural  policies. These policies have three essential components:   social justice,  economic efficiency and cultural expression.

The social justice dimension of multi culturalism seeks to  ensure that the structures and practices of Australian  society reflect and respond to the diversity of the  population, that they serve all Australians and provide  equally for all,  regardless of background.  We do not demand

conformity as the price for equity or equality.

I do not, nor I believe do you, ask any unfair advantage for  immigrants.  We do not seek special preference for ethnic  groups.  Rather multicultural policies seek equal  opportunity for all. -

The economic dimension of multi culturalism seeks to ensure  that the skills and talents of all Australians are utilised  and harnessed in the interests of all of us - that our human  resources are not wasted by barriers of language,

indifference or prejudice.

The cultural dimension of the policy asserts and seeks to  ensure that all Australians are free to develop, adapt and  share their individual cultural heritage.

5.

Let me emphasise that such a commitment is not a recipe for  division or discord. The Government has said quite  explicitly that there are limits to cultural autonomy. In  view of some recent regrettable incidents involving the

expression in Australia of ethnic tensions that characterise  some of the countries from which Australian migrants have  come, let me spell these limits out again.

First, all Australians must accept the basic structures of  Australian society - our rule of law, Parliamentary  democracy, and English as our national language.

Second, multiculturalism entails both rights and  responsibilities. The right to maintain and develop one's  culture, language and religion - and, just as importantly,  the responsibility to accept the rights of others to do the  same - lies at the very heart of multicultural philosophy.

Multiculturalism offers each of us the opportunity to have  our traditions accepted, and our viewpoints heard: it asks each of us to accept that others have equal rights.

Third, all Australians are expected to have an overriding  commitment to the future of our nation. We will not allow,  because we can not allow, the bitter conflicts of the old  world to tarnish the lustre of multiculturalism in the new  world. It is this understanding upon which the title of  your Congress is premised.

Within these clear limits multiculturalism - Australian  multiculturalism - can provide a model of tolerance and  social harmony to the rest of the world. It allows all

Australians, whether Aboriginal, immigrant or  Australian-born, to take pride in their history and  traditions. It asks all Australians to contribute their  culture to our unique and developing national identity.

In this context, I must mention the report of the Committee  the Government established last year to advise on  Australia's immigration policy. As the CAAIP Report is  still being considered by Cabinet, I am constrained in what

I should say today - although at this stage I anticipate  that Senator Ray will be announcing the results of our  deliberations shortly. Although the CAAIP Committee made a  sterling attempt to address a very complex issue, it did not

come to grips with some of the hard, central questions about  immigration, such as the points test and overseas  qualifications.

So let me simply say this: there have always been two great, and sometimes overlapping, streams in Australian  immigration, both pre-war and post-war. There have been  immigrants who came here because we needed them, such as

skilled workers with vital expertise and experience, and  those who came here because they needed us, such as refugees  fleeing oppression in their home countries.

6.

Our skilled migrants have brought their families,  and those  family members themselves have frequently brought new >   skills. The popular dichotomy between skilled and family  immigration is often exaggerated and short-sighted - for  example,  economic immigrants are less likely to be attracted  to Australia if it means separation from their families.

That is not to say that we should not shape the immigration  intake to our national interest - to do otherwise would be  irresponsible,  to all concerned.  What I do say is that our

program will remain balanced.  We live in difficult economic  times - requiring compromise and restraint on all sides -  and our immigration policy must reflect Australia's need to  deepen its skills base.

But I give this commitment.  We will continue to give proper  weight within our overall immigration program to family  reunions.

Let me add,  too,  that under our national policy on  languages,  we are equally concerned with maintaining and  promoting second language learning - not just for the ethnic  communities but for all Australians.

I want to make it clear that second language learning will  remain a balanced program as long as this Government is in  office. There will be no artificial distinction made  between economic and community languages,  or between Asian  and non-Asian languages.  The fact is, as delegates to this  Congress know well, that many community languages - such as

Italian,  Spanish, Chinese, German and Arabic - are also  vital for our economic future.

Finally, let me make some brief comments about the Special  Broadcasting Service - SBS.

Australia is unique in the world in having two national  broadcasters,  the ABC and SBS. Amalgamation is off the  agenda,  but that is not the end of the question.

We have recently guaranteed SBS's real level of funding for  the next three years. And in the public discussion paper  issued a few months ago,  we proposed a possible package  which, if adopted, would guarantee and secure the future of

SBS in the long-term - beyond the life of this and the next  Government.

That package includes, for the first time,  a legislative  base for SBS, a defined charter, administrative  streamlining, and more flexible funding arrangements.  I  emphasise that it is a total package,  not a menu of

alternatives. It is still subject to community views and to final consideration by Cabinet.

I would urge you, however,  to look at the package seriously,  responsibly and dispassionately, lest a great opportunity to  secure the future of SBS is lost. In this very real sense the future of SBS is in your hands - in how you respond to the option that has been put before you.

7.

Ladies and gentlemen

In all the relevant policy areas - from job creation to  employment training, from education to income support,  from  language policy to communications policy - our specific  policies of assistance and our broader economic and social

justice policies have served all members of our culturally  diverse community. We have a record of which to be proud.

But what of the future? Let me take this opportunity to  foreshadow my Government's plans and intentions as they  directly affect those Australians whose interests you  represent.

First, we will press on with the access and equity strategy.  We will ensure that it secures a firm place in the  priorities and planning of all Government departments and

agencies. I have asked the Office of Multicultural Affairs  to work closely with these bodies, and with community  organisations, to ensure that adequate consultation can take  place.

Second, we will ensure that Australians of non-English  speaking background, and in particular women who face a  double disadvantage, gain equitably from the broad range of  social justice initiatives that will continue to distinguish  my Government.

Third, with your support we will do everything within our  power to secure the integrity, financial viability, and  long-term security and independence of the SBS - with an

unequivocal commitment to its distinctive multicultural,   multilingual character.

Fourth, we will work to ensure that all Australians get the  chance to learn English to a level at which they can  contribute their education and skills to our economic  advancement.

Fifth, we will continue to fund and promote a balanced  program of second language learning - languages that we need  for our economic future, for the efficient delivery of  social welfare, and for the celebration of our cultural  diversity.

Sixth, we will soon announce the blueprint for our  immigration policies to the year 2000 and beyond - it will  be a balanced strategy, reflecting the needs of both the  individual family and the broader economic imperative.

We will continue to resist those who would contaminate the  program, and impugn Australia,  with their appeals to  prejudice and fear. We will not turn back.

8.

Seventh, we will tackle head on the inequities and  inefficiencies that have previously plagued the recognition  of overseas qualifications. I am pleased to announce today,  for the first time,  that the issue of overseas  qualifications has recently been added to the Structural  Adjustment Committee's agenda for micro-economic reform.

Eighth,  we will actively promote citizenship. We will  encourage non-citizens to make that final commitment to our  nation voluntarily, and promote a better understanding of  the rights and responsibilities of citizenship amongst all  Australians. We reject, absolutely, the idea of forcing

people to take up citizenship.  We reject, equally, the idea  that we should make those who wish to become Australian  citizens wait longer to do so.

And, finally, perhaps most important of all, in 1989 we will  complete preparation of the National Agenda for a  Multicultural Australia.

These eight goals offer the promise of Australia becoming an  even richer and more dynamic multicultural society in the  decade ahead.

On behalf of my Government I have already accepted those  eight goals. I welcome the support that has come from the  states and territories - but tragically, the Federal  Opposition has not yet responded to the proposed goals. Its

leader continues to reject commitment to a multicultural  Australia - the very word offends him, and has been expunged  from his vocabulary.

No matter. The National Agenda for a Multicultural  Australia will establish the Government's policy directions  to the year 2000 and beyond. It will become a major part of  the broader agenda for our next term in office.

The National Agenda has the potential to communicate  multi culturalism to the broader Australian community. If  multi culturalism is a policy for all Australians - as it  indeed is - then any image or perception that it is an

ethnic monopoly must be resisted.

That is why the National Agenda consultations have  deliberately reached out to the broader Australian  community. It is also why we must continually stress the  social justice and particularly the economic dimensions of  multicultural policies - that they reflect mainstream  Australian philosophies and that they seek to harness the

skills and talents of all Australians in pursuit of the  national interest.

Let me, therefore,  in declaring this conference open,  congratulate the Ethnic Communities Councils of Australia,  and wish you well in your second congress.  Together we have  achieved much in recent years. Much still remains to be  done.  With your support we can.

********* * * ****************

