)C&

V

•^.AUSTRALIA, rii w v v v v  .J//////J

COMMONW EALTH   PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY

C. I. s.

PRIME MINISTER

CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY EMBARGOED UNTIL DELIVERY

SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER  CITIZENSHIP CEREMONY  PRESTON - 19 JULY 1988

At the outset,  I want to offer my congratulations to the  true guests of honor of today's ceremony - the 103 people  who are about to become citizens of Australia.

As a group, you represent an enormous diversity of people  and nations.  You have come from twenty five different  countries -from Europe, Asia, the Pacific and the Americas;

from countries as large as the United States and as  small as Mauritius;

from a country as old as democracy itself, Greece, and  from Italy, one of the cradles of Western civilisations;

from places which have been the source of Australian  settlers for all of our two hundred years of continuous  settlement, that is the United Kingdom and Ireland, and  from our newer sources of immigrants, such as Korea and  Lebanon.

Let me, for the record, list the background of all the  people here today. There are nineteen Yugoslavs, sixteen  Italians, thirteen Britons, ten Greeks, and people from  Argentina, Albania, Chile, Cyprus, East Timor, Fiji, India,

Ireland, Korea,  Lebanon, Malta, Malaysia, Mauritius,  the  Netherlands, New Zealand, Portugal, the Philippines, Romania, Turkey, the USA, and Vietnam.

So you represent most of the major ethnic communities in  Australia and a large number of the smaller ones.

In short,  you represent in your diversity the diversity of  the world.

But for all your diversity as a group, you have all as  individuals arrived at the same decision.

For all your different ages and backgrounds and lengths of  time spent in Australia, you are all about to make the same  commitment - by taking on the same rights and  responsibilities as citizens of Australia.

2.

And it is for that reason - that tremendous decision you  have taken and you are about to implement - that I offer you  my most sincere congratulations.

Ladies and gentlemen,

I want to take the opportunity of this citizenship ceremony  to say something about my Government's thinking on the broad  issues of citizenship -about what it means to become citizens of Australia, and

what it means to Australians to welcome newcomers as our  fellow citizens.

Last week in Canberra I had the pleasure of playing host to  the Prime Minister of Ireland, Charles Haughey, who was  visiting Australia as part of our Bicentennial celebrations.

A very large number of Australians of course proudly claim  an Irish heritage. In the Parliamentary dinner held in honor  of Mr Haughey's visit in the Great Hall of the new  Parliament House, I said that like so many people who had  come to settle in Australia from overseas, Irish Australians

retained - as they should - the love of their land of  origin.

But for the Irish-Australians,  as it is for so many new  settlers in Australia, what is paramount is the commitment  to their new home, to Australia.

In a similar vein, I had the memorable experience in Sydney  earlier this year of speaking at a dinner of the Lebanese  community.

Present at the dinner were representatives of the entire  spectrum of Lebanese Christian and Muslim groups, meeting  together in an atmosphere of harmony and community spirit.

The point is that they, too, have left behind them the  bitterness and divisiveness which so tragically afflicts  their homeland, and have devoted themselves, together, to

building a better Australia.

As I put it in my speech to the nation on Australia Day -  Australia's bicentennial day - it doesn't matter whether  your family has been in Australia for 40,000 years or for  seven or eight generations, or whether you have just

arrived.

What does matter is whether you are committed to Australia.

We are, and essentially we remain, a nation of immigrants -  a nation drawn from 130 nations as well as from one of the  world's oldest cultures,  the Australian Aboriginal culture.

It is this very diversity that makes us special among the  nations of the world, and that makes us a strong and  resilient community.

3.

Because from the day the First Fleet arrived - through the  fever of the Gold Rush - through the growth into nationhood  and the sacrifice of two world wars - through the massive  surge of immigration after 1945 as we built the foundations  of a modern economy - and through the trauma of the Vietnam  War and its aftermath - Australians for the entirety of our

two hundred years of national development have had to accept  the fact of our racial and ethnic diversity.

I do not pretend that diversity has always been fully  appreciated, or that newcomers have been made as welcome  among us as they deserved.

But I do assert that, fundamentally, what unites us is far  greater than what may seem to divide us. We are united - by  sharing a common land, sharing a common loyalty to the  institutions of our society, and sharing a common aspiration

to build a future of peace and prosperity for our children.

Throughout these two centuries the key to Australia's  growth, the secret of Australia's success, has been the fact  that regardless of their origin, people have continued to  identify themselves as Australians - as you are doing today.  And for two hundred years these people have made good that

commitment to Australia by devoting their labor to the  protection of our peace and the enlargement of our  prosperity.

Ladies and gentlemen,

In pinpointing what makes us distinctively Australian we  acknowledge the enormous debt we owe to Britain.

Britain has given us the basis of many of the institutions  of our free society: our system of Parliamentary democracy,  the principles of rule by law and the protection of the  rights of the individual under the law, our system of  liberal education.

English is our national language and we provide the means to  those from different language backgrounds to acquire skills  in English. British migrants continue to come to Australia  in large numbers and to be very welcome among us.

And we also need to acknowledge the great enrichment our  society has received from people of other nations and  civilisations.

I have mentioned the Irish, whose great contribution goes  back 200 years.  And I want to pay tribute to those who have  come here, particularly since the Second World W a r ,  from

such countries as Italy, Greece, Yugoslavia, the  Netherlands, Malta, Poland, Germany, Lebanon, Turkey, and,  more recently, from Vietnam and other Asian countries, ,  and  Latin America.

We should recognise that circumstances have often been  difficult for such communities.  But notwithstanding  residual pockets of racism and prejudice, those communities

4.

are now widely recognised as having made a tremendous  contribution to Australia and are very much welcomed here. On behalf of the Government, I want to say that they will  continue to be welcome here and their fellow countrymen and  women will continue to be welcome here.

In surveying Australia today, it is perhaps invidious to  single out the contribution of particular immigrants for  mention. But some names readily spring to mind.

Names like that of Dr Victor Chang, the eminent  transplant specialist, who has devoted himself to saving  the lives of his fellow Australians, whatever their  background;

Or Franco Belgiorno-Nettis, who not only has played a  major role in the development of Australian industry,  and in patronage of the arts, but who now, in his  support for the Australian pavilion at the Venice

Biennale, is proudly proclaiming his adopted country to  his country of origin;

Or Alex Tzannes, the eminent Australian architect  responsible for the design of the Bicentennial pavilion  in Centennial Park, Sydney; of Imants Tillers who  painted the mural within it;

Or Jenny Kee, whose exciting and innovative designs have  introduced Australian motifs and colour to the world  fashion scene; or Judy Cassab, one of Australia's most

distinguished artists, twice winner of the Archibald  Prize; or Dr Alessandra Pucci, Qantas Businesswoman of  the Year.

Or in the field of sporting prowess, an area of  passionate interest to so many Australians, where  immigration has had a tremendously beneficial effect on  our country. What Australians of diverse backgrounds

can achieve together has been shown in the past few days  by the likes of Frank Arok and Eddie Thomson, Charlie  Yankos and Paul Wade, Vlado Bozinovski and Scott  Ollerenshaw, Frank Farina and Graham Jennings, Oscar Crino and Alan Davidson, wearing the green and

gold of Australia with pride and distinction.

Being Australian is not determined by where you come from,  or how you dress, or what you eat, or what sport you play.

It is not determined by the language that you speak at home  or the religion that you practice. It is not determined by  the colour of your skin.

It is only determined, as the contribution of so many new  settlers proves, by your commitment to Australia.

What is that commitment?

5.

The ultimate expression of commitment is contained in the  Oath or Affirmation of Allegiance that is about to be made  by one hundred and three people.

The words of this undertaking require a declaration of  allegiance to the Queen - not the Queen of Great Britain but  the Queen of Australia, the Head of State of a mature and  independent nation.

The words of the undertaking also require a promise to  observe the laws of Australia and fulfil the duties of an  Australian citizen.

Last year, that commitment was made by nearly 75,000 people  - and we applaud their decision. But remarkably, there are  still an estimated one million Australian residents who are  qualified to become Australian citizens but who have not  done so.

We do not seek to make citizenship compulsory, and we will  not make it so.

But I do want to use this opportunity to urge as many people  as possible to follow your example - to express their  commitment to Australia by taking on the rights and the  responsibilities of Australian citizenship.

Such a commitment is entirely consistent with our policy of  multi culturalism: accepting and celebrating our diversity and forging it into a unified Australia.

A multicultural Australia is one in which Australians have  an equal right to participate in all aspects of the nation's  life. Just as importantly, it is one where all Australians  are encouraged to take up an equitable share of the

responsibilities for the country's future.

This concept of multiculturalism has come in for some  ill-informed criticism in recent times; ill-informed  criticism that is sometimes accompanied by crude  stereotyping.

The policy of multiculturalism is not, as is frequently  alleged, an attempt to fragment Australian society or to  create ghettos. It recognises the fact of diversity in  Australia and the socially enriching value of diversity.

But our policy of multi culturalism also insists that all  Australians, of whatever origin, accept the overarching  principles and institutions which make us one single nation.

Multiculturalism does not seek to import or entrench  division into the Australian community. And I reject  utterly any suggestion that it has in fact done so.

It is unfortunate that much of this criticism has followed  on from the release of the FitzGerald Report on Australia's  Immigration Policies - a Report which was commissioned as

6.

part of the Government's continuing monitoring of the role  of immigration in the development of Australia.

Let me emphasise that the Report has not even been  considered, let alone adopted, by the Government and in no  way constitutes "a blueprint for Government policy" as it  has been described in the press in the past couple of days.

The Government is currently undertaking a wide series of  consultations on the Report's recommendations, and it would  not be proper for me to pre-empt this process by discussing  the Report or its recommendations tonight.

But it is right, indeed it is necessary, that I say this. If those who, for whatever reason, have embarked on a  deliberate campaign of misinformation about our policies on  immigration or multi culturalism hope that they will thereby  overturn them, then they are badly mistaken.

There will be no return to the past. The White Australia  policy is dead and buried.

The central principles of our immigration policies are  non-negotiable. Immigration will continue to be based on  our national interest. It will continue to be

non-discriminatory.  Family reunion will remain a vital  component of it. We will continue to play our part in  meeting the great humanitarian obligation to provide a haven  for refugees fleeing oppression overseas.

Despite all our history of immigration, despite all the  contributions to Australia by immigrants, despite all the  promise the future holds, there are those who want to be  taken seriously when they say Australia should turn its back  on many of its rich sources of immigrants.

But who would dare tell me that this very electorate of  Wills - which is one of the most ethnically diverse in  Australia - is not distinctly Australian? Who seriously  claims it is not - as some would have it - "authentically"  Australian?

Let us face facts: The idea that Australia would be somehow better off if it had drawn new settlers from some countries  alone is absurd and repugnant.  We should all proclaim this  loudly and without hesitation.

Ladies and gentlemen, ,

Let me conclude as I began by addressing some comments  directly to the 103 people who are about to become  Australian citizens.

Each of you brings to these offices in Preston a life story  which is the stuff of human drama.

You come from different backgrounds and different individual  circumstances. When you leave you will go to different  homes, different jobs.

*

>  *

V

7.

But to put these individual differences to one side for a  moment, it is clear you have all come for basically the same  reason.

You have come because you seek the special qualities of  peace, prosperity and harmony which characterise the  Australian lifestyle.

As Prime Minister of Australia I sincerely and  wholeheartedly welcome your decision to take up Australian  citizenship.

As the local member for Wills I express my pride at your new  commitment to Australia.

And as a citizen of Australia I welcome you as my  fellow-citizens.

When you leave today, you will be taking with you all the  rights and all the obligations of Australian citizenship.

I urge on you the task pf helping ensure Australia remains  peaceful - remains prosperous - remains harmonious - so that  it remains what I assert it is - simply, the greatest nation  in the world.

*************************

