v  MINISTER FOR  ‘ FOREIGN AFFAIRS  . AND TRADE

No. Date

M179 29 October 1988

NSSSS*1 Â·

NEWS RELEASE

-COMMONWEALTH

parliamentary library MIC AH

(Embargoed for release  at 1530 AEST on  29 October)

AUSTRALIA'S RELATIONS WITH THAILAND

Attached is. the text of the address by the

Minister for Foreign Affairs and Trade, Senator Gareth

Evans, to the Australian-Thai Chamber of Commerce in

Bangkok on 29 October 1988.

viii/88

AUSTRALIA *  S RELATIONS WITH THAILAND

Address by Senator Gareth Evans QC, Minister for Foreign  .  Affairs & Trade, to the Australian Thai Chamber of

Commerce, Bangkok, 29 October 1988

I am privileged to be the first Australian Minister to  visit Thailand since the new Thai Government assumed the  reins of office. My visit at this time symbolises the  importance that Australia today places on Thailand and on  this strategically vital part of the region. But my purpose today is to emphasise not only the continuity of  our ties but the momentum that we can together inject into

the relations between our countries.

Australia and Thailand have much more in common than is  evident at first glance. What we lack in terms of shared  cultural or historical experience,  we make up for in  important shared perceptions and interests,  underpinning  what is a growing and fruitful bilateral relationship

between our two countries.

There are many different elements in the current

relationship between Australia and Thailand, including  shared security perceptions,  the importance we both place  on the cohesion of ASEAN, our cooperation in the control of  narcotics, the closeness of our defence forces as evidenced  by joint exercises,  high level defence visits and the  Defence Cooperation Programme, and development assistance.

Australia’s concern about the situation in Cambodia speaks  for our commitment to issues of common regional concern.  This year that coincidence of interests has deepened as  Australia has moved to co-sponsor the ASEAN resolution on

this subject at the United Nations. It is. pleasing to see

VII1/88

L.

positive signals on a Cambodia settlement which meets  concerns of regional countries.  This will clearly require  continued commitment by everyone.  A Cambodia settlement  could have substantial psychological and economic impact on

the region. We will all be pleased to see an end to

suffering there and to have the principle of Cambodian

sovereignty upheld at last.

We also have a common interest in the Indochina refugee  problem. The outflow of people from Indochina has been a  particular burden for Thailand for more than a decade, and  Australia has been concerned to provide the necessary

support for a resolution of the problems caused by this  outflow. Over the years Australia has provided a very  substantial amount of financial assistance both bilaterally

and multilaterally to help Thailand to cope.

I am sure also that you know that Australia has taken more  Indochinese refugees per head of population than any other  country. We have done so as a substantial expression of  our wish to contribute to regional stability, out of a  sense of humanitarian concern and to fulfill our

international obligations, but the effort has not been  without some domestic cost. Australia supports proposals  to hold an international conference on refugees to address  some of the more intractable problems of the outflow that  we all continue to confront.

In the field of trade diplomacy, we also have important  mutual interests. Progress in the Uruguay Round of  multilateral trade negotiations is essential to sustained  world trade and economic growth. Middle sized countries

such as Australia and Thailand have a vital interest in the  achievement of tangible results at the mid-term review in  Montreal in December.  Progress on issues such as

agriculture, and particularly tropical products,  will be  evidence that real efforts towards trade liberalisation are  being made.

2

L

The Cairns Group of Fair Traders in Agriculture, of which  both countries are members,  has and will play an important  role in achieving agricultural reforms.  The Cairns Group  proposal for mid-term review action on agricultural reform,  outlines a balanced and integrated framework for reform.  Australia continues to encourage both the US and the EC to

achieve genuine progress in reforming agricultural trade.

Yet another issue for the region as a whole in which we  have obviously shared interests is the question of the  appropriate form and pace of regional economic cooperation  for the Asia/Pacific area.  Australia and Thailand have  been engaged together in exploring this issue for some

years and your former Foreign Minister Thanat Khoman will  be remembered as one of the chief early supporters of  stronger Pacific cooperation.

We have to protect our interests by investigating more  energetically than before the prospects for regional-based  economic cooperation. We are not so much talking here  about another trading bloc, as trying to identify how  existing trading patterns in the region can be enhanced and

strengthened.  Again, I see no divergence in the interests  of our two countries on such questions, provided we keep  firmly in mind that the overwhelming priority for all of us

in the region remains the achievement of multilateral .trade  liberalisation.

Of all the shared interests between Australia and Thailand,  the one that is most immediately quantifiable is our  bilateral trading relations. Here it has to be said that,   notwithstanding its importance to the relationship as a  whole and what I believe is its very bright future,

existing bilateral trade and investment is still relatively  limited. Two-way trade amounts to approximately A$650  million. Exports to Australia are a mixture of traditional

. 3

k

Thai exports of seafood and other foodstuffs and the new  range of manufactures.  Although it is encouraging to see  that two-way trade grew some 27 percent in 1987/88 and that  Australian investment in Thailand more than doubled in the

same period, we must recognise that the base levels are  relatively low. Our bilateral trade does represent only a  tiny 0.8.% of Australia's total two-way trade.

All in all,  we do have a solid basis for our existing good  relations.  But it is still in many ways only a basis,  and  we need to keep working to build on that basis a more

extensive, diverse and mature relationship.

This is especially so given that the region, and every  country within it, is changing as fast as it is. Some  people fear change, but my belief - and that of the

Australian Government - is that change creates

opportunities and challenges. Today I want to suggest to  you that change gives us a chance to broaden, deepen and  give more vigour to our bilateral and regional ties as a  basis for the future.  Change inevitably brings out some

strains and misunderstandings but eventually it can bring  us all together in a stronger and closer relationship.

It is important to appreciate at the outset just how much  scope there is. for further growth and development in our  respective relationships.

It is not only with Thailand but ASEAN countries as a whole  that Australia's two-way trade is low: ASEAN represents  only around 6% of Australia's total trade, which is really  surprisingly small given our geographic proximity and your  generally favourable economic performance in recent times.

Investment flows are also relatively small, with the only  major exchange occurring with Singapore, and most of this  being portfolio investment. Our major trading partners are  the industrial zones of North Asia, North America and  Europe, rather than each other.

4

I,

I don't think it is an exaggeration to say that the ASEAN  countries' own reliance on the majors seems to have led  them to the view that Australia is a small player in the  region, with a commercial relationship that does not  require a lot of their attention.

I suspect, moreover, that the countries of ASEAN still tend  to see Australia in 1960s terms, i.e. as a country with  rigid trade and industry policies, inefficient

manufacturing and service industries,  and a recalcitrant  labour force.

In this way they have,  perhaps,  tended to not notice the  changes that are occurring in the Australian economy and in  the Australia/ASEAN commercial relationship, to undervalue  its potential and to approach the dialogue with Australia  as a low priority.

These circumstances are changing in two quite basic ways.  First, ASEAN countries are,  as we all know, industrialising  with varying degrees of speed - quite dramatically in the  case of Thailand .- and taking advantage of new-found

comparative advantage in labour intensive manufactures.

And secondly, Australian policies of deregulation and  liberalisation are making for a much more competitive  environment which is placing our manufacturing and services  sectors in a better position to join with ASEAN in a more  complex commercial relationship.

These changes mean,  in short,  that the rather stereotyped  view of Australia which has tended to exist until now  throughout South East Asia is out of date, and the

impressions that have existed of the limited commercial  potential in our relationship are in need of reassessment.

5

fc.

6

I want to highlight just how Australia is restructuring its  economy to reduce our dependence on commodity exports.  We  are looking to do more downstream processing of our raw  materials in Australia and to establish new industries

based on our high standards of education and technology.

We are planning a wholly new emphasis on trade in services  - not only tourism, but education, a whole variety of  professional services, communications and in particular  telecommunications,  where highly developed Australian

technology and managerial expertise have proved very-  marketable around the developing world.

Deregulation of the banking sector and the floating of the  Australian dollar occurred early in the life of the Labor

Government and we announced in May this year a major  program of microeconomic reforms including lowering of  assistance to industry and a comprehensive review of

company taxation. We have also been responsive to ASEAN  concerns in proposing changes to the Foreign Tax Credit  system.

And we have, not least through the Accord we have struck  and maintained with the trade union movement over the last  five years, restored growth, reduced inflation, improved  company profitability, dramatically increased employment

and generated a high level of investment activity. .

It is appropriate that I emphasise these changes today  because for many years ASEAN countries have been critical  of Australia's industry assistance policies and have seen  them as barriers to the development of two-way trade. I  want to emphasise that Australian industry policy has

changed direction in a fundamental way. Protection for the  manufacturing sector is being reduced by about one third

while at the same time the developing countries tariff

preference has been maintained. By 1992 most ASEAN  products will face tariffs no higher than 10%, and all

import quotas are to be eliminated by 1995.

7

The trade imbalance with ASEAN is rapidly being corrected,  and on present trends will in fact be in ASEAN's favour in  the next year or so: the current account is already in  ASEAN’s favour.

I hope that the full extent of these changes is recognised  in Thailand and that it helps in promoting a new

understanding of the commercial potential in the

relationship. The changes will mean an Australia which is  in a much better position to participate with Thailand in  building a more complex bilateral commercial relationship.

The changes will also create important market opportunities  for Thailand at a time when your new export industries are  beginning to make their mark in world markets,  and at a  time when you should be exploring alternatives,  in  particular, to the US market, given that US demand will  probably slow as it comes to grips with the trade and  budget deficits of that country. It is worth remembering

that the Australian import market presently amounts to A$40  billion, and is the fifth largest in the Western Pacific  Rim.

Thailand's spectacular economic takeoff of recent years,  combined with the solid foundation of the existing  bilateral relationship,  creates an ideal environment for a  range of activities. The potential is there for far  greater commercial involvement between our two countries.

But expansion of our commercial relationship will not  happen automatically.  It will require the concerted  efforts of .  our respective business communities and  encouragement by governments through policies that

facilitate trade and investment flows.

I know that some of you are already following up on these

new opportunities. But there is much to be done.

8

For our part,  we are actively encouraging Australian firms  to examine more closely the opportunities for greater investment and general commercial involvement in Thailand.  The Australian Trade Commission is working on a more

intensive effort to draw Australian industries' attention

to these opportunities.

The Australian Government is sponsoring a visit to Thailand  of a mission next month to explore opportunities in coal  and related areas such as coal mining, coal handling and coal-fired power station technology. This is a good example of where, particular Australian expertise can help  Thailand build the infrastructure necessary for its

economic growth. Australia has been active for sometime in  assisting Thailand develop its own lignite resources.

The field of telecommunications is one with very

significant potential. The large and highly experienced  Australian telecommunications authority, Telecom, is leader  of a consortium which is bidding for the contract to  provide and construct the main digital trunk network

throughout Thailand. This is a very competitive bid and  includes the attractive offer of transferring technology  and expertise to Thailand.

There are other areas of potential such as in steel mills,  and education services and a range of other products and  services worth close examination.

In terms of your own export access to Australia, the point  I cannot overemphasise is that the myth of Australia hiding  behind high tariff walls and other forms of protection is  just that, a myth. Deregulation and reduced protection

levels of the kind that we have been rapidly putting in  place have not brought disaster to Australian industry;

they have given it new vigour and incentive, and Australian  businessmen are now in fact looking outwards - treading the  pathways of commercial opportunity in South East Asia -  more energetically and with more imagination than before.

Our capacity to take full advantage of new bilateral  trading opportunities will only be realised if our efforts  are matched by a similar approach on the Thai side to  removing barriers to trade and innovative

entrepreneurship. I understand that Thailand is addressing  the question of import liberalisation and tariff

escalation, especially some relatively high tariffs on  manufactured and processed products and certain other  import restrictions. I certainly hope that as Thailand's

confidence in its own performance grows, such barriers as  exist will be expeditiously removed.

One of the characteristics of Australia's new export drive  into South East Asia is the growth of services trade. It  will be no surprise to those familiar with Australia's  capacities to hear that in areas such as computer software,

financial services, and educational services Australia is  rapidly acquiring a name for itself.

For those among you who feel that the recent unfortunate  debate on immigration in Australia implies that Australia  devalues the human contribution to our growth and

prosperity, let me quickly refute that. As I said in the  United Nations General Assembly three weeks ago, racial  prejudice and discrimination have no accepted place in  Australia today, and I am sure that - as was recently

resolved by both Houses of Parliament, and as my Government  has unequivocally undertaken - race will never again be  used as a criterion in our immigration policy. Those of  you familiar with Australia will know that Asians in  Australia have enormously enriched our country,

economically, culturally and intellectually, and that  understanding is very widely established in the Australian

community.

The Australian Government is determined to do all it can to  promote Australia's integration into this dynamic and  diverse region, and our relations with Thailand in  particular, through much expanded economic links,  political  and humanitarian cooperation, and through encouraging  simple human contact in as many ways as we can.

