CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY EMBARGOED UNTIL DELIVERY

SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER  BANQUET SPEECH  BANGKOK - 2 FEBRUARY 1989

Thailand and Australia have been close friends for many  years now. It is a friendship based on common international  interests and on an expanding economic relationship.

Moreover, Mr Prime Minister, we have a shared commitment to  the democratic processes.  Unfortunately we live in a world  where this cannot always be said with conviction.

Mr Prime Minister, it is because we can build still further  on that friendship and forge new ties between us, that I am  delighted to return once more to the great city of Bangkok  and the beautiful country of Thailand.

On my last visit in 1983,  I paid tribute to the tremendous  changes that were taking place in Thailand.

Mr Prime Minister, if anything I had underestimated the  magnitude of those changes.

For Thailand's economic achievements since then have been  truly remarkable. Indeed on the basis of rapid  industrialisation and with a recent annual growth rate of  around 10 per cent,  Thailand is fast emerging as another

tiger in a region already acknowledged as the fastest  growing in the world.

Once again I congratulate you, Mr Prime Minister, and  through you the Thai people, for your energy,  resourcefulness and determination.

It is particularly gratifying that these developments have  been accompanied by an obvious and substantial increase in  the pace and quality of Thailand's relationship with  Australia.

2 .

Two-way trade between us has more than doubled since 1983  and is now worth over A$600 million. In that time  Australian investment in Thailand has also more than  doubled.

Yet it remains true that,  given the potential depth of our  relationship, we have still only scratched the surface.

Mr Prime Minister,

The issues we discussed this morning, the friendly and  constructive nature of those discussions and the breadth of  the agreements that we reached make it clear that both our  Governments are determined substantially to expand our  relationship.

Indeed, I believe we can claim to have put in place a new  framework for the future.

We agreed to start work on an Economic Co-operation  Agreement which will provide a formal channel of  communication between us across the entire spectrum of  our economic relationship.

We agreed to set a new target of A$1.3 billion in two-way  trade by the end of 1991 - an ambitious but achievable  target which reflects our confidence in the future.

For Australian's part we see mutual benefit in expanding our  economic and technical co-operation to encompass new and  more productive activities, such as power generation and  distribution, as well as communications,  railways,

education, and agro-industry.

We agreed to negotiate a concessional finance agreement to  facilitate further links between us.

We are to renew negotiations on a double taxation agreement.

We have reached an understanding on energy co-operation.

And, not least significantly, we have agreed to a new focus  for Australian development assistance,  broadening its  emphasis to encompass support for private sector growth and  the development of public infrastructure and utilities.  This not only includes new areas of Australian expertise; it

also represents our recognition that Thailand's  needs are changing as it grows.

3.

Mr Prime Minister,

The mutual respect, the practical endeavour and the fruitful  co-operation of our relationship is well illustrated in the  pressing field of law enforcement, particularly in tackling  the international trade in narcotics and in combatting

organised criminal networks.

I would like to pay a special tribute tonight to the men and  women in both our countries who work tirelessly to frustrate  the efforts of those who seek profit from the suffering and  misery of others.

I am pleased that during my visit, I will be able to inspect  the Royal Crop Substitution Program. This project stands as  a testament to His Majesty's commitment to assisting  disadvantaged groups in your country, particularly those  rendered vulnerable through their poverty.

Mr Prime Minister,

Australian-Thai relations, which are so strong at the  official level, are reinvigorated on a daily basis by the  significant numbers of our people who travel between our two  countries.  Thousands of Thai students are studying in  Australian educational institutions, and they are welcome

among us. At the same time,  increasing numbers of  Australian tourists are visiting Thailand for business and  holidays.

An Australian Parliamentary delegation returned recently  from Thailand and its chairman has already reported  to me on the useful and positive talks that he and his  colleagues held with their Thai counterparts.

All these exchanges help build those intangible but vital  links which are the soundest of all foundations for friendly  international relationships.

Mr Prime Minister,

The impressive bilateral co-operation that has characterised  the Thailand-Australia relationship has been complemented by  our joint efforts internationally through the Cairns Group,  and in other forums, to create a fairer trading environment.

I pay tribute to the Thai contribution to this fundamentally  important mission.

4 .

For, without a more equitable global trading system, the  goals which we both seek for our peoples could be  jeopardised.

The failure of the Montreal Review to make progress on the  issues of vital concern to us was very disappointing. It  highlights the need for a still more determined effort by  the Cairns Group in the lead up to the Geneva meeting, and  beyond.

The major economies of the United States, the European  Community and Japan need to have sheeted home to them the  fact that, without agricultural reform, there can be no  equitable or meaningful reform of the international trading

system.

I am very pleased that in our discussion today, Mr Prime  Minister, you expressed considerable interest in ideas for  enhanced consultation. Our two Governments have agreed to  explore this matter further, leading to an assessment of

possible more formal intergovernmental arrangements than  presently exist in the region.

I welcome the fact that you will be discussing this with  your ASEAN partners and we too of course will be consulting  with them.

Mr Prime Minister,

In recent years we have seen an improvement in superpower  relations leading to a greater degree of optimism than has  been justified for many years. We must grasp the  opportunities this presents to resolve problems in our own  part of the world, and to work together in building a more  peaceful, stable and prosperous region.

It was towards this end that I announced, in June last year,  a regional chemical weapons initiative which is intended to  complement the development of a global chemical weapons  convention. An expert team from Australia is currently  visiting South-east Asia to continue the dialogue which has  already commenced within our region.

This is not an isolated example of close consultation  between our Governments on international political and  security issues. Over the years a habit of close and wide  ranging dialogue has developed, of benefit to both sides.

5.

We value, too, our dialogue status with ASEAN, an  organisation that has an enviable record in building  regional peace and prosperity.

Perhaps on no issue have we been in closer and longer  contact than on the resolution of the problems in  Indo-China.

Last November,  Mr Prime Minister, at the Foreign  Correspondents Club of Thailand, you spoke of transforming  Indochina from a war zone into a peace zone, linked with the  rest of South-East Asia through close ties of trade,

investment and modern communications.

Those comments echo my own sentiments and they truly reflect  the aspirations of Australians.

We very much welcome the new approach that you personally  have brought to Thai policy towards Indo-China by building  ties with Vietnam and Laos.

Vietnam must be encouraged to see that its future lies not  in being an island of stagnation in a sea of progress,  but  in participating in that regional prosperity which is now so  obvious here in Thailand. There are signs that Vietnam's

leaders now appreciate that fact.

The peaceful resolution of the conflict in Cambodia is a  crucial issue.  This has now been a source of regional  tension for more than ten years and must be resolved and put  behind us if our region is fully to realise its potential.   The Jakarta informal meeting process,  the discussions  between Prince Sihanouk and Hun Sen, and improvements in

Sino-Soviet relations give cause for more hope than at any  time in the recent past.  Your own initiatives, Mr Prime  Minister, which have involved dialogue with Vietnam, Laos  and all the Khmer factions and, indeed, throughout the

region have played a most valuable part in the drive towards  a peaceful solution.

Many problems, however, remain, not the least being  agreement on transition arrangements leading to elections  and the creation of a neutral, independent and sovereign  Cambodia.  There is also the need to ensure that Pol Pot and

those of his barbaric regime have no role in Cambodia's  future.

Australia stands ready, as part of the region, to play its  part in any restoration of peace in Cambodia.

6.

It is significant,  Mr Prime Minister, that the Government of  Thailand and Laos have recently agreed on the  desirability of building a bridge between your two  countries over the Mekong River.

Accordingly, in response to your request to me this morning,  I am pleased to say that Australia is prepared, subject to  further consultations and agreement with yourselves and the  Government of Laos, to take on the design and construction  of this project.

We see it as an important physical link that can play a  valuable role in the region's economic growth. Perhaps just  as importantly, bridge building is a welcome symbol of the  transformation of Indo-China from a war zone into a peace

zone.

We also strongly support the efforts of your Government and  others in the region to examine realistic and humanitarian  options for dealing with the continuing exodus of people  from Indochina, and in working towards an international  conference on this issue.

Australia's record in resettling refugees, including from  Indochina, is second to none. It is a record of which we  are proud. Aside from Aboriginal Australians who can  proudly claim to have resided in our continent for at least

40,000 years, every Australian can trace his or her roots  back to immigration at some point during the past 200 years.  We are indeed a nation of immigrants.

Although in the past our immigration selection procedures  were conducted in a discriminatory fashion, I can assure you  that since the early 1970s every trace of discrimination on  grounds of race, and every last vestige of the outdated  White Australia policy, has been expunged.

I can give you my commitment that such practices will stay  in the history books where they belong. Australia will not  reverse that.

To do so would be, as I have said in the Australian House of  Representatives, not only morally repugnant but also  economically insane.

It would be to deny the active and equal membership of the  Asian-Pacific Region towards which successive Australian  Governments have worked and through which our economic  future undoubtedly lies. So this is something on which

there will be no compromise.

7 .

Mr Prime Minister,

Australia is not selectively committed to the affairs of  this region.. We are totally committed to them.

So I am grateful, Mr Prime Minister, for the warm reception  I have received in your country and for the hospitality that  the Royal Thai Government has extended to me and Hazel.

I am particularly pleased that we have been able to  establish on a personal basis such a friendly and positive  dialogue.

In doing so, we have reaffirmed the warm Thai-Australian  friendship and continued the close dialogue that has, for  many years now, characterised our bilateral relationship.

But let us look forwards, not back.

Australia and Thailand share a future of enormous scope and  potential. It is a future offering virtually limitless  benefits to our people and to the people of our region.

Let us together seize those benefits and secure that future  in a spirit of friendship, co-operation and diligence.

******************************

