Philip Ruddock MP

/

Federal Member for Dundas  Shadow Minister for Immigration  and Ethnic Affairs

Electorate  Tel: (02) 858 1011  Fax: (02) 804 6739

Parliament House  Tel: (06) 277 4343  Fax: (06) 277 2062

CHINESE STUDENTS

Chinese students have good reason to feel betrayed by the

Government's handling of their situation.

The Opposition's approach has been at all times consistent. We

have sought to ensure that claims were properly considered within

existing policy guidelines. "

The Government however in putting in place "special arrangements"

has now produced an outcome which satisfies nobody. The four-year

temporary entry for pre-Tiananmen Square PRC Nationals was

intended as a form of holding operation to provide for

protection.

PRC Nationals have been encouraged to withdraw all their

applications for permanent residency. In order to compel,

blackmail and bludgeon PRC Nationals into accepting this limited

form of entry permit all sorts of techniques have been used.

Denial of benefits was always understood to be one of the

processes. Less well understood was the process of delay in

considering proper claims. The absence of guidelines for

processing conveniently enables officers to put applications to

one side.

This has meant that some ELICOS students who came to Australia,

in many cases with the intention of staying here permanently or

at least earning monies to pay fees for short-term courses of

study, have on-going protection for four years and permission to

work.

CO.-.lb-O.w.EA-.TH  PARL!AMENTARY LIBRARY  MiCAH

Regrettably, however, the more highly qualified, eminently

employable and outstanding students who ought to be in

Australia's interests, able to stay permanently, have been

prejudiced.

Four year temporary entry precludes long term employment

contracts in universities and research institutions.

The case of Chunshi Cui is only one of many.

The lack of flexibility of the new Migration Regulations has

meant that the best and brightest students will be lost to

Australia while those who sought to manipulate our migration

criteria through illegal entry may, in many cases, be rewarded.

This is just another example of the rigidity of the new Migration

Act and Regulations.

One simple step that might have been taken to alleviate concern

would have been to enable students in universities to access

permanent residency on employment grounds.

Such an approach would have ensured that the brain-drain to

Canada, the United States and Singapore of the best Chinese

student minds in Australia, did not occur.

The sooner such provisions are put in place, the quicker this

problem will be addressed.

January 2 1990

