PRIME MINISTER

TRANSCRIPT OF JOINT NEWS CONFERENCE WITH PREMIER WAYNE  GOSS, BRISBANE AIRPORT, 16 NOVEMBER 1990

E & 0 E - PROOF ONLY

JOURNALIST: What is the significance, Prime Minister, of this agreement as far as Commonwealth-State relations are  concerned?

PM: Well the significance is that after three years of attempting to get a position where there would be  effective management and protection of the World Heritage  area in the Wet Tropics of Queensland, we've demonstrated

that now that with the election of Wayne Goss and the  Labor Government in December of last year that the  interests of the people, not Just of Queensland but of  Australia, have been put first. With the election of  Wayne we were able to put behind us all the negativism of  the past of the previous Queensland Government and we sat  down and in March of this year we reached the initial  agreement and now this is the culmination of that  agreement which we tentatively reached then and under  which Queensland will undertake the responsibility of the  day to day management of the Wet Tropics area. Together  we will be putting in a substantial amount of money, I  think about $11M this year, Wayne, from the Commonwealth

and the State Government to ensure that for this and  future generations this great natural resource is going  to be nurtured and protected and made available for  enjoyment by not only the people of Australia but I think  an increasing number of people from overseas.  It's a  very important day and I want to express my sincere  gratitude -to Wayne Goss and the Government of Queensland

for the fulsome cooperation that they've extended which  has enabled us to reach this important day.

GOSS: From our point of view this is a very important day  not just for Queensland but, I think, for Australia  because the Wet Tropics are of national and indeed  international significance and they are now secured,

their future is secured by this agreement and by what I  think is a remarkable cooperative arrangement between the  Commonwealth Government and Queensland. There are a lot  of people in the National Party who are claiming that come

this day the Wet Tropics were going to be annexed by  Canberra. Well Bob's given me an assurance they're not  going to tow it away, it's going to be left in North  Queensland and it is going to be what we all want it to  be, and that is one of the most magnificent areas in the

PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY  M ICAH

2.

country properly managed.  I mean the past three years  have seen a brawl, they've seen the Wet Tropics under  threat, we've seen millions of dollars wasted on legal  challenges.  The future sees those millions of dollars  going in on a joint basis by the Commonwealth and the  State to manage and protect the Wet Tropics long term.

JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Premier Goss has organised a summit, an environment summit,  for next year to look at  dispute settling procedures.  Would you like to endorse  that summit and perhaps see any national bipartisan

agreement or any agreement might come out of that?

PM: Well there are two things to say. I mean history in a sense is overtaking us. Firstly, that Wayne and I have  talked about this and we would want to be cooperative and  involved. Secondly, of course, at the Special Premiers’   Conference which we held up here just very recently and

which Wayne and the Queensland Government did so much to  make it a success by their pre-organisation for it, at  that we agreed again on the need for Commonwealth-State  cooperation in these areas.  What we have now is a

position of common ground where we recognise the  responsibility that Government have as well as for  economic development which we share. We also have a  responsibility for making the right decisions about  protecting the environment. We recognise that there are  areas of shared responsibility and we want to make sure

that we have effective complementarity between the things  that we do so that (a) it's effective in terms of  discharging the obligation we have in protecting the

environment. And (b) in respect of the legitimate  development which must take place in this country that we  put the least unnecessary impediments in the way by  duplication and unnecessary doubling up of processes. I  think we are at one on that.

GOSS: Absolutely. I think the other thing that you  should know is that during the Premiers' Conference I had  private talks with Bob in relation to the Conference and  secured his approval for the Commonwealth Government’s  Ambassador on the Environment, Sir Ninian Stephen, and

the Federal Environment Minister, Ros Kelly, to  participate in the conference.

JOURNALIST: ... noisy brawls previously are now costing Australia and Queensland tens of millions of dollars and  knocking the confidence of investors coming here ...

PM: I think it's true to say that the lack of - there are two things I think are relevant in answer to your  question. I think in the past, particularly in regard to  Queensland, the siege mentality that existed on the part

of the previous government who wouldn’t accept the bona  fides of the Federal Government created an atmosphere,  a  poisonous atmosphere which would certainly have worried  people who were concerned about the future, either from

3.

an environmental sense or from a developmental sense. I think that’s true. Secondly, I would say that the rather   ad hoc nature of approach that had necessarily been adopted in the past was something that gave rise to  uncertainty and that's why we at our level and Wayne, of

course, at his level has been doing things as well. But  at our level we've tried to introduce a certainty of  process now. There are three elements to that. We've  set up the Resource Assessment Commission so that we're

going to be able to on these broad issues give the  opportunity for developers, environmentalists, State  Governments, unions and business to actually have an  input into the consideration of these broad issues.

Secondly, we've set up the ecologically sustainable  development processes in specific sectors of industry  which will report to us by the end of the year. We've  got the cooperation and involvement of the State  Governments in that. So that at the end of that process

X hope we'll be able cooperatively to lay down clear  guidelines and principles which will be available to  everyone. The third point, of course as I've said, is  the cooperation we now have out of the Special Brisbane  Conference with the States which I think will mean that  everyone concerned in this area, both those whose  emphasis is the environment and those who are concerned  with development, will know that there is a clear cut

relationship and a complementarity between Commonwealth  and State approaches on these issues. So whether you  look at any one of those issues, the existence of a sort  of troglodyte government in the past up here, that's  fixed. The emergence of Wayne and the Labor Government  and the actual processes have been rectified and the  basis of cooperation established.

JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, ... going soft on  environmental concerns since the election from some  environmental quarters. Can you wear that criticism?

PM: I can wear criticism which ever side it comes from. I mean I think Wayne in your now relatively short period  in Government has come to recognise, and indeed we've  talked about it, but in these sort of areas you can never  have 100% wins. You will never really totally satisfy

some people in the environment movement whose agenda is  almost limitless. I don't say that in a hectoring way.  In fact in respect of alot-qp them I don't question their  integrity but they do have, many of them, a fairly  elastic agenda and you will never totally satisfy them. On the side of some people it's dig up anything, cut down  everything. Now those sort of red-neck developers,  you'll never satisfy them.

JOURNALIST: Prime Minister -PM: If I could make a final point. What you've got to do as Wayne was trying toTdo here, we're trying to do  federally, is you've got to establish a process which

gives opportunity to the interest groups to express their

4.

point of view. Once you've established that process so  it's not just a system of ad hockery, then I think you're  well on the way to not satisfying everyone but at least  everyone knows where they are.

GOSS: I think what this agreement's about is that I  mean, on either extreme with the development and the   environmental lobby you'll always get complaints about governments. But by this sort of cooperative approach,

by trying to get results, you get the right balance and  the broad public want to see that.  That's what I think  we've got to achieve as Government.

JOURNALIST: Who does more harm, the radical greenies or  the red-neck developers?

PM: I think that's a pointless question and I know you're asking it for constructive purposes.  ... bona  fides in that respect.  But I think in some circumstances  one would say that the position of the environmentalists

is the harder to sustain on a particular issue. On  others the environmentalists are basically right and the  developers who'll want to do that particular thing  haven’t thought it through correctly. I mean there is no  overall judgement to be made about that, I think.

JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what was the substance of your talks last night with President Bush?

PM: The main purpose of my call, we spoke the best part  of half an hour, was the Uruguay Round because I wanted  to convey to the President the profound concern that I  feel about the sense of crisis and the reality of crisis  which has developed in the Uruguay Round talks. They  were scheduled to complete in the week commencing the 3rd  December in Brussels. That was to be the final week. Now on the situation that's been created by the European

Community where they put a totally unrealistic offer on  the table which is totally prejudicial to the interests  of Australia and the Cairns Group and particularly of our  rural producers, I was not prepared to sit by andjust say  well all is lost.  The basic point that George Bush and I

discussed was the need to inject now into these latter  stages of the Round, political clout, that the  negotiating Ministers must know that at the Heads of  Government level there is a concern that we are facing  not merely a potential economic crisis but a political

crisis because if the world doesn't come to sensible  decisions to create a freed up, liberalised,  international trading system then the losses are not  merely economic but they will have profound political

implications. So we talked about that and how we can get  more political input and impetus to the process.

JOURNALIST: Did he give you some sort of indication that he'd be taking some sort of decisive action to overcome  the impasse?

PM: He outlined actions that he was taking. He'd just  within the previous 24 hours, he'd had meetings with the Lords of the European Community and the Commission and

the Italian leadership and he also indicated to se at   that time that Secretary of State Baker was going to be   engaged in bilateral discussions with the European leaders on this issue. So he and I are at one on the  understanding of the dimension of the crisis and the need  to exert leadership and we have undertaken to continue to  be in contact about what comes through from these

initiatives that he's taking, the initiatives that I'll  be taking now in contact,  direct contact with European  leaders. So we are at one on this issue.

JOURNALIST: Have you reached a decision on whether you'll be going personally to Brussels?

PM: No, I won’t be going personally to Brussels because at this stage the need is to get into the Brussels  meeting and in the minds of the Ministers involved, the  political concerns that there is at the Head of  Government.  So we've injected that. It is possible that

if the Brussels meeting doesn't of itself generate  discernible progress that we may need to contemplate a  Heads of Government meeting subsequent to that and we did  have some preliminary discussions about that. He did ask  me - what we talked about it was overwhelmingly about the

Uruguay Round, as I've explained to you. I, of course,  took the opportunity of discussing the Gulf with him and  we both affirmed to one another the commitment that we  have firstly to the essentiality of the withdrawal of

Iraq from Kuwait and the release of all hostages and the  profound hope that we both share that this conclusion can  be achieved by peaceful means.

JOURNALIST: Did he seek any greater commitment from Australia if the Gulf war eventuates?

PM: No.

JOURNALIST: And was there any indication from him that the outbreak of hostilities was imminent?

PM: No.

JOURNALIST: Or inevitable?

PM: No.

JOURNALIST: Mr Hawke, apparently last night there was a fairly savage attack on Mr Hewson.

PM: Last night?

JOURNALIST: Or yesterday. Some parties are suggesting that maybe you and Mr Keating were ...

PM: Yes, some people would want to do that to avoid the

5.

6.

realities.  I mean if you're on weak ground you always  seeK to divert attention from weakness by suggesting that there has been some lack of gentlemanliness in the attack

that's been made. The realities, of course, are that Dr   Hewson is the pathetically weak leader of not just an irrelevant Opposition but a dangerous Opposition. That  has been made clear by myself and Paul Keating in two  distinct areas.  In the area of economic policy he's been  exposed as a man who, as Paul Keating graphically but

rightly put it, will roar like a lion at his doorstop  interviews and say we must cut Government expenditure, $3B. But when the chips are down on an issue which  would've immediately in this year saved $25M or $57M in a

full year, he goes in and puts the proposition of support  for the Government in his Caucus,  but then rolls over and  allows himself to be done, doesn't fight for it and  indeed so weak is his attitude in his own Party room,  that it becomes a matter of comment to the media by his  colleagues. Now that's something that you should attack

in Government.  I mean if you are concerned about  responsible economic management then you can't afford, in  our judgement, to tolerate such weakness and hypocrisy on  the part of the Opposition and its leadership. To expose

that is not going over the top, to expose that is our  responsibility. And I said there were two areas. Secondly, the area of foreign affairs. I mean we had the  ridiculous situation which emerged yesterday that we have

the Opposition in this country now attacking not simply  Nelson Mandela and those who fought against apartheid,  but we ,now have them attacking the President of South  Africa and accusing him of playing favourites because he

has chosen as his interlocker, Nelson Mandela. These  things, you know, are just ridiculous intrinsically but  they are also dangerous for Australia.

PM: Prime Minister, Keith Wright this morning has said that he will be defecting factions.  Are you concerned  about what appears to be growing factionalism? I mean  that's three MPs now who have indicated -

PM: That's not growing factionalism, it's a bit of a reshuffling of the pack.

JOURNALIST: inaudible

PM: It's not unseemly at all. I mean X think that if Keith believes that he will be more comfortable in the  Left then that's a decision that I can live with and  presumably the Left is able to live with. That's alright  with me. He will be continuing to be a good

representative for his electorate and making a good  contribution in the Parliament. You see, what we've got  in the Labor Party is a system that's not perfect.  I  mean I've had my things to say about us and the factional

system has never worked perfectly. But see what you've  got to understand is the difference between Labor and the  conservatives is this; Labor is about change, Labor never  accepts that society as it is is perfect.  We believe

7.

that it always can be improved. That's why we now are on   the eve - and it's appropriate to say it here in this great State of Queensland which was in so many ways the  cradle of the birth of Labor - we are now on the eve of the centenary of the labor Party, unchanged in name and  unchanged in commitment. That commitment is to change

and improve society. Now when you have that sort of Party you have within it people who have causes and  concerns and some people will want to deal faster with  some issues than with others. Now the way that's worked  out is that people are in the factional groups but  they're united, united about wanting to affect a better  society. That's Labor. On the other side all you have  is this mindless, grasping back for the past of wanting  to restore things that are unrestorable and shouldn't be

restored. So you get changes of names in the  conservatives, they change their name, change their  leaders. In a sense,  nothing changes with them. I can  live with these things.

JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, factionalism hasn't been a problem in the federal sphere yet it was so divisive for  the Labor Party here in Queensland for so many years. Are you worried that it could become divisive at the

federal level?

PM: No it won't become divisive. I mean we get value out of the faction system. It is a way in which you know  who to deal with and instead of having to say well now  you know some people have got a different point of view

and they've got a different point view, but with the  factional system at least you've got a method of  organisation. As I say, let me make it quite clear, the  faction system isn't perfect and it can cause problems at  times. But we've shown now in nearly 8 years of  Government how it can be a force for good and Wayne Goss  here in Queensland is sitting in control of the

situation, he recognises that groups exist and he's able  to work with them.

JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the Australian Embassy official who last year apparently took to two Chinese  refugees with a stockwhip and an air pistol has been let  off withÂ®fine of $350, demoted but he still remains in  the Department. Isn't that fairly lenient?

PM: It seems on the face to be reasonably lenient. I've just been made aware of this issue. I'll talk about it  at the appropriate time with the Minister, Senator Evans.  On the face of it it does seem rather lenient but I would  want to know all the circumstances.

JOURNALIST: inaudible

PM: Sure. On the face it wasn't very acceptable behaviour. I'm not trying to defend it in any way.

JOURNALIST: Mr Hawke, the Charles Blunt postage problem.

8.

Do you regret stirring up that hornets nest?

PM: Do I regret stirring it up? No, I've no problem but   I bet Charlie does. JOURNALIST: Did you expect it to go as far as it has now with allegations of -PM: I ’m an innocent in these sort of things. I mean I

just had a question asked of me there in Question Time.  I mean there must be a - did they ask that question? They did and so I discharged my obligations of having the  information obtained and up it comes - $278,000. A lot  of licks.

JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, will you be having any more talks with George Bush in the near future?

PM: It's quite possible. I mean he expressed his pleasure that I ’d rung him and that we'd had the  opportunity of conversation and he undertook that we'd be  staying in contact.  Now whether that means any more  phone calls in the near future or handling it through our

diplomatic representatives but we are going to stay  closely in touch on the issue. It's very important for  Australia's farmers that we do.

JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, just back to Charles Blunt. Is there any ... or any ground for legal action or  recovery of those monies that ...

PM: I don't know. I haven't involved myself in that matter. That's something for the relevant Ministers and  Departments. I haven't intervened in that at all.

ends

