/

eTWHNISTER FOR  FOREIGN AFFAIRS  AND TRADE NEWS RELEASE

M154  Date:

10 September 1990

AUSTRALIA'S FOREIGN POLICY: RESPONDING TO CHAUGE

The following is the text of the 1990 Sir Hermann Black Lecture,  delivered by the Minister for Foreign Affairs and Trade, Senator  Gareth Evans, University of Sydney, 10 September 1990.

AUSTRALIA'S FOREIGN POLICY: RESPONDING TO CHANGE

The 1990 Sir Hermann Black Lecture, delivered by Senator  Gareth Evans, Minister for Foreign Affairs and Trade,

University of Sydney, 10 September 1990.

This is the first Sir Hermann Black Lecture since the man it

honours died in February, and I am very honoured indeed to

have been invited to deliver it. Sir Hermann will be long

remembered with warmth and admiration for his humanity, his

enormous range of interests, and his extraordinary

communication skills. As Chancellor, he was a symbol and

guiding light for the University, but he was far from a

distant, aloof figure. As well as being a scholar, he was a

teacher of distinction who relished the contact with students

which lecturing provided:  his first lecture was in 1933 and

his last in 1989 - an outstanding record of service to his

calling. His news commentaries - which is how I, as a

Victorian, best remember him - were marked by wit, insight,

and an infectious enthusiasm for the subject at hand.

The University of Sydney and our nation as a whole are much

the poorer for having lost, within a few months,  both Sir

Hermann and another outstanding member of the University

community, the former Vice-Chancellor, Emeritus Professor John

Ward, who along with members of his family and circle of

friends,  was tragically killed in a train accident in May.

John Ward was an historian of distinction who set the

University on the way to becoming one of the most eminent and

productive centres of historical study, and a Vice-Chancellor

who brought great administrative skills and personal qualities

to the demanding task of managing institutional amalgamation

and consolidation.

Both men, in their dedication and intelligence, and in the

international perspective they so amply shared, stand as

admirable examples of those qualities of versatility and

application which our nation will need increasingly if we are,

in the words of this lecture's title, to respond effectively

to change.

* * *

XVI / 9 0

2 .

The world of foreign policy is. a world of change - change not

only in the form of gradual evolution, but often also, as the

Middle East demonstrates, in the form of sudden and violent

developments which call for fast policy responses. With

events tumbling head-long around you, there is a real danger

of becoming carried along in reactive mode, dealing with

problems as they crop up, losing track of the basics, and

eventually giving up any chance of actually initiating action

to serve the nation's own purposes.

It was to try and avoid that danger that, shortly after I

became Foreign Minister - two years ago this month - I sought

very deliberately to establish a framework for foreign policy

decision-making that would at least set some fixed bearings.

I spelt out .  what I had in mind in a speech at an ANU

Bicentennial Conference in December 1988 - rather to the

disappointment of the organisers, I have to confess, who would

have much preferred a breathless enunciation of new policy

visions rather than all this stuff about process! The

framework had the following elements:

.  First, Australia's foreign policy, like that of any other

country, should be directed at the protection and

advancement of our national interests.  These in turn

could be identified in three baskets: geo-political or

strategic interests; economic and trade interests; and,

perhaps a little less predictably, our interest in being,

and being seen to be, a good international citizen.

. Secondly, having interests is not necessarily the same

thing as having influencer  the capacity to advance them.

Actual opportunities for influence in pursuing an

interest are, in the diplomatic marketplace, what is left

over when capacities are discounted by constraints. The

beginning of wisdom in foreign policy-making is to be

able to recognise, weigh and balance - at least roughly -

all the elements on both sides of this ledger.

3 .

. Thirdly, the effective political management of foreign

affairs, in the untidy real world of a cacophony of

claims but limited resources, depends on developing and

constantly refining priorities. Priorities, in turn,

define themselves as those policy areas where a major

interest coincides with at least some opportunity to

influence its achievement: there is not much point in

devoting major resources to the inherently important but

immovable or, on the other hand, the attainable but

inherently trivial.

In my Roy Milne Lecture a few months later, early in 1989, I

sought to put some flesh on these dry procedural bones by

identifying, with appropriate elaboration as to what all this

meant in specific policy terms, the four main priorities of

Australian foreign policy, in order: maintaining a positive

security and strategic environment in our own region; pursuing

trade, investment and economic cooperation; contributing to

global security; and contributing to the cause of good

international citizenship.

What I have been trying to do as Foreign Minister over the

last two years - which just happens to have been two years of

the most tumultuous changes in the world order in just about

anyone's lifetime - is define a place for Australia in the

world which reflects the kind of judgments, and priorities

flowing from them, that I have just outlined.

What I would like to do today is to take stock of how the

foreign policy approach that I have described has worked in

practice: to look at how our policy-making and implementation

has coped with the momentous period of change that we have

been through, and how - by extension - it is likely to cope

with the period of further change which undoubtedly lies

ahead.

No-one should underestimate - not that I imagine anyone here

4 .

does - the extent of the change which has occurred over the

last two years. Two years ago everyone was confidently

assuming the indefinite continuation of superpower

confrontation, a divided Germany, and Eastern Europe's

subordination to Moscow. If the present Gulf crisis had

occurred two or three years ago, then, as Eduard Shevardnadze

said in his Vladivostok speech last week, we could well have

been right on the brink of world war, with nuclear forces

placed on high combat alert. Two years ago it was hardly

thinkable that the Presidents of the USSR and South Korea

would have met; or that a rapprochement between North and

South Korea would be back on the agenda; or that there would

be a democratic election - complete with campaigning rock

stars - in Mongolia. But then, by contrast, there are few who

would have thought that the then apparently inexorable rush in

China towards modernisation and liberalisation would have

come, at Tienanmen, to such a rude and jarring halt.

Two years ago no-one could have confidently predicted that the

Five Permanent Members of the UN Security Council would agree

on anything substantive, let alone full-scale sanctions and

their military enforcement against a maverick state in the

Middle East, or a full-scale peace plan for Cambodia. Two

years ago no-one had heard of APEC - Asia Pacific Economic

Cooperation - let alone believed it possible that the twelve

major trading nations of the Asia Pacific would have already

met twice to put in place what a prominent US official

described as "one of the most important international

(developments) since Bretton Woods". And two years ago who

would have thought it possible not only that the South African

Government and the ANC would be negotiating the dismantling of

apartheid, but that the South African National Party would be

actively recruiting Blacks as members?

It is fair to say that in the two years I have been in this

job - and I don't exactly claim a causal connection! - the

world order has been more fundamentally transformed than at

any time since the First World War and the Russian Revolution,

5 .

or the French Revolution before that.

In assessing our foreign policy performance, I think we should

accept that responding to change does not mean just reacting

to change: it means in some cases anticipating change and

influencing its direction. Certainly there are areas of

international activity - the events in Eastern Europe are a

clear example - where Australia's influence will be

negligible: where, to adopt the language of economics, we

will be change-takers.  But equally there will be many other

areas of national interest, not only in our own region but

globally, where, with a little creative imagination and a lot

of carefully directed diplomatic energy, we can be genuinely

influential. Our foreign policy should be tested not just by

how well we have ridden the waves, but how well - in

appropriate cases - we have made them.

The point I want to emphasise is that, as a nation, we should

not talk ourselves into inactivity, into believing that we

have little responsibility and no role to play in world

affairs. Certainly this Government has refused to accept

passively a sense of powerlessness in the face of change.

More than any other government in recent Australian history,

we have been constantly on the look-out for opportunities to

influence the international environment to Australia's

advantage.

How well have we succeeded?

Let me begin with Australia's geopolitical and strategic

interests, which have both a global and a regional dimension.

Two years ago I ascribed slightly higher priority to our

interests in maintaining a positive security and strategic

environment in our own region than I did to our interests in

contributing to global security: today, with minds

concentrated by the Gulf crisis, one might reverse the order.

6 .

But in a world where the familiar pattern of confrontation and

ideological dispute between two superpowers is rapidly giving

away to a multipolar swirl of competing candidacies for power

and influence, these distinctions are becoming blurred: how

the world as a whole reacts to regional conflict is becoming a

litmus test for both regional security and global security.

Peace Keeping.  Australia has had a long and proud record of

commitment to UN security, peace-making and peace-keeping

operations - from Korea to Namibia. Our commitment to the

multilateral response to the Gulf crisis, UN supported if not

yet UN controlled, is very much in that tradition.

Iraq's aggression gives us a sobering reminder that the habits

of millenia do persist, and that territorial expansionism and

a preparedness by some nations, more powerful than their

neighbours, to impose their will by force, is not a thing of

the past. The situation in the Gulf is the first exercise in

crisis management which the international community has faced

after the Cold War. It will provide an example and set the

tone for the future. If the international community handles

the crisis well,  the demonstration effect will weigh heavily

on those nations which might in the future be tempted to

settle disagreements by intimidation and aggression; if we

fumble and hesitate, content ourselves with declarations that

have no effect and resolutions that are not enforced, the

demonstration effect will be equally convincing in its message

that the international community is powerless to enforce a

decision that we all recognise to be just.

Australia has the most direct of national interests in helping

get this crisis right.  For our own security, for the security

of all countries in our region, and for all small and medium­

sized nations, it is important that multilateral opposition to

aggression be shown to be successful. It was important that

the reaction to Suddam Hussein be geographically global, and

important that it be fast. Our reaction, so far from being

premature, made an important contribution to generating the

7 .

breadth of international support that will be crucial if that

opposition is to succeed.

Chemical Weapons.  There are other areas of international

security, including some given a new prominence by the Gulf

crisis, where Australia has assumed not just a supporting but

a central initiating role. We are now one of the leading

countries in the world in the international effort to abolish

chemical weapons. We have worked in a determined and

unrelenting way to secure an international Convention to ban

the production, transfer, development and use of chemical

weapons, which have assumed - alarmingly, because of the

relative ease and cheapness with which they can be produced -

the status of poor countries' nuclear weapons. Our successful

hosting of the 70-nation Government-Industry Conference

Against Chemical Weapons in 1989 brought that Convention

closer to realisation, and crystalised a dialogue between

those negotiating the Convention and those who will bear part

of the burden of its implementation, the chemical industry.

We have pursued that CW campaign on various fronts - by

chairing the Paris-based Australia Group on the control of

trade in chemicals needed to manufacture chemical weapons;

launching a regional initiative to build support for a CW

Convention and prevent proliferation of chemical weapons into

the region; and currently holding the position of coordinator

for the Group of Western countries at the Geneva Conference on

Disarmament.

Our effort will persist until it succeeds. Our object is to

achieve a CW Convention, universally applicable, banning

everywhere and for all time these cruel and aberrant weapons

of war.

Nuclear Disarmament. Australia has also been assiduous in

seeking progress on measures to eventually eliminate those

other appalling instruments of mass destruction, nuclear

weapons.  Again, our efforts have ranged over a wide variety

of forums and initiatives, from the conclusion of the Treaty

8 .

of Rarotonga, establishing a Nuclear-Free Zone in the South

Pacific, to our continuing efforts in the United Nations to

achieve an early Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty. Last month,

Australia was a leading participant in the Review Conference

of the Non-Proliferation Treaty: a Treaty, the most widely

adhered to arms control agreement in existence - but still not

widely enough adhered to - which recognises the grave

consequences of the spread of nuclear weapons beyond those

states which already have them, and which calls on all parties

to pursue negotiations on effective measures for the cessation

of the nuclear arms race.

One of the essential elements of the NPT is the obligation it

imposes on nuclear weapons states to pursue nuclear arms

control negotiations. Recent developments provide grounds for

believing that the nuclear arms control process between the

superpowers is at last on track.  Australia is not of course a

central player in those negotiations. But we have made an

important contribution by hosting the Joint Facilities in

Australia, which play a crucial role not only in stable

deterrence in a world in which, for all the recent easing of

superpower tensions, there are still in existence 50,000

nuclear warheads - with a destructive capacity between them of

800,000 Hiroshimas - but also in the verification of arms

control and disarmament agreements.  That combination of roles

that the Joint Facilities play is no less necessary now that

progress is being achieved than it was in the past, and this

Government makes no apology for being as committed to their

retention as any of its predecessors.

Regional Security Arrangements.  The security picture in our

own Asia-Pacific region is generally favourable: moves

towards democracy in various countries of the region are very

encouraging, as are the moves toward healing some of the

region's points of tension; and the world-wide retreat of

ideological competition has significantly decreased the level

of global tension. But in an environment where there are a

number of powers of great relative economic and military

9 .

strength, and where the stability (tense stability though it

may b e ) engendered by superpower presence and competition can

no longer be assured, there is no less uncertainty than there

has ever been, and probably rather more, as to what the

longer-term political - and by extension security -

environment in the region will be.

In a major Statement to the Parliament last December on

Australia's Regional Security, I sought to define in a

systematic way Australia's policy response to these various

currents impacting on security in our region. The essence of

that Statement was the theme that the policy responses or

instruments available to protect Australia's security are

multidimensional: based not only on traditional military and

politico-military capability, but on diplomacy, economic

links, development assistance, assistance for "non-military

threats to security" like narcotics and refugees, and the

exchange of people and ideas.

The ideas in this statement have a larger applicability to the

Asia and Asia-Pacific region as a whole. As became apparent

at the recent ASEAN Ministerial Meeting I attended in Jakarta

in late July, and in the course of a subsequent visit to South

Asia, and in speeches and statements that have been made in

various forums since, there is now an increasing interest in

developing a more systematic dialogue on security issues - not

only in South East Asia and the South West Pacific (the region

of primary strategic interest to Australia), but in the North

Pacific and the Sub-Continent as well. The kind of dialogue

being talked about here is dialogue to reduce the possibility

of misapprehension that is a large element of friction between

nations; dialogue so that we can come to share perceptions as

the strategic landscape changes around us; dialogue so that

we can assure others, and be reassured ourselves in turn,

about the role of military forces; dialogue that can be used

to reach out to former adversaries as well as to strengthen

existing links with friends; dialogue that can be used to

build up a cooperative capacity to tackle jointly regional

10.

issues such as security of sea lanes.

It may be that, as I suggested in Jakarta at the ASEAN

Meeting, at a later stage in this process of dialogue a

conference on Security and Cooperation in Asia - drawing

inspiration from the Helsinki process, or Conference on

Security and Cooperation in Europe - or some other similar

forum - will be seen as timely. If so, it will be because

processes of dialogue have been commenced, and have been

successful in enhancing confidence and new patterns of

cooperation among various groups of countries in the region.

Bilateral__ Regional__ Diplomacy. Multilateral efforts in

building security arrangements can only work against the

background of active bilateral diplomacy, and we have been

working very hard in this respect in both South East Asia and

the Pacific. A particularly important priority has been to

get our traditionally rather volatile relationship with

Indonesia back on an even keel.  We have been working away

quietly and systematically to rebuild the foundations of that

relationship and have established, over the last two or three

years, habits of cooperation and dialogue which have stood us

in very good stead both in bilateral problem-solving - over

issues like fishing boat incursions and the negotiation of the

path-breaking Timor Gap Treaty - and in tackling regional

issues like Cambodia and Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation.

We have also been doing some systematic institution building,

with the establishment of the Australia-Indonesia Institute

the most visible sign of this process at work.

Cambodia.  The regional security issue on which we have worked

hardest of all has been the tragic conflict in Cambodia.

Australia's peace efforts here, culminating in the detailed

plan for an enhanced UN role, which we first suggested last

November and presented in fully worked-through form - the now

famous "Red Book" - to the Informal Meeting on Cambodia held

in Jakarta in February, have been a good example of the kind

of impact that a diplomatic initiative can have in the region

11.

if it is imaginatively crafted, and energetically and

sensitively pursued.

Australia is not, and has never claimed to be, a central

player in the conflict, and has never sought to prescribe

solutions. We do, however have something important which

others more directly involved lack, namely an ability to talk

to all the parties. That has enabled us to play an effective

role in generating ideas and stimulating change: to be, if not

the driver of the settlement process, at least the map maker.

The extraordinary complexity and difficulty of the Cambodian

problem, involving as it does not only the internal warring

parties, but most of the countries of the region and the

world's major powers as well, have made all of us wary of

predicting when a durable, comprehensive settlement will

finally be achieved. However, I believe that in the aftermath

of the recent agreement on all the key elements of a

settlement package by the Permanent Five Security Council

members (which agreement fully reflects Australian ideas) the

prospects for a comprehensive settlement are better now than

they have ever been.

While the international economy has known substantially more

continuity than international strategic conditions, new

patterns of global and regional trading relationships and

practices are emerging which Australia has to master if it is

to live up to its promise for future generations. In our

economic interests, as in our security interests, we have

refused to take our external environment and the

transformations in that environment as givens, something we

are obliged to react to but can do little to influence. We

have been active at all three levels - global, regional and

bilateral.

Global.  Just as in the global political system, exemplified

12.

by the United Nations, so in the global economic system - the

GATT - Australia and other small and medium-sized countries

have a strong interest in maintaining fair rules and

practices.  In both cases, Australia is a leading proponent of

working with others to preserve, strengthen and broaden the

ambit of the multilateral system. The test for the survival

of the open, multilateral trade system lies in whether the

Uruguay Round of Multilateral Trade Negotiations, scheduled to

finish in December this year, succeeds in creating the more

liberal and predictable trade environment in which I know

Australia can thrive. Realising that the success of the Round

will be measured in terms of a balanced outcome across the

many issues on the agenda - 15 in all - and that failure to

address the concerns of participants in one area will

prejudice outcomes in other areas, Australia has been one of

the most active participants across the full spectrum of

negotiations.

It is clear, though, that agriculture remains the key to the

Round's successful conclusion. That is because agriculture is

the first priority for a wide range of participants. With

confidence in the efficiency of our own agricultural sector,

Australia has worked hard to keep attention focused on

agriculture. We have refused to simply accept the results of

the struggle between trade's titans - the United States and

Europe - but have sought to maximise our influence through co­

operation with like-minded countries. Understanding that

there is strength in numbers, Australia has supplemented its

individual efforts by building a coalition of fair traders in

agriculture, the Cairns Group, whose 14 members span

boundaries between developed countries and developing

countries, and between East and West. The Cairns Group has

given participants the role of an effective third force in the

negotiations.  *

Regional.  A satisfactory outcome to the Uruguay Round will be

particularly important for the countries of our own Asia

Pacific region which have relied on the relatively open

13.

international economic order for their continuing rapid

economic growth. For several decades now, the spectacular

growth of Japan, the Newly Industrialising Economies, and the

economies of ASEAN, has been increasingly shifting the focus

of world production and trade towards the Pacific.

It was against this broad background of economic dynamism and

growing interdependence - but with an evident need to generate

further momentum still in trade liberalisation and economic

development - that in January last year Prime Minister Hawke

called for the development of an organised process of regional

economic cooperation in the Asia-Pacific. The success of the

initiative is quite remarkable, especially when considered

against the background of the normal glacial pace of change in

international economic discussions. An idea which has been

thought about in the region since the 1960s has been

transformed - by Australia - into tangible reality in little

more than 18 months.

Two regional Ministerial-level meetings - the inaugural one in

Canberra in November last year, and in Singapore in July this

year - have consolidated the Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation

(APEC) process. Participants have reached agreement on a

number of basic constituents of the process - on future

meetings for as far ahead as 1993; on the basic principles of

economic cooperation; on a support structure consisting of an

informal network of senior officials to guide the process

between Ministerial-level meetings; and on the importance of

bringing the three Chinese economies into the process to join

the original 12 participants. Work is under way on a program

of practical cooperation on a number of work projects, which

should strengthen the gains from regional interdependence.

And non-discriminatory regional trade liberalisation has been

placed firmly on the agenda for examination following the

Uruguay Round.

Bilateral.  I think it is fair to say that, although the

results have been less spectacular, the same nose for

14.

Î² '

opportunity - the ability to assess how trends are moving and

gauge scope for influence - and the same persistence,

characterise Australia's approach to bilateral economic

issues. Clearly the catalogue of our action is too long to

traverse here, but the stake is important and the effort has

been unrelenting.  Let me mention, as examples, the useful

trade gains we have made through pushing for, and obtaining,

the liberalisation of the Japanese market for beef, and of the

United States market for steel - not to mention the huge

strides that have been made in achieving not just closer

economic relations, but effectively a single market, with New

Zealand.

Good International Citizenship

Australia's interest in being, and being seen to be, a good

international citizen is not - as I said in first talking

about this concept nearly two years ago - the foreign policy

equivalent of boy scout good deeds. Good international

citizenship is important to practise from the point of view of

national self respect and international reputation, but it is

also simply a matter of recognising that there are a group of

problems that countries face that are either too big for each

by itself to solve, or which are of a character that global

action or global pressure can very much help to solve. In

areas like threats to the global environment, international

health problems like AIDS, international narcotics trade,

refugee care and resettlement, population growth, debt and

human rights, global interdependence is an omnipresent

reality, and multilateral diplomacy an indispensable necessity

if these problems are to be addressed.

Of all the different strands of good international

citizenship, we have placed particular emphasis on three areas

- the environment, development cooperation and human rights.

Environment. We have been one of the international leaders in

the campaign against driftnet, or "wall of death", fishing in

15.

the South Pacific and elsewhere, and we have been a leading

international player in concluding or improving international

treaties on global warming, the destruction of the ozone layer

and the preservation of biological diversity.

But our highest profile activity in this area has undoubtedly

been our campaign, with France, to ban absolutely mining and

oil drilling in the Antarctica and its surrounds, and to

establish this uniquely fragile and irreplaceable continent

once and for all as a "nature reserve/land of science".

Optimism about this campaign is now justified. The frosty

reception, so to speak, which greeted the Australian and

French proposals twelve months ago has melted. More countries

and people are seeing the value of our ideas. A long-term

moratorium on mining is now being talked about

internationally; it is not the permanent prohibition we want,

but is a step in that direction. The constituent elements of

environmental protection are being embraced by a number of

countries; that does not yet constitute a comprehensive

convention, but is moving towards it.

We will not settle for a half-way house but will press ahead

to build up the basis of international consensus, so that

eventually - and I hope that this eventuality is not too long

in the making - we can be confident that the Antarctic

environment will be comprehensively protected.

Development Cooperation.  Our record here in quantitative

terms is not all that I would wish it to be. Australian

development cooperation assistance is good aid qualitatively,

and we do make, in dollar terms, an enormous contribution

annually to the least developed countries in our region and

elsewhere - significantly more per head, and as a proportion

of national income, than countries like the United States and

Japan. We have, moreover, been maintaining the real level, or

better, of aid in recent budgets. But we have been slipping

backwards in terms of aid as a proportion of GNP: to meet our

ultimate committed international target or 0.7 per cent, or

16.

even the shorter term target of 0.4 per cent, is going to be

very hard indeed in the fiscal environment we continue to

face, but we will keep trying.

Human Rights.  Australia's human rights record is one of which

I believe we can be proud.  Quite apart from all the

continuing effort we have put into the struggle against

apartheid in South Africa, and our role in promoting adherence

to standard-setting treaties like the UN Convention on the

Rights of the Child, we continue to be probably the most

active country in the world in making bilateral

representations, usually quietly but sometimes more publicly

if we believe it will not be counterproductive, on behalf of

individuals and groups: in 1988-89 the count was 400 such

representations in 68 countries, and in the year just

completed, 1989-90, it was 443 representations in 87 different

countries.  The results are not as easy to quantify, but we

have been left in no doubt over the years that the pressure is

important, and does bear fruit that its absence would not.

* * *

Two years ago, in the ANU speech to which I earlier referred,

I said that a geographically remote country of our population

size should not get ideas above its station. I was concerned

to take a sober view of the constraints on our action, and

come to a realistic assessment of the influence Australia

could bring to bear to advance its interests.  The note of

caution inherent in that approach is still appropriate. But

even accepting the limits of Australia's influence, I believe

that we can point to some outstanding achievements in our

foreign and trade policy, and to a general achievement of

having maximised our influence, given the cards we have had to

play.

The huge political and strategic changes of the last two years

means that the world will not be the same in the 1990s as it

has been since the Second World War. The new shape of things

17.

has not yet been delineated: in a very real sense, the new

world is now in the making. That opens up opportunities for

Australia, but these opportunities are not optional. The

present fluidity demands that we participate, and help shape

global strategic, political and economic circumstances in a

way that secures the position of small and middle powers

generally, and advances our own particular national interests.

One of the ways we can participate, especially when our impact

as a middle power is not decisive, is to build coalitions. We

have already used that technique to good effect. The

countries with which we have made common cause in APEC are not

all the same as those we have worked with in the Cairns Group.

The nations with which we are working to secure stability in

the Gulf are not all the same as those with which we have

cooperated over Cambodia. We will need to continue to refine

that eclecticism, building alliances most suited to the

different issues on our agenda, but with the constant goal of

maximising the influence that countries which share interests

with Australia can bring to bear.

Within that changing constellation, there are some partners

and features which recur regularly. We have differences of

view with the United States, but our alliance is a

fundamental, stabilising influence in our changing strategic

circumstances.  As a nation, we are increasingly accepting the

dictates of our geography, increasingly doing business, and

finding common cause, with our neighbours in this Asia-Pacific

region. The priority of tending and expanding our relations

with Indonesia, Papua New Guinea and with the countries of the

South Pacific is a firm and abiding orientation of our foreign

policy.

A final feature of our activity I would point to is our

ability to detect trends and identify openings for timely

initiatives. We have, as I have said, provided the catalyst

for the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation process; we have

provided a focal point for international environmental

18.

Î» '

concerns with our Antarctic initiative; our outline for a

Cambodian settlement has directed diplomatic activity and

negotiations along productive channels; our proposal for

regional security dialogues seeks to meet growing anxiety

about strategic uncertainty.

As a result, I think it is fair to say that our international

standing has rarely been higher. We are regarded as a

concerned, constructive and innovative member of the world

community. Regionally, we are viewed as a participant, aware

of the complex interplay of different roles in the various

issues on the regional agenda, and able to make a valuable and

original contribution.

If we have, in my view, responded astutely to change, it must

also be said that that change has not yet run its course. We

will not be able to linger on past achievements; nor will we

have the luxury of stepping back from the flow of events. For

Australia, we must go on, or we will go backwards. We need

now to build on our achievements, develop the capabilities we

have established, and have the stamina to pursue favourable

outcomes to the many courses of action I have mentioned, and

in the many new activities which the future holds.

That will require nous and energy. In international affairs,

as in the domestic economy, Australia cannot afford the

mentality of the plodder or the recluse. Responding

effectively to change means keeping our wits about us - in

anticipating the currents of change, in reacting to events as

they occur, and above all else in being constantly alert to

new opportunities for influence in the protection and

advancement of Australian national interests.

