'j

. ..-< (' ...,..

.  " .. , . rl -..::. . <... ' -~ ,__. '-J .. -- ,_. /  " -- #

/'

~ - cH A-r,D<7 0M : \..__:?  "

PRIME MINISTER

TRANSCRIPT OF NEWS CONFERENCE, PARLIAMENT HOUSE, 12 JUNE

1990

E & 0 E - PROOF ONLY

JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what do you think of Mr  Maxwell's attempt to buy into The West Australian?

PM: Don't think it will be successful.

JOURNALIST: Why not?

PM: Because it ... we've given an indication quite  clearly in the past of our attitude on these matters.  I'll obviously want to have a yarn with Paul about it,  but we've been at one on our thinking on this issue.

We've reflected it in regard to The Age previously and I  wouldn't see that there'd be any reason to change that.

JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the question of the  Cambodians in the Northern Territory, the Roman Catholic  church there is making representations to the Government  suggesting on the grounds of legality, practicality and

humanity they ought to be able to stay. What sort of  response can you ...

PM: Well, as I've made clear from the very beginning,  those processes that deal with these matters are under  way. That is the DORS, the Determination of Refugee  Status, they are being followed through in respect of

these people and it's right, as it should be, and I made  it quite clear at all times that that is the case. What  I am concerned to establish for everyone to understand,  and let there be no doubt about this, that Australia is  not going to have some completely open door where people  can expect they make up their mind that they will  determine Australia's immigration policy simply by coming  here. That's not the way it's going to happen under this  Government. No government, I believe, in the world has  got a better record of compassion and constructive  concern for refugees than has my Government. We've taken

on a per capita basis, and I extend credit to our  predecessor Government on this as well, on a per capita  basis, we've taken more refugees than any other country  in the world. Particularly that's true in regard to

refugees from Indo China and under my leadership we'll  continue to show compassion, but compassion -constructive and orderl y compassion - is not the same

1 -'

2

thing as saying here is an open door for anyone who wants  to come. This is, the compassion is concerned with  genuine refugees, there are others who've made their mind  up that they don't particularly like the environment in  which they live for economic reasons and are prepared to  pay, as seems to be the case, a reasonable amount of  money to people who are organising these departures. Now

I'm simply making it clear, I believe, on behalf not only  of the Government but of the people of Australia, that we  are a sovereign independent nation which will determine  its immigration policy and the categories of its

immigration policy autonomously. We will not have these  things taken out of our hands. Now for those that have  arrived then, of course, the processes of the  Determination of Refugee Status will go ahead, but I'm  making it quite clear what the attitude of the Government

is to this, to this situation - people thinking they can  just pay whatever they like, take whatever risk they like  and come here and think that they are just going to  automatically be accepted in this country. That's not  the way it's going to work.

JOURNALIST: ... process working for these people  returning to Cambodia?  PM: Well, of course, this is precisely what we've got  people in Cambodia now. We've got, as you know, a group  of people there who are talking with the Government of  Cambodia precisely about that, Geoff. I mean, we, as I

say, are in a very strong position in conducting these  discussions because of the reputation, the factual  reputation, that we have for compassion in regard to  genuine refugees. So we speak from a position of

strength. But we will want to be having discussions with  the Cambodian authorities to ensure that as much is done  as is possible to prevent the departure of these people  on the expectation that they are going to be able just be  given unqualified entry into this country.

JOURNALIST: How many boat people have been returned in  the past from Australia to various countries?

PM: I don't know the answer to that question, but what  I'm concerned about is that we have now, over a period of  time, something like 200 odd of these people from  Cambodia have arrived in what essentially appear to be,  as I understand it, about three different boat loads.  Now it's quite necessary from a point of view of this  country that the Prime Minister and the Government make

it quite clear that there's not going to be some passive  position as far as this country is concerned on this  issue.  JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what is Australia's  assessment of the return of Pol Pot? I mean, this is a

fear that some of these people have expressed. How does  our Government view that as a ...

3

PM: No, our policy has been very, very clear on this and  we are at one with virtually all the countries of the  region and around the world, who have been involved in  the processes of trying to find a resolution to this  continuing tragedy of Cambodia. There has been the view  taken that the Khmer Rouge is a part of the realities on  the ground, if you could put it that way, in Cambodia and

all countries, including for instance the United States,  have recognised that there has been a, a part for those  people to play in the processes of discussion. And  indeed, in the Australian plan that we have over recent  months advanced, we have had discussions - as you know,

as a matter of public record - had discussions with  representatives of the Khmer Rouge as well, but we are at  one with other nations in ensuring that out of these  processes that are being followed and the ... various  strands that are being followed, that there be no  situation in which the Khmer Rouge is allowed to take  over Cambodia again. There's been very considerable  advance in the last 12 months or more in the activities  of various groups and individual nations to try and get a

resolution of the situation in Cambodia and it would be  true to say that we are further advanced now than we were  a couple of years ago. There are still sticking points,  but there is a commonality of position that whatever, in  the end, is adopted has got to be one which ensures that  there will be the opportunity for the free expression of  the will of the Cambodian people. And we are all  confident, those who know anything about the situation,

have had anything to do with it, that in those  circumstances where the people of Cambodia are provided  with the opportunity of expressing their wishes, then the  Khmer Rouge will not be in a position where they'll be

able to exercise power in that unfortunate country.

JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, are you happy with the way  the short term English language courses in Australia were  monitored as they developed? And what do you make of the  fact that a high percentage of the Chinese students, by  the time of the massacre of Beijing, had overstayed their  visas? You talk of queue jumping in the context of the  Cambodians, isn't that another form of it?

PM: Well, this is not something new. We've recognised  that, that there were unfortunate features about that and  that, of course, has been reflected in decisions that the  Government has taken to tighten up these matters and  particularly it involved the Chinese and you know the

reactions that there were in China about the tightening  up that we've undertaken. We recognise, as I say, that  there were problems in that and the decisions that we've  taken are directed towards trying to ensure that we don't  get a repetition of that in the future.

JOURNALIST: Why is it that the DORS Committee process,  or a process like that, couldn't have been applied to  those students. Was it simply that it was too big a  task?

4

PM: Well, you've got, you've got some 20,000 Chinese  here who come into that pre-Tienanmen Square category.  Now the decision that will be taken, I believe, by the  Government which I've indicated will make the distinction  between the period of approximately the 20th of June,  before and after. Now in regard to the period before,  with some 20,000 people there, it, quite apart from the,

the humanitarian consideration which has led us to the  position that I have annunciated, you would also have in  that situation, mechanical problems of dealing with such  a very large number. I understand that the rate of  processing through the DORS Committee is of the order of  about 40 a month, so you have a, a mechanical problem  there. Of course, in regard to the post-Tienanmen Square  group, I have made it quite clear that the assumption

there, the assumption there will be that those people  will return to China.  JOURNALIST: But is it not the case that some of those  people would be

PM: And I, and I, look, I don't quite understand why  it's difficult for people to hear, listen and understand  what I've said on this. I've said now on three separate  occasions, that in respect of the post-Tienanmen Square  people, as indeed for anyone in this country, whether  they are post-Tienanmen Square Chinese or others, the  DORS processes are available and they will be available

to those people. I've said that three times.  JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the Department of  Immigration says that there are at least 60,000 illegal  overstayers in Australia. We're also told ... concerned  that they didn't have sufficient resources to tackle this  problem. Do you think that they need more resources?

PM: Well, that's, that's undoubtedly a question which  the, which the Minister will be putting before us in the  Cabinet. That's a matter which will have to be decided,  considered and decided.

JOURNALIST: Mr Hawke, have we had any indication from  the Cambodian Government whether they're prepared to take  these boat people back?  PM: Well, what I've seen so far and I haven't had the  opportunity of talking, obviously, with the Foreign

Minister yet, that's something I'll do as soon as it is  possible. But I've seen the public observations that  they are willing to accept these people if they return  voluntarily, but not if, not to accept them if they don't  want to come back. But these are exactly the sorts of

issues which must be talked about between us and the  authorities of Cambodia and that's precisely what's  happening.

5

JOURNALIST: Mr Hawke, you said you don't know the  numbers who've been returned before, but what has been  the process in dealing with boat people before who  haven't been given refugee status?  PM: Well if the, if the DORS Committee determines that  they don't satisfy the requirements and are therefore  eligible for staying in this country as refugees, then

they will be returned.

JOURNALIST: But they have been returned in the past?

PM: Well, I'm not sure about the, you're talking about  the people from Cambodia, I don't know whether in respect  of the DORS Committee that where they have made a  decision if they've made a decision, that they don't

satisfy the category, whether as yet any have been  returned. But -JOURNALIST: I'm talking about the Vietnamese people and  other boat people in the past, not this particular group.  PM: Yes, well, as I would understand, where they don't  meet the requirements, then we, we move to return them.  But of course in regard to Vietnam, you know that we've

had to be part, and properly part, of an international  consideration of this matter. A meeting was held in  Geneva last year in June and the comprehensive action  plan was adopted there and we are part of the, the

international attempt to deal now with this situation  which is requiring an agreement on the part of, of  Vietnam that they should accept the orderly return of  people who've not been accepted, most particularly in

Hong Kong, but not exclusively there and we've been an  important part of the process of drawing up that common  action plan. Now as to whether, out of Australia, we've  had the return from people to Vietnam who have been  through the DORS process, I can't say.

JOURNALIST: Mr Hawke, is there any prospect that we  would review our attitude to the Hun Sen regime as part  of this process of ...

PM: No, I don't think there's any question of reviewing  our attitude towards the Hun Sen regime. We have, as  I've said, Geoff, over the last couple of years, as we've  played, as I think you'll appreciate, a fairly

significant role in consideration of how best to resolve  the, the tragedy of Cambodia. We've had communications,  consultations, discussions with the regime, with Hun Sen  directly, our representatives have met with him, our  Ministers have met with him, Mr Costello has met with him

and we'll continue to do that on the basis that the Hun  Sen regime does not represent, as it stands, what will be  the final outcome of these processes. What we want to  see is the establishment of a process in which there can

be free and fair and internationally supervised elections  which will determine what will be the ultimate government

6

of that country. But until that occurs we'll have  whatever intercourse with that government is necessar y ,  both in the context of discussing these people, the boat  people and also in terms of discussing the, the question  of trying to get a resolution of the Cambodian problem.

JOURNALIST: Just back on the Chinese -PM: Beg your pardon?

JOURNALIST: Just back on the Chinese students -PM: Yes.

JOURNALIST: Have you got any thoughts as to how long  they should be allowed to stay in Australia, whether -PM: Well, I have, I have indeed got ideas about that and  I've discussed it with Mr Hand, but those details will be  contained in the submission which Mr Hand is bringing to  the Cabinet. But I've got a very clear idea and so has  he as to the sort of period that we would, we would  determine, that they should stay. I mean, without, I  won't go to that period. I know exactly what it is and  what Mr Hand will be recommending following the

discussions that I've had with him, but conceptually I  can go to it in this sense. You are going to have to  have some period of time which you believe will make you  feel that at the end of that time, one should be able to  make a judgement about the situation in China. What's

the sort of situation to which these people would be  likely to be returning and that, by definition, is not  something which is just six months away but you are not  going to make it ten years.

JOURNALIST: Li Peng -

PM: Li Peng, yes?

JOURNALIST: Li Peng late last week -PM: Yes.

JOURNALIST: - was saying some very conciliatory things  about the students and saying they would be welcomed  back. How seriously do you take that?

PM: Well, I have observed the comments that have been  made by Li Peng. We are, of course, as you would be  aware, in possession of a whole range of information  about practices and attitudes in China and all those

things have to be taken into account. I mean, just one  statement by the Premier doesn't constitute the totality  of the considerations which would determine our position.

JOUR NALIST: Prime Minister, as you move towards deciding  how long the students can stay, where there's a question  of family reunion ...

7

PM: Well, that's one of the considerations which the  Minister will be addressing in his submission and I, I  don't want to go any further into that detail. It's  obviously a relevant question which will be part of the

submission.

JOURNALIST:  things?  When do you expect Cabinet to discuss these

PM: Relatively near future. I had my discussion with  the Minister now over a week ago and he's gone off to  prepare his submission and so it will be - relatively  near future.

JOURNALIST: Mr Hawke, can we take it from your remarks  that you are ruling out permanent residency being given?  PM: Am I ruling out?

JOURNALIST: We can take it from your earlier comments  that you are ruling out permanent residency being granted  to the students?  PM: The concept will be, Michelle, as I say, I've used  the phrase quite deliberately, separate category for  these people which will take account of the facts of  what's happened in China and one will have to determine  what one thinks is an appropriate period which they can

stay and with the assumption, in regard to those people,  that, that they will want to stay and would be entitled  to, but you are going to have to have a period of time in  which it's appropriate for them and for us to make a

judgement. I mean, what you've got to understand in this  is that we shouldn't be assuming that of all these  20,000, they'll all want to stay. I mean, one would  assume that for very, very many of them, if China were to  return to some sort of normalcy, whatever word you want  to use, that they would want to return to China. So the,  the intelligent thing to do is to say in regard to these  people, well alright we understand your position, we've  got to set a period of time which you can stay and by the  end of which time it is reasonable to expect that you and  we will be able to make a judgement.

JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, can I get absolutely crystal  clear this question of the boat people. Has Australia  sent any boat people back to where they came from?  PM: Not of the, as I understand it, there have been

three boat loads and there have been, there has been no  return of those people, as I understand it. Now what we  are saying is that, making it quite clear, that if the  DORS Committee in respect of these people makes a  decision that they don't satisfy the criteria, then it  will be our wish that they go back to the point from  which they came.

8

JOURNALIST: (inaudible)

PM: I mean, I simply haven't kept up ... there may have  been some. I don't think any have gone back at this  stage.

JOURNALIST: Mr Hawke, to what extent is a resolution in  Cambodia necessary in resolving the problem as far as  Vietnamese and Cambodian boat people and has that been a  factor in Senator Evans' taking the issue up as strongly

as he has?

PM: No, no, no. Our concern with the situation in  Cambodia goes back to our first day of Government. It  was unrelated to any question of boat people from  Cambodia to here ... we'd had this continuing tragedy in  Cambodia and one of the first things I did as Prime  Minister was to call my then Foreign Minister in, Bill  Hayden, and to say we should take some role in Indo China

in trying to do what we can, given the nature of the  relationships that we enjoy with China, with the United  States and with the ASEAN countries, that I took the view  from day one that we had, because of those range of

relationships, the capacity to play some role without  overstating it and we did from day one. It was quite  independent of any question of boat people because there  has been ... continuing tragedy in Indo China generally " Vietnam and Cambodia in particular. And so Australia has

been very much at the forefront both in bilateral  discussions, regional discussions, global discussions and  within the United Nations in trying to play a  constructive role to get a resolution of this matter.

It's been quite independent of any consideration of boat  people.

JOURNALIST: ... Mr Keating said last night in London  that beyond 25 percent represented a controlling  interest, will Cabinet be considering lifting the foreign  ownership limits on newspapers from 15 percent up to  around about the 25 percent limit or perhaps in line, 20  percent limit on TV?

PM: Well, I haven't, I haven't directed any attention to  such a proposition, but if the, the Minister directly  concerned in the Communications area or Mr Keating want  to raise that matter, well, it's appropriate to be raised  but there's nothing on the table at the moment.

JOURNALIST: What of Rupert Murdoch, isn't there a  contradiction ...  PM: Well, he, he was in a situation where he started off  as an Aussie and then changed his position.

JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what's going to happen to  the students ... you've got two categories of Chinese  students, one automatically will get some sort of period  which you'll determine, but those who came afterwards, on

9

what basis will the DORS Committee consider them? On the  basis of some sort of temporary refuge in Australia ...  PM: No, the, the assumption in regard to those people  is, as I've said on, I don't know how many occasions now,  this will be at least the fourth, fifth. The assumption

in regard to those who've come post June the 20th is that  they will return to China. That's the assumption. Now  I've said and it is getting rather boring ... to  understand simple things is a bit surprising. Those  people, nevertheless, have the right to apply to the DORS  Committee process. If they choose to do that, then

they'll be considered .  JOURNALIST:  period ...

... will they be allowed to stay for that

PM: No, no, no. Look it - I hope I'm not sounding, you

know, beyond patience, but it is basically an  extraordinarily simple proposition which I'll repeat for  you. For those who came before the 20th, the Cabinet  will be making a decision that there will be a period of

time that they will stay. Right? That's not  complicated. There will be no such provision for those  after that period and if they apply under the DORS  process, then while they are being considered under the  DORS process, they stay. I mean, you don't have them  being considered by the DORS Committee and kick them out  while they are being considered. They will have, if they

choose to make the application, they will have the rights  of remaining here while they are so considered. But with  no, no period of time for them, saying for that period  you are here without question.

JOURNALIST: But on a completely different basis ... had  they been there two days or three days before?

PM: But ... you've got to make the assumption, and this  is the whole essence of distinction, you've got to make  the assumption that those who came here after the events  of Tienanmen Square came here with certain knowledge.  You've got to make a different assumption about them,  than you do about those who were here before. I mean,  no-one's questioned that, either here or anywhere else.

JOURNALIST:  later ones -So they must prove they're refugees, these

PM: The ones who are here after the 20th have no  assumption in their favour. The assumption in regard to  them is that they will return.

JOURNALIST: Prime Minister they also have a right though  I understand to apply, if they don't apply as refugees,  to apply for grant of residence on humanitarian grounds.  Now currently under your new migration regulations, there

... loophole in thim, no applications are being processed  on humanitarian grounds, because of the regulations. Can

10

you say what the Government is going to do about that,  and whether you believe that is partly responsible for  the huge backlog in immigration at the moment?  PM: I don't believe it's responsible for the huge  backlog, but all I can say is that any rights that people  have under the existing law will remain. We've not -

JOURNALIST: But under the new regulations nobody  qualifies for grant of residence on humanitarian grounds.  PM: Well if the new regulations have that impact then  that's what the case is. I am not engaged, and the  Cabinet will not be engaged, in changing anything other

than in terms that I have indicated. That is to indicate  in regard to Chinese who have come before Tienanmen  Square. I'm not going to go over it again. We'll be  doing that. We won't be making any other changes.

JOURNALIST: Well Mr Hawke. Two questions. Why are the  Cambodians in the Northern Territory being held virtually  incommunicado and will they be given the sort of help  that they will need to make an application to the DORS  Committee? Social work help, translators - you can

imagine someone coming out of Cambodia might not have in  his head a full knowledge of the Australian refugee  procedures.

PM: They will get the normal assistance that is  available to anyone who takes - who seeks to take -advantage of the DORS procedures.

JOURNALIST: Mr Hawke, will they get social service, in  terms of interpreters and why are they being held  incommunicado at the moment?

PM: Well you use the phrase incommunicado. I mean these  people have arrived here other than in accordance with  the legal immigration procedures and they are therefore  not here legally. They are accommodated, dealt with  according to the normal procedures, which make available  to them the opportunity of putting their case to DORS.

Now obviously there are certain facilities made available  to them in terms of interpreters, language and so on and  an indication of what their rights are. That has been  going on for many years and the same facilities are being  applied to these people. And will be applied. We are  not seeking to change the law in regard to those people.  What I'm seeking to do is to make clear to people who are

in that country, now in Cambodia and who may be  contemplating coming here, that they need not think that  here is a country which is going to abandon its sovereign  right to determine the level of its immigration intake.

JOURNALIST: (inaudible) ... Mr Willis any, or given him  any indication that he could have an overseas posting  with the Government and has he given any indication that

11

he might accept it? Or de you expect him to stay the  full term?  PM: I don't go to any question of - don't read too much  into this - but I don't go to - publicly - to discussions  I have with any of my Ministers about their futures.  Whether in regard to the tenure of the portfolio they  have got, possible changes to another, or possible  departure from Government. If I have such discussions  with my Ministers they are, as far as I'm concerned,  entirely personal and confidential.

JOURNALIST: Do you expect to reshuffle, to have to  reshuffle your Cabinet in the next eighteen months?  PM: No. We've just won an election. We've just had a  very significant reshuffle. I haven't directed my mind

to the question of reshuffle. I think we have a superbly  equipped Ministry as a matter of fact, whoare doing their  job really well. My mind is not on reshuffling at all.

JOURNALIST: Mr Hawke, was Senator Richardson wrong when  he apparently tells anybody who will listen that Ralph  Willis will be gone by the end of the year and he will be  offered the Finance portfolio?

PM: No, I don't know. I mean if you assert Geoff - and  I know that you are assiduous in trying to follow up  these things. Sometimes factually and sometimes with a  fervent imagination. But if he's saying that, I accept  you word for it. I'm not saying it.

JOURNALIST: Mr Hawke, Senator Richardson said yesterday  that the Party should look at falling membership and also  said that some Ministers weren't spending enough time  talking to the grass roots. Are you aware of this  problem and what steps do you think should be taken to  overcome this.

PM: I don't think it's a great problem. I think Graham  is absolutely right in sounding out the warning that all  of us, myself included, should as far as it's consistent  with the discharge of our Ministerial duties, spend as  much time as we can, with the grass roots. I think

that's a very sensible suggestion to be making. But how  far it's a problem I haven't come to any conclusion about  that. But I think it's a very sensible thing to be  telling all Ministers, spend as much time as you can with  the rank and file.

JOURNALIST: (inaudible) ... with the grass roots. Will  you be at the Victorian Conference next weekend?

PM: No, I wouldn't think so.

JOURNALIST: Why is that?

PM: Because I don't usually go.

12

JOURNALIST: It's a pretty important Conference and  you've just been to the New South Wales one.

PM: I have just been to the New South Wales one. Yes.  But I've been Prime Minister now for seven odd years. I  think - I'm not sure Michelle - how many times I've been  to the Victorian Conference in that period, but I don't  think it's more than a couple at the most. I can

remember going once.

JOURNALIST: Why don't you then?

PM: Well, why don't I go to a whole lot of other ones?  I mean I've got plenty of things to do and-JOURNALIST: It is your home State.

PM: It is my home State. But even before I was in this  exalted position, I wasn't a regular attender at the  Conference in Victoria. If they feel they would like me  to be there and I felt that I want to go, well then that  would be arranged. I haven't felt any compulsion to be

there next weekend. None at all.  JOURNALIST: Mr Hawke the Privacy Commissioner has  revealed that an enormous amount of information, held by  your Departments, on people who make FOI requests, people  who, public servants and people ... write to you. That

includes tax file numbers, debts, political ....  police .... Why is that a new concerned? Should the  Government look at that?

PM: I read the report, particularly a headline report in  the Sydney Morning Herald. I'll get a report on that  just to find out whether in fact there is anything to be  concerned about. I didn't listen to it, but I'm informed

that the Privacy Commissioner, this morning seemed to  play down very considerably, the import of what was in  the paper. But I don't tkae these things lightly. I  mean I understand, as I think anyone should, that it is

inevitable that in our society that the range of  departments that we have, Social Security, Taxation and  so on, there are going to be millions of reports and  files and the right approach for Government is to ensure

that there is the balance, the proper balance between  having the information that is necessary to provide the  services of Government on the one hand, but on the other  to ensure the appropriate levels of privacy, so that  people's personal affairs are not made available to

people or to an extent, that is not necessary to ensure  the discharge of that obligation of Government of  providing a service. Now we shouldn't be surprise that  there are millions of files. That's' inevitable. But

I'll ask for a report to reassure myself that there is no  breach of the requirements of privacy. If I get any  indication from that report that there is cause for  concern, then I'll initiate action.

13

JOURNALIST: Mr Hawke, on the economy, will it be your  objective in the coming Budget discussions, to ensure  that the Government spending is restrained to the extent  that there is no increase - real increase - in outlays in

1990-91?

PM: We've had four years, as you know, in a row Geoff of  real reductions in outlays. We'll make the decisions  which we think are appropriate for the Budget of 1990-91.  We will be engaged, without any question in this period  as I've said just in the last few days, in looking for

areas of reductions in expenditure. Just what the  balance will be I'm not quite sure. But there certainly  will be reductions. That will be done because it's  necessary from our own point of view. And it's also  necessary if we are going to be asking the States to play

their part. Now just what those figures will be is a  matter that will come out of the processes of ERC which  unfortunately start next week.  JOURNALIST: Was Mr Clark out of line when he says $1.5

billion ..... the cuts?  PM: Is Mr Clark out of line? When has he ever been line  with the Government?

JOURNALIST: Mr Hawke has ERC determined any broad target  for these spending cuts as yet?  PM: There have been some considerations, some of - I  think target might be overstating it - but there are some  ball park figures that have been thrown around.

JOURNALIST: Is $1.6 billion in the ball park?

PM: Good try. Good try.

JOURNALIST: Do you expect to cut, squeeze the States in  real terms at the Premiers' Conference?  PM: Another good try boy. Good try. We'll be expecting  the States to play a part in restraint. Now just what  that figure will be is precisely what we've got to direct  our attention to in the weeks ahead. But it's quite  clear that the States haven't exercised in the last few  years the same level of restraint as there has been at

the level of the Commonwealth and they are going to be  required to exercise restraint in this period ahead of  us.

JOURNALIST: Are you at all sympathetic to the arguments  of the States that if you want them to speed up the  process of micro reform, or in some cases, launch that  process, then you oughtn't to be as tough with them

financially?

14

PM: Yes, but that is a rather simplistic way of putting  it. If I were a Premier of a State with a Premiers'  Conference coming up on the 28th of this month, where I'd  heard the Federal Government talking about the need for  restraint, and I'd also heard that same Government  talking about the need for co-operation from the States

to pursue micro economic reform, I guess that I would try  and meld those two things and come along and say now  don't be too tough on me if you want me to play my part  in micro economic reform. I suppose that's human nature.  But the facts are that the Premiers have got to  understand that at this Conference on the 28th of this  month, that we are going to have a macro economic task in

front of us which is consistent with the sort of things  that we've had to do over the last seven years. We've  got to get the macro economic settings right. And we  will do that and we won't really be terribly responsive

to a proposition which if it was put as crudely as this,  well don't hit us too hard, because if you do we won't  co-operate in the micro economic area. Now, and I would  trust that the Premiers wouldn't be so crass as to put

the proposition in those terms. Now, that is a different  proposition however from specific areas of micro economic  reform, where it may be abeled to be argued that if  you're going to give effect to a particular reform, that

some sort of assistance may be required. Now that's a  quite different proposition and what is quite clear is  that I will be raising at this Premiers' Conference the  need for co-operation in the area of micro economic

reform. I'll expect to get that co-operation and I think  the Premiers will be entitled to expect that we will take  a sensible and rational approach to that issue. We will.  But if there's some attempt just to have this simple  proposition, don't be too hard on us. If you are we  won't be too co-operative. There won't be any mileage in

that one for them.  JOURNALIST: Would it be reflected also in your own  Budget in say a change of emphasis towards infrastructure  funding away from other areas of the Budget, given the

importance of infrastructure funding to some of the more  critical areas of microeconomic reform - rail, road, the  waterfront etc?

PM: Well we'll, as we have in the past, we'll make those  decisions in regard to funding which we believe ... Take  the area of roads. Let's just look at that. In a period  of very very considerable financial restraint on the part  of the Commonwealth where there've been these, as I say,

four successive years of real reductions in outlays,  we've nevertheless in the area of roads in our general  decisions and then in the last 12 months in two separate  specific decisions made more funding available for roads.  So we will make the decisions in regard to infrastructure

funding which are necessary to give effect to the sorts  of decisions that we think are necessary to get the  competitive structure of this economy into place.

JOURNALIST:  system etc?

15

Will that be at the cost of the transfer

PM: When you say at the cost of, I mean, in the end when  a government has drawn up its Budget and there is this  amount of money available for the transfer system, there  is this amount of money available for roads, there is  this amount of money available for defence, then by  definition there has been a series of judgements which  have said well we think the priority we have there

requires that amount of money. Now you have not got  unlimited resources so it means that you have been able  to do less elsewhere in terms of matching that priority.  I mean that's the nature of government, that's the  toughness of government in one way. I mean you've got a  position where so many of the areas of government, of  outlays and expenditures, can put a good case for more,

just looked at alone. Very easy. I mean this is really  what we go through in the Expenditure Review Committee  year after year. Every Minister's able to basically put  a very very good case for more. He can say look if you

give me more, he will be this positive response and that  outcome and benefit. But in the end it's the aggregates  and the inter-relationship of the aggregates which  determine the health of the economy. So your Minister  can say look I'll have a very healthy little situation

here if you give me another hundred million, but if you  give that one a hundred million, and this one a hundred  million and this one half a billion and so on, while he  might think he's getting a healthy outcome in respect of

the proposal that he puts to you - and he probably would  be, looked at alone - if you don't look at the aggregate  outcome you won't have a healthy economy as a whole.

JOURNALIST: Mr Hawke, at the Premiers' Conference on the  28th, how much work will you actually be able to do on  microeconomic reform? You've just mentioned specifics of  particular areas -

PM: I think what I want to be doing at the Premiers'  Conference on this issue is to really say these things.  We must realise that the sort of microeconomic reform  that we need in this country is not going to come simply

from decisions by the Commonwealth Government alone. By  definition there is so much of it which is in your  domain, obviously while - electricity, power and  generation and so on, without being exhaustive about it.

Now therefore I'll be saying what I want is a situation  of your commitment to joining with us in trying to bring  about the most effective sort of reform in these areas  that we possibly can. And to establish really, not then

at that meeting on the 28th a series of decisions about  each of these areas, but rather to set up firstly their  agreement of the importance of cooperation and secondly a  process to follow from the Premiers' Committee for giving  effect to that commitment. I believe that we will get a

commitment from the Premiers of the need for such  cooperation. So then, if they give that commitment and

16

that agreement, then to establish a process of  cooperation. Now just what will be involved in that it's  too early to say. Conceivably, and I say conceivably, it  could mean another special Premiers' Conference,  conceivably, as part of that process. Or it could mean a

series of meetings with particular Ministers in  particular areas. But that's what I see the 28th as  being about. Acceptance of the commitment, the  cooperation in the area of microeconomic reform and  agreement to a process. Because as I said the other  night, what we've got to realise in this country, and

it's terribly important that I think this, it's in our  minds as a community. You're going to have by 1992,  which is only a couple of years away, in Europe 12 states  who will have made a series of decisions about their  relationships which will mean that there will be less  obstacles, impediments to the free movement of goods and

services in Europe than there will be in Australia  between the States of Australia. Now that's not a burden  that we can intelligently continue to carry on into the  future. Now we don't have in this country a disposition  to change these things by transference in a  constitutional sense of powers between the States and the  Commonwealth. So what we've intelligently got to do is  to sit down and say well how are we going to cooperate to  make sure that we really do have one economic, national  economic unit when it comes to these issues? I believe

that the Premiers will be responsive to that.  JOURNALIST: Rather than say lumping the States together  and saying they haven't played their part, isn't it  really fairer to acknowledge that in fact some States  such as NSW have made significant steps along the path

microeconomic reform ...

PM: Well it is the case, certainly Milton, that the  records of the States both in terms of general economic  policy and microeconomic reform in particular are not  uniform. I accept that and that will be acknowledged in  the discussions we have. I mean obviously it's not  appropriate for me to try and award marks out of ten to  all the States here now. It's neither appropriate nor in  the self-interest of the Government an appropriate thing

to do. But it will be reflected in the discussions.  JOURNALIST: Two Labor States in fact, WA and Victoria,  have lost a lot of money, of their taxpayers money over  recent years. Will that be a consideration that you will  take into account at the Premiers' Conference?

PM: I think it's maybe a consideration that they would  like us to take into account but I don't think they'll  get terribly far with that proposition.

JOUR NALIST: Just clarifying something ... establishing  some sort of consensus if you like on the national goals  of this Premiers' Conference. Do you see any possibility

17

that specific purpose grants could be used or directed at  this round of State funding to microeconomic issues?  PM: No such decisions ... see being made at this  conference. We will be responsive to anything that the  States want to say to us in this area of microeconomic

reform. But I wouldn't see any decisions being made at  this conference within that framework or on those  criteria. But we really, as I say, have just got to get  very firmly onto the agenda at this Premiers' Conference  these issues and be prepared on the part of the  Commonwealth and of the States to have everything into

the ring on this. What are the things that have got to  be done by the Commonwealth and the States to ensure that  we create the best microeconomic framework in this  country to ensure an efficient and internationally  competitive economy? That's the responsibility that  we've got irrespective of our politics, whether it's

Liberal Premiers like Nick Greiner or overwhelmingly  Labor Premiers as they are and ourselves. We've got to  put political differences aside, regional differences  aside and say how together do we act to make this  national Australian economy as internationally  competitive and efficient as we possibly can?

JOURNALIST: Mr Hawke, you just commenced three inquiries  by the Industry Commission in the areas applying to the  States' rail, electricity and marketing authorities.  Aren't you shortcircuiting that ... ?

PM: Of course we're not. The first thing to note is  that those three inquiries that you refer to have been  set up after consultation with and agreement from the  States. This is not something that we've imposed upon  the States. It represents the outcome of discussions and  agreements with them. Governments, Federal and State,  don't just then say we'll put everything on hold and  we'll wait until we get those reports, either the interim  or a final report. I mean you've obviously got to

address these and other issues yourself. I mean you take  the area of trying to get an integrated rail freight  system in this country. There obviously is much that can  be done in discussion between us and the States on that

issue without simply waiting for the report from the  Industry Commission.

JOURNALIST: Mr Hawke you mentioned some of the carrots  you've offered the States in terms of speeding up the  process of micro reform. What about the stick? How  prepared is the Commonwealth to use its powers of funding

and borrowing to push the States into micro reform?

PM: Well I hope we'll get this matter resolved in a way  which involves a maximum degree of cooperation. I mean  you know that's the way I prefer to do things. Not  simply because of my nature but also because in the end

processes which reflect agreement and cooperation will  stick better than anything else. Now how in that process

18

you get, as you put it, the appropriate combination of  carrots and sticks is too early to say. But really what  I want to do is to get a position from the end of this  month of commitment to process. How in working out that  process, what we'll need to do and what they'll need to  do, that's exactly the guts of what the discussions into  the processes are going to have to be about.

JOURNALIST: ... Administrative Services Minister,  Stewart West, has suggested that ... NSW and Victoria  should be compensated for the infrastructure costs of  immigration. He was critical of the Government for not  having considered it before. a) Was he right that you

should have considered it before, and b) are you going to  start doing it now?  PM: I've got really no comment to make on what Stewart  said. Stewart was a member of the Government when all  those things were being done.

JOURNALIST: (inaudible)

PM: That doesn't follow. Nor the fact that I say it  doesn't follow means that something will be done. But  your proposition because of what I've just said means  that nothing will be done or something like that, that  doesn't follow.

JOURNALIST: Mr Hawke, a week or so ago Senator Ray said

on behalf of the Foreign Minister that the Government  would be considering the implications of the attempted  PLO raid on the Israeli ... and also Arafat's attitude on  this. Have you had an opportunity to do anything about

this or does the Government continue, attempt to continue  directly ...

PM: I understand that the Foreign Minister is having a  review of the situation. I'm given to understand that  he's doing that. No doubt at some stage he will report  to me on that.

JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, do you believe that had you  waited until the Cabinet decision had been made that  there would have been less confusion and concern in the  community over the Chinese and Cambodian issue?

PM: Not at all. I mean the confusion in the community  that you talk about, which, may I say as gently as I can  flows very considerably from the incapacity of some of  your colleagues to understand simple propositions, is not

something which necessarily would've been any different  after the Cabinet decision. I mean the things that I've  said are very simple, straightforward and may I say  unchanged from the day I first spoke on it. I read with  a certain amount of amusement I must say about Hawke  changing his position, Hawke backing down. Absolute  bloody balderdash. Hawke hasn't changed his position one

fraction. For the simple reason that what the Prime

I

19

Minister said in the first place was sensible, reflected  the requirements of this country and will be given effect  to by the Government.  JOURNALIST: Australian and Qantas need about $800  million. Some of your Caucus backbenchers are saying  that one possibility would be for superannuation funds to

be encouraged or perhaps an investment vehicle to provide  that sort of money. Are you attracted to that idea at  all?  PM: I'm attracted to this matter being discussed within  the Party. I'm very interested to see that they are  addressing their minds to a range of possibilities. The  Government will have to make decisions about the funding  of our airlines and any thoughts that anyone has on this  matter within the Government process is welcome.

JOURNALIST: Will that be in the Budget?

PM: I'm not quite sure whether it will be in the Budget.  We'll obviously have to address this issue in the not too  distant future.  JOURNALIST: Just given the effort that we are putting

into making sure that a peaceful settlement eventuates in  Cambodia and given how crucial China's position is on  this, have you had any information conveyed to you that  the recent decision on Chinese students might have upset  or set back that process.

PM: No. I don't believe that the position that China  will adopt, both for itself and in terms of any influence  it may have on the Khmer Rouge, is going to be impacted  upon in any way by this decision. I mean, after all,  other countries have made similar sorts of decisions -

the United States, Canada and so on. I think they'll  understand. They may like it ... indicated they don't  particularly like the decision we've made but -JOURNALIST: (inaudible)

PM: Well you've seen in the press the indication from  spokespersons for the Chinese government that they  haven't approved of the decision. That's all I'm going  on. I haven't had any letter from Li Peng. But in the  broad sweep of these sorts of issues the Chinese  government will make a decision which it thinks is in its  best interests in regard to how the situation in Cambodia

should be resolved. I can only express the hope that it  will be a decision both, as I say, in regard to their own  direct involvement but more importantly in regard to the  influence they have on the Khmer Rouge. That it will be

a decision which is supportive of what now I see as a  gathering momentum for a process of resolution. We've  moved a long way since the first discussions took place.  I think it was in December of '87 in Paris. That was  when we had sort of the first coming together of the

20

groups. And we're now really getting down in the  discussions which are taking place within the P5, that's  the Permanent Five, of the Security Council, and  discussions which have been taking place under the Paris  Conference procedures and in the initiatives from  Thailand and most recently reflected in the Tokyo  meeting. Now really getting down to quite concrete and  detailed issues, what for instance is the role of the  State National Council, the issue of how you can vest

some appropriate sovereignty in the State National  Council which would enable then the concept of agreement  to a United Nations, some sort of United Nations process  in the interim leading up to the election and the  oversight of the election. You're getting down to  detailed questions of how do you relate proposals about a  cease fire which now have been considered, but relating

that as they must be to an overall permanent settlement.  Now these are quite specific questions in which there  have been considerable advances made so we are, I think,  now in a position where we've got more reason to be  confident than three years ago, although still  recognising that there are very very hard decisions that  have to be made. I'm hopeful that on all the evidence  available to me that the various parties will be able to

reach a point of agreement so that all their legitimate  interests can be taken into account. There is no doubt  that in that the position of China is very important. No  doubt about that at all. But I would not expect that the  decisions that they will make on this will be affected by  the sorts of things we've been talking about here.  ends

