RUDDOCK TEL No. 028046739 11,04,90 6:38 P.01

P A R L I A M E N T  OF A U S T R A L IA

H O U S E  O F  R E P R E S E N T A T I V E S

OFFICE OF PHILIP RUDDOCK, M.P. SUITE 302

EASTWOOD CENTRE   160 ROWE STREET   EASTWOOD, N.S.W.  2122

PARLIAMENT HOUSE   CANBEKHA, A.C.T. 2600   TEL. <062) 7771 1 1

MEMBER FOR DUNDAS SHADOW MINIS I L K  KUK IMMIGRATION AND ETHNIC AFFAIRS .

TEL. 666 101 1  FAX. 604 6739

P R E S S  R E L E A S E

PHILIP RUDDOCK

Shadow Minister for immigration  and Ethnic Affaire

ISSUES IN IMMIGRATION

I am delighted to have the opportunity to continue in my role as  Shadow Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affaire.

Confidence in the immigration Program can only be maintained if  there is open and public debate about ite purpose and objectives.

I will be working to ensure these important questions are addressed  in a balanced, sensible and sensitive way.

Secretary of the Department .

I regret that it appears Ron Brown may have been sacrificed because  of the administrative failings of the former Minister.

Robert Ray had a determination to implement a new Act and  Regulations without substantial public discussion and consultation.

His legacy is an administrative nightmare and prompt action will be  required to restore credibilty to Australia's Immigration Program.

The Minister was clearly responsible and should have been held  personally accountable.

The Prime Minister's displeasure should have been directed at him.

Matters put on the back-burner during the election campaign must  now be decisively addressed. __

COMMONWEALTH

PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY  MICAH

Immigration Regulations

Robert Ray's pre-occupation with ALP machine politics has resulted  in flawed Migration Regulations,

His successor must urgently act on the considered recommendations  of the Joint Select Committee on Migration Regulations. As a first  priority the Committee should be reformed and its reports  published.

Minister Hand would also be wise to look at the unreasonable  restrictions placed on Ministerial discretion which will make it  increasingly difficult for him as Minister to redress those cases  where justice has been denied or where compassionate circumstances

demand that special consideration be given.

Daily cases are coming to notice where the strict application of  the new law makes him and his Department appear stupid and  unconscionable. ,

Many more cases of so-called innocent illegals will come to notice  bringing our immigration program only further into disrepute.

A  National Debate on Immigration

Dr Hewson has recently called for a rational and mature debate on  an appropriate Australian immigration program. This is an  important issue for all Australians and one in which I look forward  to participating. .

Important issues that will be central to this debate include:

* a clear view of what Australia's sustainable population should  be over both the short and longer term.

* the economic and environmental consequences of a target  population level.

* the criteria for migrant entry and specific economic criteria  that may need to be met.

* appropriate administrative arrangements for case-by-case  examination of refugee claims or special humanitarian  considerations.

SYDNEY  10th April 1990

V

