ALTERNATIVE DIRECTIONS IN FOREIGN POLICY

A SPEECH BY SENATOR ROBERT HILL

Shadow Minister for Foreign Affairs -

I COMMONWEALTH

to ^RUAMENTARY UBRARY

THE AUSTRALIAN INSTITUTE OF INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS

.  (N.S.W. BRANCH) SYDNEY

21 MARCH 1990 .

Thank you for the opportunity to outline the alternative  directions in foreign policy which will be taken by the incoming  Coalition Government.  .

The first difference I see is in our attitude to the relationship  between Foreign Affairs and Trade and commerce.

At a time of such dramatic changes in world politics, one might  be forgiven for believing that Australia's relations with other  countries would be high on the political agenda in this election.   That this has not been the case, is not because there are not

important issues concerning Australia's place in a rapidly  changing world, but because Australia's domestic economic decline  has been seen as of higher priority. The two are in fact related.  Our economic decline is having a detrimental effect on our

capacity to influence events both bilaterally and multilaterally

in ways which are in Australia's best interests.

In a competitive world those with most influence tend to be those  with military or economic strength. It has not gone un-not iced

that in the Government's recent paper on Regional Security,   Senator Evans resorted to emphasising our military might  vis-a-vis our neighbours, as a primary source of our influence.

It was sad to see Australia's international stature being reduced  to such terms,  so common in determining relative influence in the

Third World.

2

Third parties now assess us differently because of our economic

vulnerability. Thus, Taiwan which not many years ago was begging  of us economic opportunity, can now attach a political price to  providing for us the economic opportunity that we require.

Australia must be internationally competitive but it must also be  prepared to use foreign policy as a tool to enhance economic  interests in the way others do. Therefore a much more hard-nosed  approach to our bilateral foreign relations will be evident under

the Coalition Government. What is in Australia's interests and  particularly Australia's economic interests, will be of paramount  consideration. .

Labor has put considerable energy into the multilateral trade

round, but not the same priority into bilateral relations. It is  almost as if international economic opportunity in bilateral  relations is a little shop-soiled. To Labor it is much more  appealing to work through the international organisations, with

the specialists and in the rarefied air of the GATT.

It is evident also in the structure of the Department. Multi­ lateral trade policy was brought within the Department, yet trade  promotion,· getting one's hands dirty in the market place, was  seen as more appropriate in an Industry portfolio. Similarly,  administration of the bilateral trade agreements, in many cases,  was thought better left with the Department of Primary Industry.

In many ways therefore the function of trade within the  Department has attracted an air of unreality. It will be  interesting to see the ultimate outcome of the Uruguay Round and  to assess what Australia achieved from its years of negotiation.  That is not to say that efforts to reduce tariffs in agriculture

are not important, and of course we are committed to a more open

international trading regime, but when multilateral reform is  pursued as a substitute for hard won bilateral opportunities, one

senses that we are playing according to a different set of rules

from that of our competitors.  .

3

It is ironic that it can be argued, I believe persuasively, that

trade focus has in fact been reduced by the amalgamation of the  Departments.  There always seems to be a political issue, be it  China, PNG, Cambodia or whatever, which takes priority on the  day. Most OECD nations believe they can achieve better value  keeping the functions in separate Departments.  The partial

amalgamation which has occurred in this country under Labor could

be the worst option of all.

Andrew Peacock will not be making a decision on the structure of  the Department until after the election, but whatever choice he  makes, the emphasis will be to significantly strengthen that  function dealing with international trade.  Even in a divided

Department, political officers will need to be much more  economically conscious than in the past. In other words, the  priority of an incoming Coalition Government will be towards  economic opportunity and advantage.

You will soon see practical examples of our changed approach. For  example, Australian business will be encouraged by the next  Coalition Government to seize the economic opportunities that  arise out of Taiwan.  We won't be embarrassed by such an approach

which is not.inconsistent with our obligations to China arising  out of the Paris Communique of 1972. We will urge that Hong Kong  be invited to the next APEC meeting, rather than be deflected by  unnecessary political concerns as was the Hawke Government. And

there will be a much more vigorous effort to build Australia's  economic presence in Thailand in order to participate in the

ultimate reconstruction of Indochina. .

The second area of significant difference I wish to raise relates  to national security.

Too few resources within the Department of Foreign Affairs have  been expended in looking at the use of Australian foreign policy

in advancing our security interests, the field having almost  totally been abdicated to the Department of Defence.

No better example can be given than that of Papua New Guinea.

4

Australia sought to help PNG in relation to its problems on  Bougainville, but the dominant part of its contribution was that  of defence support.  I find it almost embarrassing that PNG now  needs to call upon Scandinavian and other international conflict  resolution experts to assist it. The Bougainville difficulty

always had both political and security perspectives. Our emphasis  towards the latter, at the expense of the former, has been at  considerable political cost.

That does not mean that we have not agreed with the  responsibility of Australia to help support the development and  professionalism of the PNG Defence Force, which includes the  supply of equipment. Such support will be necessary for a long  time to come and even when we are frustrated and disappointed.

But an undue emphasis upon defence can be counter-productive, as

has now been demonstrated.

When I was in Bougainville last year, the PNG Government was  clearly recognising both the defence and political dimensions of  the problem and it was obvious that PNG needed help in both.  A  little more help at that time for Mr Namaliu in resisting those

who simply saw the solution in more troops and hardware,  might  have resulted in a very different picture from that which PNG now

faces. .

But even when the Foreign Minister finally wrestled with the  concept of security late last year, he saw security and the  contribution to it through diplomacy in, what seems to us, as a

dangerously limited geography. Australia's security for the  future will not simply be tied up in our relations with

neighbours but in the place we make for ourselves in a very  complicated multi-polar world. .

Australia has had a comfortable niche within the Alliance and .   whilst the Cold War might have been frightening, our  responsibility in support of the United States and Western

allies, was always reasonably clear. The future is not going to  be anywhere near as simple. It might be that ideological  rivalries are reduced, but there will always be political and

5

economic rivalry.

The major powers of the future in our region will clearly include  India, China and Japan.  Yet Senator Evans dismissed Japan's

influence as "overstated" and hardly mentioned the other two.

Each relationship presents its own set of difficulties but there  has been little evidence of long-term thinking in this regard  coming from the Minister. Under our administration there will be  much more effort in the political perspective of longer-term

security assessment and our area of strategic interest will have

very different boundaries from that of this Government.

The third area in which you will witness significant change is  that we intend our foreign policy to be much less based on  personal relationships. We believe in the case of Mr Hawke, that  often his personal relationship with another leader has  determined policy, rather than sound, objective assessment.  We

saw it particularly in relation to China.

There was ample basis in China's human rights record, one need  only think of Tibet, for caution. Yet Mr Hawke's personal  relations seem to over-ride sound logic. To some extent Gareth  Evans has fallen into the same trap.  Because he finds Mr Hun Sen

personable or intelligent, he assumes that Australia's argument

has been accepted.

Fourthly, there is a whole series of Government decisions,  assessments or examples of inaction with which we disagree.

South Africa is a.classic example. It was evident at last year's

CHOGM that President de Klerk would implement fundamental reform  in South Africa, and that he needed encouragement and support.

Yet Australia under Mr Hawke and Senator Evans led the charge for

additional and deeper sanctions.  It seemed to us that in an  effort to engender personal popularity from Commonwealth leaders,  we were behind the main game. The fact that Australia is now  paying for research into the effects of financial sanctions adds

further evidence to our concerns.  In Government we would seek to  provide a better balance between encouragement and pressure in  relation to South Africa, in a more constructive effort to ensure

6

the maintenance of the process of change now occurring.

In relation to Myanmar, Senator Evans was announcing that the  election program was on track when Opposition leaders were being  locked up, martial law declared and communications cut. It

evidenced either ignorance or naivety. We would press for truly  open and free elections with international observers.

In Saudi Arabia we witnessed a gross mis judgement by the Minister

of the live sheep dispute. We would not have the same ideological  objections to calling upon private sector organisations in good  standing to help in such circumstances.

In the Middle East Mr Hawke was still advocating an international  conference when more enlightened leaders saw a unique opportunity  of getting the Israeli Government and a Palestinian delegation to  the negotiating table.  Such direct negotiations would have  provided, and can still provide, a fundamental step forward in

the Middle East conflict. We would not be locked into the  rhetoric of the past. ,

But perhaps the area of misjudgement that has concerned us most  has been the Government's inability to accurately assess and  react to the changes taking place in the Pacific. Fiji was a

classic example. Australia under this Government was unable to

predict the events in Fiji and equally clearly had no idea how to  react.  I regret to say that, despite Senator Evans'  news-catching  jargon of "Constructive Commitment", there is little evidence  that much has changed.

As a Government, we will be conscious of our responsibility

beyond our region. We will do our utmost both bilaterally and  multilaterally to encourage and support the largely peaceful·

revolution taking place in the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe.

We don't under-estimate the instability that might arise from the  process or the economic stress but an opportunity for freedom  cannot be missed. It is the responsibility of the Western .vorld

to do everything possible to ease the pains of transition.

7

With regard to the independence of Lithuania and likely similar  declarations in relation to Estonia and Latvia, I remind you that  unlike the Australian Labor Party we have never accepted the de  jure incorporation of these states into the Soviet Union.  We  therefore welcome the re-statement of Independence by Lithuania  and in government will urge the Soviet Union to facilitate that

independence in an orderly and peaceful way.

But it is within the Asia-Pacific region that our emphasis will  lie. The ideological thaw taking place in Europe is having  trouble reaching the East. Vietnam has been strident in its  objection to the democratisation taking place in Europe; the  position of China is well known; and North Korea, it seems, is

seeking a nuclear weapon capacity. We would be less reticent than  Labor in urging upon these States respect for democracy and  freedom which will ultimately enhance our security.

We will maintain efforts to find a resolution to the Cambodian  conflict and will commence an action in genocide against Pol Pot  and his deputies in the International Court of Justice.  The  sooner they are excluded from the dimensions of the Cambodian  problem, the more likely will be a settlement. The help that the

International Commission of Jurists has given us in preparation  for this case is acknowledged with thanks. We will support a

democratically-elected Government of Cambodia and accept a role  for Australia in the re-building of Cambodia.

We will look for ways in which we might support the Philippines  as it experiences considerable internal trauma - a regional  challenge rarely mentioned by the Labor Government.

Our first Foreign Affairs responsibility will however be Papua  New Guinea and the small Pacific Island states,  We will continue

to support them through their difficult evolutionary stages,  making greater effort to understand their aspirations in their  terms, rather than ours.

The final area of difference from Labor that I want to mention  today is in relation to Foreign Aid. Aid will be better targeted

8

and will be concentrated within the Asia-Pacific region. Thus the  number of countries, currently over 100 receiving aid assistance,  will be reduced. We will make greater use of non-Government

organisations in aid delivery; we will give preference for aid

which improves the economic base of the recipient country;  exhibit a bias to democratic and market-oriented countries; and.  will take into account excessive military expenditure in our

determination.

We are going to be forced to make a cut in foreign aid this year,  which is something we regret, but a significant cut in public  expenditure we believe is necessary in Australia's domestic  economic crisis. Without correcting Australia's economic decline,

the graph of foreign aid will not be returned to the upward  direction we would desire. We established our good faith in this  area when last in government and our record now looks most  impressive, when compared with that of the Labor Government.

We have excluded Papua New Guinea and the South Pacific from any  cuts in country programs and emergency and refugee assistance  from cuts in global programs.  There will, be a small cut to aid  administration as we cannot see how, at a time of aid reduction,  the Government could justify increasing the staff of AIDAB by 65  positions.

On a bilateral note we will continue Australia's record of  support for the United Nations which has demonstrated in recent

years that it can be a useful tool in helping resolve conflict  provided the Member States allow it to play such a role.  '

We intend that Australia will continue to play a vigorous role in  the international community in the preservation and enhancement

of human rights'. There will be no diminution of the resources we  will put in this area. If anything, we think Labor has become

somewhat coy in its objection to human rights abuses,  particularly those within our own region.  The good relations with  the NGOs working in the human rights area will also be  maintained. Organisations such as Amnesty International have

played a primary role and we recognise and support their work.

9

We will also continue to make use of foreign relations to enhance  the environment and I remind you that it was our policy on .

Antarctica which encouraged Labor to resolve its internal  differences and advocate a policy which it now advances as its  own initiative.

Thus it will be seen that, whilst there are not diametrically  opposed objectives in the foreign policies of the major parties,  there are important differences in priority and of detail. It is  disappointing to us, and we believe offensive to the Australian  public, that the Foreign Minister has refused to debate these  differences during the course of this election.  Last week at  short notice he withdrew from an ABC debate, and has refused to  participate in a foreign affairs debate on SBS television. With  Government has come an arrogance that no one can do it better.   That is a judgement for the Australian electorate and not the  Foreign Minister to make. .

I am pleased that the Australian Institute of International

Affairs has continued to provide a forum, probably the leading  forum in this.country, for serious foreign policy discussion. I  hope that more Australians will appreciate the opportunities and  responsibilities that exist beyond our shores, and I will always  be ready to support the Institute, as it attempts to engender  public interest in these serious, matters.

