/ w -

PRIME MINISTER

TRANSCRIPT OF NEWS CONFERENCE,  SYDNEY TOWN HALL  10 JUNE 1990

E & OE - PROOF ONLY

JOURNALIST: Mr Hawke, on the question of the Chinese  students, there's some doubt about whether the full 20,000  will be able to stay and what status they will have.

PM: Well let me say this. I have been amazed, if I can put  it that way, by the media in this last week. I see that I  have changed my mind, retreated. There's been no change in  my position, no retreat. There seems to be a complete

incapacity to understand the very simple propositions which  I put and some distinctions which I made. Now let me make  it clear. What I said was something that should not have  surprised anyone because I'd been saying it for 12 months.  And that is that in regard to those people that had come  here pre-Tienanmen that there were special circumstances

that applied to them and there would be a special category.  The details of that of course I had in some sense talked  about with Mr Hand before I made any public comment. He is  preparing a submission for Cabinet on the basis of the  discussions that we had, and the details of how we'll work

out that special category will be considered and determined  by Cabinet. But there will be, as there must be, and as  I've made quite clear over a period of 12 months, special  consideration as to how you deal with the problems of those

people. For those who came after that I've made it clear,  as will be the case, that the presumption will be that those  people will return to China. Now I noticed that in the  process some people seemed to have had a difficulty in  making the distinction between that and what I had to say in

regard to what in shorthand terms are called the Cambodian  boat people. Now obviously I understood, and do understand,  ... involved in what I said, that for those who get here,

those who've arrived, there are legal processes to which  they are entitled. And to be technical about it that's the  DORS, the Determination of Refugee Status, DORS. And people  get here whom are able to use those processes to determine  by definition whether they have refugee status in the terms

under our legislation, and internationally recognised, which  would enable them to qualify for residency here under the  refugee category. What I was trying to make quite clear and

which I repeat again is that as far as I and the Government  are concerned there needn't be some expectation that there  is simply a great open door here for any people who want to  come. People are saying oh but look at the difficulties  they encounter in getting here. Sure, but where do we draw

COMMONWEALTH PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY  MIC AH

2

- >

the line? Say two hundred people have come,  they've  encountered some difficulties. Alright, they get here.  What if it's two hundred thousand, two million? It's got  nothing to do with whether they are Cambodians,  whether they

are Irish, Greek,  Italian. The fact is that I am making it  quite clear as far as this Government is concerned that we  as a sovereign country will determine our immigration policy

and its content,  its size. And let no-one think that we're  just going to stand idly by and allow others by their  autonomous action which reflect some perhaps unhappiness  with the circumstances in which they find themselves in  their own country,  that those people are going to determine  our immigration policy. That's not going to happen. How  those things I made quite clear in my comments last week.  There was no equivocation about them. They were

intellectually integrated, politically integrated and  intellectually and politically proper. If people haven't  been able to understand it don't accuse me of some changing.   There has been no change. What i say now is precisely what

I've said before.

JOURNALIST: Mr Hawke,  why did you bypass Cabinet when you  were making that decision?

PM: It's not a question of bypassing Cabinet. As I've just indicated,  I had detailed discussions with the Minister  before I made the observation that I did. I've been Prime  Minister for seven years. On many occasions where there is

a matter of public concern and interest I, with the  responsibility I have as Prime Minister,  have made it clear  what I believe the Government's position would be. And I am  quite certain that the Government's position will be as I

have indicated. Now as to certain details, particularly as  to the details of how we work out the special category for  those Chinese that were here prior to Tienanmen,  then those  will be a matter of detailed discussion and determination by

Cabinet.

JOURNALIST: Mr Wellington Lee and some other people in the Asian community have said that some of the students, the  Chinese students,  don't deserve to stay here.

PM: Yes,  well Mr Wellington Lee over the years has made  observations which don't always emanate from his concern  with matters of immigration as such. I mean he has his  political sympathies and positions and if he sees an

opportunity to attack the Government he's been prepared to  do it over the years. And that's - good on you Wellington -  that's part of this democracy and I welcome that. But I

don't take any particular notice of Wellington Lee. I  understand what the realities are. And they are, they've  not only been recognised in this country, but it defies  description that anyone should suggest that in regard to  people who were here before Tienanmen that you don't have to

have some special considerations as to how you deal with  that. We will, and as I say the details will be worked out  in discussion with my Cabinet colleagues.

3

JOURNALIST; Will you take into consideration their skill  level,  their educational level?

PM; As I say, the details of how these things are taken  into account are properly for decision. The important thing  that I've done is to make clear that this country will  compassionately and properly understand that there are  special considerations that have to be given to that group  of people.

JOURNALIST: You must have been disappointed though that your decision sort of seemed to unveil a bitter new  dimension to the Asian immigration debate.

PM; well I don't think it did. It's very interesting.  What it did unveil was a lack of capacity on the part of  many people writing in the media to understand fairly simple

facts. But I'm used to that after seven years.  I don't get  terribly worried about that. One has an educational role in  these matters.  I think that in regard to the issue itself  that it would be fair to say that people did, generally  speaking, including those who I think misunderstood what I  was saying, certainly none of the people who've written in  the media I think,  nor Australians generally, have taken the  view that we shouldn't have a compassionate attitude on  these matters.  I haven't felt that that view has come

through strongly.

JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what do think of Mr Loosley's plan to change preselection rules in the State?

PM: I think that is a matter predominantly for discussion  here within the State branch of NSW.

JOURNALIST: Is it a good idea? Bob Hogg is proposing a  similar change nationally.

PM: I think it's a good idea that these matters should be  discussed within the Party.

JOURNALIST: Mr Hawke,  you mentioned the Budget in your speech and there has been a figure floating around that  you're going to make cuts of $1.6 billion to the  Commonwealth Budget in the forthcoming Budget. Is that

figure right?

PM: That's a good try Amanda. A very very good try. You  know that in this funny period that we're getting into now  in the pre-Budget that there are all sorts of figures and  ideas floating around. Now that's good, it's part of the

process of public debate and democracy.  But these things  will be determined in the now awful period that's coming up  of weeks and weeks in that Expenditure Review Committee.

All I will say is this, that there will be decisions which  will involve reductions in commonwealth expenditure.  Because that is necessary if we're going to meet the task  that we have.  And that is to ensure in the interests of

this country that in the period ahead there be a position

4

where production is greater than demand. Because that is  necessary to attack the twin problems of our external  account and of inflationary pressures. So we'll play our  part in Commonwealth fiscal policy and of course if we also  want the States to be involved in some expenditure restraint  we'll have to show some ourselves.

JOURNALIST:  Mr Greiner said that on the area of  microeconomic reform his government has done more than most  and he's asking for some tax rebate powers.

PM: Yes well if you read all that Mr Greiner has said over  the months and the years it makes very interesting reading.  He's the one who said at times, perhaps most vociferously,  that there's a need for restraint by the States. Then when

you look at what's happened in NSW the performance doesn't  quite match the rhetoric. But I'm not here to engage in a  slanging match with Mr Greiner, as attractive as that may  appear to be. I mean I hope that Nick Greiner and all the

State Premiers, irrespective of their political persuasion,  are going to accept that we all, all of us, have a  responsibility to match as politicians, and as decisionÂ­ makers, the economic challenges confronting this country.  That involves some hard decisions on the part of all of us.

JOURNALIST: Mr Hawke, in terms of the public debate — process of democracy, is it a wise move to throw a  television news crew out of the Conference?

PM: That's a matter for the decision of the conference. All I can say is that every other television station seemed  to think it was appropriate to meet the requirements of the  Conference. That's their business.

JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Mr Howe seems to be  foreshadowing changes, possible changes to Medicare. How  far can those changes go?

PM: I don't put specific limits on that. I have a position  where in Brian Howe I have a Minister of outstanding  competence, great track record in the broad area of social  issues. His reforms as Minister for Social Security were

historic. He blended thiti great capacity for compassion and  targetting for eliminating unnecessary expenditure but while  ensuring that those in need were better looked after. A

great record there and he seems to be bringing precisely  those characteristics and qualities to the discharge of his  new Ministry. I am quite confident, knowing Brian as I do,  that he will be having a quite wide-ranging examination of

this area and be bringing to Cabinet proposals, which I  don't know the detail of yet as I'm talking, but which will  be characterised by those considerations. That is to  eliminate waste - if that can possibly be done - to make for

better targetting but to ensure that those who need  protection get it.

JOURNALIST: Are we talking about modifying or rebuilding  Medicare?

5

PM: I'm not making any positions about it because i want to  have further discussions with the Minister and we'll want to  see what his proposals are. But it will ensure that  whatever is done you can rest assured that the

characteristics of Medicare will stay. And that is that for  the people of Australia they will have universality and they  will have equity.

JOURNALIST: Is Mr Cameron as bad a pollster as Mr Loosley  seems to think he is?

PM: Now this is almost sub judice.

ends

