Leader of the Opposition  ';', !

&11~~~A~~t,o.±l~!--:}2u.41 t)p J--t1 nee._, '5 Transcript ·_-'""\ -j t DR JOHN HEWSON MP AND JOHN LAWS 1 2UE t{Q,wsor1- ~rcthoVl PDi.La, ~uEsoAY, 11 JULY 1990 \-\ew:>on ~ & EO PROOF COPY ONLY ,~ ~(~ ~Qfi<;_ - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - ~~ tco(){)f\Uc~ovt \. . -.. And my guest, Leader of the Opposition, Dr John Hewe on. John, QOOd morninQ and welcome. HEWSON; Good morning John, how are you. LAWS; Pretty good, not a bad sort of day is it, lIEWSONt LAWS; Its a lovely day. Bob Hawke was accused of double standards in his attitude to the Cambodian refugees which was so mark~dly different from his approach to the Chinese students, but nonetheless, he was accused of double standards. It would appear to me that you're really saying what the Prime Minister said was aoout right, HEWSON; No, what I'm saying is that we have to put these boat people that arrived through the DORS procedure to determine whether in fact they are genuine refugees and at that point then we will need to make a decision what we do with any o! those that are screened out. You see the point is that not all boat people are genuine refugees. Parliament House, Canberra, A.C.T. 2600 Phone 77 4022

2 .

LAWS:

What is a genuine refugee?

HEWSON:

LAWS:

Well one that, in principle, is likely to be subject to

political recrimination if they are returned home.

How do you prove it because they all claim they will be?

HEWSON a

LA~S:

Well the DORS procedure is a well established procedure, an  internationally agreed procedure for determining that on a  case by case basis. There are a lot of criteria that they

use and they are experienced at making those judg~me11Ls.

Now what I'm saying is they have to make those judgements.  When they're made, if any are screened out and said not to  be genuine refugees, perhaps they are economic refugees,  then we have to face the prospect of either voluntarily or

involuntarily repatriating them back to Cambodia.

What about the Chinese students?

lIEWSON:

LAWS:

well I think that one of the things that I've don~ on this

recent trip is to focus a bit on the refugee issue, to visit

a camp, to talk to the United Nations High Commissioner for  Refugees, or his Office, to get a feeling for the magnitude  of the problems and I think, having had that experience and  seeing the extent of the problem in Thailand, and now as it

has impacted in Malaysia and Indonesia and finally coming  to Australia, it set~. that decision of the Prime Minister  in context. And what I'd said about that decision was I

thought the only way to deal with the Chinese students was  again on a case by case basis under the DORS procedure.

What we've got to do is, I think, look at the issue from our

point of view. And that is we need to preserve the

integrity of our immigration program, We need to ensure  that those who come here as immigrants qualify under the  rules we set.

A.re we doing that with the Chinese students?

3.

HEWSON:

LAWS:

As it looks at this stage, I mean giving a blanket approval  for a group of people to stay without any knowledge as to

whether they are genuine refugees is of course going

directly against the standard procedure. Now I don't know  whether they would all qualify as genuine refugees or not.  But it's not for me to make that determination, it is for

the DORS Committee do it. I know there are a lot of

students and I know its a laborious and labour-intensive  process but its the only equitable way to do it.

Yes. Well why isn't it being done that way?

HEWSON:

LAWS:

Because of the Prime Minister's one-off decision to treat  them differently.

Why does he have that attitude to the Chinese as opposed to  the Cambodians?

HEWSONz

I've no idea, John.

LAWS:

Do you think its an emotional reason, what's the reason?

HEWSON:

LAWSz

It undoubtedly was, perhaps, .an emotional response. I don't  know, it probably links a bit to his China policy as a

whole. But I think nobody has a monopoly on sympathy and

compassion in this area, you just want to make sure you take  the right decision and the only way to do that is to apply

the procedure.

Well there are a lot of pretty unhappy people who learned  recently, we were discussing it last week or the week

before, I can't remember, but something like $50 million was  going to be spent possible in the first year giving social  benefits to these Chinese students. A lot of awfully hungry  people in Australia.

4 .

So how does, whether its emotive or otherwise, how does the  Prime Minister explain that $50 million could be found for  that sort of thing, to help these Chinese students who may  well need help but we don't know because they haven't gone

through the system, when there are people literally living  below the poverty line in his own country. r mean, does he  want to run China or Australia?

HEWSON:

LAWS;

Well, that's the decision he's taken without explanation.  I have consistently maintained the view that if you want to  get genuine justice and genuine compassion, you apply the  procedures and where he's varied it, it is an explanation  that he has to give. Why does he favour that group rather

than some other. ·

Well, do you think that if you're Prime Minister, that you  don't have to explain things.  HEWSON:

LAWS;

No, you should have explain things.

Do you think he thinks because he's Prime Minister ho

doesn't have to explain things.  HEWSON;

LAWS:

I think he found it difficult getting out of the mess he got  himself into on that issue and has sort of since then ducked  for cover and that information has subsequently come to  light. Clearly he's got to give an explanation as to why

he's made that trade-off,  Look, we have to take a fairly hard-line view of this sort  of issue. Now I, just for the record, r have been on the

record in the past as advocating increased inunigration.  What I want to ensure is that the immigrants we get are the  ones we choose on the basis that we choose them.

Has you attitude changed since your recent trip.

5 .

HEWSON:

LAWS:

Well, my thrust on the trip was to recognise that out future  as a country is in Asia and I wanted to go around the eight

capitals that I went to to meet the political leaders, the  Btart to develop the sort of view of Australia that I

believe we can achieve by the Year 2000, which is a major  economic and political force in the Asia/Pacific Region.

Now, having gone around the region I think the thing you see  in each of the countries that I visited is a very clear idea  on the part of each of those goyernroents as to what's in

their best interests. They go into every international  negotiation or every economic decision from the point of  view of bettering their country and pushing it ahead.

We have to come back here and say we have an immigration  policy, what's in our interests? What is in our interests  is to take immigrants that meet the skill categories we want  or meet the other economic criteria, whatever basis we  choose to select immigrants on and then we need to ensure  that the integrity of that program is preserved. And the  only way you will preserve that integrity is where you've

got a set of established procedures, as in the case of the

determination of refugees, you apply them, and if they are  genuine refugees then on humanitarian grounds, of course,  you take thenl.

And we have a very good record as a country over the years  of taking a lot of refugees, But if they're not genuine

refugees, and they're just finding a way of circumventing  our irrunigration requirements ...

...

which is what they are doing ...

HEWSON:

LAWS:

well, they may be, I can't make that judgement, they may be  and if that's tne case then you have to send a very clear

signal back because unless you send a clear signal back to  Cambodia that you just can't land on the shores of Australia  and expect to stay, unless you are a genuine refugee, then  you might as well put a tour office up there on the border

and direct them straight to Au.stralia and forget about the  immigration program.

Do you see Australia as being part of Asia?

I

6.

HEWSON;

Yes, the Asia/Pacific Region and very much so. I mean Asia  will, the Asia/Pacific Region will be the fastest growing  region for the next forty or fifty years ...

LAWS:

So you see no reason why we should have any reduction in

Asian immigration?

Hr;WSON;

LAWS;

Well, I'm not doing it on the basis of race. I don't think

race should be an element in the decision.

It shouldn't be but it is.

HEWSON,

LAWSi

Well, it shouldn't be.

But it is in the minds of the public, its. back to that old

thing that you and I talked about frequently before -

perception - and its perceived as being an issue in the

minds of Australians.

HEWSON:

LAWS:

Well, I think we set our criteria on the basis principally  on the contribution that migrants can make to this country.  In doing that I obviously want migrants to make a certain  commitment to this country and be given, then, in return,

the opportunity to make their contribution. To me, the

overridingly important considerations relate to the economic  contribution they'll make. Right now there's a very active  debate about whether migrants actually cost ~oney or they  don't, whether they contribute to our growth or they don't,

and in those terms I tend to feel that immigration has been  a positive over the years. Our better growth periods in the  50s and 60s were periods of high immigration and you know,  on that basis, I think we set our criteria as successive

governments have tried to do and to determine who should  come in.

OK. Well now, if you see Australia as part of Asia, ~nd

most people do, most thinking people do, because we have  very little alternative, surely then it would be

advantageous if our iwnigration policy perhaps included an  escalation in Asian immigration.

7.

HEWSON:

I don't want to be drawn in one way or the other on whether  or not we should have more or less Asians, that isn't the

criteria. The criteria is, to me, you set your criteria on  the basis of what type of immigrant you want. Then, if they  come from Asia or they come from Eastern Europe or they come  from the Middle East, that's an irrelevant consideration,  compared to the criteria you've set.

LA~S:

Yes, but I would have thought that it ceased to be

irrelevant if we are seen as part of Asia, and are going to  be part of Asia, one would think it would be advantageous,  if they met the er i ter ia, to have Asian immigrants as

opposed to European inun~granta.

HEWSON;

LAWS:

. -·

Not necessarily. I m~an, p~rt of our problem these days is,  of course, who wants to come. A number of groups have

backed off, I would guess, in terms of their interest in

coming to Australia.

Like who?

HEWSON;

LAWS;

Well, 1 gather that it has been harder to get Europeans to  apply because of our relative economic performance. No~ it  might be true, I don't know, in the relation to the Asian

economies, where our relative economic performance has now  dropped off considerably, while we stil 1 have a higher

standard of living they are accelerating towards our

standard of living quite quickly, with growth rates of

between, lets say 5 and 10 or 12 per cent, compared to our

current growth rate of around 1 per cent, you see what I

mean. An so l think whiie we have to get our house in order

in economic terms, we also need to have a fairly clear idea  as to what role inunigration should play in our economic

growth process and then set criteria to pick immigrants on  that basis.

OK then, well wouldn't it be reasonable to assume, if aome  of the European countries are expressing less desire to come  to Australia, that that will continue so long as our

performance fails to increase, so doesn't that really mean  that the worst the performance of this country, the lower  the standard of the immigrants that we are going to attract  to this country.

I

8.

HEWSON:

LAWS:

Not necessarily. I mean there are a lot. of reasons why

people choose to shift countries and, depending on the

criteria you set, you may have more or less difficulty

attracting those that you particularly want. For example,  you may have a shortage of plum.ber6 and you may try to

attract plumbers, you may not get any applicants from

plumbers because plumbers around the world are doing quite  well. On the other hand, you may get flooded. Now it is

very hard to generalise is what I'm saying.

Away from immigration, what else did you learn while you  were away that's important to us.

HEWSON:

LAWS:

I think one of the. important issues for the Asia/Pacific  Region in the next decade is, of course, the security issue.  The US, as you know, has foreshad6wed that it will phase

down its presence in the Region. There is a lot of

uncertainty about exactly how tnat will occur. At the same  time there are question marks bver what the Soviet Union  will do in the Region and, of course, we've enjoyed for a

number of years, admittedly in the context of the Cold War­ type environment, a fairly delicate balance between those  major powers and their presence in the region. And that is  all changing.

It's changing on the Soviet Union side, of course, because  of peristroika and the collapse of communism and on the  American side they are phasing down in part because of that  and in part because of domestic/political considerations.

So in each of the areas, in each of the countries I visited,  I raised those questions directly. Now in the Philippines,  for example, where they presently have two major bases,  there.has been some speculation that they would phase those  bases down. - ! came away with a· somewhat firmer view that  the Filipinos want to terminate those bases within five to  ten years, maybe less.

How does thot effect us?

HEWSON:

Well, from our point of view, our concern is that we want

to maintain an effective US presence in the Region. Now  with the technology of warfare, you don't necessarily need  to maintain the same sort of bases and physical locations  and numbers of troops or number of weapons that you did in

the past.

LAWS:

9.

But the effectiveness of the US presence must be maintained.  So if they are to move out of the Philippines, there is a

question as to where they will base their activities, and  in that context, Singapore has recently just done a deal  with the Americans to offer a set of facilities for

servicing aircraft and so on, on a limited basis, on a

party-time basis, within the year. Now that is a clear

signal that others in the Region, be they aligned or non­ aligned by official declaration, all have the same view  that we have, that the effective presence of the US needs  to be maintained and that' a the sort of trend that's

occurring.

Other concerns in the Region, of course, are whether, in the  context of the US and perhaps a Soviet Union phase-down,  whether the Japanese will increase their military activity  and move from just domestic defence considerations to a more

significant defence presence in the Region. And, of

course, everybody is watching that as well. I don't believe  that to be the case. I don't think the Japanese have that

in mind at all. Certainly generation of Japanese don't,  although they do have, I think, about the third largest

defence budget in the world, so you are talking very large  numbers. They are concerned, though, with the balance.

If they did have that in mind, for what reason would they

have it in mind? What would that mean to Australia?

HEWSON:

Well, I think there is a genuine concern, well I don't

think, I know there is a genuine concern that the Japanese  shouldn't increase their military role in the Asia/Pacific  Region, that they are, sure, emerging as a major economic  power, the second, ! think, largest economy in the world,  the largest lender in the world, the largest giver of aid

in the world, and people see their role, principally in

those terms rather than in any sort of military presence,  establishing bases off-shore and so on.  So it is a question of balance, and my view is that all the

countries of the Region, irrespective of their particular  background or o~ientation, seem to share that view, that you  need to maintain that presence.

we will get a clearer idea of what the Soviet Union intends  to do when the Soviet Foreign Minister visits Japan later  this year and President Gorbachev may visit Japan early next  year. And I guess what they will do is settle the

arrangement of the northern islands, the northern

territories, that the Soviet Union may pass those back to  the Japanese in return for, perhaps, Japanese aid or other  industrialisation of Siberia.

LAWS;

10.

The key point in all of this, I think the big difference,

is that economics is now driving foreign policy like we  haven't seen. With the Cold war tensions evaporating, at  least that's the direction in which they seem to go,

everyone is being driven by economic considerations - the  Japanese are certainly looking at what role they might have  to play in relation to Siberia, the South Koreans have

recently broken a long-term deadlock to re-establish links  with the Soviet Union with a view to expanding their

economic influence through Siberia, getting the resources  that they need in terms of uranium or coal or timber from

Siberia, opening up the possibility of re-unification of the  Korean Peninsula, these are all quite dramatic changes from  the point of view of the economic and security balance of  the Region. But they are all driven by economic

considerations, now, rather than Cold War tensions.

And do you believe that there is still a very strong desire  for world peace?

HEWSON:

LAWS:

Oh, very strong, much, much, I think it's growing, continues  to grow.

Yes, so do I, What's this place going to be like three

years from now unless something happens very quickly?  What's Australian going to be like in three years?

HEWSON:

Well, I think we are seeing the worst elements of a

sustained high interest rate policy that you can imagine,  I mean, it really is a "flat earth" policy in the sense

that, as I think Dr Charles said while I was away, you know  we will be lucky if any industry is left standing.

See when you go round Asia and they say what are your

interest rates? you say, you know, corporate sector borrows  at 20-21 per cent, what's your inflation rate? ohl its 8 or  9 per cent, and you start talking about 12 or 13 per cent

real interest rates, that's the difference between those two  things, they scratch their head and can't understand it.  Don't you know you won't have the industry if you do that ...  That is the sort of line and that is in fact what is

happening ...

11.

LAWS:

Well, don't they know that? X mean, don't they know that  in Canberra.  HEWSON;

LAWS:

Well, its a conscious decision, I think that the Treasurer  has taken, that being unable to get a different wage deal  and being unable to take some of the structural decisions  in terms of the waterfront or telecommunications, he's opted  to just rely on interest rates. You see the job now, I fear

that in the end he is just going to push interest rates down  without having achieved any of the other policy adjustments  that are necessary. And that will just shift the pressure  somewhere else.

Because look at the shake-out that's taking place. t mean,  house prices and commercial property prices are falling,  banks and other financial institutions are now seeing a lot  of lending that they thought was quite good against assets

like real estate, are now less substantive, a number of

financial institutions have got into trouble, record levels  of personal bankruptcies and small to medium sized business  failures, and how long is it going to go on.

That's exactly right. But all this will have happened and  then if he changes his mind and says, well, this isn't

working, we'll have to push interest rates down, that's not  going to undo the harm that has already been dona.

HEWSON1

I fear we're along way down that track. See, I've been

arguing this case for a couple of years. We're a long way

down the track and the damage that's been done, and simply  to push interest rates down will put the pressure somewhere  else, sure it might start to ease some of those financial  constraints, but a lot have already gone to the wall and

will continue to go to the wall if they haven't reached it  yet, and you get the pressure somewhere else, It will come  on the Accord or some other part of the system.

You see, what I can't see any more is what Mr Keating is

going to use as a trigger to actually bring them down. He  keeps saying he wants to see inflation come down, well, that  isn't coming down and with his fiscal policy making the  States put their charges up, of course, inf lat ion isn't

going to come down as fast as he might want. The balance

of payments is getting worse year by year a we go further  into debt and the interest we pay on the debt becomes the  current account of the following year. It is a debt trap

as well.

LAWS:

12.

It seems to be that a lot of average Australians are now

frightened and I think this is being indicated by the

financial institutions that have found themselves in trouble  and I think some of them found themselves in trouble simply  because of word-of-mouth, because of panic that developed  amongst the general public, the people in Australia. Now,

I can't see that stopping, so what's going to happen? Are  more financial institutions going to go to the wall? More  companies to the wall?

HEWSON:

LAWS:

Well, certainly a lot of small to medium sized business will  go to the wall. As far as financial institutions go we've

got two problems, I mean one is the environment that's being  created that we just talked about, it was very speculative,  where they lent a lot of money against real estate and other  asset values which are now no longer there, all these real  estate prices, and share pr ices have fall en and so on.

There's that problem.

Cant just make this point, we were taking yesterday about  George Herscu, who as you know has gone bankrupt to the tune  of something like half a billion dollars, that he was

showing assets of less than $200,000. How can a man with  assets of $200,000 borrow half a billion dollars? r mean,  how can the banks allow that to happen? Surely the banks  have to accept some responsibility for it?

HEWSON:

Yes, a couple of years ago, if you go back over the last

couple of years with what was a very inflationary

environment, remember people were looking at house prices  going up month by month and there was story after story in  the press, commercial property values, share prices, before  the crash, and people borrowed against those asset values  and the fact that they were expected to continue, the

goverrunent kept saying, you know, don't worry, it's all

sustainable, there's a brave new world here, everything is  going to continue growing, anct of course that hasn't been  the case. They have collapsed.

Now where a credit assessment was made two or th~ee years  ago on the basis of those asset prices, it looked good.

Now, if its macte, of course, against much lower asset

prices, it looks bad and its that sort of dynamic that has

changed.

LAWS:

13,

That the assessments that were made at that time aro no

longer appropriate in relation to a lot of loans and all

financial institutions are obviously assessing their true  position. Now I don't, its not a time for scaremongering,  its a time for recognising the reality of the situation that  the government ...

But is it possible that it will continue?

HEWBON1

Well, I can't say that. X mean, I think we've seen a lot

brought to account already and the banks are, as I

understand it, doing an exercise now to determine the extent  of their bad loans. X think wh_at it does do is raises a

very important issue and_that is that all these institutions  need to be effectively prudentially supervised by the  authorities and in the past the Reserve Bank has just sort  of looked at banks and stood behind banks and only kept a

fairly casual eye on other financial institutions. Building  societies and other institutions are administered under  State rather than Federal law.

I think the time has come when we step back from that and

say that all these institutions ought to be ef fee ti vely

prudentially supervised so that the authorities know in  advance of any problems that they're trending in the wrong  direction and some steps can be taken. Now that issue has  not been addressed in Australia. It is a major issue and

it will just have to be addressed in the course of the next  few months.

It might mean a much more expanded role for the Reserve Bank  than they'd ever contemplated would be the case, but you  can't allow the situation to go on where basically

institutions fall between the cracks of overlapping

regulatory authorities, one at the State, one at the

Federal. Who knows whether they've done their job or they  haven't.  Clearly these circumstances were not headed off, In some  cases they may not have been foreseen. So there are two

problems, one the inflation environment has created, was  unsustainable, and that's the Government's fault, and I  think secondly, the need for a prudential standards and  monitoring of all financial institutions which has been

ducked by various governments has to be addressed.

LAWS:

14,

OK, finally, and just out of interest, how do you feel about  Paul Keating's use of a VIP aircraft to follow his new­

found interest in Melbourne footy?

HEWSON:

LAWS:

well, X have two comments, I guess, I'm absolutely amazed  at his sudden interest in football, he must have a

leadership bid in mind, I mean he doesn't strike me as a

sporting type person. But I wouldn't use a VIP aircraft

myself,

Do you think he won any friends by doing it?

HEWSON:

LAWS:

No, I don't think so. I mean I find it hard to judge, but

I would guess not. I think, you know, as I say l'm quite

surprised at his sudden interest in football,

That will do. Thanks for your time John, as usual. Hope I

see you soon. Dr John Hewson, Leader of the Opposition.

000000000

