AUSTRALIAN SENATE CANBERRA, A CT.

EMBARGOED FOR RELEASE ON MIDNIGHT. SATURDAY. 30 JUNE. 1990

The Government's proposed changes to the procedures governing  the entry of refugees received a cautious welcome from

Senator Sid Spindler, the Australian Democrats' new

spokesperson on Immigration and Ethnic Affairs.

"Temporary residence permits will allow a quick response to  crisis situations, as the present case of the Chinese

students has shown.

However, there is urgent need for several adjustments to the  ad hoc guidelines announced so far$

Refugees holding a temporary visa must be able to  end the uncertainty of their situation and apply  for permanent residence after two years or whenever  they are joined by relatives under the family

reunion provisions.

After four years they should be entitled to

priority status when applying for permanent

residence and this should not be dependent on the  then prevailing conditions in their homeland.

It is clear that the present guidelines were designed by  bureaucrats who have never experienced the human predicament  of a homeless and uncertain existence and the need to build a  new life on a reasonably stable base.

Further, it should be clear that a provision of 11,000

refugee places is a niggardly response to the growing global  refugee problem. The Australian Democrats will be pressing  for an increase to 20,000 refugee places, in line with our

continuing policy to give priority to. the refugee and family  reunion categories."

Senator Spindler paid tribute to the work of his predecessor,  Senator Jean Jenkins, who had been vindicated in her

opposition to the Government's draconian Immigration •  Regulations pushed through just before the election with the  Opposition Parties' support, but now recognised as unworkable  and unjust in many respects.

"Australia can be justifiably proud of its record in

developing a strong and cohesive multicultural society. The  Democrats will seek to ensure that this process continues in  a rational and humane manner."

DEMOCRATS! 11.000 REFUGEES NOT ENOUGH

2 .

z -  * *

"In my other Shadow Portfolio of Attorney-General and

Justice, Democrat priorities will include work on:

Cost of Justice with a wider ambit than the current  narrow terms of reference of the Committee inquiry  which was established following years of Democrat  pressure.

Product Liability legislation to provide effective protection for c o n s u m e r s .

Freedom of Information amendments to lower current  cost barriers (which the Democrats opposed).

Human Rights Legislation to cover gaps in the

current law.

Prison Reform to provide effective rehabilitation.

Company Law Amendments to tackle abuses, e.g. in the  area of loans and payments to directors and

associated companies.

Trade Practices amendments to provide effective  anti-monopoly legislation.

Class Actions,  with safeguards to prevent vexacious  litigation.

Plain English in legislation and court proceedings.

freoal Aid - increased resources to provide effective  access to the legal system.

In Treasury, Finance and Trade, it will be our task to

provide a contrast to the deregularist policies of the old  Parties, Labor and Liberal, and to demonstrate that the  economy can be managed for the benefit of the Australian  people rather than foreign financiers.

The first step will be an indicative alternative budget to  demonstrate alternative priorities. In the longer term, we  will seek to recast our National Accounts to take account of  socially useful work much of which is now excluded, and to

take stock of our natural and infrastructure assets which are  currently ignored", Senator spindler concluded.

FOR FURTHER INFORMATION, PLEASE CONTACT SENATOR SID SPINDLER

03-614 3791 (BUS) 03-648 5546 (AH)

w

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

