P R IM E  M IN IS T E R

TRANSCRIPT OF INTERVIEW WITH MAXINE MCKEW, AM PROGRAM,  13 MARCH 1990

E & OE - PROOF ONLY

MCKEW: Prime Minister, in your statement you expressed regret at the severity of the recession. Don't you think  though a lot of people reading their papers this morning  might be saying what's in it for me?

PM: Well I think it's natural for everyone to be asking what's in it for them and for the great majority of them the  answer will be positive because there is a great deal in  this statement, that I delivered yesterday, for all  Australians.

MCKEW: What about car workers, textile workers, people who  may lose their jobs?

PM: What you've got to understand is this; that we are, as  I say, a nation of 17.5 million people. If we operated and  had operated over our period in Government on the basis that  every existing job and every existing enterprise was going  to be sacrosanct and we were going to erect that level of  barrier by way of tariffs to try and ensure that, two things  would be true.  One, we couldn't in fact do it because the

rest of the world wouldn't let us do it. Secondly, we would  be bringing upon this country a level of economic activity,  a state of an economy which would have us rapidly going  backwards.  The essence of what is required for 17.5 million  people, as I said yesterday, in a world of 5.5 billion  people, a world which is becoming increasingly tougher and  more competitive is that they are not going to allow us to

have an easy living, one where we can spend more than we  produce and borrow from their savings to sustain a given  standard of living.

MCKEW: Well given the importance of what you've outlined of building a more competitive Australia why are you only now  tackling this? Why wasn't this tackled earlier on in your  term?

PM: Of course that's a nonsense question with respect.  Are you aware of the fact that there is a plan of tariff  reductions operating in both industries? I mean, the

question is a nonsense on its face. There is a system of  tariff reduction operating in both industries.

COMMONWEALTH  PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY  MICAH

2 .

1' Μ.

%

MCKEW: Prime Minister, I gather later today you'll be  meeting with Phil Toyne from the Conservation Foundation. On the question of resource security what will you be able  to say to him to convince him that the greens have not been

sold out?

PM: I'll be able to give him the facts. The facts are these: first of all of course, as Phillip I think has been good enough to recognise in the past, and that is that no  government in the history of this country has such an  outstandingly positive record in regard to conservation and  the environment as does the Hawke/Labor Government.  Fact  two, the conservation movement has made it quite clear that  it favours value-added industries in the forest industry.  Fact three - and just elaborating on fact two, and of course  so they should want value-added industries rather than  woodchipping which is absolutely, you know, unproductive in  the sense of getting the most for Australia and doing it in  the most environmentally acceptable way. Fact three, I have  an unqualified opinion from the Attorney-General's  Department that there is no way that the Commonwealth  Government can give security of guarantee in regard to  resources for the industry in the absence of new  legislation. Fact four, is that we have embedded into the  processes and the proposals in regard to legislation the  application of all the Commonwealth Government legislative  requirements in regard to one, environmental impacts  statements; two, the requirements of the Australian Heritage  legislation; three, the requirements of World Heritage  obligations; and four, the application of Aboriginal and  Torres Strait Islanders legislation. All that legislation  will be applied. It will be applied up front.  It will be  incorporated into the agreement and it's only when those  things have been done and an agreement based upon the  application of that legislation will then be given the  effect of the legislation we're bringing in to give resource  security. When all those things are taken into account I  believe that Phillip will see, and the thinking  environmental movement will understand, that we have got the  right balance between adhering to our commitment to  preserving the environment and discharging our obligations  under legislation in that respect and on the other hand  ensuring that there will be able to be established in this  country viable and environmentally safe resource projects.

MCKEW: Prime Minister thank you very much.

PM: Thank you very Maxine.

ends

