i

■ 4

Philip Ruddock MP Federal Member for Dundas  Shadow Minister for Immigration  and Ethnic Affairs

Electorate  Tel: (02) 858 1011  Fax: (02) 804 6739

Parliament Flouse  Tel: (06) 277 4343  Fax: (06) 277 2062

OPPOSITION T RAPS AGAIN

The Prime Minister's suggestion that the Immigration Program for 1991-92 could well be  cut has enunciated a shift in the Government's position on immigration.

In arguing that this would be a result of the application of past entry criteria, the PM has  now clearly accepted the position taken by the Opposition last November.

A t the time of the National Outlook Conference, I said that in the near to short term,  immigration would fall because o f the present recession.

I also argued that a proper application o f selection criteria would yield a lower outcome  unless the Government was prepared to lower the standard of entry.

The Opposition ruled out any lowering of the standard arguing that the program should  still be carefully targeted, after accommodation was made for refugees and preferential  family reunion, for those who are younger, better educated and more employable.

Already the number of applicants for immigration to Australia is down by 20%.

In the area of employer nomination and the business migration, the numbers are also  down. In times o f high unemployment and an induced recession, independent migrants  and sponsored family seeking to enter the workforce would clearly be aware o f the  personal hardship they may have to endure if resettling at this time.

It is interesting that the PM now accepts the force of the Opposition's argument and has  put aside the cheap shot that our views were simply bagging Australia.

It is a pity that the PM did not offer som e helpful advice to his successors at the A C TU   and make it clear that the national interest criteria in choosing more highly skilled  immigrants, should not be put to one side in order to help the A C TU  maintain a closed  shop.

April 15 1991

COMMONWEALTH

PARLIAMENTARY L I B R A R Y   MiCAH

