It

DR DAVID KEMP HP FEDERAL MEMBER FOR GOLDSTEIN  SHADOW MINISTER FOR EDUCATION

145 XOORNANG ROAD  CARNEGIE, VIC. 3163  PHi (03) 571 3311  FAX: (03) 571 6020

26TH MARCH, 1991 FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE

MEDIA RELEASE

EEICOS, THE UNTOLD STORY"

The Freedom of Information material circulated reveals an  extraordinary story of Government incompetence and mismanagement  of the Education Export Program, according to the Shadow Minister  for Education Dr David Kemp.

Dr Kemp said the documents support long held concerns over the  development of the English Language Program for overseas  students.

"The documents show the Minister for Employment and Education  failed to in a timely way on a great deal of information that he  received from his own officers and from the colleges on student  non-attendance, overstays and other rorts.

He said the documents also show when the Government recognised  the problems it didn't want to know about it and Departmental  officers concluded no action would be taken until there was a  crisis.. ·

Dr Kemp said the Coalition supported the Education Export  Industry but it was tragic that the initiation of this industry  occurred the way in which it did.

"The Government set out to pump up the industry as rapidly as  possible, holding out unrealistic expectations to institutions  and has only itself to blame for the problems and rorts which  appeared.

He said despite the Minister's acceptance of bona fide testing  of overseas english language students the Australian community  is still bearing a heavy price for the neglect.

"We now have thousands of students in Australia of uncertain  status, 8,000 refugee applications from PRC students, heavy  claims on the community's resources by students in financial  difficulty.

These problems are not going to go away quickly. They will be  with us for some years .  That is why it is essential that the full  facts come out".

ENDS

For further information contact  Dr David Kemp  Ph 06 277 2035

03 571 3311

