Media Release  Minister for Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic Affairs

Parliament House , Canberra , ACT 2600  Telephone: (06) 277 7860

IMMIGRATION BUDGET STATEMENT 3

The Han . Gerry Hand, MP

REFUGEE STATUS AND HUMANITARIAN STAY FUNDING TO BE INCREASED

The Federal Government has provided increased funding of  $13.6 million for the current system for determining claims  for refugee status and humanitarian stay in Australia, the  Minister for Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic  Affairs, Mr Gerry Hand, announced today.

"The current system was introduced on 10 December 1990 as a  result of the dramatic growth in the number of applications  over the last two years from people wishing to stay in  Australia on refugee and humanitarian grounds," the Minister

said.  "This development has stretched my Department's resources to  the limit. Increased funding has been necessary to allow the  Department to recruit and train more staff to cope with the  heavier workload and to put the new system into operation.

"Approximately 160 new permanent staff have been recruited  and trained in refugee assessment, and are already working  to reduce the backlog of applications. Up to 100 temporary  staff are also being recruited to deal with the immediate  backlog of applications."

Mr Hand said the backlog currently stood at over 17 000, and  it was a matter of concern to him that a high level of  applications was still being received - about 1000 a month  during 1991.

"The continued level of funding will allow my Department to  enhance the system further to provide the quickest and  fairest processing of applications that is possible in  present circumstances. It is estimated that some 13 000  primary decisions will be made in the first year," he said.

It was expected also that a new computerised case management  system would be fully in place by the end of 1991. It would  link the determination of refugee status operational areas  of the Department's Canberra, Sydney and Melbourne offices,  and would further enhance accurate planning, statistical  reporting and workload management.

. .. I 2

-2-

In addition, the Minister said, the new Refugee Status  Review Committee had commenced operations. Its function was  to provide an independent, thorough and fair basis of review  for applicants who sought to challenge a negative decision.

It was anticipated that the Committee would review in excess  of 3000 cases in its first year.  The Minister said that the funding would also cover the  contributions being made by other government departments and  external agencies involved in the new refugee procedures,  particularly in the review context.

CANBERRA 20 August, 1991

MEDIA ENQUIRIES: Lynne Adams  Minister's Office  {06) 277.7860

Daria Castello  DILGEA  (06) 257.6035

