GXMGSIRHi^

\rnsm

Australia is to contribute a further $1.5 million in emergency-  aid to Kurdish refugees,  the Minister for Trade and Overseas  Development, Neal Blewett, announced today.

The aid is to go to three international organisations providing  assistance to the Kurds. The United Nations High Commissioner  for Refugees (UNHCR), the International Committee of the Red  Cross (ICRC) and the United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF)  will receive $500,000 each.

These organisations are carrying out large scale relief  operations amongst the 1.5 million refugees estimated to have  fled from Iraq to Turkey and Iran.

"A large number of the Kurdish refugees are still sleeping in  the open, in squalid conditions, and more are arriving. Their  priority needs are shelter, clothing, food and medicines," Dr Blewett said.

Programs run by UNHCR and the ICRC concentrate on the provision  of food and shelter.  UNICEF focuses on assisting mothers and  children by providing immunisation, safe motherhood programs,  helping to control diarrhoeal and other diseases, and supplying

clothing and high energy food for children. The problem of  infectious disease is likely to worsen as warmer weather  arrives.

This is the third package of Australian Government emergency  assistance for the Kurdish refugees.  About a week ago, a large  consignment of tents, blankets, clothing and emergency food was  airlifted to Turkey. This was in addition to cash grants of  $500,000 each to UNHCR and the ICRC provided earlier in April.

"It is clear that the greatest concentration of Kurdish  refugees is in Iran. For this reason, I have decided to direct  this second package of assistance to the Iranian side of the  international relief effort," Dr Blewett said.

This latest contribution brings to over $7.5 million the total  emergency relief provided to victims of the Gulf Crisis since  it began in August 1990. The assistance is part of the  Government's overseas development assistance program

administered by the Australian International Development  Assistance Bureau (AIDAB).

CANBERRA  For further information contact Ali Gillies, Director, Public  Information, AIDAB. Ph. (06) 276 4960

No·  MT26 April 1991

AUSTRALIA BOOSTS AID TO KURDS

COMMONWEALTH

PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY  MICAH

