AUSTRALIA AND JAPAN: RENEWING A CONSTRUCTIVE PARTNERSHIP

Keynote speech by Senator Gareth Evans,  Minister for Foreign  Affairs and Trade of Australia, to 11th Australia-Japan  Ministerial Committee, Canberra, 2 May 1991.

On behalf of all my Australian Ministerial colleagues, I  extend a warm welcome to the Japanese delegation to this, the  Eleventh Meeting of the Australia-Japan Ministerial Committee.   It is particularly pleasing that we have such a large and  diverse group of Japanese Ministers present at this meeting -

six Ministers and two vice-Ministers. I believe that this is  a record for an AJMC Meeting held in Australia, and it is a  reflection of the extent and depth of our relationship.  The  strength of your representation will enable a thorough and  forward-looking exchange of views on where our two countries  are heading on a range of bilateral, regional and

international issues.

At the last meeting of the AJMC in Tokyo in January 1989, we

agreed to characterise the Australia-Japan relationship as a  "constructive partnership" built around four key components:

.  security: in particular cooperation in securing peace

and prosperity in our own Asia-Pacific region;

.  international trade: cooperation in maintaining and strengthening a free and open world economic system;

.  the resolution of international problems requiring

cooperation for their solution: in particular

protection of the environment; and

.  bilateral relations: cooperation in the further

development and diversification of the Japan-Australia

relationship.

VII/91

2

Since that last meeting there have been a series of

extraordinary changes affecting every one of these four  dimensions in our relationship:

.  East-West relations have been transformed by

revolutionary changes in the Soviet Union and East  Europe, and the collapse of the Cold War: with the result that can we now look forward to a global and regional security environment of less confrontation and  more cooperation among the major powers - although some  tensions do continue, not least in the North Pacific.

f  .  Also on security, the Gulf War has given new life to the

concept of collective security, and at the same time has  generated an important debate about Japan's wider  international political and military role.

.  The Uruguay Round of multilateral trade negotiations, upon which so many hopes for a more open international  order were based, has stalled, giving rise to new fears  that, unless a breakthrough can be achieved, there will  be a rapid retreat away from global trade liberalisation  to a situation of warring trade blocs.

. Within the region, by contrast, we have seen established

( the process of Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC)

in which Australia and Japan have played leading roles:   APEC is now becoming consolidated as a key mechanism for  promoting regional dialogue and economic

interdependence,  with a steady emphasis being maintained  on the need for non-discriminatory trade liberalisation.

.  Within our respective economies, important changes have been occurring - with some important moves toward  market-opening by Japan (but still, you will forgive me

saying, not enough)? and some very important policy

changes being made by Australia to make ourselves more

dynamic and internationally competitive.

3

Both of our countries are in a sense at a watershed period in  our national development.  In the case of Australia, we have  realised that, in terms of our domestic economy, we are  embarked on a make or break course of economic reform and

industrial restructuring to make our society and economy more  open and internationally competitive. And in terms of our  international relations, we have come to appreciate that our

future lies squarely in the Asia Pacific and have been

devoting a major diplomatic effort to establishing our  credentials as a participant, and partner, in this region.  Either we succeed in these aspirations, and consolidate our  role as a very significant player in this part of the world,  or we fail and become ever more marginalised.

It seems that Japan too is now at a watershed, in the sense  that your country must decide how to respond to expectations  from abroad that you accept wider responsibilities of  international political and economic leadership more  commensurate with your status as the world's second largest  economy.

I believe that in confronting these respective challenges, and  in responding to the demands of an increasingly fluid  international political and economic environment, there is

much to be gained from Australia and Japan continuing to work  very closely together, and building upon each other's

strengths across the wide range of areas where we find our

interests now coinciding.

The assets we bring together are indeed formidable. In

security and strategic terms, our two countries have properly  been described as the northern and southern anchors of the  Western alliance in the western Pacific region. In economic

terms we are the two major advanced market economies of the  region: Japan's ranking at the head of the GNP field is

clear, but Australia is third in the region (after China),  with a GNP equal to India's or all six ASEAN countries

combined. And with the longstanding political relationship

that has existed between us, we have an excellent basis on

4

which to work together on cooperative strategies for solving a

whole range of global and regional problems, from the

environment to delivering development assistance.

Against this background, I believe that the framework of  "constructive partnership" upon which we agreed in 1989 still  provides a very suitable basis for both understanding our  relationship and realising its potential - and for

highlighting the main themes we should pursue during our  discussions today and tomorrow.

Security

Neither Japan nor Australia are military superpowers, but we  each have an important role to play in global security - not  least through our efforts to curb nuclear proliferation, to

outlaw chemical weapons and -  to put in place an effective  missile technology control regime. Japan's contribution to  these objectives has been highlighted by its being invited to

host a United Nations Disarmament Conference in Kyoto later  this month, and I am looking forward very much to attending  that Conference as a keynote speaker.

The United Nations role - not only in disarmament, but in  peace-making, peace-keeping and peace-enforcement - has come

into new prominence since the Gulf War. It is important that

all of us in the international community join in these  collective security processes. The Australian Government  recognises the major financial and material contribution that  Japan has made to the international response to the Gulf  crisis. We welcome too your Government's recent decision to

despatch mine-sweepers to the Gulf as part of the

rehabilitation effort. We are of course aware that that  historic decision involved considerable sensitivity and

controversy inside Japan, and that the question of any larger

role in UN peace operations in the future will require careful  consideration both within Japan and in the region. For

Australia's part, I make clear that we welcome Japan's playing

any such international role.

5

Within our own region, the security situation is becoming ever  more fluid. The overall improvement of East-West relations  and the understandable desire by the United States to reduce  defence spending have led to a program for greater reductions

in American military deployments in the region. Meanwhile,  the Soviet Union's military presence in the western Pacific

has largely contracted to the north-west quadrant, and it is  signalling - most recently through President Gorbachev's visit  to Japan - a strong interest in becoming actively engaged in  political and economic relations with other countries in the  region. Within Indo-China, a gradual transformation toward a  more permanently peaceful and prosperous environment is  occurring - although not without continuing frustrations, as  we are both well aware, in bringing the Cambodian peace

settlement process to finality. On the Korean Peninsula,  while changed international circumstances have been helpful in  producing new openings in -  key relationships and some  relaxation of tension, fundamental elements of confrontation

do still remain.

The separate alliances which Australia and Japan each have  with the United States are valuable forces for continuity  which contribute in important ways to wider regional  stability. The continuing vitality of our respective security  relationships with the United States provides a basis for the

increasingly important dialogue and cooperation between

Australia and Japan on regional issues of shared concern.

In responding to the more fluid strategic outlook in our

region, Australia has been active recently in supporting  processes of regional security dialogue aimed at developing a  sense of shared security interests in the region. From that

dialogue we hope that it will be possible over time to put in  place a series of confidence-building measures that will give

us all greater confidence in the future peace and stability of  the region. We particularly value Japan's role in that  dialogue as it develops through bilateral channels and other  existing mechanisms such as the ASEAN Post Ministerial

Conference process.

6

International Trade

Both Australia and Japan rely heavily on global trade for

continued growth and development. Both of us have a vital  interest in strengthening the multilateral trading system, and  in the outcome of the Uruguay Round which is seeking not only  the further liberalisation of trade in goods, but also the  extension of the system of multilateral trade rules into  important new areas such as trade in services. Japan, as the  world's second largest economy, is clearly in a position to -

and we believe should - take a leadership role in bringing the  Round to a successful conclusion across the full spectrum of  the issues under negotiation.

As you know, the Round was supposed to end last December, but  stalled primarily because no effective negotiations were  possible on reforming agricultural trade. From Australia's  point of view - and from the viewpoint of a large proportion  of the other hundred participants - the Round cannot end  without the substantial liberalisation of agricultural trade,  on which so many depend for their own growth and prosperity,  and which will open the way to solutions in other areas.

The major trading nations, including Japan, have the solution

to this problem within their grasp. While the European  Community needs to move away from its policy of subsidising

agricultural exports, which has so radically distorted  agricultural trade, Japan needs to make its contribution  through reducing domestic support and further liberalising

access to its markets by moving away from quantitative  restrictions on imports on agricultural products, just as the  GATT has already moved away from quantitative restrictions on

manufactures.

Successful completion of the Round as soon as practicable is  Australia's top trade policy priority, and we believe pressure

needs to be kept up on the negotiating process.  A timeframe  for concluding the Round must be determined in a way which is

related to achieving an outcome of substance.

7

If we are looking to a leading Japanese role on liberalisation  at the global level, so are we also relying on a continuing  and constructive role by Japan in regional economic growth.  This should include the encouragement of interdependence and  integration within the broader framework of a liberal world

economic order. The APEC process - while still at a

relatively early stage - is in our view establishing itself as  a key instrument in encouraging regional dialogue and

integration.

Australia sees particular merit in exploring within APEC the  idea of regional trade liberalisation, consistent with the  agreement reached by APEC Ministers in Singapore in July 1990.  As we have made clear, the approach we have in mind is not

that of a trading bloc, which APEC Ministers have, in any  event, decisively rejected. Rather, we have in mind regional  trade liberalisation on a non-discriminatory basis, with the

potential to benefit countries outside the region as well as  those within it.

The notion of a regional approach to trade liberalisation is  naturally a sensitive one, particularly at this critical stage  of the Uruguay Round. The non-discriminatory approach we  propose is, however, fully consistent with the broader process  of multilateral trade liberalisation. A regional approach is

likely to gather momentum after the conclusion of the Round,  but we consider discussion should proceed while the Round is

being finalised.

Quite apart from any immediate gains which might flow from  non-discriminatory regional trade liberalisation, we believe

the process has the potential to allow our own region to  provide a lead towards stronger trade liberalisation at a  multilateral level. This is an area where Australia and Japan

have a strong common interest, and it belongs squarely within

the framework of the constructive partnership.

8

International Problem Solving

Since our last meeting, there has been a dramatic quickening  of international interest in problems associated with  protection of the earth's environment. Australia and Japan  are both committed to working for a successful outcome to next  year's United Nations Conference on Environment and

Development (UNCED). We were encouraged by Japan's recent  decision to support a prohibition on mining activity in  Antarctica which has contributed greatly to the agreement  reached this week at the Antarctic Treaty Special Consultative  Meeting in Madrid for a 50-year moratorium on mining

exploration and development there.

The Australian side also welcomes the recent Japanese proposal  to establish a bilateral mechanism for the exchange of views  on environmental issues of mutual interest. We want to work  with Japan on such matters as institutional reform to cover  gaps in the international legal framework on environmental  protection, the proposed international climate change and  biodiversity conventions, protection of forests and the  development of clean coal technologies. Such cooperation can  be pursued through international and regional forums, as well  as through bilateral discussions and collaborative scientific  research and development activity. We see a good deal of  scope for collaborative research work between Australia and  Japan in the environmental field, drawing on Japan's

experience in utilising strict environmental standards as a  stimulus to industrial development and Australia's success in  developing world competitive technologies.

Along with the environment, there are a range of other global

issues where Australia and Japan have scope for cooperation  and co-ordinated action. We acknowledge the great

contribution which Japan has already made to regional and

wider international stability, inter alia, through its

substantial aid and humanitarian programs. We can also do

more together in the areas of so-called "non-military threats

to security", such as refugee policy, the international

9

narcotics trade, international health problems like AIDS, and  counter-terrorism.

Bilateral Relations

The fourth component of our constructive partnership - further  developing and diversifying our bilateral relationship,

particularly in the economics sphere - is one to which I want  to give particular emphasis today.

Since the present Australian Government came to power in 1983,  we have pursued vigorously a sustained program of economic  reform and industrial restructuring which is aimed at  developing an open, internationally competitive economy,

capable of adapting to the changes and opportunities of our  dynamic region. These reforms extend across wide areas  including taxation; the labour market; land, sea and air  transport; financial deregulation and Government Business

Enterprises.

The Government's commitment to carry this process a further  quantum leap forward was most recently and decisively  demonstrated by our 12 March statements on "Building a  Competitive Australia". The key element of the March 12

package was the effective removal of most of the remaining  tariff protection for our industries: Australia's average

nominal rate of assistance, including both tariff and non­ tariff measures, will fall to just 3 per cent by the year

2000, making our economy one of the most open in the world.  These decisions were taken in the knowledge that exposure to

international competition represents the most powerful spur to

greater competitiveness.

We see Japan as crucially important to our economic reform  process, both because of our strong bilateral economic

relationship, and because of Japan's key role as an engine for

growth in the wider regional economy.

10

One of the most Important messages I should like to impress  upon our Japanese visitors today, and which I know will be  taken up by Treasurer Keating and Industry Minister Button in  our later exchanges,  is the extent of the structural changes  which are now taking place in the Australian economy, and the

opportunities this creates for Japan in Australia. While we  expect that mineral resources, energy products and

agricultural commodities will continue to underpin the  bilateral trading relationship, we are looking to encourage a  much broader, more diversified economic interchange.  This is  a process which is of course well under way, with Japan

already the largest market for Australian manufactures and  Japanese investment in Australia accounting for about one-  third of the total annual investment inflow.

The Australian market may be a small one in population terms,   but in purchasing power we are very large - as I have said, as  large in fact as the six ASEANs (Indonesia, Malaysia,  Singapore, Thailand, the Philippines and Brunei) all put

together.

And we offer a host of other attractions to overseas

investors, including we hope from Japan:

. a stable political and economic environment;

. rich endowment of resources and agricultural capacity;

. excellent educational facilities and a science and technology base second only to Japan's in the region;

. a well-educated and skilled workforce; and

. and a remarkably open and hospitable investment policy

climate.

Enhanced science and technology exchanges have been the

subject of high-level consideration by our two Governments,

including between our two Prime Ministers last year. The

success of these efforts will be an important barometer of the

1 Î '

11

diversification of our relationship. In this context, and  more generally, the Multifunction Polis Project (MFP),  initiated by Japan at the AJMC in 1987, is an example of how  we can give form and shape to some of the views Australia and

Japan share about broadening the economic and social linkages  in our relationship. Over the past four years our two

countries have co-operated to define and test the MFP concept.  The first meeting of the International Advisory Board in March  this year was encouraging in terms of the level of interest  and enthusiasm our cooperative efforts have been able to  generate. It is now important, of course, that as the two

architects of this project we continue to encourage

international participation and the development of business  opportunities.

As we work through our agenda today and tomorrow, the thrust  of our discussions in the bilateral area should, I suggest, be  concerned with the ways in which we can build on traditional  strengths in our economic relationship; and the many new  possibilities which are opening up for our bilateral exchanges

to grow apace.

Japanese and Australians are gradually getting to know each  other better - through massive increases in tourism, and

through cultural and educational exchanges and the like.  There is a great desire in this country to engage more closely

with your country: why else would there be, proportionately,

more youngsters studying the Japanese language here than in

any other country in the world?

Across the whole range of international, regional and

bilateral issues, I believe we can help each other. You can  certainly help us economically by investing in and trading

with us, and by working constructively with us in APEC and the  Uruguay Round. And we believe we can be a useful and

congenial partner for Japan, politically as well as

economically, and not only within the region but on the wider

global stage, as you become more and more active a player

across the whole expanding range of international diplomacy.

We should be Increasingly identifying common interests and,  drawing upon each other's strengths, becoming in a better  position to influence our interlocking futures. We may not  always agree on every detail of specific issues, but we should

face up to our differences, keep them in perspective alongside  the wide range of important political and economic interests  we undoubtedly share, and seek to move forward in ways which  will benefit both our nations and the region in which we live.

*  *  *

(

