MEDIA RELEASE SENATOR ROBERT HILL LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION IN THE SENATE  SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS Thursday, January 16

06/92

HIM. TO VISIT MEW STATES OP CROATIA AND SLOVENIA

The Shadow Minister for Foreign Affairs, Senator Robert Hill,  today welcomed Australia's recognition of Croatia and Slovenia  and announced he would visit the two new states early next  month.

"The Federal Opposition welcomes the Australian Government's  decision to grant diplomatic recognition to the former  Yugoslav republics of Croatia and Slovenia," Senator Hill  said.

"The Opposition yesterday urged the Government to support the  decision the European Community was to make overnight on the  recognition of former Yugoslav republics by itself granting  diplomatic recognition.

"To underline the Opposition's support for Croatia and  Slovenia, I plan to visit the new states early next month.

"I will use my visit to Zagreb and Ljubljana to explore ways  in which Australia can develop its relationship with the new  states and contribute to the peace process.

"The EC's and Australia's recognition of Croatia and Slovenia  is an encouraging development in the peace process, but the  task ahead is still enormous.

"Apart from the maintenance of the current ceasefire and the  deployment of UN peacekeeping forces, Australia and the  international community will need to focus on important  humanitarian issues arising out of a conflict which has  reportedly killed at least 6000.

"For example, the number of people displaced by the conflict  is estimated to be more than 600,000 - two thirds of whom are  women and children - and the figure is increasing.

"Urgent provisions need to be made available to these  refugees, and a major program of return and resettlement must  be put in place.

"Australia can help this process by contributing to a special  fund established by the United Nations to provide humanitarian  assistance."

(ends)

Enquiries* Mark Batistich on (08) 237 7920

COMMONWEALTH  PA R LIA M EN TA R Y  LIBRARY  MICAH

