MEDIA STATEMENT Philip Ruddock MP Federal Member for Dundas  Shadow Minister for Immigration  and Ethnic Affairs

Electorate  Tel: (02) 858 1011  Fax: (02) 804 6739

Parliament House  Tel: (06) 277 4343  Fax: (06) 277 2062

PARTIAL TRANSCRIPT

ABC AM - TUESDAY APRIL 14

Philip Ruddock - Shadow Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs  Cambodian boat people - legal flaw to hold up deportation orders

Jralst: The lawyers for the Cambodians have seized on the bungle by the Immigration  Department and according to the Federal Opposition it could take another three courts  before the matter's resolved. The Shadow Immigration Minister M r Philip Ruddock says  access to the courts for each step of the assessment unduly extends the whole process.  Philip Ruddock is talking to John Shovelan.

Philip Ruddock: There are two aspects to it, and obviously the Khmer are exercising, with advice, rights  that they're entitled to under the law of Australia at this time. If they're bamboozled by

it, one has to accept that of course they're following this course with the support and  counsel of their legal advisers. That really brings me to the kernel of this issue. What has  happened of course is that the whole process has become unduly legalistic. Its taken this  long time, two and a half years, before the claims were ultimately considered because

lawyers were looking over the Minister's shoulder every step of the way and that's the  first point. Now in relation to every possible technical point that can be taken, it will be  taken in legal proceedings and I suspect if they lose at first appeal, they'll go to the  second and it will end up in the High Court - and all of this is going to happen at your  expense.

Jmlt: Gerry Hand says though that this is the best refugee assessment system in the world.

Philip Ruddock: There is absolutely no doubt that Australia has in place the Rolls Royce administrative  arrangements for determining refugee claims. You have to ask yourself why on top of

those administrative arrangements we need further judicial review through three possible  tiers.

COMMONWEALTH  PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY  MICAH

Jrnlst: Some of these Cambodians people I understand are about to go through their third  assessment, isn't it about time we decided, well hang on a second, maybe we should just  let them stay.

Ruddock: No, I think the question has to be related to our responsibilities to consider their cases  properly, but you have to ask yourself whether our fixation with natural justice rules and  the application of them has been overdone. Certainly, as far as I am concerned and as  far as the Opposition is concerned, if these people are genuine, bona-fide refugees

entitled to protection they stay. But if, as asylum seekers, their claims are found to be  unfounded in terms of the international convention, then they have to go. That's the  bottom line and of course at this stage what we're seeing is the intervention of the legal  profession in these proceedings to unduly extend the whole process.

John, we've got 23,000 refugee claimants in Australia at the moment, asylum seekers, and  if we apply the same standard, we will never be able to determine the bulk of those  claims. It's costing something in the order of half a billion dollars at the moment to keep,  process and consider all the refugee claims and if you look at that, in relation to say the  Black Deaths in Custody, its more than three times the amount of money that we're  going to be able to expend on looking after their needs.

Jrnlst: So you would have a system that did not have this constant recourse to the courts, you  would have just the bureaucrats basically deciding and assessing.

Ruddock: John what we know is that under the international covenant that we have signed, there  are two ways in which these matters may be dealt with, two models that can apply. One

is the judicial model and the other is an administrative regime and the UNHCR monitor  these matters, they say both procedures are fine but we have in Australia, unlike anybody  else, is both models. Certainly that's not giving a fair prompt and effective decision  making regime. It is sacrificing the national interest to protect the needs of the claimants.

Jmlt: The Shadow Immigration Minister, Philip Ruddock.

