MEDIA RELEASE SENATOR ROBERT HILL LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION IN THE SENATE  SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS

Monday, August 24  76/92

LIBERALS TO VISIT FORMER YUGOSLAVIA

Two Liberal Federal MPs, Paul Filing from Western Australia and  John Bradford, Queensland, will attend this week's summit on the  former Yugoslavia in London, Senator Robert Hill, the Shadow  Minister for Foreign Affairs, said today.

"They will then visit the former Yugoslavia, including Sarajevo  returning to brief Coalition leaders on how Australia might best  support the UN-European peace process in former Yugoslavia and  contribute to the humanitarian needs arising from the fighting.

"The Coalition has been appalled by brutal conflict in Bosnia-  Herzegovina and the inhuman practice of "ethnic cleansing".

"We have been equally concerned by the apparent inability of the  international community to facilitate a peaceful resolution.

"This incapacity has particularly distressed the large Australian  community who have immigrated from the former Yugoslavia.

"The Australian Government has largely sat on its hands on this  issue offering few ideas and little encouragement.

"It is the view of the Coalition that in seeking solutions to  these issues which include not only achieving peace in Bosnia-  Herzegovina, but also include finding a formula for peace and  security in Kosova and the future of the former Yugoslav Republic  of Macedonia, Europe should be supported by the wider community  of democratic states.

"The Coalition is pleased that the Secretary-General of the  United Nations will co-chair the London Conference.

"The authority of the U.N. is necessary and the U.N. should

assume a much more prominent role in the negotiating phase. U.N.  support of the outcome will almost certainly be necessary.

"The Coalition supported the decision of the U.N. to endorse the  protection of the provision of humanitarian aid, by force, if  necessary.

"The Liberal Party observers will particularly examine the  humanitarian issues and the question of refugees. It should be  possible for Australia to be more useful than has been the case  to date. This visit will be helpful in the further consideration  of the Coalition's policy options.

Enquiries: Senator Hill of Mark Batistich on (08) 237 7920

COMMONWEALTH  PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY  MICAH

