No. M72 Date 6 May 1992

AUSTRALIAN TRADE ASSISTANCE MISSION TO RUSSIAN FAR EAST

The Minister for Foreign Affairs and Trade,  Evans, announced today that an Australian

Storage and Distribution Mission would visit  East from 18-29 May 1992.

Senator Gareth  Food Handling,  the Russian Far

Senator Evans said the Mission would visit Khabarovsk,

Sakhalin, Vladivostok and Nakhodka.

He said there were significant problems in food handling,

storage and distribution in the Russian Far East with post

harvest wastage and losses.

"This is an area in which Australia has world class skills and  technology," Senator Evans said. "Collectively the members of  this Mission will provide a deep pool of knowledge and

experience from which Russian authorities can draw.

"The Mission will look at a number of areas in which

improvements could be made to the food distribution chain in  the Russian Far East and will make specific recommendations to  the local authorities. These will include improvements to

storage and handling facilities for fruit, vegetables and

fish; port handling facilities for imported foods; and

processing and distribution of dairy products.

Senator Evans said the Mission would submit written

recommendations to the regional government authorities after  its return to Australia. He hoped these would result in a

number of projects being undertaken by Australian companies.

The Mission, jointly funded by the Department of Foreign

Affairs and Trade, Department of Primary Industries and Energy  and Austrade, will be led by Mr Richard Wilson, Austrade

Manager for Russia. Mr Wilson is a former Senior Trade

Commissioner in Moscow and was also Director of the Australian  Trade Display in Vladivostok in July 1990.

The Mission, accompanied by Mr Ian Wing, Senior Trade

Commissioner, Moscow, will comprise Mr Ivan Backman, Chief  Executive Officer, Linfox Distribution Group; Mr Barry

Syminton, Director, APV Baker Pty Ltd; Mr Michael Murray,

Chief Executive, International Food Processing Group of

Companies; Mr George Raspopin, Managing Director, Bondor Itex  Pty Ltd; Mr Ron Lawson, General Manager, Bondor Itex Pty Ltd;  Mr Gregory Poland, Managing Director, Seanet Pty Ltd; Mr Neil  Barker, Quality Control Co-ordinator, Australian Wheat Board;  Mr Bill Britton, Manager CIS and Europe, Australian Meat and

Livestock Corporation.

* *

CANBERRA

* COMMONWEALTH

PARLLA.MENTARY LIBRARY  MICAH

