Philip Ruddock MP

“1 %

Federal Member for Dundas  Shadow M inister for Immigration  and Ethnic Affairs

Electorate Parliament House

Tel: (06) 277 4343  Fax: (06) 277 2062

Tel: (02) 858 1011  Fax: (02) 804 6739

GOVERNMENT ADOPTS FTGHTBACK PROPOSALÂ·  ON MIGRANT ACCESS TO BENEFITS

The Government has moved to adopt Coalition policy by introducing a 26 w eek waiting  period for migrants before they can access social security benefits.

This initiative by the Government demonstrates that they have no "in principle" objection  to the concept. The Government's assertions that Opposition treatment o f ethnic  communities in its Fightback! proposals to deny access to benefits as harsh and  unconscionable has been shown to be hypocritical.

As there is no in principle objection, it is hard to understand why the Government has  not adopted our proposal in its entirety. Under Fightback! the exclusion period would  be extended to 2 years, with exemptions for refugees and humanitarian claimants and  provision for access to Special Benefits under changed circumstances.

We estimated that savings o f $250 million would be made in the first year on the basis  of Department o f Social Security figures which showed that $399 million was paid in  benefits to migrants who had been in Australia for two years or less.

The reasons why this proposal should be adopted are clear.

Most applicants for migration who are potential labour market entrants apply under the  concessional family reunion programs and independently. A s such they should have  sufficient resources or guarantees to support themselves in the event that they cannot  find immediate employment or they should postpone their decision to migrate. This

occurred in earlier periods o f recession of less disastrous impact than today.

Entrants from the concessional family category have increasingly been low skilled and  non-English speaking because o f the Labor Government's earlier relaxation o f entry  criteria and the abandonment o f the Assurance o f Support requirement.

The Government's recent moves to reduce the immigration program along with the  introduction o f this initiative show that the Coalition's concerns have been more than  justified.

18 August 1992

Contact Philip Ruddock - Pager (02) 925 3911 #25589 or (06) 249 7749 ah

