1C ÃÂ´

P A R L I A M E N T  O F  A U S T R A L I A

H O U S E  O F  R E P R E S E N T A T I V E S

O F F IC E  O F  P H IL IP R U D D O C K , M .P . M E M B E R  F O R  D U N D A S

S H A D O W  M IN IS T E R  F O R  IM M IG R A T IO N   A N D  E T H N IC  A F F A I R S  A N D  S H A D O W

M IN IS T E R  A S S I S T I N G  T H E  L E A D E R   O N  E T H N IC  A F F A I R S

S U I T E  3 0 2

E A S T W O O D  C E N T R E   1 6 0  R O W E  S T R E E T

E A S T W O O D ,  N .S .W .  2 1 2 2

T E L . 8 5 8  1 0 1  1

FA X . 8 0 4  6 7 3 9

P A R L I A M E N T  H O U S E

C A N B E R R A ,  A .C .T . 2 6 0 0

T E L . ( 0 6 )  2 7 7  7 1 1 1

FA X . ( 0 6 )  2 7 7  4 1 7 8

TRANSCRIPT .

FACE THE PRESS

PHILIP RUDDOCK MP, SHADOW MINISTER  FOR IMMIGRATION AND ETHNIC AFFAIRS

E&OE

Wednesday September 2

Coalition Immigration and Ethnic Affairs policy.

Brian Toohey: Hello I'm Brian Toohey. Over the past few weeks the Opposition's policy on  immigration and multiculturalism have been blurred by a couple of provocative  public statements. First off, John Hewson told a Liberal Party gathering in Perth  that multiculturalism was "absolutely a fundamental mistake". Then employment  spokesman John'Howard suggested the immigration quota should be dramatically  less than both the Government and Opposition targets. Well, we hope our guest

tonight will set things straight. Philip Ruddock is the Coalition's official spokesman  on immigration and ethnic affairs. Mr Ruddock welcome to Face the Press.

Philip Ruddock: Thank you very much, good evening.

Brian Toohey: Also with us are Vivien Shenker, a reporter with SBS television's Dateline program  and Tom Sulyok , news director for SBS radio.

If multiculturalism is such a "fundamental mistake" as your leader puts it,  "absolutely a fundamental mistake" what concrete steps will you take to overcome  it.

COMMONWEALTH  PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY  MICAH

1 0 0 %  R E C Y C L E D  P A P E R

- 2 -

Philip Ruddock: Well, lets be very clear about what John Hewson was saying. He did make it very  clear, when he spoke in Western Australia and when he spoke on a number of  programs after that, that multicultural Australia is something that we endorse. But

its the politicisation of multicultural programs with which we have some difficulty  and if you look at the history of multicultural programs and multicultural policies  in Australia it was a Liberal government that gave it shape and form. We had the  Galbally report followed by the programs that were initiated under Fraser. We had  a period in which we put down very clearly, after the FitzGerald report which  indicated that there were some public doubts about aspects of programs that  suggested separate development. We had an emphasis that John Howard put, when  in our program, we emphasised One Australia and you may recall that that was a  matter that people thought, having emphasised a commitment to Australia first and

foremost, that we were in fact walking away from commitment to settlement  programs and policies. That was never the case but it was interpreted that way.  After that, the Government under Hawke introduced the_ National Agenda for a

Multicultural Australia. It was a very important document in which the Government  made it clear, in the definition that when multiculturalism was properly defined, it  in no way suggested separate development or lack of commitment to Australia, in  fact it said, as part of the limits to multiculturalism, that commitment to Australia

first and foremost, and to our basic institutions and values, was an important part  of a commitment to multiculturalism.

Brian Toohey: Dr Hewson has said it, multiculturalism, is "absolutely a fundamental mistake". I  mean what does he mean by that.

Philip Ruddock: What he was making very clear, and I was going to come to this, Brian, was that in  the context of the endorsement of the National Agenda, we endorsed specific

programs that were designed to ensure that people settled successfully over time.  After that, come'the 1989 election, you saw a number of things happen. You saw,  specific funding, contrary to the Government's policies in relation to what they  called Grant in Aid programs and mainstreaming, that certain emphasis in the past

had always been in providing programs to new arrivals and not to long standing  communities. In the context of the 1989 election there was'secret one-off grants to  three specific communities, made without any public announcement, contrary to the  policies the Government was publicly espousing.

Secondly, there was the dismissal of certain senior officials that was undertaken in  the context of certain discussions that had taken place. Then you had the by-election  for Hawke's own seat, the Wills by-election where remarkably, a number of ethnic  clubs were given sports grants if they were conveniently close to the Wills electorate.

Now we take the view that if you're going to politicise the programs in that way, its  bad, and that's what John Hewson was referring to.  .../3

- 3 -

Vivien Shenker: Mr Ruddock, Dr Hewson clearly went a lot further than that. He wasn't talking  about a question of emphasis. I mean, to go on from that quotation, "not only an  absolutely fundamental mistake", but "we are a multicultural society yes, but we  should never have multiculturalism". Now you're saying multiculturalism is OK, its  just the excesses, if you like, or the distortion. 1 mean, that is a fundamental

difference, surely, between you and your leader.

Philip Ruddock: No certainly not and if you look at the statements John Hewson made and he spoke  the next morning, admittedly on the ABC, on the AM program, and he made it clear  the points I just put to you, were the points he was making.

Vivien Shenker: Well, would you agree with that, that we should never have multiculturalism?

Philip Ruddock: No, he was talking about the politicisation of settlement programs in a way which  promotes separate development. And what we're saying is, look if the government  sticks to the National Agenda definition, then they have our support. If they walk

away from that, there will certainly be criticism of it. It is the politicisation that  we've objected to and John Hewson and I are saying exactly the same thing.

Brian Toohey: He actually objected to what he called "professional ethnics". I mean, what programs  are going to be cut to make good this promise that you don't have multiculturalism.

Philip Ruddock: Well, the point that he was making, was that there were particular people, quite  close to former Prime Minister Hawke, who were able to influence him in the way  in which the Department of Immigration was structured after the last election. A

very important issue, not talked about a great deal, but Ron Brown and Tony Harris  were both shafted, and everybody knows why they were shafted, (interruption)  That's right. It was because particular people were able to get close to Hawke. What  Hewson was saying is that sort of under-the-counter deals are things that we are not  prepared to be a party to. Look, you use labels sometimes, to put across a very  simple proposition. That's the point he was making.

Brian Toohey: But "professional ethnics" surely people in a democracy are entitled to get together  in groups to represent community interests and so forth, and often the people who  are leading that will end up being, you could label them, professional - professional  environmentalists, professional unionists, professional business lobbyists, or  whatever. I mean, where...

.../4

- 4 -

Philip Ruddock: As long as you know where people are coming from, what their espousing and why  they're espousing it and that the influences are quite transparent for all the world

to see and deal with, we don't have any problem with it, but when it goes beyond  that, we do, and we've seen these examples, quite specific examples, which I've given  to you, which were a problem to us.

Vivien Shenker: Does that mean we're moving back with the Opposition, towards a policy of  assimilation...

Philip Ruddock: No, certainly not

Vivien Shenker: _

...that the emphasis will be on integrating. Again, that was very much the time, Dr  Hewson...

Philip Ruddock: No, integration is quite a different term to assimilation. Integration is a term we use  to describe a process by which people become Australians, committed to Australia,  first and foremost. A part of the National Agenda for a Multicultural Australia. It

is quite different to assimilation which assumes that those people who come and  settle in Australia have no impact upon Australia as a whole. You asked me earlier  about our commitment. Let me make it very clear. The Fightback package was a  remarkable document in this sense: it contains specific commitments to settlement  programs, which we didn't give to a lot of other programs in other areas. In relation  to all of the settlement expenditures, the teaching of English to new arrivals,

language programs, the ethnic schools, in relation to the Grant in Aid programs -  all of that expenditure was specifically quarantined from any expenditure reductions.  It didn't happen in any other area.

Tom Sulyok : To get back to the previous point, what in your opinion does it mean to be an  Australian citizen in that multicultural context.

Philip Ruddock: Well, we've made it very clear that citizenship is a matter that we think needs to be  looked at very much more closely than it has been to date. When I spoke about these  issues around about the time of Australia Day this year, I indicated that we were

embarking upon a very full review of the Citizenship law of Australia because the  Citizenship Act at the moment tells you only two or three things about citizenship:  it tells you how you get it, how you can lose it and how you can get it back again if  you lose it. It doesn't tell you what it is to be Australian.

...lb

- 5 -

With the term multicultural and multiculturalism, as such, at times some people  don't understand the definition that we have accepted. They don't understand that  bi-partisan position of the Government and the Opposition on multiculturalism,  properly defined.

Vivien Shenker: Does the Opposition have a problem with the term.

Philip Ruddock: We have a problem in the sense that a lot of people in the community don't  understand the way in which it is defined in Australia. So we have a problem to the

extent to which the community has been made aware of the way in which the  Government intends that settlement programs should operate and their purpose and  that the purpose is in fact integration over time, not separate development.

One of the reasons we've looked at citizenship is that we believe that you can,  instead of having a view that multicultural policies are just for migrants, just for  ethnics, that multiculturalism, properly defined is for all Australians. Its the very  essence of being Australian and what we wanted to do was to pull together those  elements of the National Agenda definition and put it into the Citizenship Act as  part of its statements of objectives and principles so that people would know, that  when we speak about access and equity, when we talk about social justice, when we  talk about equality of opportunity in terms of employment and the like, in Australia,  which are part and parcel of that definition, that that's what we mean by the  concept of being Australian. *

Brian Toohey: Will that now be in the Act will it.

Philip Ruddock: What we will be seeking to do is to pull together the Australian Constitution,  various Acts of Parliament like the Electoral Act, like the Public Service Acts, in

which you do get statements of rights and obligations, and while it won't be defining  them as a Bill of Rights, per se, it will be putting it, as you have with the Marriage  Act, there will be there a statement as to what it means to be an Australian citizen.  A statement of objectives.

Brian Toohey: In one case it won't mean that you can have any benefits in the first two years. One  of the clear things in Fightback is that migrants will not be allowed to have any  benefits, Jobsearch Allowance, Special Benefits, for the first two years that their  here. Now what happens to someone who comes out here, gets a job and then gets  sacked, a not unlikely consequence in the current economic environment, what  happens to them. They can't get the Jobsearch Allowance* the old unemployment  benefits, they can't get Special Benefits, how are they going to live.

.../6

- 6 -

Philip Ruddock: Well the issue is one in which there has been a good deal of discussion and debate  and the Government has moved part way towards picking up the proposal that we  had in Fightback, dealing with this very question. But the proposal was that new  arrivals, except refugees and those who come under the Special Humanitarian  Program, and those people who have experienced some marked change in their  circumstances after arrival, would be unable to obtain access to benefits. Now that's  clear, there were those exceptions. If you're dealing with the case that you put to me,  in which a person came independently and there was a marked change in their  circumstances after arrival, that is a matter that could be looked at.

Brian Toohey: That's not in Fightback

Philip Ruddock: Oh yes it is.

Brian Toohey: I've read it very carefully

Philip Ruddock: It's quite clear that we would have provisions to look at those cases where there are  extensive hardships.

Vivien Shenker: But surely that's what social security is there to look after anyway.

Philip Ruddock: Well at the moment, what you have is a situation in which the obligations that  people accept, employers accept when they nominate people, and these are the  particular situations that we wanted to get at, where you had family reunion,

concessional entrants, given a specifically relaxed entry to Australia, given a  preferential entry over others, because there was sponsorship, what we wanted was  those sponsors to accept the obligation that they used to undertake when they  signed those assurances of support. The problem has been recently that in relation  to that area particularly the assurance of support has become essentially no

assurance at all. The Government had, I think something of the order of $30 million  worth of assurances of support in which they recovered, I think, about $1.9 million  of the amounts owing. People essentially transferred the obligation to taxpayers, and  that was the reason why we are seeking to move in that direction. But when you  come to employer nominations, you face exactly the same difficulty. People come out  with an expectation that they'll be able to get a job with an employer who says, "look  I need this particular person" and unfortunately, when you survey a lot of those  people who come out under employer nominations, you find that a very large

.../7

proportion of them, 12 months afterwards are not in those same jobs. Now you have  to ask yourself, why does that happen, it can't be that the businesses automatically  went broke in the meantime, and what we would be seeking to do is to ensure that  when people make commitments to bring people out, that they have an awareness  that there are obligations that they have to accept.

In relation to independent entrants, they would be made aware that they would be  expected to have sufficient resources to maintain themselves in the first two years  after they come here.

Tom Sulyok ; On this point of entry. Seems to be a discrepancy on the number of people that you  have said, and other people have said that the figure, the number of people to be  allowed into this country...has the Opposition got a firm figure on that.

Philip Ruddock: No, we've made it very clear that if you look at the way in which immigration  programs have been conducted in recent years, and Senator Walsh was the best  person to offer some informed views about these matters, he said the program was  a series of blow outs and cave ins, I think they were the exact words. What we know  happens, when people put down a program is that its very difficult to be precise as  to what the actual outcomes will be, but we've indicated...

Tom S u lyok : At the moment you're swinging between 50,000 and 70,000.

Philip Ruddock: No. The 50,000 and 70,000 was a figure that was indicative of where Australia had  come out in terms of its program outcome in periods of recession in the past so that  you had in the 1950s, 1960,1970s and early 1980s quite severe periods of recession,  none as bad as the present recession, that if you look at the actual net outcome it  came in between’50,000 and 70,000 in each of those years. That's what we've said  would have been our expectation in a recession as severe as this.

Tom Sulyok : But recession, I mean the BIR said that has no relevance in the long term, over the  long term, it does not affect immigration, immigration does*not affect the economy.

Philip Ruddock: No what they're arguing is, that if you look at the economic arguments about  immigration, they will put it to you that there are certain benefits that can be  derived from immigration even during a period of recession. And that may well be  right if your program is structured in a way which brings people to Australian that

are not going to be a charge upon your welfare, who are going to be able to  undertake employment fairly quickly in those areas in which you have shortages.

-  7 -

.../8

But the difficulty we have at the moment, and thats one of the reasons we've argued  that you can have a lower program in this period, is that it is not as carefully  structured now as it used to be. Labor when they come into office.

Brian Toohey; (inaudible) how are you going to structure it.

Philip Ruddock: No, well I'll be quite clear, because these are the three points that I have made and  I'll put them succinctly first and then elaborate.

Firstly, we would better bona-fides test in the area of spouse entry which is at the  moment more than 25%, almost 30% of the total program. Secondly, we would  ensure that in those areas that are the national interest aspects of the program,

concessional family entry and independent entry, that there is a clear relationship  to the labour market, in other words there would be labour market testing in  relation to the points system and thirdly, the point that came out earlier we would

deny benefits to new arrivals and enforce properly the arrangements for assurance  of support. The impact of each of those of decisions would be to influence, quite  significantly people's migration aspirations, and we believe, that in relation to spouse

entry, that if you brought in conditional entry, coupled with the provisions that  relate to better testing of de-facto partners you could bring the numbers down  significantly. Most people I know, anecdote, talk about the numbers of people who  seek to access... *

Vivien Shenker: But why do you want to bring the numbers down? I mean the Canadians for  example have long accepted the arguments that the effect upon the economy of  immigration is at worst negligible at best marginally benign. That is an argument  that they have long accepted and moved on from. They have in fact increased their  numbers of immigrants in times of recession with just as high unemployment as we  have. Why is there such a fundamental difference, and why is the Opposition still

looking to tinker with immigration as a short term tool to play with the economy,  when that argument has long gone elsewhere.

-  8 -

Philip Ruddock: There are a number of issues that you raise, particularly in relation to Canada and  the United States. Both of those countries re-assessed their immigration programs

in order to given them a clearer economic focus. In other words Canada was seeking  to get a better skills outcome at a time in which they were facing problems in  relation to the extent to which family migration and refugee" entry had distorted the  outcome. They're re-assessing their position now and much more rigorous, again,  than they were, particularly in relation to refugee entry where there were particular  problems that they faced.

.../9

- 9 -

Now, our argument, in relation to the size of the program, was particularly the  difficulty you have in absorbing a large number of migrants at a very severe period  of recession. You face problems of absorption in the broader community when you  try to maintain record numbers for a period of recession. You find there are  objections within the community, and its the absorption argument that we have put  in relation to this issue. Now coupled with that you have the real difficulties that  migrants themselves experience.

We had a young man, Mohan, who spoke at our unemployment forum, here in  Sydney, who was an engineer, highly qualified engineer from India, who said, look,  for me it was an extraordinarily difficult thing to give up a highly paid position in  the Reserve Bank of India, come to Australia in the expectation that I'll be able to  get a job and to find, as an engineer, that there was something like 3,000  unemployed engineers in Australia. "I've come here", and he said "I feel like a beggar  in taking benefits to survive, because I was not properly informed about the position  was in Australia".

Tom Sulyok: But shouldn't Australia have advised that person...

Philip Ruddock: Of course, of course

Tom Sulyok: ...that at the moment this is the wrong time to come.

Philip Ruddock: Of course, and thats exactly the point we are making. You should ensure that people  are properly informed, you should ensure that there is proper labour market testing  in relation to the independent entry categories and thats one* of the propositions that  we've put as to why the program would come off and come off significantly.

Vivien Shenker: Mr Ruddock why won't you give us a figure though. I mean, you're telling us, and  the Opposition is constantly telling us that in six months you'll be in government,

you'll be the Minister for Immigration, in six months or less, according to your own  research, surely you must be in a position to tell us what your immigration quota  will be.

Philip Ruddock: Well, that assumes that you ought to specify a particular number and cap the  program if you don't get that particular number. What we're saying is that we want  to target the program more carefully, it will give you a lower outcome. But we're not

going to fix on a particular figure. The government announces programs on a yearly  basis with some knowledge about what is happening to applications, the department

.../10

-  1 0 -

can reasonably inform them of what might be the outcome of the decisions they  take. I don't have that access to the Department's data base on the sorts of  applications they're getting to be able to make a judgement as to what would happen

to particularly independent entry and concessional entry categories if you labour  market test effectively. It may reduce the program in each of those areas by 10Â­ 15,000. I don't have that level of information available to me.

Vivien Shenker: But there may not be a specific target.

Philip Ruddock: I'm saying that you might well in government be able to give greater shape to it  when you've got access to that sort of detailed information. What we're doing is I  think much more honest, in this sense, that what we're saying is that these are the  tests that we're going to apply, they will have an outcome, they will bring the  program down, but we can't precisely quantify what they are. But we're telling you  what the test will be.

Brian Toohey: But this is very interventionist isn't it, very regulatory. I mean, labour market  testing, you're going to pick where winners are going to be in the economy and  where not. I mean your whole economic philosophy is based on the idea of  encouraging the free global movement of capital. Why don't you want to encourage  the free global movement of labour.

Philip Ruddock: I think the reason is, that if you had a free market in that sense, it would distort  your immigration program entirely. There would be people who are willing to move  into Australia, particularly where there's access to benefits at the moment, who

would come in expectation that they'd be able to work in almost any situation and  you would find that it would breakdown all of the award arrangements and it would  have a whole lot of other consequences that I think people would find very difficult  to cope with.

Brian Toohey: I thought you were breaking down the award arrangements;

Philip Ruddock: Well, no we've got enterprise agreement arrangements, but no awards as I  understand it will be done away without that level of agreement between parties.

Tom Sulyok: The numbers, you still should be able to narrow it down a bit more than the  swinging 20,000, surely, because if you come down to 50,000 you're very close to Mr  Howard's argument of 50,000 or less, or fewer.

...H I

-  11 -

Vivien Shenker: No, he says dramatically less than 50,000.

Brian Toohey: _

Refugees, for example enter this, I mean you're going to have (inaudible).

Philip Ruddock: No, there are some people who argue, and we've certainly put the view that the  immigration program and refugee entry ought to be dealt with separately. In other  words your humanitarian component ought to be a humanitarian program regardless  of what you're doing in terms of immigration.

Brian Toohey: (inaudible)

Philip Ruddock: No, I'm not putting it in that context. I'm simply saying there is an argument and  our policy actually says that the refugee component is something that is seen as  separate and distinct from the sort of factors that you use to determine migration  entry....At the moment the government has reduced the number of something of the  order of 20,000 to 10,000 over the space of the last eight or nine years and we're  troubled of course that there has been this overall reduction. This year it came down  from 12,000 to 10,000 and that was a matter that we were critical of. So we're  certainly not about cutting down on refugee entry. There are certain numbers of  people that come as of right, particularly those who come under the preferential

family reunion stream and beyond that you then get into the areas that are national  interest.

Tom Sulyok : And we still have the illegals as well of course.

Philip Ruddock: Well, the illegals are a major problem and the Chinese student issue is certainly one  that compounds that. And of course, when you provide a mechanism by which they  can become permanent temporary entrants, then its a significant distorting factor.

Brian Toohey: I'm sorry, we'll have to leave it there.

ends

