F e d e r a l Member for D u n d a s  Electorate Parliament House

Shadow Minister for Immigration Tel: (02) 858 1011 Tel: (06) 277 4343

and Ethnic Affairs Fax: (02) 804 6739 Fax: (06) 277 2062

MINISTER'S COMMENTS CONTRADICTED BY  HIS DEPARTM ENT

It is no use the Minister saying my criticism o f Australia's border control arrangements  are mischievous and inaccurate, when his own department has confirmed that my  comments are entirely correct. (

Nor should he suggest that my long standing interest in immigration, and particularly  refugee matters, as well as my participation on appropriate parliamentary committees is  the reason why I "should know better". \

It is precisely because of this long involvement that I can assert that Australia has an  inability to control its borders.

The Department has confirmed that applications for refugee status will be backlogged  for many years because of the large number of applicants, over 23,000, currently in the  system.

Furthermore, a departmental spokesperson stated that none of the refugee applicants  of the recent past have been forced to return to their country even after their  applications for refugee status have been rejected.

This begs the question: Why do we bother spending enormous amounts of money  processing claims and keeping people in detention for long periods of time if they will  not be asked to leave the country.

This posture makes a mockery of the whole refugee determination process and confirms  claims by the Coalition that the immigration program is out of control.

It is no wonder that there are concerns about a significant increase in clandestine arrivals 1   on Australia's shores in the future when this is the sort of message being sent overseas. \

The Coalition has offered the government constructive suggestions to regain control of  our border entry arrangements and refugee determination processes. f

Continued long delays, inactivity and indecision compromise the integrity o f the entire  immigration program and jeopardise the claims of those who have legitimate claims for  our protection. .

21 January 1992

COMMONWEALTH  PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY  MICAH

