Philip Ruddock MP &

Federal Member for Dundas  Shadow Minister for Immigration  and Ethnic Affairs

Tel: (02) 858 1011  Fax: (02) 804 6739

Electorate Parliament House

Tel: (06) 277 4343  Fax: (06) 277 2062

IMMIGRATION INTAKE: LITTLE REAL REFO RM

The Government's announcement on the 1992-93 immigration program does  not go nearly far enough.

It is not just a question of lowering the numbers, but of reforming the entire  process. What really counts are the decisions which have been taken in an  attempt to effect a reduction in the program.

The Government has used many of the Coalition's arguments but it has not  adopted the Coalition's proposals to achieve those cuts. These have  included:

English language testing in the Concessional Family Category

Enhanced bona-fides testing in all categories, particularly  preferential family reunion,

restriction of welfare benefits in the first two years after entry

a clearer skills focus with an emphasis upon relevance to  Australian labour market requirements.

The Government has clearly failed the test to introduce reforms in the  program and has in fact put an even greater weight on the family reunion  percentage of the program.

The Coalition has consistently argued that the program needs to have a  greater skills focus. Research on the economics of immigration has  consistently shown that greater economic benefits accrue to Australia if their  is a greater emphasis on the skilled aspects of the program. The

Government however has increased the percentage of the program allocated  to unskilled entry.

COMMONWEALTH  PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY  MICAH

...12

- 2 -

The Government has made some changes to the points test. However it is  clear that some degrees and trade certificate qualifications will continue to  be acceptable and will permit entry even if, in the Australian labour market,  many people with such qualifications are unemployed.

The Government has also failed to adopt the recommendation of the  Coalition (and the Labor Council) to restrict welfare benefits to newly  arrived migrants (except refugee and humanitarian cases) for the first two  years after entry and to enhance requirements for assurances of support.  These decisions would relieve budgetary pressures and also affect the  migration decisions of potential applicants.

The government has also failed the test to introduce reforms in the balance  of the program.

Proper additional bona-fides testing in all categories could be usefully  pursued including in the Employer Nomination Scheme and preferential  family entrants. Conditional entry for spouses from off shore, for example,  could be the same as that which currently applies for change of status on  within Australia. This approach is practical, feasible and essential to ensure  that those using spouse and de-facto entry to achieve immigration entry,

rather than for the purposes of a genuine on-going relationship, are weeded  out.

The Coalition has never seen a particular numerical target as being the  objective of the immigration program.

However in the worst recession in sixty years the Government is still  endeavouring to achieve a net outcome of 70,000. This is still at the upper  end of the range in terms of net outcomes achieved in previous periods of

recession.

There is just one final point that needs to be made. In his press conference  the Minister claimed that the 20,000 Chinese students in Australia at the  time of the Tienanmen Square incident and given 4 year special entry  permits, had been taken into account in the program figures over the two  year period after they arrived.

.../3

I

- 3 -

However these people (and successful asylum seekers) are only granted  temporary entry permits and are not, and never have been, included in the  total program numbers. Only those who have achieved permanent residence  through change of status categories are included in the net figures as  "category jumpers".

The Minister himself makes the statement in his press release that  temporary entrants are not included in the net figures. The Chinese students  and their spouses and children are in this category as are asylum seekers.

This is clearly an area the Minister needs to clarify.

Immigration is important to Australia and the Coalition is of the firm belief  that immigration has made, and continues to make, an enormous  contribution to the economic, cultural and social development of our  country.

However, Labor's culpable mismanagement of the program during its term  in government has undermined public support by continuing to maintain it  at record numbers during the worst recession in sixty years.

In the development of its 1992-93 program, it has clearly failed to address  this fundamental concern.

12 May 1992

