NO.

M52 Date 10 March, 1993

AUSTRALIA'S MIDDLE—POWER DIPLOMACY: CAMBODIA AND APEC

Attached is an address delivered by the Minister for Foreign Affairs and Trade, Senator Gareth Evans, to the Australian Institute of International Affairs, New South Wales Branch in Sydney today.

CANBERRA.

E

OMMONWEALTH AMENTARY LIBRARY MICAH

AUSTRALIA'S MIDDLE—POWER

DIPLOMACY: CAMBODIA AND APEC

Address by Senator Gareth Evans, Minister for Foreign Affairs and Trade to the Australian Institute of International Affairs, New South Wales Branch, Sydney on 10 March 1993

One of the recurring themes in the Opposition's attack on the Government's foreign policy is that we have over—reached ourselves, grandstanding around the world to little useful effect on a miscellany of issues which have had little or nothing to do with Australia's national interests.

This is a criticism which, you won't be surprised to hear, I reject on all accounts. Australian foreign policy under the Labor Government has been driven by a very clear, and clearly defined, sense of national interest; conducted with a wholly realistic appreciation of the scope

and limits of our influence; focused and realistically selective in character; and entirely effective in achieving results, and in building in the process — in the region and the world at

large — a very positive new image of Australia as a diplomatically active country, conducting a responsible foreign policy with imagination and energy.

In my book on Australia's Foreign  Relations, published in 1991, 1 characterised the kind of foreign policy we have been crafting and implementing in recent years as "middle power diplomacy with an Asia Pacific orientation". Let me spell out, as I did in that book, what that means in general terms, and then spend a little time on two specific situations — APEC and Cambodia — which have shown clearly that process at work.

Australia is a middle power. We are manifestly not a great or even major power; nor,

however, as the 11th biggest economy in the world, are we small or insignificant. The

company of nations which tend to be so described is relatively limited--a dozen to twenty at most. There are no agreed criteria: it is a matter of balancing out GDP and population size, and perhaps military capacity and physical size as well, then having regard to the perceptions

of others.

While middle power diplomacy is ultimately no less self—interested than any other kind, its characteristic methods are these days more often applied to a range of problems which involve

the interests of not just a few, but many, nations. Important examples abound in such areas as arms control and disarmament, trade liberalisation, regional conflict resolution and

X11/93

2

environment protection. Australia, like most other countries, has a self—interested preference

for the peaceful resolution of conflict, acceptance of international law, protection of the weak against the strong, and the free exchange of ideas, people and goods. In a world that is increasingly interdependent, the pursuit of a great many of these interests depends on co-operation with others for their fullest satisfaction.  The argument is that, in these circumstances, middle powers are as well equipped as anyone else, and in some respects better

equipped, to generate acceptable solutions.

The characteristic method of middle power diplomacy is coalition building with 'like—minded'

countries. It also usually involves 'niche' diplomacy, which means concentrating resources in specific areas best able to generate returns worth having, rather than trying to cover the field.

By definition, middle powers are not powerful enough in most circumstances to impose their

will, but they may be persuasive enough to have like—minded others see their point of view,

and to act accordingly.

There have been a number of important such like—minded coalitions formed in recent times.

There is the Cairns Group: Argentina, Australia, Brazil, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Fiji, Hungary, Indonesia, Malaysia, New Zealand, Philippines, Thailand and Uruguay. There is

APEC: initially Australia, Brunei, Canada, Indonesia, Japan, Republic of Korea, Malaysia, New Zealand, Philippines, Singapore, Thailand and the United States with these then being

joined by the PRC, Taiwan and Hong Kong. In the case of Cambodia. our coalition building meant working from the outset with Indonesia and the other ASEANS, all five permanent members of the Security Council, Vietnam and the four Cambodian factions themselves. In

responding to the evil of apartheid,  Australia's coalition has been the Commonwealth itself, and in particular the closely knit group of nine countries which have since 1987 constituted

the Committee of Foreign Ministers on Southern Africa (CFMSA): Australia, Canada,

Guyana, India, Malaysia, Nigeria, Tanzania, Zambia and Zimbabwe.

It will be evident from these examples that coalitions which Australia has built in recent years,

or in which we have been particularly active, are by no means confined in their membership to

'middle power' countries. They often include great or major powers, and those with very much less influence as well. Moreover, the memberships keep changing. Although, for

example, trade liberalisation objectives are common to both APEC and the Cairns Group, the

countries with whom we made common cause in the former are not all the same as those with

whom we have worked in the latter. The point of middle power diplomacy is not who is embraced by it, but how the process of change is initiated and carried through. Coalition

building is inherently eclectic: we seek to build in each case the kind of alliance most suited

to the particular issue on our international agenda. But the goal is constant: maximising the

3

influence that can be brought to bear by Australia and those countries which share interests

with us.

For middle power diplomacy to be effective, a number of conditions have to be met. First, there has to be careful identification of where the opportunities lie for potentially effective action by a middle power. There is no prestige, or likely result, in enthusiastically pursuing ideas which are premature, over—ambitious, or for some other reason unlikely to generate any

significant body of support. A good example is regional military security, where we have taken the view that for the foreseeable future the most productive role for a country like Australia is to promote increasing dialogue and the gradual development of confidence building measures, rather than to seek to initiate new structures. On the other hand, APEC, the

Cairns Group, the UN peace plan for Cambodia and the Antarctic environment initiative were all examples of ideas whose time had clearly come.

Secondly, there has to be sufficient physical capacity to follow the issue through. This implies a certain minimum of physical resources, including a sufficiently wide network of diplomatic

posts, which it may be difficult for any country smaller than a middle power to match. It also means that, for a middle power, there will be a limit to the number of major issues that can be

simultaneously pursued: selective 'niche' diplomacy, while often good tactics, is also compelled by realistic necessity. Resources simply have to be concentrated where they are likely to have the most useful impact. Priority setting--involving careful balancing of the

importance of the national interests in question against the practical likelihood of their being advanced--becomes extremely important. Thus, for example, in the vast area embraced by what may be described as the 'new internationalist agenda', Australia has tended to focus its major efforts on three specific areas--human rights, the environment and development co-operation. The capacity to follow an issue through also involves energy and stamina. Many

good ideas, well capable of implementation, fall by the wayside in international affairs simply

because institutions, or the individuals who constitute them, tire. One widely acknowledged reason for the impact made, for example, by Australia's UN peace plan for Cambodia was the sheer persistence with which, over a long period, the proposal was followed through at both

official and ministerial level.

Thirdly, there has to be in most cases a degree of intellectual imagination and creativity

applied to the issue--an ability to see a way through impasses and to lead, if not by force of

authority, then at least by force of ideas. The application of physical resources to a problem

without accompanying ideas is unlikely to result in anything more than the appearance of activity. Of course, creativity and imagination are not the prerogative of middle powers; nor

should they be assumed to exist in the case of any particular middle power. The point is

4

simply that what middle powers may lack in economic, political or military clout, they can

often make up with quick and thoughtful diplomatic footwork. And resolution of just about any significant problem in international affairs--be it bilateral or multilateral in character---needs just that.

Finally, effective middle power diplomacy involves credibility on the part of the country in question. The mix of ingredients here will vary from case to case. Perceived independence

from the influence of larger powers will often be one such ingredient. The maintenance of credibility is also crucially dependent on avoiding any charge of hypocrisy: any country which preaches abroad what it fails to practise at home cannot expect to be taken very

seriously for very long. Thus Australia's domestic commitment to internationalising the

economy is crucial to our credibility in the Uruguay Round and APEC; similarly, a poor recent race relations performance here would make it very difficult for us to be heard internationally on apartheid. Nor can double standards be applied abroad: we made it clear, for example, in our discussion of Australia's human rights diplomacy that this depended very

much for its credibility on both universality in the application of principles, and consistency of

approach as between different countries.

Middle powers, simply because they are of less than great or major power status, can

occasionally do what great and major powers cannot. It is generally acknowledged that APEC

would have had much more difficulty in getting off the ground if the United States or Japan had been its instigator: each side may have feared the worst of the other, and the smaller

powers may well have felt that their own interests were at risk. Similarly, Australia's ability to talk comfortably to every country involved in the Cambodian dispute owed much to the fact

that we were not carrying any great or major power baggage. We had no axes to grind, and no immediate interests to protect, other than a genuine desire to see a terrible, protracted conflict

ended and regional stability improved accordingly.

Cambodia : Process and Outcome

The essential problem in Cambodia which confronted me when I assumed this portfolio in

1988 - and which had confronted Bill Hayden before me - was the stalemate which had developed between the four Cambodian factions and their foreign sponsors throughout the

1980s on an effective power-sharing arrangement. A new impetus towards peace was given in 1989 when Vietnam indicated that it was prepared to initiate the withdrawal of its troops

from Cambodia. France convened a major conference in mid-1989, bringing together all the

warring factions and interested parties, but negotiations eventually broke down because the

particular four-party transitional-government mechanism was not acceptable to all the

5

warring parties — or, for these matter, a good proportion of the international community.

It was against that background, in late 1989, that Australia came into the centre of the picture with the solution that we devised built around a central role for the United Nations — not just

in peace—keeping, a familiar role; not just in election organisation, also familiar enough; but actually in the supervision of the whole internal government of the country during the transition to elected government. It was a relatively simple idea, but one that needed a very great deal of diplomatic effort to persuade other countries, to make them see that this was the way through the impasse. I want to pay tribute again today, as I have on many previous

occasions, to the work of my own Department and in particular its then Deputy Secretary, Michael Costello, for the extraordinary role that was played in developing and selling this particular idea through that crucial period of December/January 1989-90: in one crucial sequence, Costello was involved in thirty separate meetings in thirteen different countries over a period of just twenty—one days. The 'Red Book' which set out our proposal in 153 pages of

detail, was put together by me and my officers in a period of not much more than a week.

This was the sort of effort we sustained over two long years of protracted negotiations which

eventually produced the Comprehensive Paris Settlement of October 1991, now being

implemented.

How successful has the UN Peace Plan been? The UNTAC operation now underway is a huge

one, with 16,000 UN troops on the ground, along with police from over 30 countries and a further 4,000 civilian personnel. The operation involves multiple components: military, electoral, civil administration, refugee repatriation, and rehabilitation and reconstruction.

Inevitably some of these components have worked more effectively than others, and the

coordination of effort between New York and the field — in an under—resourced and

overstretched UN administrative environment — has not always been optimal. Moreover, it has of course been the case since last June that the Khmer Rouge have refused to cooperate in

the whole process. This has meant, among other things, the inability to achieve disarmament and demobilisation of the contending factional forces, key elements in the original Paris Peace

Agreement.

But there are still plenty of grounds for real optimism that the basic objectives of the Paris

Peace Plan will be met— namely constituent assembly elections in May; the adoption thereafter of the new constitution and the formation of a democratically—based government;

and a strong enough basis being established for the economic reconstruction of the country.

It is no more than crude domestic politicking for Senator Hill to claim, as he did yesterday,

that "the Paris Agreement ... has clearly failed" when 4.6 million voters have registered to vote

6

without serious incident, and when more than 300,000 displaced persons have been returned to Cambodia from the Thai border camps, again without serious incident and with freedom of

choice being fully respected in the process (only 2,600, for example, choosing to go into Khmer Rouge controlled territory). Nobody, least of all me, is naive enough to think that the KR's spots have changed, and that they may have become committed democrats. But the overwhelming balance of current assessment - which I certainly embrace myself - is that the opposition they will pursue for the foreseeable future will be of an essentially political rather than military kind simply because there are very serious risks, both military and economic, in them doing otherwise. The most important single factor in their calculations will no doubt be

their inability in future to demand physical support from China; finding the formula which enabled China to extract itself from that support has been perhaps the greatest single

achievement of the Cambodia peace plan.

Nobody suggests that the overall peace process is other than fragile, particularly with

mounting concerns about political violence and intimidation perpetrated by all parties. But nor did anyone expect the process to move perfectly smoothly, without significant bumps and diversions along the way. The post-election process is, equally, not going to be at all easy to manage, either for the internal parties or the international community. But there is no reason

at this stage to make any assumption that it will not be manageable. Under the terms of the plan, the UN is committed - and that includes the Australian presence - to remain until three months after the scheduled election, ie. until August. It is premature at this stage to be making

judgements about what if any continued UN presence might be required beyond that time.

This is a matter that will obviously require a review by the, incoming government.

I would not envisage, incidentally, that review involving more full time Australian

government resources than are presently being devoted to Cambodia. Our Phnom Penh mission apart (which I presume a Coalition Government would not close) Cambodia occupies

the full time attention of just one part of one Section of one Branch of one Division of my Department: three officers in all out of a Canberra-based total of 1, 264! For Senator Hill to

devote one of the main thrusts of his assault on Government policy yesterday to the "enormous proportion of the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade's resources" devoted to

Cambodia , and the need to reduce those resources is nothing short of ludicrous.

APEC: Process and Outcomes

APEC was established in Canberra in 1989. Miscellaneous statesmen and commentators had

been making speeches for more than two decades about the desirability of some Asia-Pacific economic cooperation forum, but it was not until Bob Hawke spelt out a detailed blueprint in

Y

n O

7

Seoul in January 1989, which was then followed up with months of Australian diplomatic

blitzing, culminating in a meeting in Canberra attended by Foreign Ministers and Trade Ministers from twelve major Asia-Pacific trading nations, that the concept at last became

tangible.

Since its establishment, APEC has emerged - despite being routinely dismissed by the Coalition as a "debating society" - as the pre-eminent forum for economic debate and cooperation in the Asia Pacific region. From the outset, APEC had essentially three objectives. The first was to develop strategies for regional economic cooperation in data collection and evaluation, common problem solving and sectoral projects of one kind or

another: in these areas a number of work projects have been under way for some time, and are expected to start bearing fruit shortly as the organisation moves beyond its early formative

stage.

The second objective was to give political support to the Uruguay Round negotiations and ongoing global trade liberalisation. The best possible news for both the region and the world

would be a strong and early conclusion to the Round, boosting as this would world trade by an estimated $200 billion per year and giving a new injection of confidence into the world economy in the process. A third objective, not quite so clearly defined at the outset but rapidly coming to the top of the APEC agenda, was to explore the options for regional trade

facilitation and non-discriminatory regional trade liberalisation.

On the subject of trade facilitationsAPEC has recently agreed to set in train exercises designed

to accelerate harmonisation of customs procedures; develop a foreign investment regulation

database; establish an electronic tariff database to improve information flows; and to systematically review a wide variety of administrative barriers to market access, including

phytosanitary regulation, rules of origin and anti-dumping and environmental measures affecting trade. Four weeks ago Prime Minister Paul Keating made a major proposal for

further initiatives to broaden and extend APEC's trade facilitation agenda, which have been

very well received around the region. The measures suggested include a region-wide investment agreement covering matters such as expropriation or treatment of investment

income; work towards mutual recognition and greater regional harmonisation of technical

standards and associated certification and accreditation processes; a region-wide mechanism for addressing trade conflicts; APEC codes of conduct in non-tariff areas (eg, import

licensing); and, in the longer term, agreements in more sensitive areas such as intellectual property or competition policy These are all areas in which there is potential for APEC to

make very real progress in removing structural impediments and facilitate the flow of capital,

technology and trade as the key to the region's continuing dynamism. All these and other

Q

:1

r n

8

measures will be very much within the focus of the APEC Eminent Persons Group, recently

set up to "think big thoughts" about the longer term agenda for regional cooperation.

On regional trade liberalisation APEC is taking the first tentative steps toward exploring the possibility of tariff reduction or removal in individual sectors: at this stage there is no thought

of moving to anything so ambitious as an APEC—wide free trade agreement. The prevailing view — and one which Australia very strongly endorses — is that any move towards regional trade liberalisation must be on a basis which is wholly consistent with the multilateral trading system. Regional liberalisation initiatives, designed to produce gains additional to whatever is

achievable through global GATT procedures, would still deliver benefits for the region's

members even if pursued on a non—discriminatory basis. The present thinking within APEC is, naturally enough, that regional trade liberalisation initiatives are best pursued in the first instance in those sectors — eg. steel — where trade is presently heavily concentrated within the region, and where the benefits of liberalisation would flow as a result overwhelmingly in the

first instance to APEC members, even if others could potentially share them.

These are all ideas still in an early stage of evolution, but they are exciting ideas. Moreover they are ideas being taken seriously around the region, and which are of major importance for the long term economic health of the region, and indeed the whole global economy. Australia

has been intensely and intimately involved in the whole process for the outset, and is a

contribution of which we can genuinely be proud.

Although my perspective is obviously biased, I think that observation is one that can be

generalised across the whole field of Australian external policy. After a decade of Labor Government, Australia does have a region—wide and world—wide reputation as a confident,

competent middle power, capable of creative, imaginative and sustained diplomatic, problem—

solving efforts. Coalition spokesmen have not shown any evident sense of pride or confidence either in what we have done, or what we may be able to do in the future. Perhaps you might like to bear that in mind next Saturday: I am all in favour of bipartisanship in the conduct of

foreign policy, but — as Billy Hughes once famously replied when asked why, in his diverse

political career, he had never joined the Country Party — you have to draw the line

somewhere!

