BUILDING SECURITY IN A NEW ERA

ADDRESS BY SENATOR PETER COOK

MINISTER FOR INDUSTRY, SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

JEWISH COMMUNITY COUNCIL OF VICTORIA

Melbourne

Monday, 4 September 1995

Ch eck against delivery

Introduction

As you are no doubt aware, the Deputy Prime Minister , Kim Beazley, was unable to  address you tonight because of a death in his family.

I would like to thank you for having me here in his place.

Australia 's Jewish community has made an enormous contribution to our national life  and has always been vigorously engaged in the political process in this country.

And I welcome the direct and fair approach of the Jewish Community Council in  Victoria, which is offering the major political parties an opportunity to put forward their  policies in the lead-up to the forthcoming election .

I am pleased to have this opportunity on behalf of the Government.

There is always a temptation around election time, for politicians to warn voters of the  gravity of the decision they are about to take, and to imply that their particular party is  the only one capable of steering the ship of state safely through the stormy seas ahead.

But here in Australia, in the middle of the last decade of the turbulent 20th Century, at a  time of unprecedented change; and with great opportunities and challenges ahead of us  as a nation, I don't think it is an exaggeration to say that Australians have a very real  choice to make when they consider their voting intentions.

The choice that voters make at the next election will directly affect their lives, and  directly affect long-term outcomes for Australia.

So I am very pleased to have this chance to set out some of the Labor Government's  thinking on the issues which I was invited to consider tonight - including immigration  and multiculturalism, citizenship , the Government's racial hatred legislation and foreign  policy issues, particularly the Middle East.

And I am particularly pleased to address them because a single; key theme links all these  issues.

That theme is security - for individuals, for communities and for entire nations.

The Jewish community, here in Australia, in Israel and around the world has perhaps the  most highly developed appreciation ofthe.significance of this term and its...many  dimensions. And it's an issue this Government takes very seriously indeed.

External security

As we look out to the 21 st Century, security in the international arena is highly  problematic .

The net result of the end of the Cold Wa r has, of course, been overwhelmingly positive.

2

We no longer live under the shadow of global thermonuclear war. International actors  now have the possibility of acting independently in pursuit of their own interests.  Movement on a whole range of multilateral issues has become possible with the end of  the Cold-War gridlock.

This era offers new possibilities for peace, particularly , of course, in Middle East, where  the peace process is moving forward.

But the fact is that a period of orderly and predictable international relationships has now  ended.

The diffusion of economic wealth has lead to a diffusion of power in the international  community. Historic tensions and rivalries are once again being played out, with tragic  consequences.

The old, if unpalatable , certainties no longer prevail.

The United States - now the globe's only acknowledged superpower - is finding it a  challenge to adapt to a new and more complex era.

F or Australia and Israel , countries looking to build security for themselves in dynamic  and complex regions, this is an era which will demand of its leaders the highest levels of  statesmanship.

Israel, of course, continues to face major strategic challenges as it strives to come to  terms with its neighbourhood.

Australians stand in awe of the Government and people of Israel for their fortitude in  pushing forward the peace process, despite the devastating impact of acts of terrorism  from extremist quarters .

For the United States, Australia and other friends ofIsrael, it is important that we  continue to appreciate Israel's attention to the military dimension of regional security .

Iraq's defeat in the Gulf War was a very important step forward. But recent  developments have shown that Iraq may still represent a threat to its region for some  time. Israel 's leaders will continue to play on a complex military, political and geographic  chessboard in their region.

Israel 's approach has been the right one: to press forward despite the risks; to maintain  the momentum for peace; and, hopefully , to ensure that Palestinian self-rule delivers  sufficient economic and social benefits to Palestinians to marginalise the extremists  among them.

Australia , of course, is a very committed, if relatively modest, contributor to the peace  process in the Middle East, and we will continue to offer support wherever we can.

Au stralia w as an early participant in the comprehensive international response to Saddam  H ussein's invasion of Kuwait. Specialists from Australia formed part of the UN Special  Commi ssion on monitoring the elimination of Iraq's weapons of mass destruction  capability.

3

Australia is participating in two of the five working groups which form multilateral  tracks of the peace process.

We have provided $15 million in assistance to the Palestinian Authority to help provide  the social and economic development, which will reinforce support for the peace  process.

We have personnel in both the Multinational Force and Observers (MFO) and the United  Nations Truce Supervision Organisation (UNSTO) .

The MFO , in particular , has been a low-cost success story, enhancing communication  between Egypt and Israel and providing an important underpinning to peace between the  two countries .

An Australian is presently in command of the MFO , and our contingent will extend its  service to 1998, or a five-year commitment in total.

There will always be a special bond between Australia and Israel.

In 1949, Australia 's Foreign Minister, Doc Evatt, strongly supported the creation of the  State of Israel.

Today, Australia continues to offer its heartfelt support for Israel as it works with its  neighbours to build a sustained security environment.

Of course, Australia's external situation cannot - by any measure - be compared to  Israel's , but it is not without its own complexity.

Australia is now deeply economically engaged with the East Asian region which,  although currently one of the most peaceful regions on the globe, is nevertheless  historically volatile .

Our approach has been to pursue a sophisticated policy mix, embracing regional  cooperation through APEC and the ASEAN Regional Forum, strengthening bilateral  relationships with key regional players - such as Indonesia - and using this increased  cooperation as a vehicle to influence attitudes and developments in ways favourable to  our long-term interests .

Foreign Minister Gareth Evans has been a powerful advocate of the concept of  cooperative security . This reflects a broad approach to security , extending beyond the  military sphere to include political , economic, social , and other non-military issues.

As you know , this Government has used the full range of contacts with our neighbours,  including through education , tourism and cultural exchanges to strengthen regional  relationships .

This process of engagement with our region has involved drawing on the enormous  resources of our cohesive, diverse, innovative Australian community. This brings me to  the internal aspects of securit y.

4

Internal security

Australia today is a very different place to the homogenous population of 50 years ago.  Then, we were 7.5 million people of mainly British stock. Today, we are nearly 18  million people, one in four of us of non-English speaking backgrounds, and four in ten of  us either migrants or the children of migrants.

Australians from something like 240 different cultural and ethnic backgrounds are living  together. Our community is increasingly diverse in values, attitudes and lifestyles. Even  the basics have changed.

The role and shape of the family has shifted dramatically . An increasing number of  women are in the workforce, and returning to it while their children are young. Many  more Australian households have only one adult living in them.

The shape of the workplace is vastly different , with the job growth primarily occurring in  the service and knowledge industries, and demanding higher levels of education and  training .

Most of the changes which have taken place in our national community are unequivocally  positive.

Our diversity is a rich source of energy and creativity. We now have more genuine  equality of opportunity than ever before.

Our multicultural society is a major advantage as we continue to intemationalise our  economy and develop our trade and investment linkages .

But, as never before, we can't afford to be complacent.

We face some real challenges to our social cohesion - racism, intolerance, and a retreat  into tribalism are all ugly tendencies in other parts of the world.

As a nation in transition , we must make sure the increasing diversity of the Australian  community does not disintegrate into fragmentation .

That is why the Government has put an enormous effort into strengthening our sense of  national corrununity and individual security .

As in our foreign policy, we are pursuing a sophisticated policy mix.

Let me remind you of some of Labor's achievements in leading a changing population  through changing times.

These include:

" demonstrating a commitment to healthy levels of migration for economic, social,  family reunion and humanitarian reasons;

5

" adapting selection criteria to the long-term needs of the Australian economy and  society with annual programs reflecting Ministerial consultations with all interested  groups;

" reforming the business-skills category, to attract migrants who can create jobs and  stimulate growth;

" streamlining processing for international businesses establishing regional  headquarters ;

" streamlining processes so that good corporate citizens can bring key personnel into  Australia with minimal processing restrictions , while maintaining proper protection  for Australian workers and Australian security;

" introducing electronic transfer visa-processing, cutting processing times at  Australian airports to around 55 seconds; and

" tightening controls over illegal immigrants, thereby achieving a 30 per cent fall in  the rate of over-stay .

In tandem with these policies , the Government has committed itself to practical and  caring measures to assist migrants make their way successfully in the Australian  community and to support the important continuing work of ethnic community groups.

We have:

" increased funding for English language training for migrants by around $40 million,  spending around $155 million a year with a special focus on job-seekers ,

" expanded the translating and interpreting service to rural and isolated communities  and introduced a national, easy-to-use hotline ,

" specifically targeted unemployed people of non-English speaking background with  a range of initiatives under Working Nation,

" increased funding for community groups providing services to ethnic communities  from $3.4 million in 1992-93 to $22.4 million in 1994-95,

" increased funding for Migrant Resource Centres by $2 million in 1995-96 to enable  them to provide better for the needs of newly arrived migrants,

" improved off-shore information about settlement for all approved migrants to  Australia, and

" improved coordination of services for refugees who have suffered torture or  trauma.

Most of these measures don't get a lot of attention in the broader Australian community  or in the media.

6

The community rightly expects the Government to handle the broad issues relating to the  needs of our changing population with good sense, compassion and a clear-eyed  appreciation of the national interest.

But as I have made clear, the Government's thinking goes beyond this.

We do not believe you can simply assume that Australia will continue forever to work  effectively as a united and cohesive entity . We are constantly seeking practical ways to  strengthen and enhance that secure sense of identity .

Racial hatred legislation

The most significant recent example of our commitment to social cohesion is our effort  to enact racial hatred legislation .

The background to the legislation is important in understanding what we have been  trying to achieve. Three major reports have been released over the past few years  highlighting incidents of racial violence and harassment.

" The National Inquiry into Racist Violence by the Human Rights and Equal  Opportunity Commission was published in April 1991. The report found that racist  violence, including intimidation and harassment, is an endemic problem for  Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islanders in all Australian States and that racist  attitudes and practices pervade Australian institutions, both public and private .

" The Royal Commission into Aboriginal Deaths in Custody, also released in 1991,  recommended that governments which had not done so should legislate to  proscribe racial vilification and provide a conciliation mechanism for dealing with  complaints of racial vilification .

" And the Report on Multiculturalism and the Law by the Australian Law Reform  Commission was released in 1992 with majority support for making racial  vilification unlawful.

Some examples of the scale of the problem identified in these reports included:

" threats and intimidation of indigenous people in a wide variety of circumstances;

" harassment and intimidation of people of Asian and Middle-Eastern origin on the  streets;

" threats of violence directed against members of the Jewish community and to  property owned by the community;

" and the publication of offensive and scurrilous material denigrating particular  groups because of their ethnicity .

I remind you of these reports because it is important to be aware that the problem of  racial hatred is well-documented and disturbingly widespread.

7

And when we are confronted with this hatred we have quite a straightforward choice -we can accept racial hatred or we can act to stamp it out.

As I said earlier, one of the biggest assets we have in this country is our stable , skilled  and diverse community. We need to protect and promote that stability and we need to  make it very clear in the broader international context that racial hatred is unacceptable  to Australians .

This Government chose to act - to send the message that attempts to incite hatred  because of racial difference are abhorrent and will not be sanctioned .

And the most powerful means of sending that message is through our laws.

I should add, that those who favour education over legislation to combat racism should  bear in mind that the Government is taking on the issue on both fronts.

We have a wide-ranging program of grants to government, local government and  community groups to work on community relations at the local level. This three-year $3  million community relations agenda gives priority to initiatives dealing with youth,  media, police and the judiciary .

In addition , the Government has allocated $3 million for activities to mark the  International Year for Tolerance, with projects including those targeting youth,  indigenous people, and the need for inter-faith religious cooperation.

We believe that education combined with the law is the most powerful and effective  approach.

This year, the Government proposed legislation which would protect people from acts of  racist intimidation or harassm ent based on a person's race, colour, or national or ethnic  ongm.

The proposed legislation had both civil and criminal sanctions, and it was based on an  extensive process of community consultation .

Criminal sanctions were proposed for the more serious cases of racial hatred - including  threats of physical harm to people or property or the incitement of racial hatred. It was  proposed that crimes of this nature w ould attract a maximum penalty of two years in  pnson.

As you know, last week the Senate passed an amended version of the Bill, excluding the  criminal sanctions .

The Opposition unwillingly conceded the civil measures, but it simply does not accept or  recognise that the issue' is sufficiently grave to warrant criminal sanctions .

The legislation as passed will create a civil prohibition under federal law whereby it will  be unlawful to behave offensively, other than in private, where such behaviour insults ,  offends or intimidates another person because of their race, colour, or national or ethnic  origin. Such behaviour w ill be grounds for complaint to the Human Rights and Equal  Opportunity Commission.

8

In the Government's view, the exclusion of the criminal sanctions provisions substantially  weakens the legislation . We believe that there are very strong grounds for adopting  criminal sanctions as a clear message about Australian society and about Australian  standards.

We will reluctantly accept the Bill in its current form, but will seek an opportunity in the  future to return it to its original form.

Other measures

Thus far, Australia has been remarkably successful in incorporating peoples from around  the world and creating an open, tolerant and inclusive society .

But our long-term success will vitally depend on the common sense of identity and  purpose which binds us together and carries us forward, no matter how diverse we may  be.

Let me mention a couple of examples of nation-building initiatives by the Government.

Obviously, a key issue for the long-term cohesiveness of this country is to achieve  reconciliation with Australia 's indigenous peoples. This has been tackled  comprehensively for the first time with the Mabo decision and the Government's  legislation to follow up on the decision . There is still much work to be done, but we are  on the right path.

This year a lot of energy and effort has gone into the Australia Remembers  commemorations, and I think these commemorations have been quite remarkable in  drawing Australians ' attention to the lessons of the Second World War.

The significance of Australia Remembers to survivors of the period is understandable,  but the great legacy of this year will be that many of our young people will better  understand and honour the courage and suffering of so many Australians this century.

The Government will continue to move forward with the debate about Australia 's  constitutional arrangements. Australia should and will become a Republic - not in order  to repudiate our history, but on the contrary, in order to deal with it and put it  appropriately in its place.

It's time for us to move on now , and to ensure our Constitution and symbols genuinely  reflect the Australia of today and tomorrow.

The Government has now laid out its view that minimal constitutional change will ensure  that our Head of State is one of us, reflecting our unique identity and values.

And, in recent times, we have had a very significant examination of issues relating to  Australian citizenship with Australians All --Enhancing Australian Citizenship, a report  by the Joint Standing Committee on Migration, the Government's response to which was  released by Senator Bolkus this morning.

Many of the report's recommendations dovetail with the work done by the Civics Expert  Group entitled TYhereas the people ... ,released last year.

9

It is a curious fact that, until 1949, people living in Australia were either British subjects  or aliens. Since then, of course, citizenship laws have become more inclusive , with  remaining discriminatory barriers removed.

The Government is proposing to take up most of the measures proposed in Australians  A ll, including : raising awareness of Australian citizenship through promotional  campaigns; developing citizenship education through programs for migrants school  children and the community; and enhancing Australian citizenship laws to make them

more simple and relevant.

Measures to strengthen our citizenship practices and civics education are important  vehicles for gathering Australians around a common commitment to this country;  ensuring they understand the rights and responsibilities which are part of being an  Australian .

And ensuring that future generations can both uphold and continue to strengthen the  core values of Australian life.

The framework of Labor's multicultural policy was laid out in 1989 in the National  Agenda for a Multicultural Australia .

The principles of that document - enshrining as they do the reciprocal rights and  responsibilities of multiculturalism - have underpinned some of the most important  policy development exercises in recent years, including the review of Australian  citizenship.

The Government recently asked the National Multicultural Advisory Council to advise  on future directions for multicul tural policy. The result is a set of recommendations  designed to carry Australia forward into the next century. The Government response to  those recommendations will be released at the end of the year.

Conclusion

I w ill conclude by returning to my original theme.

We are living in times of change - globally, regionally and within our own economy and  society .

Security in this era is not guaranteed - it is something that has to be worked for, and  constantly maintained.

This Labor Government recognises the critical importance of building security for  Australia and for Australians , both externally and internally .

We will continue to work with our region to advance our economic and long-term  security interests .

We will continue to be vigilant against those who would threaten the rights of  Australians through racism.

10

We will continue to promote measures which will enhance our sense of cohesion and  national identity .

Labor's goal is to ensure that Australia remains an open, inclusive and tolerant society,  and that Australia remains a place where all Australians have the opportunity to achieve  their goals.

I am confident that, if we are vigilant - and dare I say, with the right leadership in  Government - our creative , diverse, cosmopolitan and harmonious society will be the  source of our greatest economic, social and cultural achievements in the years to come.

Thank you.

11

