

At first sight, it might seem positively mischievous to honour the memory of
Daniel Mannix by tonight honouring the memory of Herbert-Vere Evatt. After
all, while Dr Mannix, the son of an Irish farmer, and Dr Evatt, the son of a
Hunter Valley publican, were both men of intellectual refinement, while both
were loathed by the Protestant establishment of their day, while both were
more fervent in their nationalism than their imperialism, while both spoke
for essentially working class constituencies, and while both played roles in
the dramas of the Australian Labor Party, they were undeniably political
enemies in that great cataclysm of the 1950s, the Labor split.

In an earlier cataclysm which had divided not just the Labor Party but the
whole country, the conscription campaigns of 1916 and 1917, Dr Mannix had
emerged as the political enemy of another Labor leader, William Hughes. In
later years, Dr Mannix made his peace with Hughes - not just because Hughes,
expelled from the Labor Party, became more conservative with every passing
year, and certainly not because Hughes was ever to show much regard for
Mannix's beloved Irish Australian community, but because Dr Mannix was
sympathetic when in the 1930s domestic tragedy struck Hughes with the death
of his daughter. To my knowledge, Dr Mannix never made his peace with Dr
Evatt.

Thirty years, however, have passed since the deaths of
these foes of the 1950s, and it does not seem to me inappropriate to honour
both the Catholic prelate and the Protestant layman and, indeed, to honour
the one in honouring the other. For, whatever their differences late in
their lives, Dr Mannix and Dr Evatt shared one trait: each was his own
man.

I want to stress Evatt's confident distinctiveness
because, while it is true that in the Labor Party we are jealous of our
heroes' reputations, we are as prone as others to dubious labelling. The
fact is that Evatt defies easy labelling. Certainly, it would be a travesty
to say that this scholar-lawyer-politician-statesman, with a personality to
match both the extraordinary successes and extravagant failures of his
career, was this or that sort of man and to leave it at that - which is
precisely what too many of his admirers and detractors tend to do.

Formative years

The outline of Evatt's career
probably is still well enough known: the brilliant high school and
university student in Sydney, the bright young lawyer, the New South Wales
State parliamentarian in the 1920s, the High Court Justice and historian in
the 1930s, the Attorney-General and Foreign Minister in the Curtin and
Chifley Governments in the 1940s, the Leader of the Federal Opposition in
the 1950s, the Chief Justice of New South Wales in the 1960s. I want tonight
to stress especially Evatt's role as Foreign Minister - not least because
this year's Fiftieth Anniversary of the United Nations is an ideal time to
recall the splendid role he played in its creation. But, if you will bear
with me, I want first to talk about some dimensions of Evatt's career, and
some aspects of his character, which had made him a fascinating public
figure long before he became Minister for External Affairs in 1941.

His father might have ended his days as a country publican in the
colonies but he had begun them as a schoolboy at Charterhouse, and his
father's brother, Sir George Hamilton Evatt, became Surgeon-General in the
British Army. The Evatts, in fact, were Anglo-Irish Protestant gentlemen
given to producing soldiers for the crown and parsons for the established
church. Dr Evatt's mother was also of Irish Anglo Australian Protestant
stock and, by all accounts, a formidable lady who demanded much of her sons
and gave them a solid grounding in evangelical Anglicanism. A strong streak
of puritanism was to mark Evatt for the rest of his life. In his
mid-twenties he married the daughter of a wealthy American.

Given that background and his own intellectual brilliance, it is not too
surprising that the young Evatt did not lack confidence. This could show
itself in unimportant ways: outraging the rugby union gentlemen by bringing
rugby league into the university, for example. (He even flirted with proper
football, visiting Melbourne in 1910 with a Fort Street team to play what
was then called Victorian Rules.) It could show itself in more important
ways, as in 1927 when, after one term in the State Parliament, he publicly
damned his leader, Jack Lang, stood successfully as an independent and was
expelled from the State branch of the Labor Party complaining of Communist
infiltration.

In a prize winning undergraduate essay which was
later published, Evatt argued that in Australia the party differences were
minimal: Whig liberalism had triumphed completely and rightly. In his view,
however, there was a division, and it is worth quoting his youthful
description of it: a division 'corresponding to that of minds conservative
by nature and minds progressive by nature'. He continued:

In
all domains of life and an we find one class desiring to press forward, to
experiment, to find in any change a bettering of present conditions, and a
second which clings with veneration to whatever is traditional and ancient,
and which distrusts the dangerous and unnecessary proposals of what appear
to it a shallow empiricism.

There is not much doubt about the
side of the divide on which he saw himself, but it remains that he supported
conscription in 1916 and, in his essay, he questioned the Labor pledge and
Labor caucus solidarity as inimical to true liberalism. Nor was he much
taken with the notion of employment preference for trade unionists.

It is also typical of Evatt that, apparently not fully extended by
the High Court's demands, he turned to history in the 1930s with two
pioneering books - one defending Governor Bligh, till then generally seen as
a tyrant properly deposed, and the other a defensive biography of W.A.
Holman, generally seen in the Labor movement as a rat. That other great rat
in Labor lore, Hughes, was also admired publicly and privately by
Evatt.

Lawyer and High Court Judge

Evatt
had a brilliant legal career by any standards. From the University of
Sydney, he graduated with a BA (triple first), obtained an MA (first) and
took a doctorate in laws (which later became his path breaking study of the
reserve powers, 
The King and his Dominion Governors). In 1916 he
became Secretary and Associate to the Chief Justice of NSW, Sir William
Cullen. He went to the Bar in 1924 and took silk five years later. In 1930,
at the age of 36 - the youngest ever appointee, and likely to remain so - he
was placed on the High Court by the Scullin Government. There he served for
the next decade, before succumbing at the age of 46 to the siren song of
politics - leaving the Court younger than the age nearly every other Justice
has arrived. As Commonwealth Attorney-General after 1941 he went back
frequently to the High Court as an advocate - even arguing for the
Government before the Privy Council in the Bank Nationalisation Case at the
same time as being President of the UN General Assembly in 1948.

On the High Court bench, one of Evatt's most distinctive qualities as
a Judge was his concern with social consequences and civil liberties; in his
own words he "always searched for the right with a lamp lit by the flame of
humanity". His models were Holmes and Cardozo in the United States and Lord
Wright in Britain. The best known example of this was probably his
dissenting judgment in 
Chester v Waverley Corporation - the 'nervous
shock' negligence case in which he eloquently took the part of the mother
whose child had been drowned in a Council trench, and in which his statement
of the law came soon to prevail. In constitutional cases he came down on the
side of the States more often than the Commonwealth Labor politicians who
appointed him would have liked, although more for reasons of legislative
efficacy rather than any conceptual 'States rights' perspective. That he saw
legislation as a medium for social reform, and had been a member of a
reformist State Government when the Federal Bruce/Page Government was
conservative, may also have coloured his views. Certainly no Commonwealth
power enthusiast could quarrel with his interpretation of the external
affairs power in the 
Burgess case - which eventually became orthodoxy
in the 
Tasmanian Dam case in the 1980s.

Speaking in 1965
of Dr Evatt's term on the High Court, the then Chief Justice, Sir Garfield
Barwick, said this:

To the decision of such of these cases
in which he participated, Herbert Vere Evatt made great contributions. His
judgements in many of them provide forceful and lucid expositions and
applications of the law. Many of such judgements examine and relate to each
other in a masterly fashion the precedents of the past with which he made
himself so precisely conversant as he applied himself so unstintingly to the
pursuit of the answer to the problem which each case in its turn posed for
decision. They disclose extensive and penetrating scholarly research which
illumines the aspects of the law with which they deal. These judgements will
long be used by students and teachers of the law, by practitioners and by
courts of law... (they) expressed views of the law which were well in
advance of his Honour's time and received acclaim from lawyers throughout
the British Commonwealth including the Privy Council.

It has to
be acknowledged that this was a very gracious tribute from Barwick, given
not only all their obvious differences of outlook, but also their personal
history. David Marr's biography of Barwick retails a story from their days
at the Sydney Bar together which says much about their respective
personalities. Evatt believed that logic would carry the weight of his
argument, and never worried much about whom he was appearing before.
Barwick, by contrast, believed in working the man, and urged Evatt to study
a particular earlier decision of the judge in question about which -
whatever its merits - the judge was inordinately fond. Evatt ignored
Barwick's suggestion. Inevitably the judge asked him why he was not relying
on his earlier decision. Evatt replied that his junior had not drawn his
attention to the case. At that point, Barwick said "Go to buggery" and left
the court.

State and Federal Politician

Stories like this, of which there are many, are perhaps the reason why Evatt
found himself something of a political loner when, after stepping down from
the High Court bench and entering Federal parliament in 1940, he became a
member of John Curtin's Government in 1941. While he had made some friends
in the leftish artistic and literary worlds of the time, mainly through his
wife, Mary Alice, he was too highly strung, abrasive and egotistical for
much in the way of political friendships. Probably the closest he came to a
friendship in the ministry was with Jack Beasley: it is somehow typical of
Evatt that he should cultivate Beasley, who rejoiced in the nickname of
'Stabber Jack' and had been one of the Lang group which brought down the
Scullin Labor Government in 1931 - another 'rat'. Despite courting men as
diverse as John Wren in Melbourne and Clarrie Fallon in Brisbane, he did not
have a personal power base in the party when he arrived in the Federal
Parliament, and never subsequently acquired one.

Evatt entered
the NSW Parliament as the member for Balmain in the 1925 election when the
Lang Government took power on a platform of extensive social and labour
market reform. He managed the preselection hurdle partly by relying on the
then multi-member character of constituencies, which made it rather easier;
and secondly by making a successful pitch for trade union support by writing
a series of influential articles about the victimisation of workers after
the 1917 railway strike. He immediately earned Lang's displeasure by defying
the party's conventions on seniority and nominating himself for
Attorney-General - he obtained two votes in caucus. He was, nonetheless, an
energetic contributor to the Lang Government's pioneering social
legislation. This was the first government in the world-to provide pensions
for widows on a non-contributory basis, through the 19^5 Widows' Pension
Bill which the Opposition described as 'the most soul - destroying,
poisonous bill'. Seventeen years later the Commonwealth introduced similar
national legislation. Evatt played a large part in framing both bills. His
drafting skills were also applied to the 1996 Workers Compensation Bill
which he piloted through the NSW Assembly and the 1997 Family (Child)
Endowment Bill, the model for Commonwealth legislation in 1942.

Evatt returned to politics, becoming the Federal member for Barton, in
August 194() - with the help of an invitation from the ALP's National
Executive, and his willingness to contest a UAP-held seat when no-one in a
safer seat would withdraw for him. When Curtin formed a government in
October 1941, Evatt became both Attorney-General and Minister for External
Affairs.

Even with the preoccupations of the War, which saw
Evatt work to a schedule that even modern ministers would regard as
extraordinary, he retained his commitment to social reform through
legislation. The defence power allowed the Commonwealth the latitude during
the war to manage the economy in areas like labour market regulation and
prices policy. Evatt, keen to build on these gains, led the efforts of
successive Labor governments to extend the Commonwealth's peacetime powers.
Ever the legalist, he saw constitutional reform as the means for this:
between 1944 and 1948- he proposed and supported five measures for amendment
of the Constitution, only one of which, on social services in 1946, was
successful. The motif of most of the proposals was post-War reconstruction,
retaining or building on powers which Canberra had exercised in wartime,
although Evatt also added to the wide ranging reform proposals of the 1944
referendum a proposal for constitutional guarantees for freedom of speech,
expression and religion.

Evatt's passion for civil liberties
was actually never more finely demonstrated than in the battle he led not in
favour of a constitutional amendment but 
against one - the 1950
referendum on the abolition of the Communist Party. It is worth mentioning
this achievement - which I would regard as the finest of Evatt's political
career - at this point, although to do so is to jump forward in time to his
period in Opposition. When the Menzies-Fadden Government was elected in
1949, it was against the backdrop of fears of a world communist
revolutionary movement, and the new Government's first major legislative
initiative was the 1950 Communist Party Dissolution bill which, once passed,
was immediately subject to a High Court challenge. Under fire from
conservatives and some in the ALP, Evatt accepted the brief for the
Waterside Workers Federation, one of the plaintiffs mounting the case
alongside the Communist Party The High Court held the act was 
ultra
vires the Commonwealth Parliament. Menzies then called a double
dissolution, was re-elected, secured control of the Senate, and announced a
constitutional referendum to overcome the High Court decision. Throughout an
intense and bitter campaign, Evatt brilliantly, forcefully, tirelessly - and
almost single-handedly - dwelt on the potential for abuse if government
could ban a political ideology, condemning resort to totalitarian methods to
fight totalitarianism. His argument eventually won the day in enough States
to defeat the referendum. It was a wonderful victory for Evatt, but it came
at a huge political cost: the mantle 'defender of communism', reinforced
when he leapt headlong into the Petrov affair three years later, was to hurt
Evatt badly, in subsequent polls and in the internal politics of the Labor
Party. But as Justice Michael Kirby has written, this 'libertarian
warrior's... leadership in the defeat of the referendum campaign, against
all odds, was a wonderful and lasting contribution to the political ethos of
this country'.

Foreign Minister

If the
referendum campaign was Evatt's finest domestic political achievement, it
was as foreign minister that he made his most enduring contribution to the
course of Australian history, and to Australia's place in the world. While
not Australia's first foreign minister - 'External Affairs' had existed as a
separate portfolio since Federation, although more often than not held by
the Prime Minister of the day as a minor additional encumbrance - he was
certainly the first to really deserve the title. Certainly I think it is
accurate to describe him as Australia's first genuine internationalist.
Although John Latham and Stanley Melbourne Bruce were both seen in Geneva as
friends of the League of Nations, there were no Australian political leaders
before Evatt, and have been very few since, with anything like his
commitment to the building of cooperative multilateral institutions and
processes to address both security and development objectives.

Foreign ministers, in the very nature of their job, have to deal with
governments, personalities, circumstances and policies in constant flux, and
their lasting monuments tend to be few. Evatt's successor, Percy Spender,
was a lucky exception, leaving behind him after only two years in the job
both the Colombo Plan and the ANZUS treaty. In Evatt's own eight years in
office, there are really only two lasting monuments that really stand out,
but what significant landmarks they were! The first was to swing Australia
behind the Indonesian Republic and contribute significantly to its effective
independence from the Netherlands. And the other - which I particularly want
to focus on tonight - was his contribution to the founding of the United
Nations. Evatt's contribution to the San Francisco Conference of 1945 was
the stuff of which legends are made, and rightly so - especially in his
fight for the rights of the smaller powers against the greater in the roles
of the General Assembly and the Security Council, and in his faith in the UN
as an agent for social and economic reform and as a protector for human
rights.

The Big Three - the US, the Soviet Union and the UK -
were interested in a successor to the League of Nations as an international
peace-keeper only if it met their needs, was their creature and threatened
them with no embarrassment. It was the Big Three - supplemented by this time
by China - who drafted a charter for a United Nations. It was the Big Five -
by this time with France included - who invited the other forty-five states
then comprising international political society to discuss their draft at
San Francisco. If a small power like Australia wanted to see changes made to
that draft charter, it would clearly have to force those changes on very
reluctant, not to say intransigent, great powers. And the great powers so
organised the conference as to stack the odds against small power
impertinence. The conference lasted for three months - and it comprised some
four commissions. twelve technical committees of the whole, a steering
committee of the whole. an executive committee and a host of
sub-committees!

It was in that maelstrom that Evatt made his
mark. Assisted by a handful of very able officials Evatt daily raced from
committee to committee in a performance of energy, brilliance and judgment
rarely seen. The United States sent a delegation of 174, for example. Evatt
had a delegation of 45, but he used only a handful; it was largely a one -
man band. By the end of the conference, he was accepted by all there as the
leading voice of the medium and small powers, the one with whom the great
powers had to treat.

Scarcely any aspect of the long Charter
for the United Nations Organisation which emerged from the San Francisco
Conference escaped Evatt's attention, but I want tonight to mention some
particular campaigns which engaged him.

One concerned the role
in the organisation of the great powers, who envisaged a Security Council
which would handle threats to the peace, and on which each of them would
enjoy a veto right on all matters except purely procedural questions (though
that left a veto on what would be regarded as a procedural question) and
also peaceful settlement procedures where they were parties to disputes.
Evatt accepted that the wartime great power concert had to underpin a
post-War system, but he wanted the veto limited to decisions on the
imposition of sanctions against aggressors. Although Evatt is perhaps best
remembered for his fight on the veto question, he was in fact locked out of
much of the politicking on that question, and the fight tended to be carried
by liberal elements in the large United States delegation unhappy with the
prospect that even investigation or discussion of an issue could be vetoed.
In any event, he and those who thought like him lost the fight: the Soviet
Union, which feared Western use of the United Nations against it, was
immovable, and the great powers retained virtually a blanket veto
right.

Evatt was unusual in that, while he was prepared to
accept a high degree of great power domination of the United Nations for a
time, he did not see this hegemony based on the War-time alliance continuing
indefinitely. He was very keen, therefore. to prevent a great power veto on
subsequent attempts to amend the Charter. Here, too, he failed despite a
strong fight. Again, the Soviet Union was immovable, but in truth, none of
the great powers wanted to surrender control over the future of the
organisation.

Evatt also fought hard, and this time
successfully, to prevent a great power veto over regional security
arrangements. He feared that in certain circumstances the Soviet Union or
China might veto United States assistance to Australia of the kind which so
recently had saved Australia's bacon in the war against Japan. This was also
an issue of sensitive concern to the Latin American states, who comprised
more than a third of the states represented at San Francisco, and theirs was
probably the key role. but he entered the fray and he was on the winning
side.

Evatt's greatest success was in forcing very reluctant
great powers to accept a wide role for the entire United Nations membership
in the General Assembly. The great powers would have made of the Assembly a
talking shop, and one limited to vague generalities at that. In a stubborn,
wearing campaign which lasted for months, Evatt succeeded in winning for the
Assembly the right to discuss and make recommendations on any matter covered
by the Charter with the single exception of security questions actively
before the Security Council. In this campaign, he was drawn into direct
negotiations with the representatives of the great powers, and they accepted
him as the de facto representative of the middle and small powers.

A vital prerequisite for any international organisation is that
member states accept some loss of domestic jurisdiction. While Evatt was a
convinced internationalist, he was also a nationalist and, a child of his
time, a stout defender of White Australia. Projecting his experience of
Australian industrial relations, where disputes could be manufactured on the
expectation that subsequent conciliation or arbitration procedures were
likely to provide

some concessions for a professedly aggrieved
party, he was concerned that a state could force Security Council discussion
and recommendations on White Australia merely by threatening to go to war on
the issue. As he put it, there would be a premium on violence. For once, he
was on-side with the Soviet Union, which was the first to seek to have a
domestic jurisdiction guarantee inserted in the Charter, but Evatt can be
given the credit, if such it be, for having its ambit widened to cover
everything except actual enforcement action by the United Nations. He was
not especially hypocritical on this matter, though, accepting that any
number of later international conventions could remove questions from
domestic jurisdiction.

Evatt also led a successful - and
exceedingly worthy - campaign, this time mainly against the United States,
to have-a full employment pledge written into the Charter At the time there
was widespread fear of a world economic recession after the war. This did
not happen. But the pledge also reflected Evatt's view and that of his
government that economic and social issues must rank with more explicitly
military issues as central to international harmony and, therefore, as
United Nations business.

The last of his campaigns I would
mention related to colonies. Although Evatt was determined that Australia
should retain control of Papua and New Guinea, and although he believed that
some colonial societies would need indefinite tutelage by Western imperial
states, he was anxious to have all colonies brought within the scope of the
United Nations and not just the few mandated territories taken from Germany
and Turkey back in 1919. He was concerned mainly to guarantee humane and
progressive administration of colonies and to remove them from the context
of imperial conflict. But in pursuit of this, he was

responsible for having written into the Charter a requirement that all
colonial powers report to the United Nations on their administrations.
Rather to his chagrin, this clause later was to serve as the platform for
the whole revolutionary decolonisation process at the United Nations.

As I have said, the United Nations was established on the assumption
that the great powers' War-time alliance would continue into the peace: that
they would police world security by means of United Nations procedures, and
in appropriate association with other United Nations members. In fact, the
Cold War had already begun in 1945, and the result was that the United
Nations would be largely paralysed in conflicts involving the great powers
and their clients. As Evatt complained in 1947, 'the old order is dead,
while the future order is powerless to be born'. This disheartened him. So
did the frequent preference of United Nations members for political
processes rather than the legal processes enshrined in the Charter and
congenial to his temperament and training. Informal charter amendment by
Assembly resolution scandalised him. It was not that he was naive. He could
play politically hard himself when he thought Australian interests were at
stake, whether in defending South Africa, forcing through the kind of
trusteeship agreement he wanted for New Guinea, or in refusing to submit an
agreement for Papua at all. Nor was he at all pacifist: he valued the United
Nations security system precisely as providing for the forceful suppression
of aggressors. But he still saw the United Nations as the best hope for
world peace in the 1940s and 1950s if only states could be persuaded to use
its processes. For this reason, he had Australia continue as a busy,
constructive member of the United Nations. In 1948, he was delighted to
succeed representatives of Belgium and Brazil as President of the General
Assembly.

He had other reasons, though. One was that Australia,
a barely emerging British dominion at the time, had made its presence felt
at the 1919 Paris Peace Conference in which the League of Nations was
established, but had later drifted back to the margins of international
society. He saw the survival of the United Nations and Australian busyness
in its councils as not the only way of keeping Australia involved in
international affairs, but as one very important way - a view to be shared
by his conservative successors.

The other reason was that
Evatt, while aware of the need for regional security arrangements and of the
unequal distribution of power among states, was never quite the complete
devotee of power politics. In his view, states like Australia could exercise
influence through the quality of their representatives, by the value of
their ideas, and by the persistence of their diplomacy - and that is very
much a view I share.

Evatt's Foreign Policy Legacy

Evatt's conviction that Australia's national security interests would
be served by developing an international system of security through the
United Nations clearly has a resonance in contemporary Australian policy. I
can't put the point more succinctly than it was made in our 1994 Defence
White Paper:

Our national interests are served by ensuring
the existence of effective UN mechanisms for conflict prevention, management
and resolution. As a middle power, we have a particular interest in
fostering an orderly international system in which agreed norms of conduct
constrain the use of force, and in supporting international institutions
which give us important opportunities to shape that system. We support UN
and other multinational peace making and peace keeping endeavours because we
consider that institutions which are effective, and are seen to be so, in
crises today are more likely to be effective in helping to protect
Australia's interests should they be challenged in the future.

It is interesting to observe that Australia's recent proposals to strengthen
the UN's role as an instrument of cooperative security seem to have struck a
particular chord with countries such as Argentina, Brazil, the Nordics,
Poland, Japan and Jordan who share our interest in building an international
system which does not rest solely on neo-realist theories of 'great power
balance'. Evatt, writing in 1948, pointed to the explanation for this:

The truth is that Great Powers are inevitably preoccupied with
questions of prestige and spheres of influence, whereas lesser powers whose
interests in lasting peace are just as great, if not greater, are more
detached in their outlook on many issues and are in a better position to
make an unbiased judgment on the justice of any proposed settlement.

For Evatt, the UN was to be an agent of 
collective security,
based on the concept that its member states would agree to renounce the use
of force amongst themselves and collectively come to the aid of any member
attacked by an outside state, or by a renegade member. I have argued, by
contrast, that the central sustaining idea for contemporary efforts, in the
UN and outside it, to maintain international peace and security should be
the larger one of 
cooperative security. This concept embraces not
just collective security, but two other ideas as well - common security and
comprehensive security - which have been current in thinking about
international security co-operation for some time. 
Common security
was first articulated as a concept in the 1980's: essentially it is the
notion of states finding security 
with others, rather than against
them. 
Comprehensive security is simply the notion that security is
multidimensional in character, encompassing a range of political, economic,
social and other non-military considerations as well as military
capability.

Cooperative security is a useful term not only
because it brings these three approaches together, but does so in a way
which emphasises prevention and at the same time encompasses the whole range
of responses to security concerns, both before and after the threshold of
armed conflict has ben crossed. At one extreme this would involve long-term
programs to improve economic and social conditions which are likely to give
rise to future tensions; at the other it would include enforcement of peace
by full scale military means. Evatt in fact did foreshadow in his own
thinking some of these 'new' concepts in arguing, as he did, at San
Francisco for a Charter that paid more than lip service to economic and
social issues, not just for their own sake but because these represented the
root causes of conflict.

A priority theme of our activity at
the UN in recent times has been to urge that the Secretary-General and
member states give greater weight to preventive approaches, by putting more
priority on preventive diplomacy and addressing the underlying causes of
tensions and disputes through peace building - by which we mean both
international laws, regimes and arrangements on the one hand, and on the
other hand in-country strategies aimed at economic and social development
and institution strengthening. All this would have met Evatt's approval, not
least because of his lawyer's faith in international arbitration and other
legal procedures for the peaceful settlement of international
disputes.

At San Francisco, Evatt was acutely conscious of the
balance to be struck between establishing an 
effective world body,
necessitating the backing and participation of the great powers, and at the
same time keeping within bounds the extent of the influence which those
powers would wield through the organisation. This remains a pressing issue
in 1995. A feature of the period of Security Council activism since the end
of the Cold War has been the concern of many countries about domination of
UN decision-making by the five Permanent Members of the Council, and more
specifically by the three Western members, the so-called P3. One result of
these concerns is that, for the first time since 1945, there is now a real
possibility that new permanent members will be added to the Council.
Australia

has strongly supported such a change. Our reasoning
is drawn from the same pragmatic national self-interest that inspired Evatt;
we do not aspire to permanent membership ourselves but we have a strong
stake in an effective Security Council. To retain legitimacy and a guarantee
of international support in responding to the range of new and difficult
situations which now confront the international community, the Council must
represent the broad range of interests and perspectives of UN member states,
and it must reflect the realities of power at the turn of this country, not
those prevailing fifty years ago.

One of the crucial elements
in any expansion of the Security Council's permanent membership is the veto
power. The fact is that those who have it cannot be forced to give it up -
indicating how far-sighted Evatt was in trying to remove the great powers'
ability to veto Chaner amendment. But if the veto were extended to all
serious aspirants for permanent membership, we would have an unworkable
Council, with up to ten countries able to block UN decision-making. At last
year's General Assembly, I stated Australia's preference that the veto not
be extended to any new permanent member and proposed - no doubt
quixotically, since the existing P5 would have to agree to it - that the
veto power of the existing Permanent Members be slightly diluted by
requiring two from their number to concur in its exercise. One alternative
approach would be to revive Evatt's own proposal that the veto be excluded
in its application from all aspects of peaceful settlement procedures, or
even confined solely to Council action taken under Chapter VII (that is, the
enforcement provisions of the Chaner): but no doubt that is an even more
quixotic aspiration.

I expect it will take considerable further
negotiation before the question of Security Council structure is resolved.
The point here is, as Evatt would have appreciated, that some compromise
will have to be struck if there are to be new permanent members at a time
when the overall UN membership will not support an unqualified extension of
the veto power. But the point is also that both the overall membership (the
majority of whom, like Australia, want an effective, representative
Council), and the existing permanent members (who will otherwise face the
risk of erosion of the authority of a key body in which their influence is
wielded), have reasons to find such a compromise.

It was not
only the global but regional security environment that occupied Evatt's
attention at San Francisco. He had no illusions that the UN could offer any
absolute guarantee of protection against armed threat to Australia, and
recognised that if collective security was found wanting, Australia would
need to "fall back on regional arrangements and ultimately upon those of its
own defence forces and those of its allies". His starting point was to seek
to keep the U.K. and the United States engaged in maintaining security and
order in the South West Pacific.

We see regional security
rather differently fifty years later. The emergence of strong independent
states in the Asia-Pacific region since 1945, and of groupings like ASEAN,
has given Australia opportunities to foster active regional co-operation
with a much wider range of prospective panners than was possible in the
1940s. Our alliance with the United States and our support for a US presence
in the region remain constants in our approach to regional security. But our
thinking has changed: from seeking great power guarantees and 'special
relationships' to our advocacy of cooperative security at both the regional
and global levels. And our circumstances have changed: from an apprehension
of threats from the North, to our recognition now of the

opportunities to advance our economic and security interests which
exist through partnership and integration with our region.

Evatt's insistence on including specific language on co-operation on
economic and social issues in the Charter was motivated by the Labor
Government's goal of maintaining full employment after WWII. Under the terms
of the UN Charter as it eventually emerged, the Economic and Social Council
(ECOSOC) shares with the General Assembly responsibility for the UN's
promotion of international economic and social cooperation. Largely due to
his persistence, UN member states pledged to take 'joint and separate action
in co- operation with the [UN] organisation' for the achievement of goals
specified in Article 55 of the Charter, including 'higher standards of
living, full employment and conditions of economic and social progress and
development': indeed this undertaking, in Article 56, became known at San
Francisco as 'the Australian pledge'.

Some Americans, including
Nelson Rockefeller, then a State Department adviser, suggested at the time
that Evatt wanted language in the Charter which would allow the Government
in Canberra to use the external affairs power to legislate on matters
outside the federal powers listed in the Australian Constitution - an
interesting forerunner to some of the claims we hear to this day from
sceptics and cynics on the Opposition benches! But it is far more likely
that Evatt was sticking to a brief which reflected the common policy
assumption in Australia at the time, which was that full employment in
Australia would largely depend on the major economies' willingness to pursue
that objective.

One of the few positive effects of the
paralysis of the UN Security Council during the Cold War was that the social
and economic goals set out in Article 55 became for the most part central
concerns of the UN. Ironically, one of the exceptions was full employment,
as multilateral co-operation on employment policies and related financial
and trade policy were discussed in the International Labour Organisation,
the international financial institutions and the OECD rather than the UN
itself. In contrast, the UN's role in such Article 55 areas as technical
development assistance, poverty alleviation, children's welfare, refugee
problems, international health and human rights has been very substantial -
and the member states' pledge in Article 56 has taken a very concrete form
through support for multilateral aid funds and programs and through
bilateral assistance.

The pledge in Article 56 has come to be
one of the features of the UN that distinguishes it from the League of
Nations. It has been the basis for initiating a range of programs and a
variety of roles that have helped the UN endure its setbacks and retain the
faith of member states when the League failed to do so. A major debate is
currently taking place - in which Australia is a central participant - about
the UN's role in economic and social development, and about making ECOSOC a
more effective body for developing and implementing programs for
international co-operation in a more co-ordinated and effective way.

A further element of continuity in our foreign policy from Evatt's
period as Foreign Minister is our commitment to the promotion of human
rights. As President of the UN General Assembly in 1948, Evatt presided over
the adoption of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. This was much
more than a symbolic act for him: throughout his career there was evidence
of his basic attachment to civil and political and economic, social and
cultural rights. In the 1920s in the NSW Parliament, he introduced
abolitionist legislation and argued for minimum labour conditions. At San
Francisco, he backed Jessie Street's efforts to obtain gender equality
within the UN as part of the Charter. As a lawyer he defended freedom of
speech in numerous cases, with the struggle over the Communist Party
dissolution act no more than the icing on the cake in this respect.

The Universal Declaration remains the foundation for the standards of
human rights and fundamental freedoms accepted by the UN Member States - the
basis for the six major human rights instruments and all the machinery and
expert bodies associated with them. Two Australians, Professor Philip Alston
and Justice Elizabeth Evatt - Dr Evatt's niece - serve with distinction on
two of these bodies, the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights
and the Human Rights Committee respectively.

Dr Evatt was not
content, however, with establishing and articulating standards in the UN; he
also sought effective ways of implementing them. In 1947 Australia proposed
that an International Human Rights Court be established. This was an idea
well ahead of its time, and even in 1988 when we revived the idea on the
occasion of the 40th anniversary of the adoption of the Universal
Declaration, the notion of a single supervisory body was too bold for many.
Several developments since, including the establishment of tribunals to
consider extreme and outrageous human rights violations in the former
Yugoslavia and Rwanda, and the growing realisation that six parallel treaty
bodies is a cumbersome arrangement, suggest that the option of a single body
to monitor observance of basic standards may be an idea whose time has
come.

Conclusion

As we all know, Evatt's career
after his days as foreign minister, which ended with electoral defeat in
1949, was not a very happy one for him or his Party. Opposition was not his
forte. Parliament was not his preferred forum. Domestic politics did not
come easily to him, although no one should ever forget his inspired
leadership of the constitutional referendum campaign in 1951. Party
politicking was almost entirely beyond him, and it may be that his
ineptitude here made the great Labor split of the 1950s worse than it need
have been. Probably we will never know to what extent declining health
contributed to his difficulties in those years. By the time he retired from
politics and became Chief Justice of New South Wales in 1960 his condition
certainly was sad indeed.

Evatt's memory has been tarnished in
this country because of events in the 1950s and the embarrassments of his
final years in public life. But for all the controversy and criticism he
generated, Evatt was one of the defining figures in our nation's history. It
is an ambiguous legacy, true, for those of us in the Labor movement His
setbacks as Labor leader in the 1950s and his contribution to the ALP split
contributed mightily to keeping the Party out of power for twenty-three
years. But on the more positive side, Evatt has left us with an invaluable
legacy in our law, our institutions and elements of our policy because of
his vision for Australia as a social democracy, because of his fight against
a proposal for constitutional change which would have worked tragically
against this country's fundamental freedoms, and because of his far-sighted
pursuit of our interests in collective security and international
cooperation.

It is above all the Evatt of San Francisco who
deserves to be remembered, and remembered with bipartisan pride. As Paul
Hasluck, who worked with him at San Francisco (and had very mixed feelings
indeed about his personal qualities), wrote: 'at the conclusion of the San
Francisco Conference...Evatt...was recognised as a figure of moment on the
world scene'. At the conclusion of the Conference, the American Secretary of
State, Edward Stettinius, declared that 'no one had contributed more to the
Conference than Mr Evatt'. The Peruvian delegation went so far as to move a
resolution that the small powers 'pay homage to their great champion, Mr
Evatt'. And the New York Times said of him, in perhaps the finest tribute of
all, that there were two kinds of power, that exercised through crude
national muscle and coercive methods, and that purveyed by the force of
ideas, argument and intellectual effort - and that Herbert Vere Evatt
epitomised the latter.

All in all, an Australian not to be
forgotten - and certainly not in this Fiftieth Anniversary year of the birth
of the United Nations.

