Leader o f the O p position

29 January 1996 JF/AS

TRANSCRIPT OF THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  THE HON JOHN HOWARD MP  LAUNCH ‘SYDNEY AIRPORTS’ POLICY  AND LOWE CAMPAIGN OFFICE

FIVE DOCK, SYDNEY

Topics: Sydney Airport Noise, Badgery’s Creek, Campaign

E&EO

To Paul and Rita Zammit, to my current and future parliamentary colleagues but most  importantly of all the electors of the seat of Lowe, I have enormous pleasure in being  here this morning. Not only because I believe we have an outstanding candidate for  the seat of Lowe in Paul Zammit, which we certainly do, but this gathering this  morning with its marvellous cultural and ethnic diversity drives home a very  important point about the political scene in Australia and drives home a very  important reality about modem Australia. And that is, as a community we have the

great fortune to be united as Australians yet amongst ourselves to have a glorious  sense of diversity and difference which adds a very special lustre to the notion of  being an Australian in the 1990s.

It is also worth reminding ourselves and reminding the Australian people of the  contribution that previous Liberal governments have made to the building of the great  modem post World War II Australian society. The great waves of immigration,  particularly from nations such as Italy and Greece that occurred after World War II  essentially occurred during the governance of Liberal/National Party governments.  And it’s also worth reminding the Australian community, ladies and gentlemen, that  two of the great milestones in recent immigration history. Firstly, the abolition of the  White Australia policy in 1966 and the opening of Australia’s doors to IndoChinese  refugees in 1977. Both of those decisions were taken by Liberal Governments.

So the seat of Lowe has a lot of diversity in it. But I suspect that despite that diversity  there is a unity around a large number of things. There is a unity of concern about  what has happened to living standards in Australia over the last 13 years. There is a  unity of concern about the lack of incentive to be involved in private health insurance

Parliament House, Canberra, A.C.T. 2600 Phone 2774022

- 2 -

(interjection from the audience)

... and it’s always good to have a little bit of encouragement down on the right hand  side but ladies and gentlemen there is enormous unity of concern about so many  things in the Australian community. Those things transcend the boundaries of  individual electorates but there is a unity of concern in this electorate about something  that has a special local resonance. And that unity of concern relates to the way in  which the people of Lowe have been abandoned, ignored and had their interests  trampled upon by Labor over the aircraft noise issue.

And that ladies and gentlemen is why I have quite deliberately chosen to release the  Coalition’s policy on aircraft noise here in the electorate of Lowe. Because this policy  serves as a reminder that the political party that cares about reducing the noise burden  on people who live in this electorate is the Liberal Party. The candidate who is

concerned about reducing the level of noise affecting this electorate is Paul Zammit.  The party that has shown a complete disinterest in reducing that noise level is the  Labor Party. The candidate who has abandoned the interests of her electorate is Mary  Easson.

Ladies and gentlemen the features of this policy will be well known to all of you but  let me just go through one or two of them again. The first of those is that we have a  very strong commitment to reopen the East West runway

(Interjection from the audience)

My vocal chords will outlast anybody, I can assure you of that. So ladies and  gentlemen, the particular features of this policy are already well known. The first and  most important of the policy commitments of the Coalition is that immediately upon  election we will set in train the action required to achieve a reopening of the East

West runway. I want to make one very important point. That is that the  overwhelming bulk of people who will benefit from the changes that I am announcing  in this policy today are in fact people who live in Labor held electorates. So many  people, including the people of Lowe and the people of Grayndler and the people of

Sydney as well as the people of Bennelong and the people of North Sydney and I add  to that list of Labor held electorates, electorates like Parramatta as well. The  overwhelming bulk of people who have been unfairly treated on the aircraft noise  issue are people who live in Labor held electorates.

I make the point first and foremost that this is not just a policy exclusively designed  for people who live in the Liberal Party heartland. It is a policy designed for all of the  people of Sydney, the bulk of whom live in Labor held electorates who have been  unfairly treated by the Government on the aircraft noise issue.

- 3-

I’m not arguing my friends that anybody can abolish aircraft noise overnight. And  I’m not saying to the people of this electorate or to any adjoining electorates that noise  is going to disappear altogether. What I am saying is that in the good traditional  Australian way, the burden is going to be more evenly and more fairly shared around.  That is the fundamental principle of this policy.

The policy reiterates our commitment to proceed with the construction of a second  airport, subject to the completion of a satisfactory environmental impact statement. I  notice with interest that the Labor Party has hopped aboard the environmental impact

statement bandwagon in relation to Badgery’s Creek after months of procrastination  and refusal to follow our lead on that.

The policy commits a future Coalition government to maintain a cap on the air  movements at Sydney Kingsford Smith airport to a figure of 80 air movements per  hour.

The policy recommits a Coalition government not to privatise, I repeat, not to  privatise Sydney Kingsford Smith airport until the East West runway has been  reopened and until the completion of the environmental impact statement in relation to

Badgery’s Creek. And it’s interesting ladies and gentlemen that our commitment in  relation to the privatisation of Kingsford Smith airport illustrates our approach to the  concept of privatisation. We support privatisation when it benefits the public. But if  it’s necessary to impose a condition precedent to the privatisation of an asset so as to  protect the public interest, we will do so. The privatisation of Kingsford Smith airport  is a classic example of that kind of commitment.

We remain very strongly committed to the notion of the fair sharing of burdens in  relation to noise through the operation of our airports. We believe that the policy that  we are committing ourselves to today is one that will meet the legitimate demands of  people who live under the existing North South flight path. It is a policy not designed  to punish a section of the Sydney electorate. Rather it is a policy to remove the  current punishment on a specific section of the Sydney electorate. No electorate is a  better example of that than the electorate of Lowe.

Let me just say two or three things in anticipation of Mr Brereton and Mr Keating  repeating the criticisms that they’ve made in the past of our policy on Sydney airport.  There is an argument that in some way operating the three runways in inherently less  safe than the operation of the parallel runway. All of the evidence that was presented  to the Senate inquiry repudiated that proposition. Expert after expert including  experienced air traffic controllers as well as experienced pilots testified to the fact that  intersecting or interleaving runways operated safely all around the world. The notion  that in some way it couldn’t be done at Kingsford Smith was a totally erroneous  notion.

- 4 -

The other argument that will be advanced by some is that in some particular fashion  the operation of the three runways will reduce the capacity of Kingsford Smith airport.  Once again, the evidence of experts as presented to the Senate inquiry was completely  in the opposite direction.

This document, ladies and gentlemen, is a document entitled, “Putting People First”.  The purpose of the policy is to respond to a problem that is affecting the quality of life  of many people who live in inner Sydney. It is effecting their quality of life in a way  that is unfair and unconsciounable. It does not represent some kind of mythical,  artificial solution to a practical problem. What it represents is a practical and fair  response that will result in a fairer sharing of a burden with a commitment by a future  Coalition government to proceed with the construction of a second airport in Sydney’s  west subject, and I stress subject, to the completion of a satisfactory environmental  impact statement.

This commitment of ours - to a fairer policy, to the reopening of the East West runway  - represents a clear alternative to the policy of the Keating Government. I want to  make it very clear to all of you that this is not an issue on which people should  temporise or park themselves in the middle. If you want the East West runway  reopened; if you want the noise burden fairly treated and not unfairly dumped over  your houses, then you ought to Vote 1 for a Howard Government.

There are only two alternatives in this election. You either have a Howard  Government or a Keating Government. You don’t have anything in between. So, if  you want Howard’s policy on the airport, you’ve got to vote for Howard; you’ve got

to vote for Zammit; you’ve got to vote for Hockey and Cameron and for Mansour and  for all of our other candidates. Don’t muck around with anything in between because  if you don’t vote for them you’ll end up with Keating and you’ll end up with  Keating’s airport policy.

So I have very great pleasure in launching this policy. Before I finish can I just say  one other thing and return to the remarks I made at the beginning. I really am very  proud to have Paul Zammit as the Liberal Party candidate here in the electorate of  Lowe. Not only does he already represent half the electorate in the New South Wales  parliament but he and his wife Rita really radiate the representation of the great  diversity of this electorate. He understands so many of the different communities that  make up the community of Lowe. Both he and his wife’s involvement in so many  electorate and so many community activities stamp both of them as the sort of people  who, in the truest sense of the word, can bring quality local representation to the  electorate of Lowe.

Our campaign nationally has got off to a remarkably good start. But can I say to all of  you that it is a very long road ahead. Don’t be carried away by early opinion polls.  Don’t imagine that this is going to be anything other than a very hard campaign.

- 5-

Believe me when I say that we do start as the underdogs because 13 years of  incumbency have given to this Government, which ruthlessly spends taxpayers money  in the partisan political interest, access to facilities that you and I wouldn’t even dream  of in campaigning senses. The incumbency factor in Australian politics confers a  massive advantage now unlike the situation even ten years ago, let alone 20 years ago.

Opinion polls will come and go. It’s an old cliche that there’s only one poll that  counts. Ahead of us, if we are to win the glittering prize of Australian politics, if you  are to have Paul Zammit as your Member, if you are to have so many other new  members particularly here in the State of New South Wales, ahead of us lie five very  hard and arduous weeks in which we will go through I suppose moments of elation  and moments of concern. Don’t get complacent, don’t believe for a moment because  you pick up the Sydney Morning Herald or some other papers and you see some great  headlines, don’t believe that is necessarily going to be maintained during the  campaign.

It’s a very hard fight. I believe that we have the job ahead of us. I am ready. The  organisation has never been better prepared. I’ve never been prouder than I am today  of the group of candidates that are gathered behind me in the name of the Liberal  Party. None is more impressive than the man I hope will be, and with your help he  will be, the next member for Lowe, Paul Zammit.

Thank you.

(Ends)

