Senator Cheryl Kernot Australian Democrats Parliamentary Leader

27 June, 1996 MEDIA RELEASE 96/364

FAREWELL SID SPINDLER AND ROBERT BELL

Australian Democrats' Leader Senator Cheryl Kernot tonight bid a formal farewell to  Senators Sid Spindler and Robert Bell.

Senator Spindler this week retires after six years as the Democrats' Senator for  Victoria.

A founding member of the Democrats, Senator Spindler has been a tireless worker,  renowned for his dedication to both the party and issues of social justice.

He has been at the forefront of national debates on industry, trade and taxation,  policy and he has led the Parliament in the areas of opposition to child labour,  support for migrants and refugees, gay rights and improving conditions for low paid  and exploited workers.

Senator Bell bows out of the Senate after six years of dedicated representation of  issues affecting Tasmanians.

A strong environmentalist, Senator Bell has been a leading opponent of  woodchipping in native forests and has played a key role in debates about the use,  dumping and effects of hazardous and industrial chemicals.

As education spokesman, Senator Bell has led the fight against fees for education  and has been a vigorous defender of Australia's state school system.

Senator Kernot said: "The Democrats will sadly miss Sid and Robert. We and the  community have much to thank them for. I wish them both well in the future."

Senator Kernot also welcomed Lyn Allison, from Victoria, and Andrew Murray, from  Western Australia, who take up their positions on the Democrats' Senate team on  Monday.

Senator-elect Allison will take on the portfolios of Schools, Local Government, the  Arts, Public Service, Community and Disability Services and Consumer Affairs.

Senator-elect Murray will cover Communications, Small Business, Industry,  Transport, Tourism and Accountability.

To arrange comment, contact: Cheryl Thurlow (06) 277 3203 or 0418 630 137.

COMMONWEALTH  PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY

D emocrats

