. ....

112/96

JOINT STATE1.1ENT

Minister for Employment, Education and Training S-F CrtQYl  Minister for Schools, Vocational Education and Training R. Free.

29 January 1996

$11 :MILLION PROGRAM FOR DISADVANTAGED YOUNG PEOPLE

Disadvantaged young Australians will benefit from the personalised assistance now available  through the new $11 million program, Homeless Youth and Refugee Action Program  (HYRAP) .

The Minister for Employment, Education and Training, Simon Crean, and the Minister for  Schools, Vocational Education and Training, Ross Free, said the establishment ofHYRAP  recognises that disadvantaged young people often need extra case management assistance  beyond that offered by mainstream services .

HYRAP enables local community organisations to provide individuals with the necessary  level of pre-vocational support to overcome the severe personal problems, such as family  breakdown, substance abuse or lack of self esteem, which could be barriers to their further  education, training

The program recognises that these young people need to attain a stable and secure personal  life before they are ready to move on to further education, training or a job.

This approach to case management builds and expands on the experience of the successful  Jobs Placement, Employment and Training (JPE1) pilots completed last year and  complements the programs and services available under Working Nation.

While the focus of HYRAP is on homeless and refugee people under 20 years of age, the  flexibility is also there to assist Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islanders and people from Non  English Speaking Backgrounds according to their individual circumstances.

Mr Free said this program will be an important element of the Homeless and at Risk Youth  Action Package (HAR YAP) with its focus on prevention and intervention to assist young  homeless people to remain in or return to school or work.

The period of post placement assistance provided to disadvantaged young people entering  employment will be extended from 13 to 26 weeks and there will be greater flexibility to  include those young people returning to education or being placed in training.

Mr Crean said this will be of particular importance for young people who need assistance to  return to education, including those with literacy and numeracy problems, young homeless

4356

,.. ..

people from non-English speaking backgrounds and Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander  young people.

Mr Free said homeless students face particular difficulties in undertaking secondary  education and often find it difficult to access the information and support needed to help them  make a successful transition from secondary education to further study or the workforce.

"In recognition of these difficulties additional resources will be provided to enable case  management for secondary students receiving the Student Homeless Rate of AUSTIJDY/  ABSTIJDY."

"To ease the financial pressures of buying books, equipment and other school expenses an  additional one-off lump sum of $300 will be automatically paid to secondary students on the  Student Homeless Rate (SHR.) of AUSTIJDY, or to those under 18 years receiving the same  allowance under ABSTUDY and to those who do not receive the equivalent assistance  through the Incidentals Allowance."

Mr Free said the package of new measures for hom~less young people respond to a number of  the major recommendations in the Morris Report, Aspects of Youth Homelessness and the  majority of recommendations relating to the Commonwealth in the Gill Tasker report,  Moving On : AUSTUDY and the lives of unsupported secondary students.

Mr Crean said the number of Youth Training Initiative (YTI) clients awaiting referral to case  management will be given priority by the CES with the aim of reducing the waiting to  . negligible levels by April 1996 : 1bis will be acl:iieved through increased referrals to  Employment Assistance Australia (EAA) and Contracted Case Managers.

The Government will also ensure that young unemployed people are able to take full  advantage of the work experience opportunities available through voluntary work.

"Significant flexibility is available in the provisions for voluntary work, particularly for  young people in case management, but they are not well known," Mr Crean said.

"To rectify this situation, an officer from the Department of Employment, Education and  Training will be outposted to the National Volunteer Association, which is funded by the  Federal Government, to work with the Association to ensure young people are aware of the  range of opportunities available to perform voluntary work, particularly for young people in  case management"

Media contact: Catherine Payne, Mr Crean's Office, Ph. (06) 277 7460  John Miner, Mr Free's Office, Ph (06) 277 7540  Details available on DEET's internet home page-http://www.deet .gov.au.

4.357

