Leader of the Opposition

11 February 1996 CF/WH

TRANSCRIPT OF THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  THE HON JOHN HOWARD MP  DOORSTOP INTERVIEW - SYDNEY

Topics: The first debate; costings document

E&EO..........................................................................................................................................

JOURNALIST;

How are you feeling about tonight Mr Howard?

HOWARD:

I’m delighted he’s finally decided to come.

JOURNALIST:

Do you think you will be the winner?

HOWARD:

I’ll leave that to the Australian people. I think these things are matters for the public to  judge. I’m confident, I’m relaxed, I’m glad there’s a head-to-head debate. I think it is  important and I’m delighted that he’s finally decided to come and respond to my invitation.

JOURNALIST:

Do you think he may have the upper hand having released his costings document?

HOWARD:

Is that what you’d call it?

Can I just say one thing about that costings document? I’ve received the offer o f a briefing  from the Commissioner of Taxation about a tax avoidance scheme. If it’s possible for the  Commissioner of Taxation to brief me during the campaign about tax avoidance, why isn’t it  possible for the head o f the Treasury to brief me about the state o f the budget?

Parliament House, Canberra, A.C.T. 2600 Phone 2774022 Fax 277 2055

COMMONWEALTH PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY

. JOURNALIST:

Would you support legislation to try and get this $800 million from .........

HOWARD:

The Liberal Party will always support legislation to stamp out artificial tax avoidance  arrangements. I haven’t seen all o f the detail o f it and I want to have a look at, but the  principle I state very clearly and that is that any artificial tax avoidance arrangements that  throw the burden onto the ordinary battler, steps to stamp it out will always get our support.

I’ve got to say though it is very curious timing isn't it? Isn’t it convenient, that this has been  discovered three weeks before the election? Isn’t that convenient?

JOURNALIST:

Do you believe that the tax avoidance in this country is this great to save $800 million?

HOWARD:

The Prime Minister for 13 years has said he has stamped it all out. I mean, for 13 years he  has been running around saying in hairy chested fashion, “I’ve stamped it all out” and then  suddenly on the eve o f an election when he needs some dough he suddenly discovers it. Now, let me say again as a principle any measure that the Government proposes to stamp out

artificial tax avoidance I will support, but I want to see the fine print and I want to be satisfied  that it is bona fide. But I just say again and tills is the most important issue about costings,  why can’t we see the books about the budget? Why on earth i f  it is possible for the Tax  Commissioner to talk to me about tax avoidance, it’s not possible for the Head o f the

Treasury to talk to me about the state o f the budget?

I’ll see you later.

ends

X *  TCTAL PAGE.02 **

