

Alexander Downer: Let me just say something by way of introduction
and then I am happy to answer your questions. I've had a very constructive
day here today in Port Moresby, meeting with the Deputy Prime Minister and
Finance Minister, with the Defence Minister and, for quite some time, the
Prime Minister, and had lunch with the Prime Minister after my
meetings.

These were very constructive meetings. The important
thing is that we, all of us, reaffirmed the close friendship between
Australia and Papua New Guinea and the fact that as a new Australian
Government, we were determined to ensure that this was a very constructive
bilateral relationship and it's a relationship that means a great deal to
the new Australian Government.

We obviously talked about the
issue of development assistance programs. I made it clear before I left
Australia and I made it clear here today that the Coalition Government isn't
breaking the treaty on aid. Those commitments are there and the process of
moving gradually from budget aid to program aid is under way and the new
Government is not going to change that. We did say to the Papua New Guinea
Government that we'd be happy to sit down with them at the official level
and work through ways of making sure the mechanism worked more effectively
than it has been working in the past. Now that will involve, as I've said,
not introducing any moratorium on the existing treaty arrangements, not
abandoning the treaty, but simply maintaining the treaty arrangements but
talking about the types of project aid that the Australian Government will
finance. I think the Papua New Guinea Government has been very receptive to
the fact that we are prepared to talk about those sorts of things.

My view is that there's no point in providing aid to expand the whole
range of services into new areas if the existing services aren't working
effectively, and that's a point I've made to the Papua New Guinea
Government.

I have obviously reaffirmed Australia's support for
the IMF and World Bank packages. I'm optimistic that the second tranche of
the World Bank loan will come through and that the Papua New Guinea
Government will meet its commitments and satisfy the World Bank.

I have some optimism about that and I think it's true to say the
Papua New Guinea Government is confident that they will achieve that.

We talked about the Bougainville situation at some length. I've made
it clear that I don't believe any military solution is possible in that sort
of environment, and that the Australian Government has an aid program at the
ready to go ahead to assist with the reconstruction of Bougainville. That
program is about $60 million. The Papua New Guinea Government is going to
talk with us about that and the implementation of that program. We've made
it clear of course in the last few weeks that we won't provide logistic
support to the Papua New Guinea Defence Force in the context of
Bougainville. I obviously haven't changed that position today
 that remains our position. Of course we are committed to the
defence cooperation program with Papua New Guinea. We would like to see that
program work more effectively than it has been over recent years. I think
that message has been well received  that is, a broad defence
cooperation program that isn't a program that will operate in the specific
context of Bougainville.

So at this stage, we still maintain
our view that we would like to see a negotiated solution to the problems on
Bougainville. We believe that is the only solution that is going to be a
lasting solution to the problem. I think the PNG Government understands that
position very well.

But it's been a very friendly, very
constructive and very worthwhile meeting. I'm delighted that I've come here
as one of the first visits I've made since I became the Foreign Minister.
One of the things that I think the Papua New Guinea Government appreciates
is that I came here for around a week last year and got to know the country
a bit. I got to know Port Moresby, I went to Ok Tedi and I went to
Bougainville. So I do have some on-the-ground experience of some of the
problems that Papua New Guinea faces. I think that was, as I've said, well
appreciated by the PNG Government. So, I think it's been a visit well
worthwhile. I've been very warmly received and developed very good personal
relationships with the Prime Minister himself, with whom I spent a good deal
of time today; with the Deputy Prime Minister and Finance Minister; and also
with the Defence Minister as well.

Okay, if you have any
questions, I'm happy to answer them.

Mary-Louise O'Callaghan
(The Australian): Mr Downer, Mary-Louise O'Callaghan from The
Australian. Were you disappointed that you were not able to see Mr Miriung
as you were originally hoping... (indistinct)?

Downer:
Well I understand he's not in Port Moresby, so I'm not able to do anything
about that. I hope when I come back here I will have the opportunity to see
him but he'll have to be here at the time I'm here. I don't recall where he
was, but I understand he's out of town.

O'Callaghan: On
the question of Bougainville, did you discuss (indistinct) ways in which
Australia might be able to assist Papua New Guinea?

Downer: Well, I talked to the Papua New Guinea Government about
options that we would be happy to look at if they wanted any assistance. But
I made the point that this is an internal matter for Papua New Guinea. It is
a country which is a sovereign country and it's entitled to make its own
decisions ultimately on these matters. But if they wish us to provide any
assistance with the negotiating process, or a good offices service and to
help achieve a negotiated outcome, then we'd be very happy to provide
assistance. Obviously that's something that they'll take away with them and
think about.

Jonathan Tannos (Post-Courier): In relation
to Australian assistance so far to Bougainville, are you satisfied with the
way that the funds or assistance from Australia have been utilised?

Downer: Well, it's difficult for the funds to be utilised.
It's not a question of being satisfied or dissatisfied. That's the wrong way
to put it. It's not been possible for us fully to expend the money that we
committed ourselves to because of the fighting that's taken place. The
security situation is simply not adequate for us to fulfil those
obligations. Absolutely, the Government here, the PNG Government has made it
clear that it still wants us to maintain our commitment to development
assistance for Bougainville. I simply certainly would do that and the Papua
New Guinea Government is going to come forward with a few proposals for us
to look at over and above what was considered under the previous Government.
So we'll have to look at their proposals. They haven't done that.

That reminds me, I did forget to mention one other thing, and that is
there is an annual Ministerial Forum between Australia and Papua New Guinea.
We were expecting when I came here today that the Ministerial Forum would
meet in around October of this year but at the request of the Papua New
Government, I have agreed that we bring the Forum meeting forward. It is to
be held in Australia. I have agreed to bring it forward so that we can sit
down and talk through in much greater detail a lot of the issues that I have
canvassed here this afternoon, in particular the question of the aid program
and how better that can be targeted; the general financial situation in
Papua New Guinea; and clearly the issue of defence cooperation, how the
defence cooperation program can move forward. All of those things will be
considered in much more detail in the Ministerial Forum. All I could say at
this stage is that I've set in place the mechanisms for a very cooperative
relationship for the next few years.

O'Callaghan:
(indistinct).. talks today that in terms of the aid that you wouldn't be
looking at considering a moratorium... (indistinct) that the treaty would
remain in place. This morning you said you would be doing your best to
quarantine PNG... (indistinct)

Downer: Absolutely, I
will be, yes. I mean that in terms of the budget, of course. We provide
around $320 million a year. I'll be doing my best to maintain that level of
aid to PNG.

O'Callaghan: But you can't rule out the
possibility of (indistinct)?

Downer: Well, you will have
to read the budget on the 20th of August. If I had a dollar for every time a
member of the Coalition Government had been asked whether he could rule
things in or out, I'd be the richest man in the world. I can assure you that
the stock answer to the question is that you'll have to wait until the 20th
of August.

Henzy Yahkam (The National): Was it really
necessary for Australia to evacuate Miriori out of Honiara?

Downer: We were asked by the Papua New Guinea Government some time
ago whether we would take Mr Miriori in Australia and we refused that
request. Then the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees approached
us and asked us whether we could assist with him being transported to the
Netherlands. Obviously bearing in mind that the Papua New Guinea Government
had specifically asked us to take him in Australia, we assumed, and I think
we have rightly assumed, that the Papua New Government would have no
objection to him being transferred by the United Nations High Commission for
Refugees to the Netherlands. The only reason we became involved in this at
all as a matter of fact is because of a written request from the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees to help with partial help with
transport, provision of transport so that Mr Miriori and the members of his
party would be able to  his family  would be
able to...

Yahkam: Does that not... (indistinct) ...in
PNG internal affairs?

Downer: Well, we're just trying to
be helpful as I made clear to the PNG Government. I think they well
understand. The PNG Government asked us, asked us, if we would take Mr
Miriori in Australia some time ago and we said no, we wouldn't.

Yahkam: How can... (indistinct)

Downer: The
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees subsequently asked us simply
because of a transport problem if we could help solve the transport problem
to well, we didn't take Mr Miriori to the Netherlands. We
agreed to provide assistance with that transport problem. It seems entirely
consistent with the desires of the Papua New Guinea Government.

O'Callaghan: Was it the Papua New Guinea Government or the Solomon
Islands Government that asked if you would take him in Australia?

Downer: It was the Papua New Guinea Government.

Lucy Palmer (BBC stringer): Where did the RMF actually take Mr
Miriori?

Downer: Remember that this was at the written
request of the United Nations High Commission for Refugees. He was taken to
Brisbane and then he was transferred to a flight to the Netherlands. I'm not
sure of the exact... absolutely. The only reason we took him was just
through lack of availability of charter services, that was all, at the
request of the United Nations High Commission for Refugees.

Palmer: Have you and Sir Julius discussed this today?

Downer: It's not been an issue. We have spent a lot longer discussing
it here than I discussed it with the Papua New Guinea Government. It's not
been an issue they particularly raised with me. It's an issue, since you
asked the question, it's an issue that I've just run through with them. I
think we made the right decision not to take Mr Miriori in Australia but
given that the request was made by the Papua New Guinea Government we knew
they wouldn't object to us responding positively to a cri de coeur from the
United Nations High Commission for Refugees.

Palmer: Can
you say what reasons were given to (indistinct) Mr Miriori's presence or
refugee status in Australia at that time?

Downer: Well,
we thought it was inappropriate to do so.

Yahkam:
(indistinct) ...Australia has assisted, indirectly, the illegal Bougainville
movement...

Downer: Well, hang on. Let's just take you
on, head on, head on, and say to you when the Papua New Guinea Government
asked us to accept Mr Miriori in Australia, we were somehow helping, if we
had exceeded to that request we would have been helping the illegal movement
in Bougainville? Is that right? Is that the basis of your question? Of
course it's not, of course it's not. That simply, with the greatest of
respect, is an absurd proposition. If the Papua New Government had come to
us and pleaded with us, pleaded with us to make sure that we did not do
anything to move Mr Miriori from Honiara, well then we would have taken that
into account. But they didn't, they did the reverse. They asked us if we
would take him to Australia. So we did better than that. We responded to the
United Nation High Commission for Refugees proposal to give then a bit of
help, a bit of transport assistance which was all we did 
provided them with a bit of transport assistance to take him to...
ultimately for him to go to the Netherlands. But if the Papua New Guinea
Government  just let me add  if the Papua New
Guinea Government had any objection to this, I suppose they would have said
so to me, but they didn't. So I think the premise of your question is wildly
wrong  with a greatest of respect.

O'Callaghan: You said earlier you were optimistic that PNG would work
things out with the World Bank.

Downer: Yes, I am
optimistic about it. They are obviously cognizant of the problems that still
remain between them and the World Bank but I get the impression that they're
pretty determined to fix those problems. Obviously there's got to be a fair
of dialogue between them and the World Bank. This is just a matter of
judgment but my judgment is that this matter will be fixed up fairly
soon.

Palmer: How concerned is the Federal Government at
the reported high levels of corruption in the Papua New Guinea
Government?

Downer: That's a very leading question
 I wouldn't even dignify it with an answer. Again, with the
greatest of respect.

Tannos: The World Bank conditions
(indistinct) ...release the second tranche (indistinct). What is Australia's
view in relation to (indistinct) to appreciate those conditions and to
fulfil them?

Downer: Of course they appreciate the
conditions, they understand the conditions, but I think they're willing to
in general terms, they're willing to fulfil the guidelines laid down by the
World Bank. I don't think there's any question of that. I just get the
impression from talking with them that there is a quiet optimism that they
will be able to resolve their problems with the World Bank.

Tannos: Australia is a donor and lender. Isn't it concerned that
(indistinct) Papua New Guinea is not going as well as it should?

Downer: Well, we've supported the IMF  the
previous Government  and we do as well, previous Australian
Government, and we do as well support the IMF/World Bank package. We have a
loan that we've made to Papua New Guinea which is linked to that package. I
think that answer speaks for itself. That's our position.

Palmer: In the context of what you were talking about (indistinct),
the Australian public's perceptions of Papua New Guinea, obviously when
people get together they talk about the long and the durable and the warm
relationship, but that argument is really only true of the people who have
some experience of PNG. Many Australians are deeply suspicious if not
outright hostile to Papua New Guinea and the stories they hear about the
place. Will the Federal Government be doing more to try and include Papua
New Guinea in its foreign affairs policy and to give it a higher profile in
the country?

Downer: Well in answer to the second part
of your question, yes, we will be giving Papua New Guinea a higher profile
in Australian foreign policy than was the case under the previous
Government. The illustration of that is that on one of my first trips out of
Australia as Foreign Minister I have come to Papua New Guinea. I mean
literally speaking on my second trip. That reflects the fact that I do give
a very high priority to Papua New Guinea. The point I've made to Sir Julius
Chan and other ministers today is to remind them that the first overseas
trip I made as the foreign affairs spokesman for the then Opposition was to
Papua New Guinea. So we will be giving it a higher priority and a higher
profile than the previous Government did. I don't think the premise though
of the first part of your question is actually right. I think there's
actually a lot of affection towards Papua New Guinea in Australia. I don't
think there's hostility. There has been some concern about economic problems
in Papua New Guinea. That's incontestable there has been. Generally
speaking, I think Australians have a lot of affection towards Papua New
Guinea. I could only put it that way. I would reckon I was a reasonable
judge of that, being a politician and having enormous contact with the
community, particularly coming just out of an election where I have been
especially focused on the community. I hope I shall remain so in
government.

Tannos: Is Papua New Guinea accountable
enough for the money that is spent by Australia here?

Downer: Well, that issue is of course the point of the aid treaty
arrangements that were put in place by the previous Government. That means
in the end, an increasing proportion of the aid we provide to Papua New
Guinea will be earmarked and will be subject to what we call an audit trial,
so that everybody in my electorate who wants to know where they money goes
when they're sending it to Papua New Guinea knows exactly where it's gone
and what it was spend on. I mean that is a political reality in Australia,
that providing budget aid, just writing out a cheque for another country
isn't something that in a democratic society voters particularly want to. I
mean they want accountability. I think they're, in general terms, happy
enough to provide aid to Papua New Guinea because of the affection they have
for Papua New Guinea. But they would like to know what it's being spent on.
I owe it to my country and to Australians to ensure that that money is
accountable.

Tannos: I'm asking because the Prime
Minister, Sir Julius, once said why can't his government or the government
of the day be left alone to decide to do with the money?

Downer: Well, exactly, they can be left alone to decide what to do
with their budget. That's the whole point. But where they are recipients of
development assistance, obviously the donors want to know what happens to
their money. That's another matter. With their own resources, well of course
it's a matter for them.

(ends)

