MEDIA RELEASE ,  Senator Nick Bolkus  B38/96

MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND ETHNIC

AFFAIRS AND MINISTER ASSISTING THE PRIME

MINISTER FOR MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS

Parliament House Canberra ACT 2600  (06) 277 7860

LABOR'S VISION FOR MULTICULTURAL AUSTRALIA

Labor will continue to build on cultural diversity as Australia's greatest national asset with the  Prime Minister's launch of the ALP's immigration and multicultural policy, Multicultural  Australia, in Melbourne today.

Highlights of the policy include:

a Productive Diversity Advisory Group which will hold a forum for all bilateral chambers  of commerce on how cultural diversity can best be used to maximise community and  industry opportunities, particularly during the Sydney 2000 Olympics;

job opportunities and training for bilingual workers in the lead up to the Olympics;

increased funding for multicultural and indigenous broadcasting;

strategies to counter isolation for migrants living in remote areas;

improved settlement for refugees and humanitarian entrants;

upgrading of information technology in Migrant Resource Centres.

"The reforms of the last three years in almost every area of immigration and multicultural policy  have paved the way for Australia to enter the 21st Century as the most successful multicultural  society in the world," the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, Senator Nick Bolkus, said  at the launch. "Multicultural Australia reaffirms our commitment to non-discriminatory and  inclusive migration, citizenship and settlement policies, and sets new and exciting directions for  all Australians.

"The new initiatives are modest in terms of funds, costing $8.85m over three years in my  portfolio, with another $14.3m over four years within the Communications portfolio.

"But they will have a major impact in terms of building on the success of the last few years, and  paving the way for the future."

Senator Bolkus reaffirmed Labor's commitments to criminal sanctions against extreme acts of  racial hatred; to a progressive Access and Equity strategy, and to increasing the accessibility of  English tuition while taking the unique Translating and Interpreting Service into a new phase.

"We will maintain and strengthen multicultural policy development within the Prime Minister's  portfolio," he said. "And Labor will continue a vibrant and truly non-discriminatory migration  program which is in tune with our social and economic needs, while maintaining Australia's proud  record on humanitarian assistance."

Details of the policy highlights are in the appendix to Multicultural Australia.  l\1ELBOURNE FEBRUARY 24 1995 Contact: Ruth Dewsbury (0418) 624 847

~  "

2

Mierant Resource Centres: infonnation techno)oey uperade

The 28 Migrant Resource Centres (MRCs) around Australia vary greatly in the quality and  quantity of information technology (IT) on the premises, and the level of staff skills in the  area. No MRCs have Internet access.

An increasing amount of data on services, poiicies and programs is available on-line to IT  users, provided that they are suitably equipped and trained. In the near future, all  Immigration regulations and policy manuals will be available in this way.

It is proposed to improve the working effectiveness of MRCs by upgrading their IT capability  in three stages:

national IT audit of MRCs

equipment upgrade to a specified standard, connection to the Internet, plus paid Net  access for a specified period per week

staff training.

Cost: $.75m over three years

National Inteerated Settlement StrateeY Secretariat

The National Integrated Settlement Strategy (NISS) operates across the three tiers of  Government to co-ordinate the delivery of essential services to migrants. Its operation is co " ordinated nationally through the Ministerial Council on Immigration and Multicultural  Affairs.

A recent review of the impact of NISS found that it had been successful in bringing together  the key service delivery agencies and in playing an advocacy role for the needs of migrants  at national and state/territory levels. It has several successful projects to its credit, all  achieved at minimal cost, through better resource sharing and co-ordination.

It is proposed to establish a small permanent secretariat within DlEA to enable the NISS to  playa stronger and more strategic role and work towards a fully-integrated Commonwealth  settlement plan.

Cost: This will be funded from within the existing resources of the Department of  Immigration and Ethnic Affairs.

Productive Diversity Advisory Group

Labor's work on Productive Diversity has helped to shape the attitudes of institutions and  managers towards the diversity of the Australian workforce. Harnessing diversity as an asset  has become apriority.

..

1

APPENDIX

MULTICULTURAL AUSTRALIA

Highlights

Humanitarian Case Co-ordination

Refugee and humanitarian migrants have special needs when they flrst arrive in Australia,  as a consequence of the traumatic circumstances of their departure from their home countries,  and because many do not have the family and community links enjoyed by migrants from  more settled communities.

While services exist which can assist refugees, these can be delivered more effectively if a  co-ordinated approach is taken to individual cases. This involves a confldential appraisal of  health and settlement needs on arrival, together with professional follow-up.

Humanitarian case co-ordination has been successfully trialled in Victoria and South  Australia, and subsequently extended nationwide. It is proposed now to build on the success  of the project and improve it.

This would entail:

grants to Migrant Resource Centres

grants to specialist torture and trauma treatment and rehabilitation agencies

Cost: (total over three years): $3.5m

An increasing number of migrants are geographically disadvantaged by residence in the outer  suburbs of large cities, in small towns, or in rural areas, and have difflculty accessing  settlement and support services, community resources and information about programs and  services. Welfare workers in remote areas encounter higher ancillary costs stemming from  distance and isolation. A package of measures is proposed to alleviate some of the problems  faced by migrants in remote areas. There would be two elements to the package:

Local interagency co-ordination and service enhancement: his would aim to give  better access to services and information by creating a co-ordination and support  network across levels of g~vemment.

Grant-in-aid regional loading: This would be an enhancement to grants-in-aid by the  Immigration Department for workers in remote areas, to compensate for higher  ancillary costs and to enhance workers' ability to respond to clients' needs.

Cost: [both elements combined]: $1.0m over three years.

. ~ .

..

, ,

5

but these are currently limited by lack of funds. These include support for satellite  infrastructure for national networking and sector information management.

This initiative will create access to essential programming such as specific news and current  affairs and create a broad range of community based programs which can be accessed eg via  satellite. The Community Production and Development Fund will be administered through  the Community Broadcasting Foundation. -

Cost: $4m over four years.

Multicultural broadcasting: ethnic and indigenous radio

Australia has a vibrant community broadcast sector. Ethnic community radio plays an  important role in meeting the communication and information needs of communities of non " English speaking backgrounds. With new ethnic radio groups coming into the sector, the  number of new language broadcasters has and will continue to increase.

Labor will provide additional funding of $4m over four years for the ethnic community  broadcast sector. Smaller ethnic communities and new communities need to be encouraged  to use radio as a means which simultaneously helps those communities become informed  about and participate in Australian society and contribute to its culture, as well as servicing  the needs of specific ethnic communities.

Labor also acknowledges the new indigenous community radio stations emerging as new  community channels are offered up in regional, remote and metropolitan licence areas. An  extra $1.5m will be provided to the current Community Broadcasting Foundation allocation  for indigenous radio.

Cost: $6m over four years (multicultural broadcasting - $4m; indigenous broadcasting -$2m)

Expansion of SBS TV

Labor will extend SBS TV coverage to 13 more regional areas over the next five years. This  would be achieved within existing resources. Areas to be covered: Albury/Wodonga;  Grafton/Kempsey; Narrabri/Tamworth; Orange/Bathurst; Taree/Port Macquarie;  Rockhampton; CootamundraiWagga; Mackay; Shepparton; Bunbury; Griffith/Leeton; Mt  Gambier; Mildura.

Extension of SBS Radio

Labor will extend SBS radio to another 1. 75m people in 15 regional areas over the next five  years, at a cost of $4.3m. Areas to be covered: Gold Coast; Ballarat; Goulbum Valley;  Townsville; Latrobe Valley; Albury/Wodonga; Cairns; Geraldton; Central Coast; Spencer  Gulf North; Launceston; Bunbury; Griffith; Mildura; Alice Springs.

Cost: $4.3m over five years.

4

combat racism.

It is proposed to extend the Community Relations Agenda over the life of the next  Government. Among the priority areas to be targeted will be schools and education systems.  This will complement other anti-racism initiatives aimed at schools which were announced  by the Government on the release of the Our Nation document (response to the Report of the  National Multicultural Advisory Council) on 20 January 1996.

Cost: $3m over three years.

Community broadcastine

Labor is committed to community broadcasting. Australia has a world class community  broadcasting sector.

There are currently 130 licensed community radio stations, five community televisions  stations and over 100 aspirant groups. The community broadcasting sector has been a major  part of Australia's media make-up for the past 20 years especially at the local level and is  an access point in the community to changing communications technologies and services.

Community broadcasting offers access to communities to produce their own media and reflect  community and local interest. This is especially important for communities who would  otherwise have no voice and no effective profile in the 'main' media.

Labor provides annual funding of community radio through the Community Broadcasting  Foundation - funding for multicultural, indigenous, the print handicapped and general  community radio stations.

As shifts in broadcasting escalate towards national networking, and as new broadcasters come  into the sector, it is essential that the community broadcasting sector continues to be  supported and recognised as playing an important role in the cultural infrastructure of local  Australian communities.

Additional funding will provide support for sector infrastructure, program production and  access to new technologies and delivery systems.

Community Production and Development Fund

Labor will provide $4m over four years to establish the Community Production and  Development Fund. The fund will encourage innovative locally produced programming which  can be supported and delivered throughout the sector. The fund can be accessed by  community radio and television stations for specific indigenous, ethnic, children's or radio  print handicapped services. Programming will be syndicated so all community broadcasters  can take advantage of the output of the fund.

There are also a number of development initiatives to be taken up by the sector as a whole,

..

. .

..

. ..

3

Policy development in this area has rested with the Office of Multicultural Affairs (OMA).  Business and industry input has been obtained through a series of forums and action research  projects.

It is proposed to establish a standing committee of experts who will be able to provide  Government with advice and use their own networks to promote the principles of Productive  Diversity. The secretariat to the group would be located in OMA.

The Group will hold a national forum for all bilateral chambers of commerce and other  interested organisations, to maximise community and industry involvement in Productive  Diversity, particularly in the run-up to the 2000 Olympics. Combined cost of the Advisory  Group and the national forum will be $O.6m over three years

Cost: [Group meetings, Secretariat costs, national forum]: $O.6m over three years.

Tappin2 bilin2Ual skills for the Olympics

In the run-up to the Olympics, the demand for bilingual workers in the services sector will  grow significantly.

Labor will tap the rich resource presented by our multilingual workforce to create at least  100 job opportunities for bilingual jobseekers in 1996, and in each year leading up to 2000.

Labor will provide 6-12 months employment and accredited training in interpreting (to  "language aide" level in the first instance), retail, tourism and hospitality for at least 100  bilingual jobseekers in metropolitan Sydney.

In the short term, the Government will build on the highly successful Meet and Greet  program delivered by Tourism NSW under the Government's Working Nation Jobskills  package.

In the medium term, the Government will develop a traineeship specifically for bilingual  workers in the services sector. Where necessary, participants will undertake training in  interpreter skills prior to commencing work under the Jobtrain and Special Intervention  programs.

The Government will work with the NSW Government and the Olympic Co-ordination  Authority to secure places for those successfully completing the program as required to meet  demand for bilingual staff and volunteers in the lead-up to the Games. A register of suitably  trained bilingual people will be maintained with the Olympic Co-ordination Authority.

Community Relations A2enda

The Community Relations Agenda is a successful model for combating racism by providing  resources to communities to achieve change. Under the Agenda, $2.235m was allocated in  1995-96 as 47 grants to community groups, non-government organisations, tertiary  institutions and local government agencies for projects to improve community relations and

