,

M e d

"

I a R e I e a s e

The Hon. Philip Ruddock MP Parliament HOUSEl, Canberra ACT 2600

Telephone : (06) 277 7860 Facsimile: (06) 273 4144 Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs

MPS 34/97  REFUGEE RESETTLEMENT ADVISORY COUNCIL

The Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs, Philip Ruddock, has announced  a new advisory council on refugee resettlement.

"The Refugee Resettlement Advisory Council will advise me on the settlement of  refugees, humanitarian entrants and migrants, focussing on the appropriateness and  adequacy of Commonwealth services, especially for refugees", Mr Ruddock said.

"The establishment of the Council reflects the priority the Government gives to the  successful settlement of refugees and humanitarian entrants, and 10 continuing  community consultation in the settlement process. II

"I have recently completed community consultations to hear concerns about, and  suggestions for improving, the settlement services provided to refugees and  humanitarian entrants. The Council will allow ongoing dialogue with the community ."

The Council will advise the Minister on settlement priorities. Its work will complement  the broader work and focus of the new National Multicultural Advisory Council, the  membership of which will be announced in the near future.

"\ am very pleased that Major General Warren Glenny AO, has agreed to chair the  Council. As Chief Executive Officer of Austcare, he will bring valuable expertise to the  Council," Mr Ruddock said.

Other members of the council are:

Dr Mohammed Taha Alsalami  Mr Paris Aristotle  Mrs Ellen Goodman  Ms Carmel Guerra  Mr Kevin Liston  Ms Kathryn Nguyen  Ms Margaret Piper  Mr Gerald Searle

"The Council members bring a wide range of experiences from working directly w ith  refugees as well as personal experiences as refugees and migrants," Mr Ruddock said.

The Minister acknowledged thEl contribution of members of the former Settlement  Advisory Council. The functions of that Council have been subsumed into the new  Council, which will focus more strongly on refugee and humanitarian settlement issues.

4 April 1997  Media Inquiries Steve Ingram 0419 278 715 or 06 277 7860

Details of the Council's membership are attached

,

-2-

REFUGEE RESETTLEMENT ADVISORY COUNCIL  TERMS OF REFERENCE

The Refugee Resettlement Advisory Council will:

advise the Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs on matters relating  to the settlement of refugees, humanitarian entrants and migrants. In particular :

the appropriateness and adequacy of Commonwealth services, especially  for refugees;  priorities for attention within the National Integrated Settlement Strategy  (NISS), with particular emphasis on improving coordination of service

delivery for refugees;

receive community feedback on implementation of Council recommendations and  evaluate the effectiveness of such action.

In addressing these issues, the Council will:

develop a work plan, agreed with the Minister, identifying priority issues to be  addressed in the next twelve months, having regard to priorities identified  elsewhere in the NISS framework and to the work of the National Multicultural  Advisory Council (NMAC);  contribute advice on the basis of personal expertise as individuals with either  past or current involvement in the area of settlement of migrants and refugees.

REFUGEE RESETTLEMENT ADVISORY COUNCIL  Biographical details of Members:

Mr Warren Glenny  Mr Warren Glenny, chairman of the  Refugee Resettlement Advisory Council,  is the Chief Executive Officer of  Austcare. Mr Glenny is a former

General Manager with Coles Myer  having commenced with Fosseys in  1968. He has also had a distinguished  career in the Army Reserve spanning  more than 40 years. Mr Glenny

commenced as a cadet with the Royal  New South Wales Lancers and retired  in 1994 as Major-General commanding  the Reserve 2nd Division.

Dr Mohammad Taha Alsalami  Dr Alsalami is a prominent leader in  Sydney's Muslim community and is also  concerned about human rights abuses  in Iraq. He is the chairman of a local  Community Refugee Settlement

Scheme (CRSS) group. He is also

Involved in a number of Muslim

community and cultural groups in NSW

Mr Paris Aristotle  Mr Aristotle is the Director of the  Victorian Foundation for the Survivors of  Torture Inc. He has been actively

involved in a number of organisations  and Government committees dealing  with refugees and issues relating to  rehabilitation of torture and trauma

survivors. He is currently a executive  member of the International Society for  Health and Human Rights and is a

member of the Victorian Government's  Ministerial Multicultural Human Services  Council. He has also been the

convenor of the National Forum of  Torture and Trauma Rehabilitation  Services, a former member of the  Australian Refugee Council and the

Settlement Advisory Council.

Mrs Ellen Goodman  Mrs Goodman is a senior lecturer at  Macquarie University's Business Law  Department. She has been involved in

a number of committees examining anti " discrimination and ethnical issues. Mrs  Goodman came to Australia with her  family as a refugee fleeing pre-World  War Germany.

Ms Carmel Guerra  Ms Guerra is the Coordinator of the  Victorian Ethnic Youth Issues Network.  Ms Guerra has been a youth worker for

13 years, with extensive experience in  program development and policy areas  with ethnic communities and young  people, including work with both newly  arrived refugee groups and established  communities. She is currently a  member of the Victorian Government's  Youth Suicide Prevention Task Force.

She has also served on the ACOSS  board, FECCA and Australian Youth  Policy Action Coalition. She was a  former member of both the Settlement  Advisory Council and the former

National Multicultural Advisory Council.

Mr Kevin Liston  Mr Liston has been the Director of the  Australian Refugee Association since  1983 . He has a background in social  work and has been extensively involved

in refugee organisations including the  Survivors of Torture and Trauma  Assistance and Rehabilitation Service,  SA Refugee Week Committee, SA

Council of Churches' Refugee and  Migrant Issues Committee and the  Refugee Council of Australia. Mr Liston  is also a member of COSMIC, the South  Australian State Settlement Planning

Committee.

- j-

Ms Kathryn Nguyen  Ms Nguyen is the President of the  Movement of Support for International  Committee for a Free Vietnam. She has  worked extensively with the NSW  Vietnamese community, often as a  spokesman for that community. She  has also been a member of the Asian  Youth Business Council. Ms Nguyen is

a practising solicitor.

Ms Margaret Piper  Ms Piper is the Executive Director of the  Refugee Council of Australia, a position  she has held since 1991. Ms Piper is  also a member of the boards of Uniya,  the Refugee Advice and Casework

Service, NSW and International Social  Services NSW. She was a founding  member of the Australian National  Consultative Committee on Refugee  Women. She has also travelled

extensively, visit ing many countries of  first asylum and refugee producing  countries in Africa, Asia, the Middle East  and Latin America.

Mr Gerald Searle  Mr Searle is the Director of the WA  Catholic Migrant Centre. He has been  extensively involved in WA refugee and  community based organisations,  including founding the Refugee Council  of WA, being a member of the WA

Refugee Week Committee, the WA  Settlement Planning Committee and the  Advisory Committee to the Australian  Bishops Conference on Migrant and

Refugee Interests.

