

Â

Media Release

Philip Ruddock MP

Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs

Minister Assisting the Prime Minister for Reconciliation

Â

AMEP 50th Anniversary celebrationsÂ   
launched in NSW

MPS 154/98

The Minister for Immigration 
and Multicultural Affairs, Mr Philip Ruddock, today launched celebrations 
marking the 50th anniversary of the Adult Migrant English Program (AMEP) 
in New South Wales.

Mr Ruddock said the 
celebrations paid worthy tribute to what has become one of the biggest 
human success stories in Australia's history, with nearly 40 000 new 
arrivals from nearly 90 language backgrounds now learning English under 
the program.

"The AMEP is one 
of Australia's key migrant settlement schemes which has helped 1.5 million 
migrants since it commenced in 1948.

"The program is 
going from strength to strength in helping vast numbers of adult migrants 
and refugees learn English and therefore settle more successfully in 
Australia, find employment and avoid social isolation".

A highlight of the celebration 
was the Minister's unveiling of a new publication entitled "Journeys: 
Stories from the Adult Migrant English Program" which documents 
for the first time the experiences of a wide range of former AMEP students 
from all over the world.

"The stories these 
people tell all have one common thread - the welcome and help they received 
through the AMEP program.

"Such success underpins 
the Government's ongoing commitment to assisting the settlement of new 
arrivals to Australia through the allocation of $95 million per year 
to the AMEP".

Mr Ruddock also praised 
the ongoing success of the Wanyaarri educational program he originally 
launched last year.

"My responsibilities 
now incorporate the crucial area of reconciliation and it is gratifying 
to see that the Wanyaarri program is teaching new arrivals about the 
original Australians and the richness of Aboriginal culture and its 
traditions.

"Wanyaarri stops 
the development of negative attitudes based on false stereotypes. It 
is ground-breaking and uniquely Australian."

The AMEP's 50th anniversary 
celebrations will continue throughout the year and into early 1999, 
culminating in a major international conference: "The AMEP: 50 
Years of Nation Building" to be held on 10-12 February in Melbourne.

Thursday, 10 December 1998 Â   
Media Inquiries: Brad Robinson (02) 6277 7860 or 0419 278 715

Â

Â

Â

jy

