PRIME MINISTER

28 September 1998

TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER  TH)tJl'41'1UHNliD\VA.IIDMP  ADDRESS AT THE SYDNEY JEWISH MUSEUM  DARLINGHURST, SYDNEY

E&OE ................................................................................................... .

Well thank you very much Rabbi and ladies and gentlemen. This is the fourth occasion  that I have visited the Museum in an official way. I came ro the ofening in 1992. I came  here in the joint press conference in 1995 to commemorate the 501 anniversary of the ... .I  am sorry, 1994, the 501h anniversary of the liberation of the concentration camps. The  press conference attended by General Hague and the fonner British Deputy Prime  Minister and the Russian Foreign Minister to symbolise the alliance which in World War  TI ended the Nazi domination of Europe. And I came again on Christmas Eve to take part

in the ceremony of lighting the Menorah. And I have come here today for two reasons. I  have come, firstly and very importantly, to honour on a personal basis and on behalf of  the Australian Govermnent, and I know the Australian people, the life and work of the  late John Saunders, of course who was responsible so much for the building of this  Museum. 1n many ways John Saunders, who was a very good mend of mine, in many

ways he was a living exemplar a.nd personification of that special character of post World  War II Sydney to which the people of Eastern Europe, particularly the people of Jewish  background from Eastern Europe, the contribution that those people made to the  revitalisation and the profound change for the better that occurred in Sydney from the end  of World War II until modem times.

John was a holocaust survivor. He came ro .Australia as a very young man wirh those  searing tragedies and experiences behind him. And from the word go when he arrived in  Australia he made a new life, he built a very successful business empire, he, not content  to enjoy the financial reward of that, he gave much back to the community. I can't think  of anybody who is more philanthropic, nol only to the Jewish community but also to the

broader Australian community. He personified that enormous sense of hope and

optimism which was so typical and so magnificent amongst the post-war Jewish  community in Sydney. To imagine the sense of hope and optimism given the terrible  circumstances which so many of those people had passed and the suffering they endured  and their fanulies endured to those ofus who are not personally touched by those  circumstances was, indeed. a quite remarkable thing.

I remember very well the great sense of achievement and excitement that John exhibited  on the day of the opening of the Museum. And it was in every sense a great bipartisan  occasion. It was an occasion where people from both sides of politics came together to  honour the contribution of the Jewish people but also to mark in a very profound way the  detennin\ition of the Australian community never to forget the lessons of the holocaust,  never to forget the poisonous character of racism in any community. never to forget the  consequences that can flow from unbridled intolerance and unbridled racism. The  atrocities perpetrated on the Jewish people during World War 11 represent, without doubt,  the darkest period in the history of mankind. And it is the obligation of every  government of every civilised country and the current possessors of every modem  civilisation to remind future generations of those alrocities and to remind future

generations of the causes of those atrocities.

And this Museum is a wonderful memorial to John Saunders, it is also a wonderful  reminder to the people of Sydney and to the people of Australia of the suffering of the  Jewish people. It's also, on a different note, a reminder of the contribution that the  Jewish people have made to our nation from the very beginning of European civilisation  in every walk of life Jews have made a remarkable impact on Australian life.

I am very privileged on a personal basis to have had a long association with the Jewish  community, particularly of Sydney, but of Australia more generally. It is an association  that I am very proud Lo own, ir's an association that long pre-dates my entry into public  life. And the friends that I have made in the Jewish community are amongst my very  closest and most treasured.

Sydney, of course, along with Melbourne has, I understand; on a per capita basis the  largest population of holocaust survivors of any nation on earth. And it is very  interesting that our nation of 18.5 million people not only has the largest number of  holocaust survivors on a per capita basis but was also the country that on a per capita

basis took more refugees from war torn Indo-China in the late 1970s than any other  counny on earth. It does say something of the inherently tolerant streak in the Australian  community and it does say something for our continued recognition of the importance of  any civilised society offering a haven to people who are refugees from persecution aAd

suffering and I hope that will always be in the character and the nature of the Australian  people.

l recognise the enormous personal contribution that John Saunders made to this Museum.  I would like today to announce that the Coalition Government if it is re-elected will  contribute an amount of Sl million towards the John Saunders Foundation which will  ensure a very, very strong support into the future for this Museum and will make a very

significant contribution to the maintenance of the Museum in the years ahead. I would  also like in similar vein and in similar honour of the Jewish people of Australia, and most  particularly of Sydney, I would also like to announce that out of the Cultural Heritage  Trust we intend to contribute$ I million to the maintenance and restoration of The Great  Synagogue in Elizabeth Street in Sydney. This is very much in sympathy with the

contributions that the Government has made to the restoration of St Mary's Cathedral and  St Andrew's Cathedral in Sydney. It is a fine building. It is on the register of the  National Estate and the contribution of $1 million towards its mazntenance and  restoration wi]] also represent a proper recognition of the pl.ace of that building and the  culture and the life of the people that it embodies as having made a very significant  contribution to the character of our city over the last 200 years. ·

Ladies and gentlemen, I thank you very much for having me here today. Can I, again,  say how much I admired the work of the late John Saunders. He was not only a great  Australian and a great Jew he was a great personal friend of mine, he was a great friend  of many people in Sydney, not only in the Jewish community but in the broader  community. He was a wonderful person who overcame great personal adversity and  suffering to make an enormous contribution to life. He maintained a grear sense of hope

and optimism and energy and enthusiasm. He always had a good sense of humour and he  was always willing to give back to his fellowman, indeed, more than he had received  from life. And I hope that this Museum will be forever a reminder to all Australians that  we must be vigilant to protect a tolerant, open, humane and racially non-discriminatory  society not only here in Australia but around the world. Thank you very much.

(ends]

