

Â

“Friends of Cambodia” Meeting, Bangkok 19 April

Communique

Â

Representatives from 
the “Friends of Cambodia” countries met in Bangkok on 19 April with 
Ministers from the ASEAN Troika. They paid tribute to the efforts undertaken 
in recent weeks by the ASEAN Troika as well as by Japan and other countries 
represented at the meeting.

Â

The "Friends” 
expressed their appreciation of King Sihanouk’s important contribution 
to helping restore political stability, in Cambodia, in accordance with 
his constitutional prerogatives. They welcomed his return to Cambodia.

Â

The “Friends” 
welcomed other recent positive developments, especially the return to 
Cambodia on 30 March of Prince Ranariddh. This marked positive progress 
in the ability of all political parties to freely participate in the 
electoral process in Cambodia. The “Friends” further welcomed Prince 
Ranariddh’s statement of 17 April agreeing to sever ties with the 
Khmer Rouge, reject autonomous zones and reintegrate his forces. The 
“Friends” urged all the Cambodian parties to move forward cooperatively 
in fully implementing a ceasefire, in the spirit of the Japanese Government’s 
“Four Pillars” initiative and King Sihanouk’s ceasefire proposal. 
This action should be the basis for resolution of the issue of participation 
of all parties in the elections.

Â

The “Friends” 
called on all the Cambodian parties to exert their best efforts in cooperation 
with international donors, to work towards a free and fair election 
on 26 July in which all Cambodians will be able to express their view 
freely and without fear, and whose outcome will be respected by all 
parties. The “Friends” hoped the election will be an important step 
in Cambodia becoming a fully integrated member of the regional and international 
community.

Â

With this in mind, 
the “Friends” encouraged the Cambodian parties to proceed with the 
necessary preparations for elections on 26 July. As part of these preparations, 
the “Friends” urged the Cambodian Government to create a climate 
conducive to the holding of free, fair and credible elections, in particular:

Â

Â·  To ensure that all parties have the opportunity to freely 
participate.

Â

Â·  To ensure free access to the media by all parties.

Â

Â·  To protect the human rights of all Cambodians.

Â

The “Friends” were particularly concerned by recent and past extra-judicial 
killings and urged the Cambodian Government to investigate these killings 
as a matter of urgency and bring those found responsible for such abuses 
to justice through proper judicial procedures. Determined action is 
necessary to ensure that those who violate human rights do not enjoy 
any form of impunity.

Â

Â·  To ensure that the Constitutional Council convenes as soon 
as possible.

Â

Â·  To support and adequately fund an impartial, independent 
National Electoral Commission as well as itsÂ Â  provincial 
and communal commissions.

Â

The “Friends” 
are committed to the provision of electoral assistance to Cambodia to 
help prepare for the elections but expect the Cambodian Government to 
ensure conditions for free, fair and credible elections in order to 
continue that assistance  .

Â

The “Friends” 
also welcomed the role that the United Nations has agreed to play in 
the elections and strongly encouraged the Cambodian Government to cooperate 
with the United Nations. It is essential that no constraints be placed 
on the United Nations or any international observers under its coordination, 
which would affect those observers ability to report on the election 
outcome, or the United Nation’s ability to coordinate them in accordance 
with international standards.

Â

The “Friends” 
agreed in principle to hold a further high level meeting before the 
elections.

Â

ASEAN 
TROIKA STATEMENT

Bangkok, 
19 April 1998

Â

1.Â  In accordance with   its mandate to keep ASEAN engaged in efforts to contribute 
to the restoration of political stability in Cambodia, the ASEAN Troika, 
composed of the Foreign Ministers of the Philippines, Indonesia and 
Thailand, met in Bangkok on 18 April 1998 to review and assess recent 
developments on the Cambodian situation.

Â

2.Â The ASEAN Troika 
met on 19 April 1998 with the “Friends of Cambodia” and the Representative 
of the United Nations Secretary General in Cambodia to continue their 
exchange of views and consultations on Cambodia.

Â

3.Â Welcoming the complete 
amnesty granted by His Majesty King Sihanouk to Prince Ranariddh, with 
the full support of the Cambodian Government, which facilitated the 
return of the Prince to Cambodia from 30 March to 3   April 1998, the ASEAN Troika called for the early implementation 
of the other elements of Japans “Four Pillars” peace plan for Cambodia. 
They urged all parties concerned to intensify their dialogues and consultations 
for the full realization of the plan.

Â

4.Â The ASEAN Troika 
expressed the hope that a permanent cease-fire would soon be in force 
in Cambodia. They welcomed the proposal, made on 30 March 1998, by His 
Majesty King Sihanouk on the cease-fire and the arrangement by which 
forces loyal to Prince Ranariddh will give back the area under their 
control and reintegrate themselves into the Royal Cambodian Armed Forces 
under the auspices of the United Nations and with full dignity and safety 
for all concerned. The ASEAN Troika welcomed the statement of Prince 
Ranariddh on 17 April 1998 disassociating himself and his forces from 
the Khmer Rouge and supporting the abovementioned proposal of His Majesty 
King Sihanouk.

Â

5.Â  The ASEAN Troika discussed the elections to be held in Cambodia 
on 26 July 1998. At this crucial period of the run-up to the July 26 
elections, the ASEAN Troika reiterated the importance that they attach 
to the creation of a neutral political environment that is conducive 
to the holding of free, fair and credible elections. They looked forward 
to all Cambodian political forces’ returning and participating in 
the electoral process and hoped that there would be no further legal 
obstacles in the way of their participation.

Â

6.Â The ASEAN Troika 
urged the Cambodian Government to facilitate the safe return to Cambodia 
of the Cambodian displaced persons in Thailand with the assistance of 
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees in time for them to 
participate in the election process.

Â

7.Â The ASEAN Troika 
discussed the urgent need for international electoral assistance to 
Cambodia, including the sending of observers. On its part, the ASEAN 
Governments have expressed their readiness to send observers. In addition 
to the assistance that governments will be prepared to extend, they 
also discussed the possibility of non-governmental organizations extending 
assistance in the form of observers and monitors and agreed to request 
the United Nations to send the appeal in this regard.

Â

8.Â The ASEAN Troika 
underscored the need for the Cambodian Government to complete the technical 
preparations for the elections including early voters’ registration, 
the completion of the membership of the Constitutional Council and release 
of funds for the National Electoral Commission.

Â

9.Â The ASEAN Troika 
welcomed UN Secretary General Kofi Annan’s official acceptance of 
the Cambodian Government’s request that the United Nations act as 
coordinator of the international observation of the elections in Cambodia. 
They endorsed the principles and modalities contained in the UN Secretary 
General’s Memorandum which will guide the United Nations in carrying 
out its coordinating role.

Â

10.Â The ASEAN Troika 
reaffirmed its support for the vital and unique role of His Majesty 
King Sihanouk in advancing the cause of national reconciliation, fostering 
political stability in Cambodia, and facilitating the country’s reintegration 
into the international community. They looked forward to their audience, 
with His Majesty in Siem Reap on 19 April 1998 and to His Majesty’s 
continued presence in Cambodia and his grace in playing this vital and 
unique role in the critical months ahead..

Â

11.Â The Foreign Ministers 
of Indonesia and the Philippines expressed their appreciation to the 
Royal Thai Government for its proactive contribution to the ASEAN Troika 
and Friends of Cambodia processes and also for the warm hospitality 
and excellent arrangements made for the ASEAN Troika Meeting.

