

Â

PRIME MINISTER

Â

Â

21 August 1999

Â

TRANSCRIPT 
OF THE PRIME MINISTER

ADDRESS 
AT TASMANIAN DIVISION OF THE

LIBERAL 
PARTY STATE COUNCIL

GRAND CHANCELLOR 
HOTEL, TASMANIA

Â

Subjects: 
Liberal Party traditions; Liberal achievements; Tony Rundle; Hydro policy, 
Tas  mania’s debt; Forest industry; 
Tough on Drugs policy; Gun control;

E&OE……………………………………………………………………………...

Thank you very much, Shane; to Jim Bowler; to Sue 
Napier, your Grace; Senator Jocelyn Newman, the senior Federal representative 
from Tasmania and my valued Cabinet colleague, my other Parliamentary 
colleagues, ladies and gentlemen.

Can I say how happy I am again as Prime Minister 
to address this State Council, this annual gathering, of the Tasmanian 
Division of the Liberal Party. I wish also to extend my great gratitude 
to Jim for the tremendous work that he’s done over the past years 
as President of the Division. I came through the Party organisation. 
I know that the pay is low and the material rewards are limited but 
I also know that the immense satisfaction of fighting for something 
that you believe in and contributing to a cause that you feel will better 
the welfare of the people of Australia is about the most satisfying 
and rewarding thing that you can do. But it hasn’t been easy here 
in Tasmania. And I thank you most warmly, Jim. You’ll be remembered 
and the work that you’ve done will be seen quite properly as an immense 
contribution to the Liberal Party cause in Tasmania.

Can I also join Shane in remarking on the contribution 
of Tony Rundle. Shane was right, he and Tony got away with blue murder 
on occasions through their quiet, whimsical, effective way. I mean, 
they sort of sat and said nothing and they, you know, when one or other 
of their colleagues was sort of railing against the centralists in Canberra, 
they would say, oh, you know, they shouldn’t talk to you like that, 
John, that’s shocking but how about such and such. They did it very 
well. They did it very skilfully. But Tony did something else at the 
last election here in Tasmania. And I know it’s not, in a sense, of 
much comfort and satisfaction in the political world to say, well, you 
were right but the people didn’t understand that. But in the long 
run that does mean something. Because in the long run being in office 
is not about having a white car and having the privilege of being the 
Premier or the Prime Minister and sort of getting welcomed and people 
saying nice things about you. In the long run being in government is 
about trying to do good things for the country or trying to do good 
things for your State. And what Tony Rundle did at the last election 
was to say what had to be said. And what he said in the last election 
campaign was true then and it’s even more true a year on. Because 
every country, every State, every municipality is, in the end, master 
of its own destiny and that implies both privileges as well as responsibilities. 
And Tony was prepared to discharge the ultimate responsibility of somebody 
holding a position of authority and that was to tell people what was 
needed to secure their future even though part of the message was not 
immediately accepted and not immensely palatable. And in the long run 
when the history of this period of Tasmanian politics is written people 
will say that Rundle was right in what he said about the State’s debt 
and the he had the courage to state it. I wish you well. I wish both 
you and Carolyn every happiness in the future. I count you as a friend 
and colleague of the highest order and I think you’ve done a great 
thing by the Tasmanian people and by the Liberal Party here in your 
State.

A gathering like this, friends, is an occasion to 
reflect as well as project forward. This is the last Tasmanian State 
Council of this century, this millennium. And it’s an occasion, therefore, 
to reflect on the heritage of the Liberal Party. It will be 50 years 
in December since Robert Gordon Menzies and Arthur Fadden led the Coalition 
to power in 1949. And over that 50 years there’s a lot about the Liberal 
heritage of which we should be immensely proud. We should understand 
the character of our party. We, in the term that I’ve coined somewhat, 
we are a broad church. Unlike centre right parties in other parts of 
the world the Liberal Party of Australia is the custodian of both the 
classical Liberal tradition in our society as well as the conservative 
tradition. We are neither a conservative party exclusively nor are we 
a small ‘l’ Liberal Party exclusively. We are a mix of the two. 
There are things about Australia’s history and our past that I believe 
continue to serve us well and should be preserved. There are things 
about our past and there are things about what we do now that need to 
be changed and reformed to provide us a stronger and better future. 
And the art of good statecraft is to choose from the past, from the 
heritage, from the history, those things that are of continuing and 
enduring value but also to recognise that change and reform in other 
areas is necessary to secure stability and to secure progress. And the 
Liberal Party has always been about trying to balance those things. 
The Liberal Party has always been about the liberty of the individual.

One of the proudest things 
that I was able to say at the Wentworth Hotel on the 2   nd  of March 1996 when I formally accepted 
the immense privilege that had been conferred upon me and my party at 
the election, at the ballot box that day was that the Liberal Party 
of Australia was owned by no one section of the Australian community.

We are sympathetic to business. But we are not beholden 
to business. We understand the importance of profit and capitalism but 
we recognise the potential for abuse and excesses that can occur. We 
recognise that the Government has a limited role but nonetheless a strategic 
role within our community. We are not for the government withdrawing 
from all areas of activity, but we are for the government focussing 
on those areas that properly belong to government and that does not 
normally include commercial activity.

We’re a Party that does not believe in privilege 
or class. We are a Party that honours and respects tradition but also 
prides itself in sharing the great egalitarian tradition of the Australian 
people. We are increasingly a party that represents people who might 
in another time and another era have regarded themselves as traditional 
supporters of the Labor Party. I was immensely satisfied and pleased 
that in 1996 one of the great features of the Coalition’s victory 
on that occasion, was that many of the great industrial centers of our 
country, and the great mining centres of our country, historically associated 
with the Australian Labor Party were in fact returned federal members 
representing the Coalition.

The city of Broken Hill is represented in the federal 
parliament by a member of the National Party. The city of Mt Isa is 
represented in the federal parliament by a coalition member. The cities 
of Whyalla and Port Pirie in South Australia are represented in the 
national parliament by a Liberal member. And so the list can go on. 
And I think it is very important that as we move into the next millennium, 
for all of us to understand that we’re living in a different political 
world. It’s a less ideological political world.

The Australian community, particularly those under 
30 are not as beholden to ideology as were their parents. They don’t 
see themselves being involved in an angry struggle about ideology the 
way in which their parents may have in the 1960s. They are however people 
who look for positive outcomes. They are interested in a political party 
that delivers results. That can do things to make their lives more secure. 
And I think as we move into the next millennium we will see politics 
shaped less by rigid ideology but nonetheless shaped very strongly by 
basic values and there is a difference.

Ideology to me has always been something rather rigid 
imposed from above. Whereas values are things that come from the community 
and in a sense are ageless. The instincts of candour and honesty and 
civil behavior and respect for the rights of the individual and the 
acceptance that in any decent society along with rights and privileges 
go responsibilities and obligations. They are values which are quite 
ageless in my view and embeddable. They will be expressed in different 
ways in different times and political parties have a responsibility 
to respond to those different circumstances.

So it is important on an occasion like this that 
we think about what our party has achieved. Not only have we been in 
office for 34 of the last 50 years, but many of the great breakthroughs 
that have occurred, the great breakthroughs in terms of tolerance and 
human values and a quality of opportunity have occurred under Federal 
Liberal governments. It was after a federal Liberal government that 
really opened up opportunities for the entire Australian population 
for a university education. And the reforms carried out in that area 
by the Menzies government in the 1950s remained one of the great contributions 
to the expansion of education to the Australian people.

It was under a coalition government that the white 
Australia policy was ended under the Prime Ministership of Harold Holt. 
It was under the leadership of the Fraser government that was accepted 
into our country over 150,000 Indochinese refugees. In fact we took 
more Indochinese refugees in the 1970s on a per capita basis than any 
country on earth and that was Australia being an open hearted, decent 
spirited country offering a haven to people whose lives have been devastated 
by a long and costly war. It was under a Coalition government that we 
ended one of the great sectarian divides in this country when we provided 
assistance to independent schools and recognised a cornerstone of education 
policy in this country. And that is that every Australian parent has 
the right to choose the form of education that his or her child should 
receive. And that principle was re-endorsed only two or three months 
ago when we announced long-term plans to provide even more choice to 
Australian parents in relation to the education of their children.

A Coalition government has 
been responsible for many of the great [tape break] and coming up to 
date we now have a Coalition government presiding over and having made 
a great contribution towards achieving the strongest economic conditions 
that this countr  y has had for more than 30 years. And there are many 
statistics that I could regale you with this morning about the strength 
of our economy. The one that in a persona sense is the most heart-warming 
of all is that in the three-and-a-quarter that we have been in government 
since March of 1996 we have seen a 5.8 percentage point decline in the 
number of young Australians looking for work. And that is the best figure 
of all because in the end a good economy exists to provide good living 
standards and rising job opportunities.

Our unemployment rate is still too high. It’s seven 
percent nationally. It’s much higher in Tasmania. It’s lower in 
other parts of Australia. It’s uneven, it’s lumpy. And we still 
have a long way to go but it’s better than it’s been for the last 
10 years. And we’ve created almost 500,000 jobs in the last three 
and a bit years. And if we can continue our current rate of economic 
growth and, better still, if we can persuade the Senate to pass our 
laws entrenching youth wages and dealing with the unfair burden on small 
business of the unfair dismissal laws then we can hope to drive that 
unemployment rate even lower. And it will be one of the goals of the 
Government to keep doing that. Because the economic strength we have 
now must be translated increasingly in the years ahead towards providing 
more job opportunities for our young people. And those job opportunities 
will essentially be found in private business and the private sector. 
The strength of the business community and the business sector is still 
the foundation of job generation in this country. And that is why the 
security that the Federal Government, the Howard Government and the 
Rundle Government brought to the timber industry in this State was so 
important because it’s a major employer in Tasmania. And that is why, 
as I said to you last night, I’m distributed at the import of the 
amendments that are being proposed in Canberra by our Federal opponents. 
Although, I make it plain to you, there’s no way those amendments 
will be accepted by the Government. But the very fact that they’re 
being proposed show an indifference towards the long-term economic security 
of this State. At long last I think there in Tasmania we’ve got a 
balance between the maintenance of a strong industry but also a proper 
concern for the environmental values of the State. And I want that balance 
preserved, I want it protected and I want it secured. And I can assure 
you on behalf of the Federal Government that we’ll make absolutely 
certain that nothing is done to undermine, disturb or qualify the agreement 
that I signed with Tony Rundle covering regional forest arrangements 
in Tasmania and the investment that has been made by the industry will 
be fully honoured and fully protected and the jobs that have been created 
and secured as a consequence of that investment will also be fully honoured 
and fully protected.

As we survey both the past and the present political 
scene at this State Council gathering we also throw forward naturally 
to the next millennium. What Australia has been able to do over the 
last three years has been to win a new respect, a new admiration around 
the world. We have important goals both nationally and internationally. 
We seek to build our reputation as a ‘can do’ country, as a country 
that can convert our inventive capacity to commercial benefit and commercial 
return. A country that has the capacity to become not only a regional 
financial centre but a world financial centre. Because the generic assets 
we have at the moment, a stable government, a stable economy, clear 
laws of corporate behaviour, an incorruptible judiciary, well regulated 
and supervised banks, Australians having a great capacity to speak the 
languages of the region with considerable skill and dexterity, all of 
those things make Australia an increasingly attractive place in which 
to invest and to establish regional service and financial activities. 
And we have great opportunities as we go into the next century to achieve 
those goals.

And in relation to Tasmania 
I want to assure you again that the Government I lead will continue 
to have a particular concern for the special requirements and the special 
circumstances of Tasmania. We have, after all, a very good record. We 
gave Tasmania su  ch fundamental programmes as the freight equalisation 
scheme. We’ve always understood the disabilities of an island State 
regarding transport costs. I don’t think anybody can contest the fact 
that Tasmania has been fairly treated out of the Natural Heritage Trust 
and all the other programmes that have come from the sale of the various 
tranches of Telstra. And we’ll continue to ensure that Tasmania gets 
her fair share and gets a fair deal. But as I said last night and I 
repeat this morning, that there remains a long-term cloud over the economic 
future of Tasmania and that is the debt of this State which is four 
times the State average. And until the bullet is bitten and something 
is done about that debt here in Tasmania your economic growth will continue 
to be constrained. And that is why I remain compassionately of the view 
that something must be done about the privatisation of the Hydro. I 
know that’s unpopular in some circles in Tasmania. I know I will be 
condemned for saying it. But just as Tony Rundle spoke the truth a year 
ago, I speak the truth this morning when I reassert its necessity. Every 
other State in Australia and nationally is tackling the debt problem.

The South Australian Government struggled to get 
its electricity authority’s privatisation legislation the Parliament 
and succeeded. The Victorian Government has massively reduced the debt 
of that State and lifted the hopes and the living standards of Victorians 
by the action that it’s taken. If we can secure the sale of the rest 
of Telstra by the year 2002 we will free Australia of net Commonwealth 
Government debt and that will lay the foundation of good circumstances 
for interest rates in the early years of the next century and also provide 
us the flexibility in time for further reductions in taxation. Because 
if you can rid yourself of the burden of debt the money you otherwise 
use to pay off the debt can be used for either the provision of new 
services or reductions in taxation. And that is why eliminating debt 
is so tremendously important. And just as we had to take action at a 
national level to achieve that outcome and just as the Victorians did 
it and the South Australians have done it and others have done it so 
it is necessary also for Tasmania to do it. I don’t say that in any 
hectoring or insensitive or hard-hearted sense. It is a statement of 
reality. And each must make a contribution to solving their own difficulty 
and their own problem. And I think it remains extremely important that 
that be done.

The last thing that I want to say to you ladies and 
gentlemen of a policy character is to remind you, as we should always 
as Liberal’s remind ourselves that we don’t exist just to get the 
economy right. We don’t exist just to achieve business and material 
wellbeing for our community, important though that is, because it provides 
jobs which is a basis of family security. But we also exist to achieve 
great social goals and we’ve achieved many of those over the last 
three and a quarter years. No audience in Australia would know better 
than you do of the traumatic impact of the Port Arthur tragedy which 
occurred in April of 1996. But we were able to achieve then through 
national gun control legislation is one of the great social achievements 
of the last ten or twenty years.

I know it was unpopular in some areas, but its long 
term contribution to the security of people is immense and we only have 
to see the almost daily demonstration of the terrifying impact of unlimited 
access to weapons in the United States to realise what an important 
measure that was borne out of the most awful and traumatic tragedy.

So it is equally that we remain very committed to 
the ongoing fight against the drug menace. We may argue in our community 
about the margin, about this or that approach to fighting the drug problem, 
but most of us agree as to 95 percent of what needs to be done. We need 
to educate young people against starting on drugs. We need to remind 
them of the link between so-called soft drugs and hard drugs. That the 
one leads to the other. And this absurd notion that marawana can be 
consumed without any long-term harm is not only clinically implausible 
and ridiculous, but has been constantly disproved by individual experience.

We need to provide more resources 
for law enforcement. We need to make it very clear that there is no 
mercy, sympathy or compassion in our community for people who traffic 
out of the human misery of others, which is what drug dealers do.

And finally, of co  urse, we must be compassionate and caring and understanding 
for those people who want to break the drug habit. And I’ve talked 
to a lot of people who are trying to break the drug habit. I’ve talked 
to the parents who’ve lost their children through drug overdoses. 
And there is no more I guess arresting, sobering experience for a person 
in public life to do than to sit down at length to people who’ve gone 
through that tragedy and it’s important that we do that, it’s important 
that we understand it. It’s very important that we also have in this 
country a support mechanism so that if somebody wants to give up the 
habit then they get help immediately and they don’t have to wait a 
month or two before they get that assistance.

And at a federal level we have responded. We’ve 
put an extra $500 million into our Tough On Drugs Strategy. And I wish 
to public debate focussed on all the positive things that the government’s 
of Australia are trying to do together - labor and Liberal alike - 
rather than focus on the fact that we may disagree about whether you 
have a safe injecting room which I don’t support or whether you have 
heroine trials which I don’t support either. I think it would be a 
good idea if we focussed on the things that we are achieving together 
because there’s a lot of collective determination on the part of all 
the governments of Australia to try and do something about this dreadful 
scurge in our community. And it’s also important that we keep a sense 
of perspective about Is to remind you as we should always as Liberal’s 
remind ourselves that we don’t exist just to get the economy right. 
We don’t exist just to achieve business and material wellbeing for 
our community, important though that is, because it provides jobs which 
is a basis of family security. But we also exist to achieve great social 
goals and we’ve achieved many of those over the last three and a quarter 
years. No audience in Australia would know better than you do of the 
traumatic impact of the Port Arthur tragedy which occurred in April 
of 1996. But we were able to achieve then through national gun control 
legislation is one of the great social achievements of the last ten 
or twenty years.

I know it was unpopular in some areas, but its long 
term contribution to the security of people is immense and we only have 
to see the almost daily demonstration of the terrifying impact of unlimited 
access to weapons in the United States to realise what an important 
measure that was borne out of the most awful and traumatic tragedy.

So it is equally that we remain very committed to 
the ongoing fight against the drug menace. We may argue in our community 
about the margin, about this or that approach to fighting the drug problem, 
but most of us agree as to 95 percent of what needs to be done. We need 
to educate young people against starting on drugs. We need to remind 
them of the link between so-called soft drugs and hard drugs. That the 
one leads to the other. And this absurd notion that marawana can be 
consumed without any long-term harm is not only clinically implausible 
and ridiculous, but has been constantly disproved by individual experience.

We need to provide more resources for law enforcement. 
We need to make it very clear that there is no mercy, sympathy or compassion 
in our community for people who traffic out of the human misery of others, 
which is what drug dealers do.

And finally, of course, we must be compassionate 
and caring and understanding for those people who want to break the 
drug habit. And I’ve talked to a lot of people who are trying to break 
the drug habit. I’ve talked to the parents who’ve lost their children 
through drug overdoses. And there is no more I guess arresting, sobering 
experience for a person in public life to do than to sit down at length 
to people who’ve gone through that tragedy and it’s important that 
we do that, it’s important that we understand it. It’s very important 
that we also have in this country a support mechanism so that if somebody 
wants to give up the habit then they get help immediately and they don’t 
have to wait a month or two before they get that assistance.

And at a federal level we 
have responded. We’ve put an extra $500 million into our Tough On 
Drugs Strategy. And I wish to public debate focussed on all the positive 
things that the government’s of Australia are trying to do together 
- labor and Liberal ali  ke - rather than focus on the fact that we may 
disagree about whether you have a safe injecting room which I don’t 
support or whether you have heroine trials which I don’t support either. 
I think it would be a good idea if we focussed on the things that we 
are achieving together because there’s a lot of collective determination 
on the part of all the governments of Australia to try and do something 
about this dreadful scurge in our community. And it’s also important 
that we keep a sense of perspective about it and understand that a percentage 
of the population we’re dealing with, although it is too large, is 
nonetheless a minute section of the Australian population.

And finally can I echo what Shane Stone had to say 
and that is to express my immense gratitude to all of you for the loyalty 
that you’ve demonstrated to me, to Tony Rundle and, I know, that you 
are demonstrating to Sue. Sue faces a big fight but it’s a very winnable 
fight. I know what it’s like to be in Opposition - I had a lot of 
practise, too much practise. I have no intention of ever going back 
to repeat the experience. But one thing that you have to do, if I may 
respectfully say, in Opposition, be it Federal or State, is that you 
have to start fairly early in marking out your territory in telling 
the community about those things for which you stand.

We all know what Oppositions are against. They’re 
against the Government, they’re agin the Government and they want 
to change the Government. We all know that. But the big challenge for 
Oppositions is to tell the Australian public or the Tasmanian public 
why it is they ought to change the Government, to tell the public why 
it ought to vote for them, as well as telling them why they should vote 
against the Government. Now, I know that you and your colleagues, Sue, 
are starting to do that and we’ll be very willing to provide any help 
and assistance we can.

The Australian political scene 
is more volatile now than it used to be. I don’t take anything for 
granted. We’re travelling fairly well at the present   time but that doesn’t guarantee that we’re going 
to win the next Federal election. Nobody should think that for a moment. 
We’ll win the next Federal election if we work hard and we continue 
to deliver outcomes and people continue to believe in us. Then we’ll 
win it. We won’t win it because people think, oh well, the other crowd’s 
hopeless. That doesn’t work as much as it used to because we’re 
living in a less ideological world and we have to work to win and achieve 
every vote. And so it is with the State Opposition, policy building, 
policy branding, policy differentiation is tremendously important so 
people know what you are for as well as what you are against.

But it is a good time to be in government because 
we’re a great sort of historical watershed, the turn of the century 
and the beginning of the third Christian millennium. It’s a remarkable 
time to be in government. It’s a great privilege. It’s a great opportunity. 
And I have that privilege and that opportunity essentially because of 
the loyalty and support of people in this room and people like you all 
over Australia who year in and year out, without recognition or reward 
but because you believe in a cause, you’ve been willing to give up 
your time and your energy and your talents and your intelligence to 
support the Coalition and the Liberal Party around Australia. I thank 
you most warmly for that.

[Ends]

Â

Â

jyÂ  1999-09-02Â  16:42

