

Media

Phillip Barresi MP Member for Deakin

602 Whitehorse Road, Mitcham VIC 3132

Â

Helping refugees to help themselves

Â

Federal Member for Deakin Phillip Barresi MP believes the time is 
right for the World Bank and international aid agencies to put in pla ce 
systems that will enable Kosovar refugees in Europe to take their first 
steps towards self-reliance.

Â

“While the refugees are happy and relieved to be 
safe from flying bullets and militant aggressors, there is a grave sense 
of despair and loss of sell-esteem gripping these once proud people, 
who are now totally dependent on others,” says Mr Barresi, who visited 
camps in Elbasan, Albania last week.

Â

“The generosity of nations such as Australia and 
Albania is much appreciated, but it’s time to look at the next step. 
One possible initiative is a micro-credit program, which would allow 
many displaced Kosovars to begin commercial operations on a small scale 
and restore some of their confidence.

Â

“With the conflict in Kosovo far from resolved, 
the refugees face the bleak prospect of being welfare recipients during 
rather lengthy stays in camps in Albania, Montenegro, and Macedonia. 
As reported by NATO documents, that situation will further stretch those 
national economies.

Â

“The opportunity to begin micro-businesses would 
give many of these refugees a greater sense of purpose and relieve some 
of the pressure on these nations. I would envisage these operations 
would be conducted in conjunction with existing local businesses.

Â

“Given that most of these Kosovars now own little 
else than the clothes they are wearing, these displaced Kosovars would 
need small loans to begin their enterprises. Activities such as woodwork, 
cooking, carpentry, metal work and market gardening would no doubt produce 
some much-needed commodities for the camps.

Â

“I believe it would be most appropriate that the 
World Bank and non-government organisations operating in the area investigate 
the possibilities of such a micro-credit scheme. These schemes have 
proven successful in the past and there is no reason they shouldn’t 
be successful for the Kosovars,” said Mr Barresi.

Â

Further information: Michael Fitzgerald 02 6277 4350 
0412 472 111

13 May, 1999

Â

jk

