

Â

Australia 
at Year's End - Retrospect and Prospect

Speech by the Hon Alexander Downer 
MP, Minister for Foreign Affairs, at the National Press Club

Canberra, 1 December 1999

(Check Against Delivery)

Â

Introduction

When I accepted the invitation of the National Press 
Club to talk at one of its lunchtime addresses for the last time this 
year and began to think of a suitable topic for my remarks, my thoughts 
naturally turned to taking a look at Australia's position in the world 
at year's end. But I have resisted the temptation to make this speech 
an overarching review of Australian foreign policy in the 20th Century 
for several reasons.

Firstly, I want to give a realistic snapshot of how 
Australia is placed at the end of a very busy year of diplomatic activity, 
and I don't want those impressions to be overwhelmed by a time-scale 
that would delight none but the historians in my audience.

Secondly, this allows me to take what you might call 
a more philosophical approach in drawing some broader lessons for Australian 
foreign policy from the two most prominent issues on our foreign policy 
agenda over the past few years - the East Asian economic crisis, and 
the resolution of East Timor's status.Â   
Thirdly, the longer time frame might suggest an attempt at defining 
the Coalition Government's place in Australia's foreign policy annals 
- and I can assure you that such a task will not be required for many 
years yet!

Finally, I have to admit that my public speaking 
schedule in 1999 has left me with a severe case of millennial overload, 
and the thought of another speech laced with references to "the 
new millennium" or "the passing century" did not enthuse 
me. So while I might disappoint any people here today who are playing 
ClichÃƒÂ© Bingo, I'm not going to adopt the Ray Martin Simply the Best 
manner on this topic by nominating the best Australian foreign policies 
of the past 100 years.

Instead, what I want to do is demonstrate how the 
Government, by sticking to the fundamental task of promoting the national 
interest in foreign policy, has won the respect of the international 
community for our nation and has strengthened Australia's position in 
the region and the world. And in doing so, as I have mentioned, there 
are no better examples to use than Australia's handling of the East 
Asian Economic crisis and the problem of East Timor.

National interest as the focus 
of foreign policy

When our Government was first elected in 1996, we 
set about placing the national interest at the heart of the Coalition's 
foreign policy.

We made this quite explicit when we released our 
White Paper on Foreign and Trade Policy in 1997. We pointed out that 
the pursuit of national interest through foreign policy is not some 
arcane diplomatic art, but is all about promoting the fundamental interests 
of Australians. It is about ensuring the continued security of the Australian 
nation, about protecting the standard of living of all Australians, 
and about ensuring that our economy continues to flourish and provide 
more jobs for this and future generations.

As we also pointed out in the White Paper, the national 
interest also encompasses the aspirations and values of our community. 
Our values reflect such things as belief in the rule of law and in freedom 
of the press, the notion that all governments should be accountable 
to the people through elected parliaments, and the principles of liberty, 
justice and the "fair go".

Some of these values have a very Australian flavour, 
but many of them reflect the kind of common human aspirations that have 
been enshrined in documents such as the Universal Declaration on Human 
Rights. Our values strengthen Australian foreign policy, helping to 
maintain our traditional ties with North America and Europe, and to 
build and strengthen links within other regions, including Asia.

It is wrong to assume that such matters don't count 
in Asia - they do. The political tide that swept across our region in 
the wake of the economic crisis has proved that Asians are just as willing 
as Australians to pursue their democratic rights. A mistake that Australian 
observers often make when looking at other societies is to confuse differences 
in form with differences in substance. No one says that the Australian 
way of doing things is the only way. We rightly celebrate diversity 
within our Australian society - shouldn't we also celebrate it around 
the globe?

And just as we are ready to 
give advice to neighbours on matters like freedom and justice, so should 
we always be ready to take advice. If you think we have nothing to learn 
from our neighbours, I would remind you that the Independent Commission 
Against Co  rruption in NSW, and its counterpart bodies around 
Australia, are modelled on Hong Kong's ICAC.

The reason why Australia has been so successful in 
promoting its national interests under a Coalition Government is that 
we have made those interests quite explicit. We have always aimed to 
be friendly but forthright in pursuing our foreign policy goals. Our 
neighbours know that we look to protect and advance Australian interests, 
and we assume that they do the same for the interests of their country. 
Our ties are clearly based on mutual respect and mutual benefit, and 
are highly appreciated for those reasons by our partners.

Above all, as I said last week in relation to China, 
we have abandoned the notion that Australia has a "special" 
relationship with any country. To have a "special" relationship 
with another country, means by definition that we would go out of our 
way for another country or act in a way that exceeded expectations simply 
because for some mysterious reason we found them to be "special". 
And they would act so for us because they found us "special". 
In the real world, the conduct of foreign policy does not work like 
that. Our relations with many nations may be particularly close and 
warm, stemming from historical and cultural ties or strong economic 
complementarities, but we no longer pretend that some magical "chemistry" 
can substitute for national interest.

In fact, those "special" relationships 
may constrain policy choices and thereby act against our interests. 
Instead of papering over differences in the name of advancing a "special" 
relationship, we should celebrate what unites us and be honest and open 
about the differences we have, while working to resolve them. After 
all, I don't think I could name one single country around the world 
that we see eye-to-eye with on every single issue: I doubt there is 
one. Why set ourselves up for inevitable disappointment by claiming 
we have "special" relationships?

This kind of approach has won much recognition for 
Australia in recent years. The truth is that no country wins respect 
by being obsequious. By being realistic and forthright, Australia has 
been able to advance its national interests in a very stormy regional 
environment over the past two years - and it is to the that environment 
I now turn.

The regional economic crisis - 
our first test

I have often said that Australia's response to the 
East Asian economic crisis was a defining moment for our nation. Our 
performance during the crisis displayed the basic strength and soundness 
of our economy, and the high quality of our civil, political and economic 
institutions. Many of the factors contributing to the crisis in the 
region were shown to derive from failures in systems of governance, 
while our strong performance in the face of the crisis was seen to be 
due to good governance.

For all these reasons, Australia was well placed 
to assist its neighbours to deal with the impact of the crisis. And 
we have been unstinting in our assistance - indeed, judged by the size 
of our population and economy, Australia can probably claim to have 
done more than any other nation on earth. Only two countries participated 
in the IMF second tier support arrangements for Indonesia, Thailand 
and Korea - Japan, and Australia. When it became clear that the terms 
of the IMF package for Indonesia were inappropriate, it was Australia 
that took the lead in arguing that those conditions should be ameliorated. 
And I think it fair to say that, had it been any other country than 
Australia putting those arguments - being, as we are, so closely involved 
with the region, and yet having largely avoided the economic fallout 
of the crisis - we might have not been as successful as we were in gaining 
the necessary changes.

We have also provided substantial assistance under 
our bilateral aid programs for the countries hardest hit by the crisis. 
Australia established a $50 million, three-year Economic and Financial 
Management Package to help lift standards of financial management throughout 
the region, and we doubled the amount of funds for crisis-related activities 
in our Asia Crisis Fund to $12 million. And in concert with others, 
we have been an active participant in the international forums that 
have been examining the structural weaknesses of the international financial 
architecture, so that other crises may be averted.

The financial crisis was a 
true test of Australia's mettle, and gave a real edge to our engagement 
with Asia. We had shown ourselves to be a true friend, an "all-weather" 
friend, of the region - prepared to match our actions to our rhetoric, 
to back up our   faith in the region's future with a substantial 
response. We recognised that the crisis was not just a challenge to 
the interests of our neighbours, but was a challenge to our own, and 
we met that challenge head-on.Â   
The crisis also threw into stark relief some home truths about our own 
country, facts that had often been overlooked or discounted in the past.

It demonstrated the falsity of saying that Australia 
was "only" a small or middle power. There are more than 200 
nations in the world. With a total global population of 6 billion, we 
might put the population of the average country at around 30 million. 
Australia, of course, has a population of less than two thirds that 
size, and yet in 1998 our GDP was the 14th largest in the world - bigger 
than all the countries of East Asia except Japan and China, and around 
80 per cent of all the ASEAN nations combined. We are a major exporter, 
especially to the economies of East Asia, and many of our industries 
are world leaders.

Economically, then, Australia is a very significant 
country indeed. That is reflected in the fact that we were chosen to 
participate in the G20 group of nations that will consider further global 
financial reform. We are also a scientifically sophisticated nation 
that is at the forefront of technological innovation, and well placed 
to lead the world into the new age of the information economy. Finally, 
we have a strong and capable defence force that is right up to date 
with the latest technological advances on the battlefield - an advantage 
that was highlighted by our rapid and effective response to events in 
East Timor, to which I now turn.

East Timor - Australia's unique 
role

Having passed one major foreign policy test, Australia 
was this year faced by an equally significant problem - the status of 
East Timor. Once again we met the challenge directly, and proved our 
value to the region.

In reviewing the international response to events 
in East Timor, it is clear that no other country could have matched 
Australia's leadership role. We were active at every stage of the diplomatic 
effort that led up to East Timor's vote on autonomy, and in its aftermath. 
Australia has put more than 5,000 members of its armed forces on the 
ground in East Timor, backed by many more in the skies and seas around 
the territory, and in support functions back in Australia. We have committed 
over $70 million in humanitarian aid for the East Timorese this year, 
and have assisted relief efforts by international agencies and other 
countries in other ways. And Darwin has for many months been the main 
staging area for all aspects of the international effort in East Timor.

Many other nations may have been able to match some 
of these initiatives, but none could have matched them all.

Australia's policy on East Timor 
is clearly in line with our national interests.

Not for one minute did our Government think it could 
stand idly by while there was continuing and serious conflict in our 
immediate strategic environment - we simply had to offer our assistance. 
We did so, you may recall, in relation to the conflict on Bougainville, 
where over the years something like 20,000 people had died. It is not 
realistic, then, to think that Australia would not try and resolve the 
situation in East Timor.

And in considering our national interest in this 
matter, one point I've often made is that East Timor stood in the way 
of establishing a genuine long-term and productive relationship between 
Australia and Indonesia.

Proof of the damage the issue had caused to our relations 
with Indonesia can be found in the widespread view in Australia that 
we could only promote Indonesian ties at the expense of dropping East 
Timorese issues - that we had to ignore East Timor despite continuing 
human rights concerns, Australia's historical ties with the island, 
and its close geographic proximity.

In effect, the presence of 
East Timor on our bilateral agenda made relations with Indonesia very 
one-sided. For example, between June 1975 and November 1999, there have 
been 12 official visits by Australian Prime Ministers to Indonesia - 
indeed, by every P  rime Minister from Whitlam to Howard. In that same 
period, the Indonesian President has not visited Australia once.

President Soeharto did not visit because he knew 
there would be massive demonstrations on the subject of East Timor. 
The very fact that he felt unable to come here shows there was a very 
big problem in the bilateral relationship, one that made the relationship 
very unbalanced. From that lopsided situation we are now able move on 
to resolve past tensions, and for both sides to have a more balanced 
and stable relationship.

Some have expressed concern that we have resolved 
the East Timor issue at too high a price for the East Timorese and Indonesians. 
I reject that view.Â   
Firstly, it is not for commentators and others here to judge whether 
the East Timor ballot was worthwhile, especially when the East Timorese 
clearly believe it was. Secondly, I am confident that Indonesian relations 
will recover quite quickly, because our two nations share a significant 
and obvious interest in building a strong relationship based firmly 
on mutual respect. Australian Governments have long said that Indonesia 
matters to us. Just as importantly, Australia also matters to Indonesia 
- economically, strategically and diplomatically.

Conclusion 
- Australia's heightened pro  file

Today I have chosen to focus my comments by reference 
to East Timor and the East Asian economic crisis, but there are many 
other examples of how the Coalition Government has fought the good fight 
for Australia in recent years.

I could, for example, have spoken about Papua New 
Guinea - about our involvement in the Bougainville peace process, and 
our response to last year's devastating tsunami. I could have looked 
at our proud record on disarmament matters - how we helped save the 
Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty, and how we have worked for the elimination 
of landmines. I could even have talked about how Australia took Japan 
before the International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea for its over-fishing 
of Southern Bluefin Tuna, and won.

In all these, and in many other cases - big and small 
- we have shown how Australia can make a difference, without having 
to be apologetic about pursuing legitimate national interests.

So, how does Australia stand after two years of turbulence 
that have involved a complex juxtaposition of economic, political and 
security crises, the like of which our region had not seen for decades?

I believe that our country has emerged with its standing 
significantly enhanced. Our response to the difficulties faced by our 
neighbours has been timely, effective and very substantial. We have 
not only showed an ability to meet the challenges thrown at our nation, 
in some areas we seem to have positively thrived on them.

When it first became clear that East Asia was heading 
into a massive economic downturn, for example, most commentators expected 
Australia to be pulled down also. Those were not unreasonable assumptions, 
based as they were on Australia's past performance. What such judgements 
failed to take into account, of course, was more than a year of concerted 
and fundamental economic reform by the Coalition Government, an effort 
that had transformed our nation and had given our economy the strength 
and flexibility to cope with the crisis. That is why, as our region 
entered its worst economic crisis in five decades, Australia went from 
strength to strength. And that is why we had the resources, and the 
knowledge, to help put our neighbours back on the path to recovery.

Australia's efforts over the last two years in relation 
to the economic crisis and East Timor have won us respect, recognition 
and praise in our region, and around the world. Economists hold Australia 
up as the model for others, the example of how attention to the economic 
fundamentals can ensure solid growth even in the harshest of international 
environments. Governments seek our advice and assistance on reform and 
governance issues. Leaders around the world have commended Australia 
for taking the lead on East Timor, and commentators in East Asia praise 
Australia for showing that countries in our region can act to solve 
our own problems.

To be sure, voices of criticism 
about Australia's action over East Timor can still be heard. But we 
need not be overly concerned about them, for three reasons. Firstly, 
the critics are vastly outnumbered by the supporters of Australian action, 
including in   the East Asian region. Secondly, most of the negative 
comment comes from those who are pursuing short-term domestic agendas, 
which will soon pass. And thirdly, once the passage of time has taken 
the heat and passion out of the issue, even our critics will come to 
acknowledge the validity of our actions, and that they derived from 
the best of motives.

Australians, then, have every reason to feel confident 
of their place in the region, and the world. In a manner that no amount 
of speechifying or theorising could have achieved, we have proved our 
value to our neighbours and validated our role in our region - the countries 
of East Asia are important to Australia, but Australia is also important 
to those countries. We have demonstrated why Australia deserves its 
place at the table when international issues are discussed. And we have 
shown the global reach of our interests, across the Asia Pacific region, 
into Europe and North America, and beyond.

With the economic crisis and East Timor, Australia 
was tested in a manner which, perhaps, we have not seen since the end 
of the Second World War. Our nation's strength and integrity have been 
proven, our confidence and reputation affirmed. But every day, through 
robust and effective responses to the myriad of challenges in the international 
arena, Australia proves its worth.

At year's end, we can be proud of the way our country 
has passed those tests, and know that whatever surprises the future 
may have in store for us, Australia stands ready to meet them.

ENDS

Â

Â

Australia   at Year's End - Retrospect and 
Prospect - Questions and Answers

Alexander Downer MP, Minister 
for Foreign Affairs at the National Press Club

Canberra, 1 December 1999

(Check Against Delivery)

CHAIR:  Â

Thank you very much Minister.

As usual we pass on to o  ur period of questions and the first one today is 
from Amanda Buckley.

QUESTION:  Â

Amanda Buckley, Bloomberg 
News, Mr Downer. I know you'd be disappointed not to get a question 
about the WTO demonstrations that are keeping us all riveted to the 
TV sets toda  y. At the weekend I saw Alan Oxley the former GATT 
Ambassador saying that many Federal Ministers were frightened of using 
the word 'free trade' in their speeches at present because it seems 
to be coded for many people for globalisation, job losses, and other 
things that they don't like. The sort of backlash that we saw with Jeff 
Kennett down in Victoria.

I guess the question for you as Foreign Minister 
is how do you go about building domestic support for free trade? How 
do you better sell these policies and how seriously do you take this 
sort of backlash that we see going on in Seattle today and certainly 
here in Australia as well?

ALEXANDER DOWNER:

Well I take it not so much in Seattle but more broadly 
speaking around the international community reasonably seriously. I 
think I'm right in saying, I might not be entirely right, but I think 
I'm right in saying the last time I made a speech here at the Press 
Club was a speech in support of globalisation, and not surprisingly 
I am a very strong supporter of the liberal market approach and trade 
liberalisation. Yes, I'll say it - free trade. I've always been a supporter 
of free trade.

I read Alan Oxley's article and well I just don't 
agree with the point. I mean I think what we have to do is continue 
to argue our case. I've never thought, by the way, in all the time I've 
supported free trade and that's ever since I was a student, I've never 
thought that it was an easy case to sell because the benefits are spread 
widely and where there are losers they're usually rather heavily concentrated. 
The closure of a factory makes a front page story. The opening of the 
addition of 10, you know, jobs per factory somewhere else in another 
part of the state or the community it doesn't really make a story at 
all.

But what can we say about trade liberalisation and 
the liberal market model? We can say that no country that has tried 
it has ended up poor as a result. We can say that those countries that 
have tried to close themselves off from the rest of the world have all 
suffered in doing so. We can say that changes in technology are completely 
irreversible. They are irreversible, and what we've got to do is make 
those technological changes work for us, and make globalisation work 
for us, not become - I was going to say twentieth - twenty-first century 
luddites.

Those people who are demonstrating 
in Seattle are basically the 1999 equivalent of the Luddite movement 
in England. They want to stop history in its tracks, they don't want 
to see any progress. They blame all of the problems of the world on 
trade liberalis  ation. I don't think many people would believe the 
arguments that they were particularly putting to their advantage to 
the advantage of the various groups that they represent, that they went 
out and tried to make sure that society took advantage of globalisation 
rather than try to resist the inevitable.

The Luddites failed because what they were proposing 
was absurd. Equally, these people are trying to defy technology and 
you can't do it.

CHAIR:  Â

The next question is from 
Catherine McGrath.

QUESTION:   Â

Mr D  owner, Catherine McGrath, ABC Television.

There are reports that John Howard is planning a 
trip to the UK next year to coincide with the Centenary of Federation. 
Can you tell me how advanced plans are? Are you involved? Will you be 
going, and how much will it cost?

DOWNER:

I can't tell you how much anything will cost of that 
nature. So the last part of the question is I don't know. I have to 
be a little careful here not to announce the travel plans of the Prime 
Minister or other Ministers or even myself prematurely. What I can say 
is that during the course of next year in either June or July, and Alex 
Allen will remember exactly which month it is - I think it's July - 
there is going to be an Australia Week in Britain in order to commemorate 
the passage of our Constitution Bill through the British House of Commons, 
through the British Parliament. It will be hundred years since that 
happened, as distinct from a hundred years since the day Federation 
actually came into effect at the beginning of January 2001.

So that is what the celebration next year is for, 
and I think it would be indiscreet of me to start prematurely making 
all sorts of announcements about what's going to happen. But it's going 
to be a pretty big event. There are a range of different functions that 
have been organised for that week, and I think I could probably go so 
far as telling you that inter alia I shall be participating.

CHAIR:  Â

Ian McPhedran.

QUESTION:   Â

Mr Downer, Ian McPhedran from 
News Limited. Firstly, thanks for the Christmas Card. [  Laughter]

Given the ...

DOWNER:

The nice family touch I thought.

McPHEDRAN:Â

It was very good.

Given the level of dissent 
developing amongst the young people in East Timor, which I'm sure you 
would have seen in some DIO reporting. Do you believe that Xanan  a Gusmao and his comrades are up to the tasks of 
rebuilding that place, and, secondly, I heard one of your senior colleagues 
the other day, and perhaps future opponents, characterise your leadership 
skills as a bit of a joke, and I'd like to ask you do you have any ambitions 
to one day again lead the Liberal Party?

DOWNER:

Well, honestly, I didn't enjoy the experience very 
much last time. Well actually to be honest with you, I did to start 
with, but I think I ranged from having the highest approval rating - 
some swine will dig this out, I may as well do it myself - from having 
the highest approval rating of any political leader in Australia's history 
to something akin to the lowest approval rating of any leader in Australian 
political history, so I'm not sure what my wife would think if I came 
home one day and said guess what, I want to do it all again.

But DIO - DIO is an analytical organisation by the 
way, it's not an intelligence collection agency, so just for those people 
who, not necessarily you by the way, but those people who seem to think 
that it has another function, it doesn't.

Do I think Xanana Gusmao and his team are up to the 
task? I basically do. I mean I think - I've said this on a number of 
occasions when I first met Xanana Gusmao which was in a Jakarta prison 
at the end of January or early February of this year - it was in February 
I think. I was very impressed with him, and I did think he had that 
sort of Mandela quality of not just courage but he had that quality 
of forgiveness and I don't think if you're giving birth to a new nation 
which has been a fairly violent birth, and that was pretty much the 
case with South Africa as well, you aren't going to get very far unless 
you have that sense of forgiveness. You might not forget, and you surely 
wouldn't, but that sense of forgiveness.

I was, for example, very impressed 
with the reports I heard today in the media of the meeting between President 
Wahid and Xanana Gusmao.

It seems to me that for East 
Timor it's absolutely fundamentally important that East Timor builds 
a constructive relati  onship with Indonesia. That can only be done if there 
are at least is some sense of forgiveness and they don't forget, they 
certainly should be able to forgive, and the pragmatic view of how to 
take East Timor forward is absolutely vital.

I think Xanana Gusmao, and for that matter President 
Wahid have both shown that through their meeting, and I think in the 
way Xanana Gusmao generally speaking has been dealing with the difficult 
domestic issues that he has to deal with so far he's been doing that 
impressively. So it's early days for him, but I place a lot of hope 
in Xanana Gusmao. I have a - you've probably gathered this over the 
last year - I have a very positive view of him. I have mixed views about 
all sorts of people, but I do have a very positive view about him.

CHAIR:  Â

The next question is from 
Jane Nelson.

QUESTION:  Â

Jane Nelson from Reuters, 
Mr Downer.

Given the challenges you've 
faced over the last two years in terms of the East Timor crisis, and 
the Asian financial crisis, is our next big challenge   rebuilding relations with Indonesia, and in that 
context are your plans firming for a trip to Jakarta to visit President 
Wahid?

The second question. Given the record of visits between 
the two countries, would it be more appropriate for President Wahid 
to actually come to Australia?

DOWNER:

Well, I made the point in my speech which I regard 
as an important point, and that is that our relationship with Indonesia 
must be a balanced one built on mutual respect.

A great challenge for me to rebuild relations with 
Indonesia. I would say it's important for Australia to have a constructive 
relationship with Indonesia, but it's important for Indonesia to have 
a constructive relationship with Australia. It's not a one-way process, 
it's a two-way process. In so far as it's important for us to rebuild 
relations with Indonesia, it's important for them to rebuild relations 
with Australia.

Both sides are pragmatic enough to recognise the 
importance of doing that and we will do it in a cautious progressive 
sort of way.

I think at the business level the relationship seems 
to me to be working pretty well. At, if you like, the sort of broader 
community level, the contacts are being maintained. Our Ambassador in 
Jakarta has had very good access to the new government from the President 
downwards and the Indonesian Ambassador has now arrived here and we've 
given him a - I think you would agree - a warm welcome, so things are 
gradually moving forward, and at some stage I will go to Jakarta and 
then we'll see about visits by heads of government. That's just something 
that hasn't been contemplated in any very significant way at this stage.

I think everyone in Australia would more or less 
agree with this, that we need to take the relationship forward but we 
need to do it cautiously step by step.

There are still East Timor issues that remain to 
be resolved. There's still the need for the refugees who want to return 
to East Timor who are in West Timor to be able to return. There are 
over a 100,000 - I think the UN's estimate is about 107,000, 108,000 
as of yesterday have returned, but there are still somewhere between 
a 100 and 130,000 left to return. We want to see them return.

We want the whole of the East Timor issue bedded 
down and I've said before, people argue with me about this, but anyway 
I think they're wrong. I've said before, once there is integrity in 
our relationship over the issue of East Timor and we are really getting 
to that point now, then our bilateral relationship is going to be a 
great deal easier to manage in the years ahead.

Foreign Ministers won't ever, you know, in the future, 
come here to the National Press Club and be asked to, you know, explain 
difficult issues in relation to East Timor which might be cutting across 
the bilateral relationship with Indonesia and make that sort of invidious 
judgement that Australian Foreign Ministers over the last quarter of 
a century have had to make about well what can I say about East Timor 
without doing too much damage to our relations with Indonesia.

CHAIR:  Â

There's a question from Denis 
Grant.

QUESTION:  Â

Denis Grant, Mr Downer, from 
SBS Television.

Clearly in all this, the out 
take of the air, I suppose, in so far as Indonesia is concerned is the 
rising tide of secessionist, of independence sentiment   in the archipelago. I wonder if we could have your 
analysis today on those other troubled places in Indonesia - Aceh, Ambon, 
Irian Jaya, and the likelihood of some form of independence or autonomy 
in those places?

DOWNER:

Well, Denis, you'd appreciate that I'm not a commentator. 
It's not for me to, you know, casually embark on a bit of analysis here 
of what might or might not happen. Inevitably I have my own views about 
it, but I think - I've said this on many, many occasions since I've 
been Foreign Minister and no doubt before that - that the last thing 
we'd want to see is the Balkanisation of Indonesia. I mean the Balkanisation 
of the Balkans has been enormously painful and the East Timor exercise 
has been, whilst in my view necessary, nevertheless painful, but to 
see other parts of the country breaking up and breaking off I think 
would be very destabilising for the region as a whole, and I think that 
would be a view pretty much reflected right around the international 
community.

It is, I'd put it to you this way. In Irian Jaya 
and especially in Aceh, it is a very great challenge for the Indonesian 
Government to find a way through which guarantees a peaceful settlement 
in those places and other parts of the country, yet, you know, it is 
a very great challenge. They're working at it.

We often use the expression in diplomacy which isn't 
a very exciting one, that both sides should exercise restraint. The 
fact is though that resort to violence in years gone by in places like 
Aceh by the military has only had the effect of encouraging secessionist 
movements, and the violent option, and I think President Wahid very 
well understands this, the violent option is in the end the secessionist 
option, the peaceful option, peaceful negotiation, clever and peaceful 
negotiation is likely to help to maintain the integrity of Indonesia 
as we know it today.

But it's a very difficult task. I mean, you know, 
Indonesia was the Dutch East Indies, that's what turned it into Indonesia 
and it's not like Thailand which was, you know, since, I don't know, 
the 1300s - somebody will correct me - but I think around the 1300s 
a quite sort of coherent and well established country, Indonesia, was 
in a sense a creation of colonialism, as a lot of countries around the 
world were. I suppose this country was in a way, but a lot of countries 
around the world were and are, and that has created all sorts of question 
marks about their boundaries.

But it's interesting that an organisation like the 
OAU, the Organisation of African Unity, has adopted the view which is 
a pretty sensible view in my opinion, that you wouldn't want to start 
revisiting all the colonial boundaries. That would just create chaos, 
so too for Asia.

CHAIR:  Â

Peter Kholenems(?)

QUESTION:   Â

Peter Kholenems, Sydney Morning 
Herald, Minist  er.

Look, I wonder if you'd say something about the rather 
flood of leaked documents which have been coming out recently. How concerned 
are you and the Government about this? I mean are these documents, the 
leaking of them, doing serious damage to the national interest as apart 
from causing some embarrassment to the Government, and do you agree 
it suggests that at least in some elements within the defence community 
there is a good deal of opposition to elements of the Government's policies, 
and, finally, what on earth are you going to do about it?

DOWNER:

Well in so far as it's alleged that the documents 
are leaked from the Defence establishment is obviously not my responsibility, 
but in the - clearly not my ministerial responsibility although I obviously 
have an interest in it. Do these things damage the national interest? 
Well yes, I suppose so. I mean what I would say though is that there's 
obviously somebody who has some sort of political agenda who is pushing, 
sort of very narrow selection of documents around in order to try to 
make a point and it's a very narrow selection of documents the Government 
receives of course the totality of documentation and gets advice from 
many different agencies, so to draw any conclusions from a handful of 
leaked documents is as I've often said, quite wrong, quite misleading 
and is as a matter of fact quite dishonest.

But nevertheless on the last 
part of your question, were there differences between Defence and my 
Department or differences between Defence and the position of the Government 
as a whole as I saw alleged by somebody the other day. To the best of 
my knowledg  e the answer to that is no.

This whole issue of East Timor has been managed throughout 
the year - the end of last year, or through last year and this year, 
with a very great sense of unity in the Government and I don't just 
mean between the Prime Minister, me and the Defence Minister and other 
Ministers who have had an interest in it, but the at least leadership 
of the different government departments and agencies.

For example, the suggestion that there is somehow 
a different of view on the strategy we should have adopted between the 
Defence Department and my Department is just manifestly untrue. I mean 
there are thousands of people in the Defence Department and there are 
- I see people from my Department here, they would like me to say hundreds 
of people in my Department - a couple of thousand - but I mean to expect 
all of those people to have just one view is obviously not the real 
world. There must be a variety of views.

But generally speaking through Defence and Foreign 
Affairs there has been tremendous support for what the Government has 
done. In fact I think I could say this about my Department which is 
always very discreet and very professional as you would know, but there 
was a real sense when we changed our policy on East Timor of relief. 
A real sense that we had lanced the boil, and they have been tremendously 
supportive of the Government as have the senior people who I've been 
dealing with in Defence.

This argument that there is somehow a difference 
boils down to what? It boils down to this proposition that somehow during 
the year we should have sent in a peacekeeping force and just fixed 
the problem of East Timor and that would have done it. Well, we couldn't. 
And anybody who was actually day by day engaged with the issue knows 
we couldn't.

They know we tried, they know we raised it with the 
Indonesian Government, but those people all know that it simply at the 
end of the day was not possible. We couldn't have done it without going 
to war with Indonesia. And it is cheap and glib for people to run around 
and say, oh, you should have sent in a peace keeping force in March 
or April or May or June.

How? Or we should have got the Americans who at that 
time were heavily engaged with the Kosovo war, we should have got them 
to concentrate their diplomatic, perhaps even military resources on 
the issue of East Timor.

We tried, and they, to be fair to the Americans, 
did show a good deal of interest, but they weren't about to start threatening 
the Indonesians in the way eventually of course they did, after the 
violence erupted after the result of the ballot was announced.

Earlier in the year, it just wasn't going to happen, 
and no amount of re-writing of history, no amount of reconstruction, 
no amount of extremely selective, if I may say so, extremely selective, 
narrowly based leaking is going to change that single fact, and inevitably 
the Defence Department are inquiring into leaks that took place, but 
in so far as there is supposed to be somebody in Defence dissatisfied 
with the Government's policy they are certainly not people in the senior 
echelons of the Defence Department. I couldn't speak for everyone in 
the Defence Department, and I think we're sort of pretty much tracking 
down where this material is coming from now.

CHAIR:  Â

The next question is from 
Brendan N  icholson.

QUESTION:  Â

Brendan Nicholson from The 
Age, Mr Downer.

You obviously feel strongly 
about the leaks. What happens if you find the people who leaked?

And a second question, the, 
as you said the ...

DOWNER:

It's a matter for the appropriate authorities, not 
for me.

QUESTION:  Â

A significant proportion of 
the East Timorese population is still in West Timor at the moment. Estimates 
of the likely death toll in the violence that followed the ballot have 
ranged from a few hundred up to 80,000 - that estima  te was given at a Senate hearing by an academic recently. 
What advice are you getting on the likely toll?

DOWNER:

Yeah. Well I've noticed some say 80,000. I think 
that's a confusion there. That was once said, it was said, that 80,000 
people could not be accounted for, not to assume that those people had 
been killed, but you know, were they in the hills, were those people 
in the refugee camps - I don't think it was ever ... well I don't know 
about an academic for the Senate committee, I just don't know the answer 
to that, but I don't think it's been alleged that 80,000 people were 
killed.

But I saw it written after the violence did erupt 
that tens of thousands of people were killed. Now let me see. I think 
INTERFET have so far been able to substantiate that about, the deaths 
of a fairly small number of people, about 130, 140 people. That's not 
to say that's the end of it believe me. I think there will be a lot 
more than that.

This may turn out to be wrong, I just don't know. 
I don't want it to be quoted back at me endlessly in years ahead, completely 
out of context, so I qualify this very heavily in order just to answer 
your question. We think that the number of deaths is likely to be in 
the hundreds rather than the thousands, and I had a discussion yesterday 
with Sergio Demello (?) about this he has the same impression that we 
have as well. But we really don't know at this stage, but it would appear 
more likely to be somewhere between five hundred and a thousand than 
thousands of people.

We think that if there had been thousands or even 
as one journalist in The Australian, a commentator in The Australian 
newspaper wrote, tens of thousand of people have died. We think if that 
had been the case then INTERFET would have clearly found the evidence 
of that, and ...

QUESTION:   Â

Even if they were dumped at 
sea ...

DOWNER:

Well even if they were dumped at sea the bodies would 
have washed up unless they were dumping at sea - they clearly weren't 
dumping at sea tens of thousands of bodies with concrete around their 
necks so the bodies would stay under water. I mean simply the mechanics 
of that would be impossible.

So this is in any case an assessment that you asked 
the question, this is an assessment that we would make and the UN would 
make. I mean I hope - look, believe me, if between five hundred and 
a thousand people died, that's a terrible thing. That's a lot of people 
to die. But, on the other hand, it's not tens of thousands.

CHAIR:  Â

James Gribble.

QUESTION:   Â

James Gribble from AAP, Mr 
Downer.

You just mentioned Sergio 
Demello, the Administrator for East Timor. You had talks with him yesterday, 
was there any development o  n the timing of the INTERFET troops withdrawing and 
the UN Blue Helmets going in sometime next year. Is there any sort of 
harder date with that, and can you give us a little bit of an assessment 
on the immediate future for East Timor once the UN takes over. You know, 
what will be needed, what does Indonesia need to contribute, and what 
will Australia need to contribute?

DOWNER:

Well first of all on the timing of the peacekeeping 
operation replacing INTERFET, I've said for quite a long time now, now 
a few months, or few weeks, that our expectation is that it would be 
somewhere between the middle of January and February, probably it's 
going to be the latter rather than the earlier part of that period. 
We still don't know the answer to that question.

The Secretary-General was going to make his decision 
very soon about who the Commander will be or those who know that the 
Commander is expected to be a Filipino General. Then there will be the 
mechanics of putting together the force. What The Philippines is going 
to do, what role Australia will have, what roles other countries in 
the region and beyond will have in that force and then getting those 
on the ground who aren't already on the ground and the transition from 
General Cosgrove as the Force Commander to the new Force Commander, 
obviously that's something that has to be worked out as well.

So I don't have any real update for you in terms 
of the actual timing of that, but our expectation is that it will be 
in the early part of next year.

What needs to be done? A lot. First of all a lot 
of money is needed. The consolidated UN appeal is for $A300 million 
between now and the end of June next year. $US200 million, for some 
reason or other they use the figure of $US199 million. But that money 
is starting to come in.

Australia will have, as I 
mentioned in my speech, will have provided by the end of the financial 
year somewhere in the vicinity of $74 million. We would look to the 
European Union to contribute generously - obviously in particular Portugal, 
but other membe  rs of the European Union, to the Americans, the Japanese, 
Canadians, and so on. But I think you'll find there will be good support 
from around the world, from those countries to help meet the United 
Nations' target.

What has to be done? Well in the very short term 
there's still humanitarian assistance. There's need for shelter, those 
sorts of things. There will be a need to reconstruct the economy as 
time goes on and in the medium term we expect that East Timor will probably 
need an aid program of somewhere in the vicinity of $A100 million a 
year. But it's a bit early to be sure of that. So that gives you a bit 
of a sense of where we're at.

CHAIR:  Â

Question from Graeme Dobell.

QUESTION:   Â

Prime Minister (  sic  ) from Radio Australia.

Why has your Government wa  lked away from the hierarchy you set in your Foreign 
Policy White Paper which put Indonesia and China up there with the United 
States and Japan. What is the benefit to the national interest by a 
gratuitous down-grading of what Australia seeks to achieve with China 
and Indonesia, and more specifically, do you believe that the Wahid 
Government has taken an actual decision to take a hands-off approach 
to Middle East asylum seekers who come in through their airports and 
then board boats to Australia. Is the Wahid Government actually deciding 
to send a message to Australia about why it is special?

DOWNER:

Well if I may say so, I think that's a sort of obscure 
misinterpretation of what I'm saying. I'm saying it in our foreign policy 
we thought that having, using the rubric of special relationships simply 
set up false expectations that if, to put it another way from the way 
I put it in the speech, there would be an assumption that those countries 
wouldn't work in each other's national interest but would do favours 
for each other way over and above that, and expectation that will only 
inevitably be dashed and cause disappointment.

I've said nothing gratuitous or I've done no gratuitous 
down-grading of any relationship. What we've said in the White Paper 
was that the four most important relationships for Australia for geo-political 
and economic reasons and reasons even beyond that, the four most important 
relationships for Australia were the four that you mentioned - Indonesia, 
China, Japan and the United States, and we haven't changed that assessment 
at all. They are the four most important relationships for Australia, 
you know, for different reasons, but it is clear those relationships 
are of particular importance, and, you know, inevitably with Indonesia 
we've gone through a difficult period, a period of strain, which, you 
know, we don't walk away from. That's a fact of life.

A lot of people in Australia have felt, well most 
people in Australia, have felt very strongly about what happened in 
East Timor particularly after the result of the ballot was announced 
on 5 September, and that obviously did lead to a deterioration in our 
relationship and, you know, I think Indonesia had a sense of, you know, 
humiliation, when the International Force came in and took over East 
Timor and Australia was the leader of that International Force.

But that's not to say we regard the relationship 
with Indonesia as suddenly unimportant or that we're down-grading it. 
It remains one of our four most important relationships, and that, I 
think, is a statement that would stand any test of time, and probably 
in a 100 years when the foreign minister stands here it will be true 
that those relationships will remain, will probably remain the four 
most important for a country like Australia. Who would know?

As for the Middle East, well, there are refugees 
coming from the Middle East. Well our Ambassador has been talking to 
Ministers in Jakarta and has found those talks pretty productive and 
they've given undertakings to investigate the issue and for discussions 
to continue. There hasn't been any sense by the Indonesian Ministers 
that we've been speaking to that frankly they didn't care about this 
issue, or they wanted to teach Australia a lesson or something like 
that.

It goes back to what I said 
earlier. It is in Indonesia's interests to build a constructive relationship 
with Australia, not just in Australia's interests to build a constructive 
relationship with Indonesia, and so they need to handle the issues which 
are   of concern to Australia in a responsible way and 
our impression is that they are.

This suggestion that somehow the Indonesian Government 
doesn't care about the representations we've been making in relation 
to the Middle East refugees is apparently born out of an answer that 
President Wahid gave to a question that was asked of him by all accounts 
completely out of the blue at a press conference, and that, you know, 
refugees coming to Australia were a matter for the Australian authorities. 
Well, you know, I think you shouldn't place too heavy an interpretation 
on an answer given to a question out of the blue by the President. I 
think that's quite an unfair interpretation to put on his remarks. It's 
unfair to him to put that interpretation on his remarks.

We need to do more with Indonesia on this issue and 
we will be doing more and certainly when I do visit Indonesia it will 
be one of the issues that will be at the top of my agenda.

CHAIR:  Â

Well Minister, thank you very 
much for joining us again today. Do come b  ack.

I'd like to give you a small trophy to remind you 
of the occasion. It's been a fascinating hour, and good luck for the 
Year 2000.

DOWNER:

Thank you.

[Applause].

ENDS

Â

Â

Â

jyÂ  1999-12-06Â  09:09

