

Â

Media Release

Philip Ruddock MP

Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs

Minister Assisting the Prime Minister for Reconciliation

Â

International English languageÂ   
conference opens in Melbourne

Â

MPS 21/99

Leading English language 
and settlement experts from around the world are gathering in Melbourne 
today for a major conference entitled 'The AMEP: 50 Years of Nation 
Building.'

The Minister for Immigration 
and Multicultural Affairs, Philip Ruddock, said the conference is the 
culmination of a year of celebrations marking the 50th anniversary of 
the Adult Migrant English Program (AMEP), one of Australia's key migrant 
settlement schemes.

"Since it began 
in 1948, the AMEP has helped about one and a half million of Australia's 
new arrivals to learn English and settle into their adopted country.

"As the only language 
program of its kind in the world, the AMEP is acknowledged as a world 
leader and one of Australia's key migrant settlement programs.

"The conference 
will showcase the important contribution the AMEP is making to our nation-building 
through assisting the successful settlement of non-English speaking 
migrants and refugees.

"The conference 
will also provide new strategic thinking for the AMEP to continue serving 
the community with excellence into the new millennium.

"Internationally 
respected experts from the United Nations, the US Immigration and Naturalisation 
Service and Universities in Hong Kong, the United Kingdom, the United 
States and Vietnam will address the conference. They will be joined 
by eminent Australian English language and settlement experts.

"In this stimulating 
environment, we hope to demonstrate internationally in a constructive 
and progressive way that Australia's pride in the AMEP is well-founded," 
Mr Ruddock said.

The AMEP provides nine 
million hours of English language tuition a year, and last year assisted 
over 39,000 clients from 89 language backgrounds.

The conference will 
be opened by His Excellency, the Governor-General, the Honourable Sir 
William Deane AC, KBE.

The Keynote Address 
will be given by Brunson McKinley, Director-General, International Organisation 
for Migration (IOM), Geneva.

The conference, convened 
by the Department of Immigration and Multicultural Affairs, will run 
until 12 February.

Wednesday, 10 February 1999Â   
Media Inquiries: Brad Robinson (02) 6277 7860 or 0419 278 715

Â

Â

Â

jy

