

Â

‘SCAPEGOATING MULTICULTURALISM:

THE COMPLEXITIES OF THE IDENTITY DEBATE’

Â

ADDRESS BY

PETRO GEORGIOU MP

FEDERAL MEMBER FOR KOOYONG

Â

THE SYDNEY INSTITUTE, SYDNEY

WEDNESDAY 3 MARCH, 1999

Â

Â

Members of the Sydney Institute, distinguished guests, ladies and 
g entlemen.Â  Let me start by thanking you for coming tonight 
and particularly Anne and Gerard Henderson for their kind invitation.

Â

Multiculturalism has 
been an Australian success story for more than 20 years. It involves 
the right of all Australians to express and share their individual cultural 
heritage, the right to equality of treatment and opportunity and the 
removal of discriminatory barriers.Â  It also involves making a 
commitment to Australia and Australia’s interests, to the basic structures 
and principles of Australian society - the constitution and rule of 
law, parliamentary democracy, tolerance and equality, freedom of speech 
and religion, and English as the national language.Â  But, despite 
its success, it has been made a scapegoat.

Â

Some saw a giant multicultural 
‘industry’ emerging.Â  Others muttered darkly about the establishment 
of ethnic community power centres and the descent into ‘warring tribes’.Â  
Some saw it as undermining the revolutionary progress of the ethnic 
working class.

Â

Frank Devine warned 
of the “zealots of multiculturalism, many nursing a hatred of the 
Anglo majority”.Â  Bob Birrell spoke of multiculturalism providing 
the “fuel for those arguing we are becoming a nation of tribes”.Â  
Peter Walsh claimed that multiculturalism “has corrupted political 
processes and public administration.”Â  And now, we have Mr Paul 
Sheehan who alleges that ethnic industries abound, thriving on exorbitant 
government handouts.

Â

Many have rebuffed these 
attacks on multiculturalism, and I want to pay tribute to those defenders 
of multiculturalism, people like Gerard and Anne Henderson, Colin Rubenstein, 
James Jupp, Greg Sheridan, Jim Gobbo and many others.

Â

In the main their rebuttal 
was a positive affirmation of multiculturalism’s contribution to Australia.Â  
The fact is that multiculturalism engendered community support.Â  
Multicultural policies and programs were implemented.Â  Despite 
impediments and resistance, multiculturalism’s institutional reforms 
survived changes in governments and administrations.

Â

We are not a perfect 
society.Â  The process of reconciliation is still ongoing and there 
remain pockets of racism and intolerance in our community. But the overriding 
fact is that, rather than a fractured, divided society we can boast 
one that is internationally unique - a tolerant cohesive community 
of more than 100 different ethnic cultures.Â  And yet, despite this, 
the critics have persisted.Â  This is their right in a free society, 
but it is legitimate to say that some displayed a cavalier disregard 
for the facts.

Â

For more than 20 years 
multiculturalism has survived a primitive chorus of falsehoods and allegations 
of ‘multicultural industries’, ‘ethnic rorts’, tribes, ghettoes 
and social engineering.Â  These attacks have not abated.Â  Indeed, 
they have been given a new dimension which I will return to later.

Â

When Australian multiculturalism was first acknowledged in the 1970’s 
it was a response to the reality that post war immigration had changed 
the face of this nation.Â

In one of the largest and most diverse h uman immigration waves 
in the twentieth century, migrants from more than 100 different countries 
came to Australia.

Â

All sought a better 
way of life. Some craved the liberty and freedom denied to them in their 
home country. Others longed for open spaces and opportunity.Â  Some 
sought only to flee cruel and barbaric inhumanities - bitter years of 
racial and cultural persecution, intolerance, war and genocide.Â  
They wished for the opportunity to live happy, healthy, prosperous and 
free lives; and the right to live with dignity, respect and equality.Â  
For many, this meant retaining valued aspects of their cultural heritage.

Â

To try to understand 
this, let’s reverse the situation.Â  Between 1947 and 1973 some 
300,000 Italians migrated to Australia.

Â

Imagine if, in just 
some 20 years, 300,000 Australians were, at Italy’s invitation, to 
settle in that country.Â  It would be reasonable to expect that 
such a group would maintain contact with its Australian heritage.Â  
They would probably like their children to be able to learn English.Â  
They would probably continue to speak English among themselves.Â  
They would appreciate being able to follow Australian news, sporting 
and cultural events through English language newspapers, radio and television.Â  
And they would hope that native Italians would respect their Australian 
identity while still respecting them as valued citizens of Italy.

Â

This is more than an imaginative exercise in putting ourselves in 
the place of the migrant.Â  It reflects every day reality in Australia.Â  
The fact is that the massive wave of post-war migrants to Australia 
participated ever more fully in Australian societ y.Â  They 
committed to Australia, to our legal and democratic values and institutions.Â  
At the same time they created the schools, the religious institutions, 
and the voluntary associations that would help preserve the components 
of the distinct heritage that they valued, and to help successfully 
settle further migrants.Â  These commitments and institutions were 
the basic ingredients of multiculturalism.Â  They were not concocted 
by politicians or bureaucrats.Â  They were not imposed by some elite.Â  
They were not the artefacts of any so-called ethnic industry. Multiculturalism 
was made possible because of the commitment and efforts of our grandparents 
and parents.

Â

It was only many years 
after this network of institutions was established that governments 
adopted a policy to meet the reality of the diversity created by our 
post-war immigration program. A less successful migrant experience would 
not have given our nation the foundation and confidence to support and 
encourage cultural diversity.Â  A weaker nation would not have had 
the courage to build on that foundation.

Â

Multiculturalism was 
an outgrowth of the best of the core values of Australian society.Â  
Not all of them, just the best.Â  Liberal democratic traditions 
of respect, equality and the rule of law, as well as intellectual, artistic, 
cultural, religious and political freedoms.Â  The opportunity for 
equitable advancement and an inherent sense of fairness.

Â

Multiculturalism was 
not a vehicle by which Australian culture was to be extinguished or 
denigrated. Nor was it an experiment in social engineering.Â  Rather, 
it was a simple policy of equity. It was the articulation of classical 
liberal philosophy.Â  It was about honouring the very basic obligations 
that democratic social institutions have to their citizens, regardless 
of the culture from which they originate.

Â

So at a basic level 
multiculturalism argued that a fundamental public service such as a 
police force should have the capacity to communicate effectively with 
a linguistically diverse society. Similarly, an education system needs 
to accommodate the diverse needs of those who are not native to Australia. 
It is a basic philosophy of respect for the needs of a nation’s people.

Â

Multiculturalism was 
a rejection of assimilation.Â  It understood that we couldn’t 
make people Australians by demanding they renounce heritages they value. 
It was a rejection of notions that Australians must conform to a common 
stereotype.Â  It embraced and encouraged the diversity of cultural 
identities and it did so while reinforcing the overarching values of 
Australian democratic pluralism: the rule of law; a commitment to parliamentary 
democracy and its institutions; and a commitment to mutual tolerance 
and respect.

Â

I believe we can take 
pride in the Fraser Government’s courage.  It replaced a discredited 
assimilationism with the fundamental principles embodied in the Galbally 
Report:

Â

“… equal opportunity 
and equality of access to general services, the provision of special 
services where these are needed; respect for cultural diversity; consultation, 
self-help and self-reliance.”

Â

By embracing these principles, 
the Fraser government made an evolutionary leap. For the first time 
it institutionalised multiculturalism and for the first time our Government 
demanded that its departments, statutory authorities and services become 
responsive to the diverse needs and requirements of our changing population.

Â

As Malcolm Fraser said 
in 1981, multiculturalism “is not an abstract or alien notion, not 
a blueprint holding out utopian promises, but a set of guidelines for 
action which grows directly out of our society’s aspirations and experiences.”

Â

Multiculturalism has positively contributed to Australian culture 
and its values. Its overriding ethos of tolerance and harmony has contributed 
to th e fact that the conflicts of the international community 
have rarely played themselves out in Australia despite our extraordinary 
diverse population and the passion of some of those conflicts.

Â

Its commitment to social harmony and tolerance has reinforced the 
character of Australian democratic society.Â  Ethnic diversity is 
a fact of life in all cultures. In many countries however, it is repressed 
and divisive - as we have seen in Bosnia, Rwanda,  Sri Lanka 
and many other parts of the world. In Australia, a mixture of constructive 
leadership, good policy and creative thinking saw multicultural policy 
enhance, enliven and enrich Australian life.

Â

And the fact is that 
the majority of Australians have embraced multiculturalism.Â  At 
the height of Hansonism support for multiculturalism ran at between 
70 and 78% in AGB McNair and Newspoll.

Â

And yet, despite this 
community support for the policy, there remains a chorus of critics 
that allege that multiculturalism has divided our society by encouraging 
the emergence of ethnic power blocs.Â  They seem incapable of accepting 
that an ethnic community organisation does not equate with an ethnic 
power centre or tribe or an ethnic industry or any other disparaging 
description.Â  The truth is that such organisations are part of 
the legitimate expression of community interests in a diverse and sophisticated 
pluralist democracy.Â  It is the nature of our democracy that we 
see many and varied such groups at work in Australian society serving 
the interests of their members.

Â

It does strike me as 
unusual that the formation of an industry or professional association 
to lobby Government is recognised as a necessary reality of modern society, 
whereas the formation of an ethnic community representative group or 
a collection of such groupings is disparagingly seen as the rise of 
an ethnic industry or a worrying and dangerous new power centre.

Â

Government provides 
financial support and assistance to all sectors of Australian society.Â  
We provide billions every year to industry, science, arts, sport and 
to a multiplicity of special interest groups. Much of this assistance 
goes unremarked upon. But our expenditure on multicultural programs 
or Immigrant settlement programs, comparatively small as it is, has 
become the focus for endless accusations of rorts and special treatments.Â  
By distorting the real expenditure on these programs critics like Paul 
Sheehan and before him Stephen Rimmer have generated a number of false 
and misleading accounts of purported government funding of ethnic communities.

Â

For example, Sheehan 
alleges that national expenditure on multiculturalism is $2 billion 
annually, whilst Rimmer estimates it to be $7 billion.Â  How high 
can the bidding go?Â  And yet at the Federal level at least, the 
1998-99 budget allocation for the entire Immigration and Multicultural 
Affairs portfolio is $563 million.Â  Most of which has nothing to 
do with Multicultural Affairs but is spent on the movement of people 
(tourists, visitors, business people) in and out of Australia.

Â

What these critics of 
multiculturalism seem not to appreciate, isÂ  that it was the years 
of anti-multicultural propaganda, claims about ethnic funding rorts, 
dire warnings of the creation of tribes, scare mongering about the creation 
of powerful ethnic leaders that has all found expression in Ms Hanson.

Â

If one looks at Ms Hanson’s 
comments on multiculturalism one does not need to be a rocket scientist 
to see the progeny of many years of attacks on multiculturalism.

Â

Let me quote Ms Hanson:

Â

“Multicultural policy 
operating through the power of the ethnic lobby is creating divisive 
ethnic politics” or “the billions of dollars spent on the divisive 
policies of multiculturalism will be redirected to benefit all Australians 
not the minority interests whose funded existence continues to assist 
in dividing us.”

Â

But the all too apparent 
lesson is that the constant chipping away at multiculturalism has ultimately 
had a corrosive effect.Â  The litany of false claims, exaggerations 
and distortions have found expression in one of the most divisive and 
manipulative politicians in Australian history.Â  Hopefully Ms Hanson 
is now a spent force - time will tell.Â

Â

Whilst public support 
for multiculturalism has endured, there is no guarantee that this will 
continue in the face of a continued barrage of attacks.Â  Screaming 
headlines like “The Curse of the M word”, convey a sense of failure 
of a policy that has been overwhelmingly successful.Â

Â

Today we are seeing a new breed of critics, who have developed what 
appears to be a far more sophisticated assault on multiculturalism.Â  
They accuse it of being an impediment to the Australian identity.

Â

The new attack on multiculturalism, as a barrier to  the realisation 
of our true identity has made multiculturalism a scapegoat in a more 
complex fashion.Â  There are two prongs to this critique.Â  
One prong attacks on the ground that multiculturalism has either denied 
or denigrated Australia’s historical identity.Â  Simultaneously, 
the other prong blames multiculturalism for impeding our progression 
towards their vision of a new Australian identity.

Â

Two proponents of this 
latter school of thought are   The Australian’s  Paul Kelly and Professor Stephen Fitzgerald.

Â

Both argue that multiculturalism 
served as an impediment to the development of their ideal of a new Australian 
identity.

Â

For example, Kelly in 
his work,   The 
End of Certainty  suggests “ It is true that Labor pandered 
too much to the ethnic lobby; its enthusiasm for multiculturalism detracted 
from the promotion of an Australian identity…...”

Â

According to Fitzgerald, 
it was multiculturalism that impeded the development of Australia’s 
identity to meet the new focus on Asia.Â  In his recent book,   Is Australia an Asian 
Country , Fitzgerald claims :

Â

“There had been a 
moment, in the late 1970s, when the ending of the Vietnam War, East 
Timor, the new relationship with China, the boat people, and a dim awareness 
of how important Japan had become to us economically, produced some 
concentration of Australian attention on its Asian neighbours and on 
what manner of society we were, or wanted to be, in this neighbourhood.Â  
Multiculturalism turned the discussion of identity inwards upon itself, 
and it developed in what was an unforeseen and I believe entirely negative 
direction.”

Â

Multiculturalism to 
Fitzgerald distracted attention from the direction that Australian identity 
should have been taking.

Â

Professor Brian Galligan, 
writing in the November 1998 edition of   Quadrant , presents a variant of the Fitzgerald theme. Galligan 
bemoans the fact that, as Australia approaches its constitutional centenary, 
there is a lack of self-assurance among Australians. The cause, according 
to Galligan: “In the absence of a positive articulation of Australia’s 
political community and citizenship, multiculturalism increasingly filled 
the void from the 1970s on … Multiculturalism was inappropriate, however, 
as an articulation of our national identity…”

Â

But of course multiculturalism 
never sought to articulate an alternate national character.Â  Our 
identity is not a social entity devised in the halls of academia or 
Canberra. And multiculturalism is not some surrogate form of national 
identity. It is an integral component, but not itself the entity- in 
the same way that a wave is part of, but not itself an ocean.

Â

For these critics, Australia’s 
identity is considered inadequate to either meet the demands of the 
future or the region. So their attention turned to multiculturalism 
- as a scapegoat for the inability to develop the Australian identity 
they desired.

Â

However, the other prong 
of identity theory sees multiculturalism, not as the roadblock to our 
identity being refashioned, but as having denied and excluded an already 
developed and significant historical identity.

Â

Thus John Hirst suggests 
that “multiculturalism became an indictment of Australian society 
and ultimately a denial of its very existence….”

Â

Similarly, Michael James, 
the editor of the magazine   Agenda  accuses multiculturalism of denying Australia’s historical 
identity, achievements, and values. Multiculturalism, says James, “suggested 
that migrants need not try to adapt to Australia, because Australia 
would adapt to them, as if Australia were a sort of cultural terra nullius 
in which the residents way of life had no priority over those of the 
migrants.”

Â

But multiculturalism 
never defined or replaced Australia’s identity. It did accept the 
the primacy of our political and legal system and the centrality of 
English as the national language.Â  It was a recognition of a social 
reality and the impact on Australian culture of that reality. It did 
not seek to extinguish our traditions and values but sought to reaffirm 
and complement Australia’s cultural strengths.

Â

Multiculturalism was an intelligent and necessary response to the 
diversity of our immigrant population, to the need for equity in the 
government services provided to them and to the need to accommodate 
the unique cultures that our migrant population have  brought 
with them.Â  And rather than in any way seeking to extinguish that 
culture, it embraced it while successfully encouraging an overwhelming 
commitment to Australian core values.Â  James conjures up the imagery 
of multiculturalism encouraging a nation of immigrants contemptuous 
and dismissive of the way of life they found here.Â  That is false.Â  
Australia’s immigrant population overwhelmingly valued the Australian 
way of life, and added their own dimensions, to the enrichment of all 
Australians.

Â

The gre at irony is that those who believe that multiculturalism 
treated Australia as a cultural terra nullius so fundamentally misunderstood 
the issue that they made multiculturalism a scapegoat for attacks on 
Australian identity of which it is not guilty.

Â

With the impending new 
millennium, the Centenary of Federation and the republic referendum 
almost upon us, let alone the discussion about the preamble, our reflection 
on our identity is intensifying as it intensified in the approach to 
Federation nearly one hundred years ago.

Â

At this time in the 
last century Australian identity was in the process of being engineered 
on the basis of White Australia, later expressed in   The Bulletin’s  motto ‘Australia for the white man’, which 
effectively dismissed not only Aboriginal Australians, but also Asians 
and the entire female half of the population.Â  Thankfully, few 
Australians would want to go back to that expression of identity.

Â

Multiculturalism does 
not inhibit us from defining our national identity. An authentic Australian 
identity for the next millennium cannot be achieved through a rejection 
or denial of the positives of Australia’s reality. Multiculturalism 
is part of that reality.Â  It is not the sum of it, but it is an 
integral component.Â  Discrediting our achievements in order to 
redefine who we want to be is the politics of scapegoating.

Â

Ladies and Gentlemen, 
there is no end to the task of identifying ourselves as a nation.Â  
What is certain in my mind is that multiculturalism has added another 
dimension to Australia’s national identity which relied on and brought 
to the fore some of the best things that hold Australia together and 
that differentiate us from other nations.

Â

Australia has a strong 
and continually evolving identity. It is rich.Â  And it is the sum 
of our historical experience. It is not solely multiculturalism. Nor 
is it the republic debate, pre 1965 Australia, pre federation Australia, 
Aboriginal or Anglo Celtic Australia. It is the sum of all these and 
more. But even though our identity warriors try to define it as one 
or the other, to turn it into a battleground for their grand plans or 
reactionary status quo, our identity will continue to evolve and strengthen.

Â

Before I conclude tonight, 
I want to leave this message.

Â

Ours is an overwhelmingly 
tolerant and cohesive society.

Â

Multiculturalism embraces 
the best of Australia’s values.Â  It is part of our traditions 
and history.

Â

It is part of who we 
are today.Â  We cannot deny who we are, or what we were, if we are 
to create an honest future.

Â

In a nation that places 
freedom above all else, people cannot be free if they cannot be proud 
of who and what they are.Â  They cannot be free if they must be 
ashamed to wear a turban.Â  They cannot be free if they cannot pray 
at the mosque at lunchtime.Â  They cannot be free if they cannot 
hang a Chinese sign outside their store.

Â

Multiculturalism gives 
our nation that freedom.Â

Â

It gives our people 
the dignity to be Australian, without denying their heritage.

Â

Thank you

Â

Â

Â

jyÂ  1999-06-17Â  10:06

