About | Contact | Support Us | People | Policies | Parliament | Media | News | Search

ACT | NSW | NT | QLD | SA | TAS | VIC | WA | YADS

Media Releases

Senator Andrew Bartlett Senator for Queensland Australian Democrats spokesperson for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs

Press Release Dated: 10 Apr 2000 Press Release Number: 00194ab Portfolio: Immigration and Multicultural Affairs

Just because it’s legal, doesn’t make it right “Just because it is legal, doesn’t make it right”, the Australian Democrats said of the Immigration Minister’s efforts to deport the Kosovar refugees, efforts which the High Court today ruled to be legal.

Democrat immigration spokesperson, Senator Andrew Bartlett, said, “The Immigration Minister may be playing by the rules, but the Government made its own rules in April last year, when they insisted on the passage of the Temporary Safe Haven legislation before allowing the refugees into Australia.

“The Government always intended to cover themselves legally so they could take the morally repugnant step of forcibly deporting these Kosovar refugees without having to abide by any of the normal refugee determination processes that apply in Australia.”

“Ironically, if these refugees had never come here they would have a better chance of getting a permanent place,” he said.

Senator Bartlett accused the Government of using the Safe Haven legislation as a cover to get around Australia’s obligations under the Refugees Convention.

“The Government’s legislation removed all rights from the Kosovars and placed their entire future at the mercy of the Immigration Minister. There is no right of appeal, no requirement to follow natural justice and not even any guidelines required to be followed,” Senator Bartlett said.

“In such a situation, it’s not surprising some of the Kosovar people have reacted in the way that they have.

“We now have the utterly outrageous situation where a place that was a Safe Haven has overnight been turned into a Detention Centre,” said Senator Bartlett.

“This all could have been avoided if the Minister had not taken away the rights of the Kosovars before allowing them to come here - or if he had simply been prepared to make a small expansion to the refugee program to allow for victims of the war in Kosovo.

“We could have offered these people a permanent haven instead of the sad, desperate situation the Minister has created. All these extra costs for cancelled flights, private security guards and court cases could have been put into services for genuine refugees.

“This has been a very expensive exercise in terms of funds, as well as the human cost, just so the Government can send a message that it is tough on migration.”

The Australian Democrats have accused the Government of a lack of compassion in relation to the Kosovar refugees.

The Democrats and others have repeatedly called, over the past twelve months, for the refugees to have the same rights as any other person on Australian soil to apply for protection in Australia through the normal processes.



Top | Email Authorised by: Jim Downey, 10 Brisbane Avenue, Barton ACT 2604. Copyright Â© 2000 Australian Democrats

http://www.democrats.org.au/media/display.htm Last modified: Thu, 09 Mar 2000 14:37:46 Today: Wed, 12 Apr 2000 12:31:25

