

MEDIA RELEASE

Â

LAURIE BRERETON MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS

Â

12 January 2000

2/00

Â

REFUGEE SITUATION IN WEST TIMOR

Â

The Shadow Minister for Foreign Affairs, Laurie Brereton, today called 
on the Australian Government in boost humanitarian assist ance 
to East Timorese refugees in West Timor.

Â

“The report in today’s   Jakarta Post  that more than 400 East Timorese have died of 
disease in refugee camps further illustrates the very serious humanitarian 
situation in West Timor”, the Shadow Minister for Foreign Affairs, 
Laurie Brereton, said.

Â

The   Jakarta Post  quotes data issued by the East Nusa Tenggara (West 
Timor) administration revealing that 310 of the victims were children, 
with 262 below the age of five years. Adults made up 185 of the victims. 
Earlier this week the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) released 
a survey which revealed that 24 per cent of East Timorese children in 
West Timor are suffering from moderate to severe malnutrition. Four 
per cent are severely malnourished, making the situation an ‘alarming’ 
one which UNICEF considers warrants immediate remedial action. Between 
100 and 140 thousand East Timorese remain in refugee camps in West Timor.

Â

“East Timorese refugees in West Timor are at severe 
risk of dying from preventable diseases”, Mr Brereton said. “In 
December the World Health Organisation warned that contaminated water 
supplies and unhygienic conditions were likely to lead to a deteriorating 
health situation. Outbreaks of malaria and dengue fever were also anticipated 
with the onset of the wet season.”

Â

“Although the activity of pro-Indonesia militias 
in the refugee camps is reported to have declined, reports of harassment, 
intimidation and extortion continue to be received. As recently as 20 
December, an Amnesty International team found that many refugees are 
unable to freely decide to return to East Timor. According to Amnesty 
International: ‘Given the general climate of fear, degradation and 
misinformation, it is no wonder that the flow of refugees across the 
border between West and East Timor has slowed down to a trickle in the 
last few weeks.”’

Â

“It is also of deep concern that the West Timor 
provincial administration has advised that emergency humanitarian aid 
to the refugees will cease at the end of February. The Coordinating 
Minister for People’s Welfare and Poverty Eradication Basri Hasanuddin 
is also reported to have indicated the Indonesian Government lacks the 
funds to continue humanitarian programs beyond the current fiscal year 
ending 31 March.”

Â

‘The Australian Government allocated $3 million 
last December to meet emergency health needs of East Timorese refugees 
in West Timor. While this was an appropriate initial contribution, the 
deteriorating health conditions and deaths make it essential that Australia 
provide further medical and other humanitarian assistance without delay.”

Â

“Indonesia faces enormous humanitarian challenges, 
especially those arising from the continuing religious violence in the 
Maluku Islands. Labor last week called for Australia to be generous 
in offering humanitarian assistance to help Indonesia alleviate the 
consequences of these conflicts. The prompt provision of additional 
assistance to the refugees in West Timor would be a further important 
contribution to help address growing humanitarian crises in Eastern 
Indonesia.”

Â

Contact: Philip Dorling 02 6277 4717 or 0416 203 058

Â

Â

ddÂ  2000-01-14Â  10:48

