8 August 2000

POLICE OVERSEAS SERVICE MEDALS - EAST TIMOR Minister for Justice and Customs, Senator Amanda Vanstone, will today present Police Overseas Service Medals and Clasps to members of the Australian Federal Police at Parliament House.

The ceremony will be held in the Mural Hall, Parliament House, at 11am, and will be attended by approximately 65 AFP officers, their families and guests. 16 officers will receive the medals or clasps in the ceremony.

"AFP officers were amongst the first international contingents into East Timor, having served there since July 1999, when they played a significant role in the successful conduct of the self-determination ballot,’ Senator Vanstone said.

"It was in fact, only the unarmed civilian police, mostly Australian and led by an Australian, who refused to give up when others were ready to leave East Timor. They stood between armed militia and the defenceless people of East Timor.

"Without that group and their willingness, or determination, to hold on in a desperate and dangerous situation, the United Nations may have in fact withdrawn.

"More than 250 Australian police have now served in East Timor, as part of an ongoing commitment by the Australian government to the restoration of peace and democracy in the new nation. And our police are still there.

"The presentation today of Police Overseas Service Medals to those members who have served is an important acknowledgement of the

contribution of Australian police to the people of East Timor."

Similar presentations are being held around Australia.

The Police Overseas Service Medal was originally created to recognise Australian police serving in Cyprus. It is a counterpart medal to the Australian Service Medal, which recognises members of the Australian Defence Force who serve on overseas campaigns. The medal is now awarded for peacekeeping in other operations. Background information on the AFP’s involvement in United Nations missions and East Timor, and more detail regarding the police overseas service medal is contained below.



Media Background:

AFP involvement in peacekeeping

Australian police have been serving with UN missions since 25 May 1964, when 40 officers stepped onto the island of Cyprus to help keep the peace between it's two conflicting peoples — the Greek and Turkish Cypriots.

The responsibility passed to the Australian Federal Police on its formation in 1979.

The AFP’s role in Cyprus can be likened to community policing without the normal recourse of arrest and presentation of evidence in a court of law. The AFP provides 20 personnel on rotation, with continued involvement being assessed on the renewal of each six-month mandate.

In early 1989, two AFP superintendents were seconded to work with the United Nations Border Relief Operation (UNBRO) in Aranyaprathet, in north-eastern Thailand, to assist the UN and the Thai government to improve security and protection of 300,000 displaced Cambodians located in refugee camps along the Thai-Cambodian border.

In May 1992, 10 Australian Federal Police officers were sent to Cambodia as part of Australia's contribution to the United Nations Transitional Authority in Cambodia (UNTAC). In January 1993 the original contingent was relieved by a second contingent of 10.

The contingent's role was to assist in bringing peace and democratic elections to Cambodia, a country which had been devastated by war for more than 20 years.

In May 1993, one AFP officer was seconded to UNOSOM II to provide advice on the need for police monitors and, where possible, organise the development and training of a civilian police authority in Somalia. In November 1993, a second AFP officer was appointed as the director of police services and deputy director of justice in Somalia.

Two contingents of AFP officers served with the UN in Mozambique in 1994, aiding civil authorities in restoring law and order to an infrastructure that had broken down during civil war.

Twenty-five AFP officers, three members of the Victoria Police and two members of the Queensland Police served in Haiti from October

1994 until March 1995 as part of a multinational force formed in the wake of a military coup.

Following peace talks in Burnham, New Zealand in October 1997, four AFP members were deployed to Bougainville as part of the Truce Monitoring Group. The TMG concluded in April 1998 and was replaced with a Peace Monitoring Group to which two AFP officers were seconded on a 12-week rotational basis.

Fifty members of the Australian Federal Police left Australia in June 1999 as part of the United Nations Assistance Mission in East Timor. UNAMET was established to oversee the conduct of the UN-sponsored ballot on the future of the province.

The role of civilian police in UNAMET was to advise members of the Indonesian police in the course of their duties and to escort ballot boxes after the vote.

Violence erupted in East Timor in the wake of the ballot, and UNAMET members existed in conditions of extreme hardship and personal danger until a decision was made to evacuate the mission's headquarters in Dili and posts in outlying areas.

With the deployment of the Australian-led International Force in East Timor, civilian police returned to East Timor. They continue to serve there under the auspices of the United Nations Transitional Authority in East Timor, carrying out monitoring and advisory duties.



Police Overseas Service Medal

The Police Overseas Service Medal was established in 1991 to recognise service with the international peacekeeping organisations by officers of Australian police forces and other designated classes of persons.

The Regulations permit the Governor-General, on advice of the Minister for Justice and Customs, to declare any period of service with an international peacekeeping organisation to be prescribed service. This provision permits backdating.

The Medal comes with a Clasp to denote the area of prescribed service and any subsequent award to the same person is made in the form of a further clasp appropriately inscribed.

Awards of the Medal are made by the Governor-General on the recommendation of the Chief Officer of an Australian police force.

The Police Overseas Service Medal is a nickel silver circular medal ensigned with the Crown of Saint Edward. The obverse bears a globe of the world focused on Cyprus, where a large number of Australian police have served over a long period, surmounted by a branch of wattle, which represents Australia.

The globe and wattle are surrounded around the rim of the medal by a chequerboard pattern representative of police forces worldwide. The reverse includes an inscription pane, the Federation Star and the words "Police Overseas Service Medal" around the rim. The riband is a chequerboard pattern of alternating black and white squares, six squares across, representing police service.

Return to Index

