Kim Beazley - Doorstop Interview

Â

Subjects: Stolen Generation, Petrol Prices, Kosovo Refugees, John 
Moore, Collins Class Submarines, Bulletin Article, Datacasting

Â

Transcript - Parliament House, Canberra - 12 April 2000

Â

E & OE - Proof Only

Â

JOURNALIST: Do you think that the Prime Minister 
has gone, actually gone some way to alleviate the concerns of Aboriginal 
groups. After the dinner last night, they seemed to be quite surprised 
at how well it went.

Â

BEAZLEY: Well, I hope it went well, and I hope 
the Prime Minister changes. There has to be not words, but underpinning 
realities. And they have, as a group of people, been terribly ill-served 
by this Prime Minister over the course of the last few weeks and months. 
Terribly ill-served. It is not just enough for the Prime Minister to 
offer a friendly face. He has to come forward with realities. He has 
to retreat from what he had to say about the stolen generation. Genuinely 
retreat from that. He has to be very, very careful that he monitors 
the impact of the changes that are being made in the Northern Territory 
to see if it makes any darn difference at all. And he needs to stop 
exploiting Aboriginal issues for political purposes, and doing so, so 
obviously, as he has been in the last few weeks. What you find of the 
Aboriginal people in this country is that they are extraordinarily willing 
to take what you say at face value. They offer a very friendly face 
to government, but, at the same time, they are easily let down, and 
this Prime Minister has been into letting them down big time.

Â

JOURNALIST: Was last night important ...(inaudible)...

Â

BEAZLEY: There have been these steps before. 
There have been these meetings before. The reality is what emerges in 
the document on reconciliation and the Prime Minister's commitment to 
seeing it come through. The reality is what emerges in dealing with 
the issues in relation to the stolen generation. The reality is the 
impact of any of these changes on the effect on the Aboriginal community 
of mandatory sentencing in Darwin. I mean, these are the realities. 
Either, these things move forward and, therefore, we do have a genuine 
bringing together of our whole community, or they don't and the running 
sore is still open.

Â

JOURNALIST: Well, Geoff Clark said last night 
that they didn't really move forward at all. That he has done nothing, 
and Mr Howard has refused to budge, and they are just further frustrated 
now than they were before the meeting.

Â

BEAZLEY: Well, that is the problem. There just 
has to be movement from this Government. Australian people want to put 
this issue behind them. The Australian people in their minds on these 
issues are way beyond the Prime Minister. The Australian people have 
a generous open heart on this, and he is closed-minded.

Â

JOURNALIST: On the issue of petrol prices, the 
move to actually give the money back to the retailers. Is that going 
to go a long way to bringing prices down?

Â

BEAZLEY: Every day, more taxpayers' dollars are 
thrown to cover more lies that the Liberal Party told us about the GST 
during the last election campaign. One lie after another dealt with 
by huge infusions of taxpayers' dollars, and more and more complexity. 
Remember, this is the Government that asked for simplicity. Now we have 
got the dipstick police on diesel fuel. But I suppose the dipstick police 
are going to double up with the thermometer police for cooked chickens. 
And they are going to double up with another set of dipstick police 
for the locations of the boundaries associated with this latest promise 
on petrol. This is an incredibly complex tax, now, and more and more 
taxpayers' dollars, which could go into public hospitals and education, 
have to be spent on making up for the Government's lies and saving the 
face of Costello.

Â

JOURNALIST: ...that petrol prices will be cheaper 
in the bush..?

Â

BEAZLEY: Why are they under threat anyway? They 
are under threat anyway because of the Government's tax on a tax. It 
is the Government's GST, the effect of the Government's tax on top of 
fuel excise. That is the only reason why there is a differential in 
tax treatment between the bush and the city, which they are now trying 
to cure. If they weren't doing this in the first place, they wouldn't 
have this problem.

Â

JOURNALIST: Do you think the complexity of the 
boundaries would be the biggest problem?

Â

BEAZLEY: Well, who is going to fall on what side, 
and what about suburban Australia. I invite you to go into the western 
suburbs of Sydney, the eastern suburbs of Perth, the eastern and northern 
suburbs of Melbourne, and ask them what their petrol prices are like. 
And see how they feel about it. The moment you go down this road of 
trying to make up for your lies, then you raise all sorts of other anomalies. 
And you are going to find this repeated in so many areas of the impact 
of the goods and services tax over the next twelve months. You know, 
John Howard is out there saying, 'oh look, after July 1st everything 
will be revealed and everything will be good and everybody will want 
to ask Kim Beazley questions about what he is going to do'. Everything 
will be revealed after July 1st. And what will be revealed is anomaly 
after anomaly, unfairness after unfairness, and we will just have to 
sit there and look through all these things as we start going through 
the process of making this incredibly complex tax less complex and less 
unfair.

Â

JOURNALIST: Should Australians be ashamed how 
the Kosovo refugees situation is unfolding in the light of the fact 
that..?

Â

BEAZLEY: No Mr Ruddock should be, not Australians. 
Australians have welcomed the Kosovo refugees with enormous open hearts. 
I am very proud of my fellow Australians and the way in which they have 
treated these refugees since they have been here. And I understand that 
there is always going to be a problem associated with them returning. 
We understood that at the outset. But, at the outset, I said we need 
to keep a generous open heart for exactly the sort of circumstances 
that we now find ourselves in. The last few, many of whom will have 
been traumatised, and some of whom are only admitting now how far they 
have been traumatised by their experience. And it is still clear that 
there are areas of great danger and some folk are going to those areas. 
And, really, at this stage, with so few left, the Minister ought to 
allow them to apply on a case by case basis and have those cases individually 
considered.

Â

JOURNALIST: What do you think about John Moore's 
preselection battle seeming to rear its head again?

Â

BEAZLEY: Well, I was told by a Liberal the other 
day that branch stacking in the Labor Party is a bagatelle compared 
to the Queensland Liberal Party, a bagatelle compared to the Queensland 
Liberal Party. So, no doubt there will be a few television programs 
on that in the not too distant future.

Â

JOURNALIST: Just on another John Moore, defence-related 
issue. A report this morning that they are considering leasing aircraft 
and submarines from private companies of foreign countries. Do you think 
this is going to further jeopardise Australia's defence capabilities?

Â

BEAZLEY: We ought to take a look at all propositions 
which keep capabilities up, but lessen the cost. But I am in favour, 
basically, of building our equipment here, as much of it as we can. 
And we ought to be encouraging those processes. We build defence equipment 
very well. But we will take a look at any sensible options that keep 
the cost of that down, the cost of our national security down.

Â

JOURNALIST: We build defence equipment very well, 
except the Collins Class Submarines. A great track record.

Â

BEAZLEY: The Collins Class Submarine is now being 
competed for, in terms of ownership, by the two best submarine builders 
in the world. When Electric Boat, the principal nuclear submarine builder, 
and HDW, the principal conventional submarine builder, desperately want 
a piece of the action, what does that tell you about the Collins Class 
Submarine?

Â

JOURNALIST: You would say that, though, wouldn't 
you, when you were Defence Minister at the time the contract was signed?

Â

BEAZLEY: What does it say about the submarine, 
when the two best submarine builders in the world want a piece of the 
action? You know, I have a bit of a feeling that this submarine has 
been a victim of politics. There is always going to be in a piece of 
equipment the glitches in its introduction. But, as I understand it, 
most of those are now resolved, and what we have is a submarine that 
the best boat builders in the world, submarine builders in the world, 
want to get their hands on. I think it is time the story started to 
change.

Â

JOURNALIST: ...front cover of the Bulletin. Are 
you happy with the coverage of that article?

Â

BEAZLEY: I like the article, but I didn't know 
I was so ugly.

Â

JOURNALIST: The article itself, though, has looked 
at your personality and perhaps ... about your softness and about you 
not actually reading newspaper articles...

Â

BEAZLEY: Well, I don't often read newspaper articles 
about myself, that is true. I think folk who do tend to get a little 
bit vain or unnecessarily depressed. But, nevertheless, I am a devotee 
of the media, as any politician must be. On the question of whether 
or not I am hard enough to be in this business, I have been in it 20 
years. I have been in the toughest fights in government over 13 of those 
years. I am now leading a Party in tough political circumstances. I 
reckon I have developed the sorts of thick layers of skin that you need 
to survive. And, more to the point, it is only, now, the Labor Party 
that has the ideas in the field for this century. The Liberal Party 
has run out of ideas and, in particular, John Howard has run out of 
ideas. The thing that I like about that article is that it shows we 
are the only people out there with a view of where we ought to be going.

Â

JOURNALIST: ...(inaudible)...

Â

BEAZLEY: Our main concern is with datacasting, 
to tell you the truth. Because that is what is going to allow a degree 
of diversity. That is, if you like, going to allow the next generation 
of information services to come into play in this country. Probably 
with considerable advantages for those in regional Australia, but also 
for the development of new industries and new businesses. And that is 
the area of our concern and that report says that the regime that is 
being offered is going to be restrictive and damaging to those objectives. 
And so what we have said is if they want this through by the middle 
of this year, then they had better start showing us their legislation 
so that we can start to make up our minds on it.

Â

Ends

Â

Authorised by Geoff Walsh, 19 National Circuit, 
Barton ACT 2600.

Â

