Indonesia: Humanitarian Crisis In Maluku

Â

Laurie Brereton - Shadow Minister For Foreign Affairs

Â

Media Statement - 22 February 2000

Â

The Shadow Minister for Foreign Affairs, Laurie 
Brereton, today renewed Labor's call on the Australian Government to 
offer additional humanitarian assistance to help Indonesia address the 
consequences of violence in the Maluku Islands.

Â

"Although religious violence in Indonesia's 
Maluku Islands has for the moment subsided, an appalling humanitarian 
crisis continues on Australia's doorstep", Mr Brereton said. "International 
media attention has evaporated, but the problem hasn't gone away. Substantial 
humanitarian assistance from Australia would be very valuable."

Â

"According to a previously undisclosed assessment 
by Indonesian Government and International Agencies, nearly 370,000 
people have been forced to flee their homes and communities in Maluku. 
This figure is much higher than earlier estimates of internal refugees 
from religious conflict in the province. Nearly 1,700 people were reported 
killed in North Maluku in late December and January."

Â

"A Joint Assessment Mission comprising 21 
representatives of the Indonesian Government and United Nations and 
other International Agencies, visited Maluku from 22 to 27 January. 
The Mission presented its report to diplomatic posts in Jakarta on 6 
February."

Â

"The Joint Assessment Mission confirmed 
that urgent funding is needed for relief efforts in Maluku, especially 
for food, health, water supply and sanitation."

Â

"Cases of malnutrition were observed in 
Ternate in North Maluku where there is an urgent need to expand relief 
operations. Health services throughout Maluku have been severely disrupted 
with 'the combination of reduced medical manpower and increased pressure 
for medical services rapidly turn[ing] into a nightmare for both patients 
and health administration'."

Â

"The Joint Assessment Mission assesses overall 
humanitarian assistance needs at US$83.4 million, with only $US12.4 
million presently available from the Indonesian Government and committed 
international funding. A very substantial shortfall in funds amounting 
to US$71 million was identified."

Â

"Given the fragile nature of the present 
security situation, the Joint Mission highlighted the need for preparedness 
to further expand relief operations. A resumption of widespread fighting 
would compound the humanitarian situation massively."

Â

"Last year Australia provided a modest $766,000 
in food aid and $1.45 million in medical supplies to assist relief efforts 
in Maluku. Since then the humanitarian situation has deteriorated dramatically."

Â

"Labor has repeatedly called on the Australian 
Government to offer additional assistance to alleviate suffering in 
the Maluku Islands. To date there has been no response. The Joint Assessment 
Mission Report which has been in the hands of the Australian Government 
for more than two weeks, leaves no doubt about the urgent need for substantial 
international assistance."

Â

"A prompt and generous offer of additional 
humanitarian assistance would be an appropriate response to a major 
crisis on Australia's doorstep. It would be the act of a good neighbour. 
The Australian Government has already hesitated too long. They should 
act now."

Â

The Joint Assessment Mission Report is available 
from Mr Brereton's Office.

Â

Authorised by Gary Gray, 19 National Circuit, 
Barton ACT 2600.

Â

