President Wahid's Summit Meeting Proposal Laurie Brereton - Shadow Minister for Foreign Affairs

Media Statement - 2 November 2000

Printer friendly page

The Shadow Minister for Foreign Affairs, Laurie Brereton, today called on the Howard Government to endorse Indonesian President Abdurrahman Wahid's proposal for a summit meeting between Indonesia, Australia, East Timor and Portugal.

"The proposed four-nation summit meeting has the potential to provide a much needed circuit-breaker for the Australia-Indonesia relationship", Mr Brereton said.

"It is now reported that both Portuguese Prime Minister Antonio Guterres and East Timorese Foreign Minister Jose Ramos Horta have declared support for the proposed summit. Australia is the one country yet to give clear endorsement to the idea."

"Prime Minister Howard should drop his insistence that President Wahid must visit Australia before any broader meeting can take place."

"Mr Howard and President Wahid have had only two brief meetings, one on the fringe of a State Funeral in Tokyo and the other at the UN Millennium Summit in New York."

"A further short encounter on the margins of the forthcoming APEC meeting in Brunei in mid-November is by itself unlikely to advance the bilateral relationship.

"If Mr Howard is serious about building a new relationship with Indonesia, he should seize the opportunity provided by President Wahid's initiative and use discussions in Brunei to work out an agenda for a summit before the end of this year."

"This would allow substantive discussions on a wide range of pressing issues including security on the border between East Timor and West Timor, the fate of East Timorese refugees in West Timor, and future relations between Indonesia, Australia and the soon to be independent East Timor."

"It would provide a critical opportunity for Australia and Indonesia to begin building a new neighbourly relationship."

"Mr Howard should stop the game-playing that has seen the vital Australia-Indonesia relationship drift to its lowest ebb since the Konfrontasi of the early 1960s. He should move without delay to embrace President Wahid's initiative."

Authorised by Geoff Walsh, 19 National Circuit, Barton ACT 2600.

