

Marston, G. (2002), ‘Fashion, fiction, fertile inquiry? Struggling with the postmodern challenge and  social policy analysis’, in T. Eardley and B. Bradbury, eds, Competing Visions: Refereed Proceedings  of the National Social Policy Conference 2001, SPRC Report 1/02, Social Policy Research Centre,  University of New South Wales, Sydney. 298-316.

Fashion,  Fiction,  Fertile  Inquiry?

Struggling  With  the  Postmodern  Challenge   and Social Policy Analysis

Greg Marston  School of Social Work and Social Policy, University of Queensland

1  Introduction

Until relatively recently, a profound silence could be heard in core social policy as to  the  postmodern,  conveying  a  notion  of  isolation  from  key  trends  in  social  theory   (Carter,  1998:  102). While  some  policy academics  and  practitioners  have  seized  on   the  possibilities  offered  by  poststructural  understandings  of  power,  identity,   knowledge  and  discourse,  many  question  its  exploratory  and  explanatory  potential   (Yeatman,  1994).  It  is  perhaps  not  surprising  that  ‘orthodox’  social  policy  research   remains  sceptical  and  even  hostile  towards  the  intellectual  perspectives  offered  by   postmodernism.  Social  policy  research,  that  which  is  understood  as  the  academic   study of welfare, has an unavoidably structural element; its whole history as a subject  (its causal logics, its research tools; its statistical headings) has been concerned with  patterned  disadvantage  (Carter,  1998:  110;  Deacon  and  Mann,  1999).  To  relinquish   that is to apparently relinquish its core goals and purposes. As Taylor-Gooby (1994:  403) argues, 'The implications for social policy are that an interest in postmodernism  may cloak developments of considerable importance'.

While some academics in the social policy community may choose to stand firm and  argue that social policy does not bend to the dictates of fashion, the risk is that new  lines of inquiry, issues and questions will be overlooked, and opportunities for a richer  and  more  sophisticated  account  of  policy  practices  may  be  missed.  Advocates  of   postmodern  approaches  to  social  policy  issues  claim,  among  other  things,  that  this   diverse body of theory draws attention to local struggles and transformations, to the  dialectical relationship between language and material practices and to the centrality  of identity, difference and culture in social change - practices and processes that were  previously  obscured  (Fairclough,  1995;  Penna  and  O’Brien,  1996;  Mann,  1998).  Of   course, these claims should not be taken at face value.

This  paper  addresses  the  question  of  the  usefulness  of  postmodernism  for  social   policy, focusing attention on social policy analysis1 and starting from the assumption

1  Typically the social policy tradition is distinguished from the broader category of public policy analysis.  The dominant perspective in public policy analysis is to look at political decision making, exploring such  phenomena as the operations of power and the influence of interest groups, while social policy centres  on the normative bases and distributional consequences of particular policies (Petersen et al., 1999: 7). In  this section I will be drawing on and evaluating both forms of overlapping policy literature, as both are  relevant to the concerns of social policy given that the processes of policy making are what constitutes  policy outcomes.

STRUGGLING WITH THE POSTMODERN CHALLENGE

299

that poststructuralism is no different to other new schools that tend to overemphasise  the  distinctiveness  of  their  own  approach  and  to  dwell  at  some  length  on  the   deficiencies  of  what  went  before  (Petersen,  et  al.,  1999:  7).  In  the  first  part  of  this   paper,  I  briefly  summarise  the  academic  social  policy  debate  about  the  value  of   postmodernism for social policy analysis, and in so doing introduce the concepts that  will be further explored later. In the second part, I outline some of the key theoretical  tensions  that  distinguish  positivism,  critical  theory  and  postmodernism.  In  the  third   and  final  part  of  the  paper,  I  seek  to  demonstrate  the  value  of  postmodernist   approaches  to  social  policy  analysis,  to  show  how  a  ‘critical  postmodernism’   (Yeatman,  1994;  Carter,  1998)  offers  productive  ways  of  thinking  about   contemporary social policy issues. In illustrating these possibilities, I focus on critical  discourse analysis as one site where a critical postmodernism can be made operational  in  studies  of  the  policy  process.  In  summary,  this  paper  argues  for  a  constructive   dialogue between postmodernism and social policy research, where the task is one of  augmentation and adding - not replacing existing research paradigms.

The Debate So Far

In the last three decades of the twentieth century, all the disciplines  in  the  social  sciences  have  experienced  a  fundamental  reappraisal   of  their  basic  assumptions,  theories  and  methods.  The  most   significant  common  feature  of  this  reappraisal  is  the  recognition   that ‘culture’ deserves much more serious attention as an object of  study in its own right and this has produced a reassessment of the  linguistic,  discursive  and  cultural  conditions  of  social  research   (Smith, 1998: 231).

The  above  quote  captures  trends  in  epistemology,  postmodern  social  theory  and   analytical  frameworks  that  are  reassessing  the  importance  of  language  and  culture.   Missing from  the  above  excerpt,  however,  are   the  differentiated  effects  that  the  so-called  ‘cultural  turn’  has  had  on  social  science  disciplines  that  remain  resistant  to   alternative epistemologies. In the area of social policy analysis for instance, there are  policy  academics  that  remain  sceptical  about  the  postmodernist  critique  of   conventional  social  science  (Taylor-Gooby,  1994;  O’Neill,  1995),  while  others  are   more  optimistic  about  the  possibilities  offered  by  these  intellectual  perspectives   (Bacchi, 1999; Clark, 1998; Carter, 1998; Leonard, 1997).

There  are  many  reasons  that  may  explain  an  ambivalent  attitude  towards   postmodernism. The subject of social policy is under a massive weight of history and  orthodox visions of what is proper are deeply embedded in educational institutions -  at present it is somewhat like asking a currently unadapted car to run on unleaded fuel  (Carter, 1998: 110). On another level, the debate stems from a question about whether  the study of culture, discourse and meaning should replace the traditional concerns of  social policy, or whether this fluid body of theory is able to sit alongside established  research paradigms.

Claim and Counter-Claim

Over the past five to ten  years, social policy research has started to engage with the  question about the usefulness of postmodernism for policy research. In the mid 1990s,  the Journal  of  Social  Policy  published  a  debate  about  whether  postmodernism   represented a ‘great step backwards’, or ‘a small step forwards’. Here the debate was

GREG MARSTON

300

polarised. On one hand, there was Taylor-Gooby (1994) who viewed postmodernism  as depoliticising the agenda of social policy. On the other hand, there was Penna and  O’Brien  (1996)  who  believed  the  different  strands  of  poststructuralism  and   postmodernism  offered  alternative  theoretical  frameworks  and  a  more  inclusive   political agenda to address contemporary welfare state restructuring.

Taylor-Gooby  (1994:  only  one  space  after  colon  385)  argued  that  postmodernism   contributes  to  depoliticising  social  inequality  and  disadvantage,  by  discrediting   structural analysis and emphasising plurality and relativism:

Postmodernism  ignores  the  significance  of  market  liberalism  and   the associated trends to inequality, retrenchment and the regulation  of  the  poorest  groups.  From  this  perspective,  postmodernism   functions  as  an  ideological  smoke  screen,  preventing  us  from   recognising  some  of  the  most  important  trends  in  modern  social   policy.

In this argument, the value of postmodernism is being evaluated against a modernist  understanding of ‘truth’ and ‘reality’, articulated within a meta-narrative about market  liberalism. In response, Fitzpatrick (1996: 306) states that Taylor-Gooby largely bases  his  reservations  about  postmodernism  on  assertions,  rather  than  argument,  and  as  a   result  he  does  not  ask  whether  postmodernist  theory  could  be  used  to  develop  a   critique  of  economic  liberalism.  In  other  words,  setting  up  unitary  conceptions  of   modernism  and  postmodernism  as  ‘binary  opposites’  does  nothing  to  clarify  that   which  is  useful  in  recent  theoretical  debates  (Taylor,  1998:  31;  Thompson  and   Hoggett, 1996).

Taking a more positive interpretation in their article in the Journal of Social Policy,  Penna  and  O’Brien  (1996:  60)  believe  that  social  policy  analysis  can  and  should   benefit from postmodernist theorising:

At  the  level  of  political  culture  and  at  the  level  of  political   economy  the  capacity  of  normative  policy  analysis  to  deliver   effective  solutions  to  the  multiple  lines  of  exclusion  and   marginalisation  characteristic  of  contemporary  society  is  at  best   uncertain.  Postindustrial,  postfordist,  poststructuralist  and   postmodernist  writings,  separately  and  together,  provide  the   discipline of social policy with alternative theoretical perspectives  and  a  political  agenda  with  which  to  address  the  complexity  of   current restructuring.

However, for these ideas to influence social policy, they need to appear as operational  and utilisable constructs for the study of welfare (Carter, 1998: 104). This empirical  challenge has started to be taken up in recent years.

A Practical Engagement

In the late 1990s, through a series of edited collections and journal articles, the debate  about  the  utility  of  postmodern  thought  moved  toward  a  practical  engagement  with   contemporary social policy issues (see Carter 1998; Mann, 1998; Ferge, 1997; Taylor,  1998;  Leonard,  1997,  Fraser,  1997;  Culpitt,  1999;  and  Bosworth,  1999).  In  the   Australian context, among others, Dean (1997, 1999) has developed Foucault’s work

STRUGGLING WITH THE POSTMODERN CHALLENGE

301

on governmentality into an analytical technique to interrogate the construction of the  unemployed  citizen  and  labour  market  programs  in  general.  Using  a  theory  of   discourse,  Bacchi  (1999)  and  earlier,  Watts  (1993),  have  employed  theories  of   discourse  to  understand  policy  as  discursive  practice.  Yeatman  (1994)  assesses  the   implications  of  postmodern  feminist  theorising  for  questions  about  the  state  and   community.  Petersen  (1999,  et  al.)  have  employed  poststructural  accounts  of  power   and knowledge to discuss questions of citizenship, technology and public welfare in  Australia. These writers have all engaged with issues that are of current importance to  the social policy field.

The critical interests of social policy - an analysis of power relations, the state and an  overriding  concern  with  the  distribution  of  resources  -  have  not  been  lost  in  these   accounts.  However,  the  way  in  which  these  constructs  are  conceptualised  is  very   different  to  how  they  have  been  discussed  in  a  modernist  discourse.  In  this  respect,   postmodernist  thinking  stands  in  a  critical,  but  not  necessarily  an  oppositional,   relation  to  modernist  ideas.  Postmodernism  acts  as  an  analytical  aid  by  opening  up   different ways of thinking about rights and justice. ’Postmodern emancipatory vision  does not offer a utopian future, but works to develop contestatory political and public  spaces, which open up in relation to existing forms of governance‘ (Yeatman, 1994:  ix).

This brief summary of the debate about the value of postmodernism for social policy  analysis suggests a particular account of what postmodernism signifies. In this paper,  for example, I am not using the terms modernism and postmodernism to describe two  distinct historical eras, or to assert that we have moved into a postmodern age.

The  ‘post’  prefix  is  used  here  to  denote  a  different  intellectual  and  philosophical   orientation  to  the  project  of  modernity.  ’The  term  ”post”  suggests  that  it  is  possible  now to bound the project of modernity, to discern its features, to understand the kind  of  paradigm  it  comprises‘  (Yeatman,  1994:  8).  In  exploring  the  discourse  of   modernity and its influence on social policy research, I want to consider briefly some  of  the  distinguishing  characteristics  of  traditional  and  postmodern  approaches  to   policy analysis, which have been touched on in the above discussion. In the following  section,  I  have  been  careful  to  avoid  simply  rehashing  the  somewhat  tired   philosophical  binary  between  positivism  and  post-positivism  (Mann,  1998).  Yet,  at   the same time, and as a starting point for a dialogue, it is important to have a sense of  what  defines  these  different  paradigms  before  discussing  how  a  ‘critical   postmodernism’ (Yeatman, 1994; Carter, 1998) might be envisaged and practised in  studies of the policy process, and social policy research more generally.

2  Evaluating  the  Differences  Between  Positivist,  Critical  and   Postmodern Social Policy Analyses  This section explores some of the competing epistemologies that have informed social  policy  analysis,  including  positivism,  critical  theory  and  postmodernism.  A  detailed   evaluation  of  these  paradigms  is  beyond  the  scope  of  this  paper.  In  the  following   discussion I have focused on a brief appraisal of the major features of each position.  What will be identified and defined in this discussion are the conceptual tools that can

be  used  to  constitute  a  form  of  critical  social  policy research,  which  is  informed  by  poststructural theorising.

GREG MARSTON

302

Positivism and Social Policy Analysis

In short, positivism is based on a notion that the laws of understanding and studying  the  ‘natural’  world  also  apply  to  the  social  world.  ’Positivism  assumes  an   unproblematic  relationship  between  conventional  knowledge  of  the  nature  of  the   world  and  its  actual  nature‘  (Hastings,  1998:  193).  Despite  recent  challenges  to   positivist  philosophy,  a  rational,  value-free  science  continues  to  have  significant   hegemonic power in normative analyses of the policy process and welfare regimes. In  the  post-war  period  in  the  West,  a  form  of  positivism  emerged  that  emphasised  the   importance  of  value-freedom,  hard-facts  and  prediction  as  the  basis  for  developing   ‘objective’ policy proposals for governments, businesses and other private institutions  (Smith, 1998: 77). The following definition succinctly captures the positivist nature of  orthodox social policy research. ’Social policy research is concerned to generate high  quality objective knowledge that can be deployed in social planning‘ (Taylor-Gooby  1994: 387).

This  epistemological  position  has  inspired  much  of  policy  research’s  most  used   methods, such as survey, the questionnaire and statistical models (Hughes, 1990: 16).  Despite emerging epistemologies that are calling into question the founding principles  of the modern welfare state, orthodox social policy research continues to be captured  by  a  positivist  tradition  that  has  in  turn  inspired  large  numbers  of  population  based   studies  aimed  at  improving  social  planning  (Mann,  1998:  84). In  general,  orthodox   policy  research  relies  upon  a  positivist  epistemology  where  the  main  task  of  the   researcher is  one  of  discovering objective  facts  and  presenting them  in  a  descriptive   format  in  the  expectation  that  policy  makers  will  take  notice  and  act  accordingly   (Jacobs  and  Manzi,  2000:  35).  Arguably,  this  paradigm  has  had  mixed  success  in   influencing policy-makers (see Dalton et al., 1996).

Rational Actors and Empiricism

The positivist approach remains limited, partially due to its conceptual reliance on a  rational-actor understanding of the policy making process and its continuing faith in  the transformative potential of empirical facts (Ham and Hill, 1993: 77; Watts, 1993).  Rationality in policymaking can be defined as the process where, when faced with a  range  of  policy  options,  the  decision  makers  choose  the  alternative  most  likely  to   achieve  the  stated  outcome  (Ham  and  Hill,  1993:  77).  Within  this  paradigm,  policy   language is accepted as a neutral medium in which ideas and ‘objective’ worlds can  be  quantified,  represented  and  discussed.  From  the  rational  perspective,  the  state  is   regarded as an empirical agent of governance and policy making, reliant on empirical  processes  of problem discovery, and secondly as  an entity whose history, processes,  and  institutions  can  be  understood  empirically  (Watts,  1993).  The  reliance  on   ‘objectivity’  has  meant  that  policy  analysis  has  largely  ignored  policy  language,   particularly  the  implications  of  both  the  passing  of  certain  words  from  policy   discourse and the introduction of new terms that feature prominently in policy debates  (Jacobs and Manzi, 1996: 544).

Moreover, the  rational  representation  of  policy  making  remains  problematic  for  its   insufficient account of the political context, insufficient emphasis on the participants  in the process and the ideal type nature of the model itself (Dalton et al., 1996: 17).  While not seeking to deny the place of positivist policy analysis, this approach has its  limitations,  particularly  when  it  comes  to  understanding  issues  of  power  and  social

STRUGGLING WITH THE POSTMODERN CHALLENGE

303

relations  between  actors  in  policy  change.  As  Yanow  (1996:  6)  states:  ’Positivist   knowledge does not give us information about meanings made by actors in a situation.  When we read a policy we see more than just marks on a page, we hear more than just  sound  waves‘.  In  other  words,  the  positivist  paradigm  does  not  invite  the  policy   researcher  to  be  reflexive  about  their  practices  of  truth  production  in  policy   development.  In  order  to  capture  the  cultural,  political  and  contested  dimensions  of   policymaking it is important to consider what the critical theory tradition offers.

Critical Theory and the Argumentative Turn

Critical social theory, with its classical roots in Marxism and Hegelian philosophy, is  principally  concerned  with  liberatory  social  transformation  via  political  struggle  to   overcome  oppressive  structures  (Healy,  2000).  This  stands  in  contrast  to  positivism   where the role of social science is merely to understand and investigate a given social  order. Despite its theoretical advancements, the understanding of culture and ideology  in  critical  social  science  has  tended  to  retain  the  Marxist  theory  of  ‘false   consciousness’,  where  oppressed  social  groups  internalise  dominant  ideologies,  and   are  thus  prevented  from  transforming  themselves  and  society  into  an  ideal  utopian   state  until  this  falsity  is  recognised  (Bottomore,  1984).  This  definition  of  ideology   rests on the assumption that the oppressed have greater access to the truth, where the  agency of the oppressed indicates the truth of humanity and the path to emancipation  (Dean,  1999:  123).  The  assumption  in  this  version  of  critical  social  science  is  that   there is a fixed system of true representation and false representation. In this account,  critical theory is conceived of as a mental construct used to guide emancipation, with  little  acknowledgement  that  emancipation  is  always  relative  to  an  established   discursive order (O’Brien and Penna, 1999: 52; Yeatman, 1994: 7).

In  the  case  of  critical  theory  and  public  policy  making,  there  has  been  some  work   done  on  transforming  this  body  of  theory  into  forms  that  are  relevant  for  everyday   policy practice, particularly in the case of second-generation critical theorists such as  Habermas.  For  example,  Forester  (1993),  in  his  work  on  the  relevance  of  critical   theory  for  public  policy,  argues  that  in  using  Habermas’s  theory  of  communicative  action  we  can  conduct  policy  research  that  focuses  on  the  situated,  performative   qualities of the policy analysts’ work - their conversations and their texts - and realise  how power, class, culture, ethnicity and control manifest themselves in their speech,  writing  and  gesture.  Similarly,  Jackson  (1999)  uses  Habermas’s  work  on  ‘public   spheres’  to  discuss  the  communicative  processes  involved  in  a  Council  tenants’   forum,  where  he  observed  the  clash  of  discourses  of  the  local  government,  social   housing providers and the ‘lifeworld’ discourse of tenants.

These examples of critically informed policy making studies constitute what Fischer  and  Forester  (1993)  refer  to  as  the  ‘argumentative  turn  in  policy  analysis’.  Diverse   theoretical  perspectives,  ranging  from  French  poststructuralism  to  the  Frankfurt   school  of  Critical  Social  Theory,  have  informed  the  growing  concern  with   argumentation in policy practice (Fischer and Forester, 1993). From these rich sources  research questions can be formed about what policy analysts and decision makers do,  how language and modes of representation enable and constrain their work and how  policy rhetoric includes and excludes policy actors.

The  argumentative  turn  in  policy  analysis  acknowledges  various  understandings  of   power, it emphasises the constructive nature of policy language and it draws attention

GREG MARSTON

304

to the complex relationship between agency, identity and institutional structures. This  style of policy analysis  challenges the positivist  assumption  that  all  human action  is   literal,  measurable  and  instrumentally  rational,  and  seeks  to  reveal  how  this   assumption overlooks the extent to which policy issues are enunciated as the outcome  of  power  relations,  identity formation,  ideological  contestation  and  political  conflict   (Yanow,  1996;  Jacobs  and  Manzi,  1996).  It  follows  that  much  of  the  emphasis  in   critical accounts of the policy process is on communicative approaches to achieving a  more  democratic  policy  process  through  diverse  forms  of  participation  and   negotiation.

In  terms  of  social  planning,  Healey  (1993:  249)  argues  that  what  is  being  invented   through these types of studies is a new form of planning that is both appropriate to our  recognition of the failure of modernity’s conception of ’pure reason‘; yet is searching,  as  Habermas  does,  for  the  continuation  of  the  Enlightenment  project  of  democratic   progress  through  reasoned  argument  among  ‘free  citizens’.  In  doing  so,  Habermas   seeks  to  recuperate  the  ‘public  sphere’  of  modernity  (Steele,  1997:  50).  However,   holding  onto  a  theory  of  reasoned  argument  among  free  citizens  suggests  that   participants  in  the  policy  process  are  momentarily  able  to  step  outside  practices  of   domination.  This  possibility  is  problematised  by  the  postmodern  insistence  that   domination  and  resistance  are  embedded  in  all  practices  of  power  (Leonard,  1997).   The  next  section  explores  this  claim  further  and  in  a  broader  sense  considers  the   contribution  of  postmodernism  for  critical  social  policy research  and  policy making   studies.

Postmodernism and Social Policy Research

Postmodernism  is  based  on  an  epistemology,  or  more  precisely  an  ontology  that   acknowledges  multiple  meanings  within  any  given  discursive  context.  In  this  way,   postmodernism shares the foundations of a social constructionist epistemology, where  meaning resides in individual interpretations within specific contexts (Spivey, 1997).  Postmodernism and poststructuralism, separately and together, provide the discipline  of  social  policy  with  a  range  of  pathways  that  assist  in  theorising  ‘societal   restructuration’  at  the  discursive  level.  The  multiple  strands  of  postmodernism  and   poststructuralism dispute totalising meta-narratives of western reason by arguing that  social  progress  is  particular  to  specific  contexts,  which  brings  greater  attention  to   cultural regulation at the local level (Agger, 1991: 121; Penna and O’Brien 1996: 40).  In  considering  the  implications  of  these  claims  for  social  policy  analysis,  I  have   focused on how social power, the state and universalism are represented, followed by  a discussion about poststructural understandings of the policy process itself.

Social Power, the State and Universalism

In  terms  of  understanding  power  and  policy  analysis,  postmodernism  offers  an   important  contribution,  however,  not  in  the  ‘top-down’  or  authoritative  sense  that   state-political  power  has  been  understood  in  social  policy  research  (Ham  and  Hill,   1987:  22).  For  postmodernists,  power  is  not  principally  repressive,  and  it  must  be   practised, rather than possessed. Foucault believes that individuals are always  in the  position  of  simultaneously  undergoing  and  exercising  power  (Jacobs  and  Manzi,   1996: 549). In other words, power is both multi-dimensional and complex (Jacobs and  Manzi, 1996: 550).

STRUGGLING WITH THE POSTMODERN CHALLENGE

305

There  are  a  number  of  implications  of  this  position  for  researching  and  theorising   policy change.  First,  postmodernism  argues  that  the  perceptions  of  individuals  are  a   central  dimension  for  understanding  power  relationships.  Second,  language  as  an   expressive  act  is  a  form  of  power,  and  language  is  a  creative  and  controlling  force   (Jacobs and Manzi, 1996). This dual account of power means that research attention  must  be  given  to  both  ‘top  down’  and  ‘bottom  up’  understandings  of  power,  to   identify  practices  of  resistance  that  disrupt  domination.  Postmodern  theory  provides   an important contribution for understanding micro-processes, precisely because these  intellectual perspectives reject grand theories that seek to offer only one interpretation  or  one  explanation  of  social  phenomena.  Attention  to  resistance  and  other  micro-rebellions at the local level of policy practice help to overcome a totalising, repressive  and functional view of social power and the state.

Social  policy  research  generally  treats  the  state  as  a  unitary  object  with  its  own   rationale,  motivations  and  interests.  In  this  normative  account,  the  welfare  state  is   positioned as some kind of ‘thing’ that thinks and responds; in contrast, postmodern  narratives  dismember  the  state,  emphasising  the  various  and  inconsistent  practices,   which  shape  its  manifold  components  (Petersen  et  al.,  1999:  8).  The  position  of  the   state as the main seat of power is also downplayed in poststructural and postmodern  approaches.  In  the  Foucauldian  governmentality  literature,  the  state  emerges  as  one   segment of a much broader play of power relations involving professionals, schools,  families, leisure organisations and so forth (Dean, 1999). In this respect, among this  network  of  state  practices,  it  is  not  possible,  nor  it  is  desirable  to  develop  welfare   programs based on grand narratives divorced from local contexts.

The Welfare Subject

This  decentred  account  of  the  state  also  problematises  conceptions  of  the  universal   welfare  subject.  In  his  critique  of  positivism,  Foucault  (1983)  argues  that  the   dominant  discourses  of  modernity transformed  human  beings  into  universal  subjects   through  ‘modes  of  objectification’,  where  the  individual  was  created  as  an  object  of  study  and  intervention  to  be  regulated  and  divided  through  various  binaries  and   exclusions  (for  example  sane/insane,  heterosexual/homosexual,  bad/good).  Social   policy,  for  example,  constructs  its  subjects,  such  as  the  ‘needy’,  ‘disabled’  and   ‘homeless’.  Bodies,  minds,  values,  interests  and  behaviours  are  then  inscribed  onto   them (Gibbins, 1999: 37). The subject within this modernist discourse had to possess  a fixed identity, able to be placed in the social order as either one of ‘us’, or one of  ‘them’ (Leonard, 1997: 17).

Modern welfare inspires a belief in the universal human subject, which exists in spite  of differences across time, place, culture, gender and ethnicity (Fuery and Mansfield,  2000: 6). Basically, there is an inherent universalism in the project of modernity that  has  little  place  for  particularist  knowledge  and  identities  (Thompson  and  Hoggett,   1996; Ellison, 1999). In postmodern feminist theorising, critiques of positivism have  continued to build (Yeatman, 1994; Weedon, 1997). In the wake of feminist and post-colonial criticism, the debate has sometimes polarised between those who cling to the  tradition based on a model of universal humanity, and those who see human society as  a field of endless and irreducible differences (Fuery and Mansfield, 2000: 6). In  the  field of social policy,  this is by no means a new debate. Over the past twenty years  there  has  been  a  sustained  critique  of  universalism  from  various  sources,  including

GREG MARSTON

306

feminists, single parents, disability groups, anti-racist groups and many others (Mann,  1998: 99).

There is a dichotomy here that runs to the heart of social policy analysis. On one side  stands the universalist plea for greater social justice and equality, a ‘fair’ allocation of  social goods to mitigate the inegalitarian effects of the market; on the other, demands  for the recognition of diversity and ‘difference’ sustain the view that universalism can,  paradoxically,  be  socially  exclusive  (Ellison,  1999:  59).  The  question  about   reconciling  particularism  and  universalism  is  obviously central  to  debates  about  the   value  of  postmodernism  for  social  policy;  however,  there  is  not  sufficient  space  to   address this issue here. The basic point is to recognise that the search for solidarity on  basic  economic  and  social  issues,  while  retaining  a  commitment  to  responding  to   diversity,  will  continue  to  be  of  considerable  political  importance  (Leonard,  1997:   176). Dismembering the state and the goals of social policy are not the only objects  that  are  subject  to  the  postmodern  critique.  Postmodernism  also  raises  valuable   questions  for  studying  the  policy  process,  particularly  in  relation  to  the  category  of   discourse.

Poststructuralism, Discourse and the Policy Process

In  the  case  of  policymaking  research,  French  poststructuralism,  and  particularly   Foucault’s  work  on  discourse,  offers  an  important  contribution.  Using  Foucault’s   work,  one  author  who  has  been  at  the  forefront  of  the  study  of  the  symbolic  and   linguistic  aspects  of  policy  making  since  the  1960s  is  Murray  Edelman  (Parsons,   1995:  179).  In  one  of  his  later  books,  Constructing  the  Political  Spectacle  Edelman   (1988)  argues  that  the  real  power  in  policy-making  resides  in  the  process  whereby   problems  are  constructed  and  articulated,  since  it  is  through  language  that  we   experience politics. Similarly, in the Australian context, Bacchi (1999) has developed  what she refers to as a ‘what’s the problem?’ approach to policy analysis, where the  deconstructive  analytical  emphasis  is  on  how  the  policy  problem  is  discursively   represented  because  this  contains  an  explicit  or  implicit  diagnosis  about  how  the   problem  should  be  addressed.  Both  these  political  theorists  draw  on  the  work  of   Foucault and Derrida in making sense of discourse and policy change.

Despite the valuable work of these policy theorists, interrogating and deconstructing  the language of policy has not received sufficient attention in social policy research.  In  fact,  there  is  limited  evidence  about  the  influence  of  discourse  analysis  on  the   social  policy  community  (Jacobs,  1999:  210). While  the  term  ‘discourse’  itself  has   entered  social  policy  writing,  it  is  also  the  case  that  there  is  often  little  theoretical   acknowledgement or engagement with the social theories that have placed discourse  on the social policy agenda. The lack of explicit interrogation of policy language may  seem  somewhat  surprising,  given  that  policy-making  is  heavily  constituted  by   discursive practices. As Majone (cited by Fischer and Forrester, 1993: 2) states: ’As  politicians know only too well, but social scientists often forget, public policy is made  of language. Whether in written or oral form, argument is central in all stages of the  policy process‘.  Yet,  policy research  has  largely ignored  the  possibilities  offered  by  discourse  analyses  in  favour  of  super-structural  accounts  of  social  change  pursued   within the social science of variables (Jacobs and Manzi, 1996; Hastings, 1998).

STRUGGLING WITH THE POSTMODERN CHALLENGE

307

The Social Construction of Policy Problems

Positivist  conceptions  of  language  as  an  objective  mirror  of  an  external  reality  are   destabilised  by  poststructuralism.  ’Poststructuralism  emphasises  the  instability  and   contingency of the structural context of social interaction‘ (Torfing, 1999:   55). The  plurality  of  language  and  the  impossibility  of  fixing  meaning  once  and  for  all  are   basic  principles  of  poststructuralism,  informed  by  a  social  constructionist   epistemology  (Weedon,  1997:  82).  The  implication  of  using  a  social  constructionist   epistemology  is  not  to  question  the  existence  of  the  ‘object’  per  se;  it  is  the   universalism  of  knowledge  that  is  questioned  in  these  accounts.  Lyotard  (1984),  for   example,  believes  that knowledge  is  stable,  and  even  predictable  within  specific   situations - but it is not necessarily universal.

There is of course nothing particularly enlightening about suggesting that objects are  constructed in thought. The research innovation comes from showing how policies are  constructed and contested. For showing that policy problems are socially constructed  implies - in theory at least - that they can be constructed differently and that there are  alternatives  to  the  dominant  discourses  that  currently  define  the  terrain  of  social   policy. The aim then is to encourage reflexivity and inspire the moral imagination of  policy makers, or at the very least to make policy-makers consider the consequences  of talking, acting  and  thinking  in  certain  ways.  To  take  a  current  example  in  the   Australian  political  context,  the  Commonwealth  Government  constructs  asylum   seekers  as  ‘illegal  refugees’,  or  simply  ‘illegals’.  This  construction  immediately   positions  this  group  of  people  as  lawbreaking  ‘others’,  who  should  be  treated  with   contempt, rather than compassion.

Moreover,  constructing  the  policy  problem  in  terms  of  ‘illegality’  immediately   legitimises  the  current  policy  prescription  of  enforced  detention.  This  example   highlights  how  policy  language  can  become  its  own  form  of  ‘cultural  injustice’   (Fraser,  1997).  A  basic  assumption  in  this  approach  to  policy  research,  is  that   discourses, which  are regularised and ritualised (that is racist, sexist), have as much   capacity to injure, to oppress and to exclude as the material barriers that people face in  their everyday lives (Corker, 2000: 447). Yet, this does not mean that discourses are  fixed; they are also contestable and contingent.

Policies as Socially, Culturally and Historically Contingent Realities

In  accepting the  poststructural  claim  that  social  policies  are  not  pre-existing givens,   reflecting  an  underlying  reality,  it  follows  that  what  constitutes  a  policy problem  or   solution  is  historically,  socially  and  culturally  contingent  (Yanow,  1996;  Torfing   1999). Contingent meanings are inherently unstable discursive structures. Discourses  that underpin the welfare state, for example, are not simply imposed from above but  involve  the  way people  view  themselves;  hence  dominant  discourses  are  potentially   fragile  and  malleable.  Policy  meanings  are  only  ever  partially  fixed  and  different   participants  in  the  policy  process  are,  at  various  times,  engaged  in  a  struggle  to   advance their particular version of the policy problem or policy solution. ’In this sense  the  problem  and  the  participants  are  ”mutually  constitutive”:  the  one  reinforces  the   other‘  (Colebatch,  1998:  27).  It  follows  that  from  a  post-structural  perspective  the   objects of investigation are both the policy products (documents, legislation) and the  individual and organisational activities that develop and implement these products.

GREG MARSTON

308

In  capturing  this  process,  the  aim  is  to  find  an  approach  that  makes  it  possible  to   consider the relative autonomy of symbolic and cultural systems without giving up the  traditional  political-economic  focus  of  critical  social  policy.  According  to  Nancy   Fraser  (1997:  7)  both  cultural  politics  (recognition/identity)  and  social  politics   (redistribution)  must  be  re-coupled,  both  practically  and  intellectually,  if  we  are  to   conceive of provisional alternatives to the present political order:

A critical approach must  be ’bivalent‘, in contrast, integrating the  social  and  the  cultural,  the  economic  and  the  discursive.  This   means  exposing  the  limitations  of  fashionable  neostructuralist   models  of  discourse  analysis  that  dissociate  ’the  symbolic  order‘   from the political economy.

It is important to interpret critical social theory and poststructural accounts in terms of  their possibilities of building a comprehensive conceptual framework for the study of  social policy change which is able to accommodate structure and agency, and able to  investigate the relationship between discursive and material change at multiple levels  of  analysis.  The  next  section  will  briefly  articulate  a  specific  form  of  discourse   analysis  that  holds  onto  the  critical  tradition  while  at  the  same  time  utilising  the   insights of poststructuralism and postmodernism discussed above.

3 A Possibility for Dialogue: Overcoming an Either/Or Position

One site in which poststructuralism and critical social policy analysis can meet is in  an adequate theory and method of discourse analysis that recognises both material and  discursive  practices.  The  starting  point  is  to  keep  a  critical  focus  on  questions  of   justice,  rights  and  material  disadvantage,  and  to  avoid  the  trap  of  unqualified   relativism  which,  at  its  most  extreme,  postmodernist  thinking  embraces  (Ellison,   1999:  70).  There  is  a  risk  in  wholeheartedly  abandoning  conventional  paradigms,   embracing  the  new  or  adopting  an  either/or  position  in  relation  to  social  theory.   Poverty, for example, is an ideological formation, it is a truth produced by particular  discursive  strategies,  but  it  is  also  a  social  construction  -  and  people  die  from  it   (Clarke,  1998:  183).  It  is  clear  from  this  example  that  where  social  constructionism   becomes  problematic  is  where  it  disregards  the  relative  solidity  and  permanence  of   some social entities.

In working through these epistemological issues and complexities, policy researchers  must  not  be  bound  by  simplistic  dichotomies  that  force  them  to  choose  between   critical  social  theory  and  postmodernism  (Agger,  1992:  75).  Each  body  of  theory   needs to be seen as a set of intellectual tools that can be used together, but at the same  time  held  in  constant  tension.  Moreover, in  suggesting  that  a  dialogue  needs  to  be   promoted, it is not simply a case of social policy listening to social theorists, it is also  a  case  of  social  theorists  being  a  little  more  reflexive  and  a  little  more  attentive  to   debates  within  social  policy  (Mann,  1998).  There  is  sometimes  a  tendency  among   postmodern  writers  to  represent  the  welfare  state  singularly  in  terms  of  its  public   welfare  and  disciplinary practices  (Rose,  1996,  1999),  while  remaining silent  on  the   function  and  features  of  occupational  and  fiscal  welfare.  Similarly,  in  the  work  of   Fairclough (1992) there is a tendency to discuss the forces of marketisation and neo-liberalism as if they were a colonising force that has swept into previously protected  spaces. Yet, the Australian welfare state, like many others in the western world, has a  long history of market forms of human service provision through a mixed economy of

STRUGGLING WITH THE POSTMODERN CHALLENGE

309

welfare. Arguably, what  has changed in  recent  years is  the intensification of market   forms of welfare provision.

Moreover,  the  theoretical  tools  developed  in  the  ‘post’  literature  -  discourse,   language,  power/knowledge,  subjectivity  -  need  to  be  coupled  with  everyday   struggles  and  practical  concerns.  As  Mann  (1998:  101)  argues,  it  is  the  struggles  of   those  who  have  to  rely  on  public  welfare  that  have  done  much  to  generate  a  more   reflexive  but  distinctly  critical  social  policy,  and  it  is  to  these  critical  voices,  these   subject  identities  that  we  should  pay much  more  attention. In  other  words,  in  social   policy analysis, it is not enough to simply engage in academic discourse analyses of  written  policy  texts.  As  Jacobs  (1999:  204)  states:  ’A  commitment  to  both  text  and   practice is necessary to understand the policy process‘. In the interests of producing a  richer and more politically informed account of policymaking we need to consider the  interpretative  accounts  of  policy  actors,  paying  particular  attention  to  which  groups   are  able  to  access  the  production  of  policy  discourses  and  the  reasons  others  are   marginalised.  In  a  policy  context,  this  involves  empirically  exploring  the  discursive   and  non-discursive  components  of  policy implementation  and  the  way meanings  are   made, used, conveyed, disseminated and translated (Healey, 1993: 28).

Meanings  are  produced  in  the  interpretation  of  a  text  and  therefore  they are  open  to  diverse readings, which may differ in their ideological import, hence the importance  of capturing the voices of those that negotiate the policy field (Fairclough, 1992: 36).

Indeed,  the  intersection  of  discourses  can  be  regarded  as  moments  of  interactions   between actors, not just of the relationship between discourses, which are moments of  such  events.  In  a  research  sense,  this  means  bringing  together  the  material  focus  of   traditional  social  policy  analysis  with  the  poststructural  insights  about  the   constitutional power of language and representation. Paying attention to these voices  demands  a  theory  of  discourse  that  explicitly  incorporates  the  perspectives  of  those   that find themselves excluded from policy processes. One approach that meets these  demands is critical discourse analysis.

Using Critical Discourse Analysis to Study Social Policy Change

Critical discourse analysis (CDA) is basically a sociological account of language use.

Critical discourse analysis attempts to bring together a political economic framework  appropriated from critical theory, with its focus on material inequalities, together with  the insights of cultural studies and poststructuralism. Critical discourse analysis is one  approach  that  is  able  to  provide  evidence  of  ongoing  processes,  such  as  the   reconstitution  of  knowledge  and  the  reconstitution  of  ‘self’  through  detailed  textual   analysis,  which  acts  as  a  counter  balance  to  overly  rigid  and  schematising  social   analyses  that  have  plagued  social  policy  research  (Fairclough,  1995:  209).  In   countering  an  overly  rigid  structural  analysis,  however,  CDA  does  not  reduce  all   social practices to a textual reality. Importantly, CDA differs from some versions of  discourse  analysis  that  end  up  seeing  the  social  as  nothing  but  discourse,  which  in   itself  represents  a  form  of  ‘discourse  idealism’  (Chouliaraki  and  Fairclough,  1999:   117).

CDA is interested in investigating the category of discourse as an instrument of power  and  discourse  as  an  instrument  of  the  social  construction  of  ‘reality’  (Sotillo  and   Starace-Nastasi, 1991: 412). Whereas much of the earlier work on language use and

GREG MARSTON

310

discourse  has  a  linguistic  bias,  critical  discourse  analysis  provides  a  more  socio-political  emphasis;  which  is  what  makes  it  suitable  for  social  policy  analysis  (van-Dijk,  1990:  8).  In  terms  of  theoretical  orientation,  critical  discourse  analysis  shares   critical  theory’s  concern  with  ideology,  hegemonic  politics  and  the  postmodern   critique  of  the  value-free  assumptions  and  cause-effect  relationships  underlying   positivist  social  science  (Agger,  1991:  109).  In  this  way,  critical  discourse  analysis   makes  it  possible  to  forge  links  among  critical  theory,  poststructuralism  and   postmodernism and the links between micro, meso and macro accounts of discourse.

A Multi-Conception of Discourse Place

Discourses  have  micro  features,  in  terms  of  their  linguistic  structure;  however,   discourses  also  operate  at  more  global,  societal  and  cultural  levels.  At  this  macro-level, systems of discourse are closely associated with ideology, hegemony and with  the  enactment  and  legitimation  of  power  (van  Dijk,  1998:  9).  Hence,  the  term   ‘critical’  implies  making  visible  the  interconnectedness  between  concepts  and   practices  (Fairclough,  1995:  36).  The  relationship  between  macro,  meso  and  micro   levels of discourse is of primary concern to Norman Fairclough (1989, 1992, 1995),  one  of  the  founders  of  critical  discourse  analysis,  who  conceptualises  discourse  in   terms  of  three  main  dimensions.  Textual  analysis  (micro)  is  concerned  with   description  about  the  form  and  meaning  of  the  text2, discourse  practice  (meso)   focuses on the discursive production and interpretation of the text and socio-cultural  practice (macro)  operates  at the level  of broader  social analysis.  In a  policy setting,  this model can be used to study how policies are produced and interpreted.

A way of researching discourse at these multiple levels is by focusing on the network  of  institutions  that  produce  and  interpret  policy  texts  within  established  policy   communities  (such  as  the  housing  sector,  education  policy,  health  networks,  or  the   community  sector).  For  Fairclough  (1995:  37)  the  institutional  site,  such  as  the   government, the school, or the family emerges as the pivotal site where social change  functions  both  upwards  towards  the  social  formation  and  downwards  to  concrete   social actions and material practices. Social institutions are (amongst other things) an  apparatus  of  verbal  interaction,  a  site  of  discursive  practices  (Fairclough,  1995:  38).   Institutions,  such  as  the  government,  government  departments  and  community   agencies are critically important policy-making sites.

There are a number of recent studies that illustrate how critical discourse analysis can  be made operational in the context of social policy research (see Jacobs and Manzi,  1996; Wodak, 1996; Hastings, 2000; Marston, 2000). What has been missing from a  lot of the empirical research to date has been an account of how policy actors actually  interpret  and  negotiate  contemporary discourses  that  define  the  contested  discourses   of the welfare state (Hastings, 2000), such as neo-liberalism, communitarianism, and  the ‘new moral economy’ of welfare (Rodger, 2000). To address this gap, there is a  need  to  do  more  work  on  identifying  resistant  practices  in  the  face  of  discursive   change. A poststructural reading of hegemonic practices is a useful way of theorising  these forms of contestation.







2   A text is taken to be any instance of written or spoken discourse.

STRUGGLING WITH THE POSTMODERN CHALLENGE

311

Critical Discourse Analysis, Hegemony And Resistance

Hegemony  can  be  defined  as  the  discursive  face  of  power,  and  as  such  is  a  central   concept in critical discourse analysis, and is particularly useful when thinking about  contestation  over  social  policy  issues. Hegemony  is  the  attempt  to  provide   authoritative definitions of social needs, and the power to shape the political agenda  (Fraser, 1991: 100) In the social policy arena, hegemony is therefore concerned with  how social policies are culturally framed. Framing involves the attempt to fix policy  meanings  and  welfare  subjectivities,  which  are  used  in  political  discourse  to   legitimatise  policy  directions  (for  instance  ‘dole  bludger’,  ‘welfare  dependant’).   Hegemonic struggles in social policy discourse are in a sense a struggle about what it  means to be a welfare recipient.

This conception of subjectivity as a site of struggle helps us to focus on the way that  different social identities are discursively formed through power relationships within  welfare  state  structures.  There  is  a  pressing  need  to  understand  the  way  differences   and  identities  and  the  attendant  ideologies  of  legitimacy  and  entitlement  are   constructed  in  welfare  discourses  and  how  these  relate  to  social  relations  of  power   (Brah, 1996).  This is particularly important given that the ‘regulation of the poorest   groups’  is  not  only  material  but  also  involves  a  discursive  regulation,  which  is   inscribed  with  categories  of  contested  identities  (Taylor,  1998:  348).  Hence,  the   welfare  subject  is  understood  in  critical  discourse  analysis  as  decentred  and   heterogenous and is neither unified nor fixed, but fragmented (Brah, 1996: 122).

However,  the  capacity  for  voluntary  action  is  retained  within  critical  discourse   analysis.  To  get  beyond  the  philosophical  stalemate  between  subjectivity  as  a  mere   ideological  effect  on  the  one  hand,  and  the  idea  of  an  autonomous  subject  on  the   other, it is necessary to look at micro-relations of power, which is where the concept  of  resistance  comes  to  the  fore  in  critical  discourse  analyses  of  social  policy issues.   Here,  one  is  trying  to  render  an  account  of  the  diverse  everyday  experiences  of   heterogenous  subjects  as  they  struggle  with  the  relationships  between  determining   structures, that which is internalised from these structures, and what remains in their  own intentions, albeit mediated in culture (Leonard, 1997: 47).

In research terms, it is important to focus not only on how hegemonic domination is  secured and reproduced at the expense of transformation, but also how subjects may  contest  and  progressively  restructure  domination  through  everyday  practice   (Fairclough,  1992:  34-35).  In  terms  of  the  broader  objectives  for  policy-making   studies,  ‘Discourse  analysis  can  assist  policy  makers  in  reconceptualising  their   approach  to  problems  and  to  understand  why  certain  issues  come  to  be  seen  as   problems’ (Jacobs, 1999: 211). In other words, critical discourse analysis can be used  to  deconstruct  the  policy  texts  to  reveal  assumptions,  subject  positions  and  social   relations between and within institutional contexts.

The recent Commonwealth Government welfare reform agenda provides an example  of  the  possible  value  of  this  form  of  analysis.  The  starting  point  is  to  problematise,   rather  than  accept,  the  discursive  construction  of  the  policy  problem.  In  the  case  of   welfare reform, the policy problem was predominantly framed by the Commonwealth  Government in terms of ‘welfare dependency’. Structural explanations, such as labour  market changes, were jettisoned in favour of a moralistic, individualist account of the

GREG MARSTON

312

policy  problem  where  welfare  claimants  were  positioned  as  holding  back  the   ‘economic competitiveness’ of the nation (Newman, 1999).

Policy  academics  and  policy  activists  using  this  approach  would  interrogate  the   discourse  of  welfare  reform,  rather  than  accepting  the  ‘policy  problem’  as   representing some form of objective reality. In analysing this issue, critical discourse  analysis  is  interested  in  the  connections  between  the  socio-cultural  context  and  the   text  itself.  A  critical  discourse  analyst  might  ask  what  made  this  discursive  policy   frame possible and more importantly, what are its multiple effects? Or we could ask:  how  has  the  very  notion  of  welfare  become  so  derisory  and  why  has  ‘being   dependent’ become so pejorative? And what does this individualistic discourse mean  for  governance  and  the  emergent  role  of  the  state?  In  terms  of  the  policy  actors  it   would be valuable to get an interpretative account of the policy process that was used  to  develop  the  welfare  reform  package,  to  get  a  sense  of  the  discursive  contestation   that  defined  this  particular  issue  -  to  capture  the  ‘messiness’  of  policy-making  that   gets lost in official discourse and government publications.

The political nature of these questions, and the power of this form of analytics, is to  disrupt  the  ‘naturalness’  and  the  inevitability  of  current  rationales  at  the  level  of   policy practice. The assumption in this form of analytics is that criticism itself can be  a  real  power  for  change,  depriving  some  practices  of  their  ‘self-evidence’  or   ‘naturalness’, while extending the bounds of the thinkable to permit the invention of  others  (Burchell  and  Miller,  1991).  In  contrast  to  some  forms  of  critical  theory,  the   intention of critical discourse analysis is not to put forward and impose a ‘blueprint’  for how people should live in the future, but to offer resources for transformation by  identifying  resistance  practices  where  they occur  and  giving  a  voice  to  those  policy  actors that struggle to be heard in their attempts to access policy practices.

Highlighting  positive  forms  of  resistance,  and  micro-rebellions  against  dominating   discourses is an important social and political process. This does not mean that we do  not need our grand narratives to make some sense of global social change, however,  we  should  not  make  assumptions  about  how  these  grand  narratives  are  experienced   and transformed by actors at the local level of policy practice.

4  Conclusion

In the first part of this paper, it was argued that in order to understand the changing  nature of social services, social policy research must go beyond static explanation and  normative policy analysis. Creating an intellectual and practical space for this to occur  will  continue  to  be  a  struggle,  given  the  weight  of  history  behind  social  policy   education  and  the  personal  and  professional  investment  that  maintain  particular   paradigms  within  research  institutions.  In  negotiating  the  sometimes  extreme   positions  between  positivism  and  poststructuralism  and  in  seeking  to  avoid  ‘trench   warfare’, this paper has argued for a common ground between the traditional material  concerns  of  social  policy  with  patterned  disadvantage  and  the  radical  constructivist   claims that reduce all objects of study to mere artefacts of knowledge represented in  ever shifting textual relations.

In  taking  this  position,  I  recognise  that  there  is  a  conservative  and  relativist  strand   with  postmodern  writing,  however,  the  ‘anything  goes’  approach  can  be  avoided  as   long  as  a  political  focus  on  contemporary  social  struggles  and  ethical  practices   remains  at  the  centre  of  the  research  focus.  It  is  also  imperative  that  a  capacity  for

STRUGGLING WITH THE POSTMODERN CHALLENGE

313

voluntary  agency  is  retained,  given  the  difficulty  of  conceiving  of  social  policy   without  its  intentionally  acting  subjects.  In  addition,  ‘critical  postmodernism’  must   not  only  be  interested  in  the  sources  of  discourses,  but  also  the  lived  effects  of   discursive  practices,  particularly  the  dialectical  relationship  between  discursive  and   material  change.  These  theoretical  insights  will  also  need  to  be  worked  out   methodologically  to  suit  particular  research  interests  within  the  social  policy   discipline.

Critical  discourse  analysis  is  one  approach  that  potentially meets  this  challenge  and   provides a useful dialogue between critical theory and postmodern theorising.

In  many  ways,  critical  discourse  analysis  speaks  to  the  core  goals  of  social  policy.   Social  policy  research  has  a  long  and  significant  history  of  investigating  and   addressing material  disadvantage, yet  it  is  still  in  its  infancy in  terms  of  sufficiently  understanding  the  culture  injustices  that  play  a  part  in  maintaining  and  obscuring   continuing inequalities. Critical discourse analysis is able to show how these material  practices  are  constituted  by  discourses.  When  used  in  conjunction  with  other   qualitative  approaches,  critical  discourse  analysis  has  the  potential  to  be  a  powerful   and revealing form of social inquiry, particularly when used to investigate the nature  of  changes  and  forces  that  are  shaping  welfare  state  programs  and  forms  of  service   delivery  at  the  local,  institutional  and  socio-cultural  level.  In  its  significance,  the   discursive dimension of social change and its role in reproducing material inequalities  and  practices  of  domination  and  resistance  is  unlikely to  diminish  in  the  future.  As   Poynton (2000: 38) concludes:

Possibilities for an oppositional stance - for any kind of resistance  to  the  operations  of  new  forms  of  power-  are  giving  way to  very   different  kinds  of  engagement  with  issues  of  power,  government   and  their  legitimation.  Discourse  remains  at  the  heart  of  these   issues,  however,  rendering  critical  forms  of  discourse  analysis  -   current and future - of ongoing importance.

References

Agger, B. (1991), ‘Critical theory, postructuralism, postmodernism, their sociological  relevance’ Annual Review of Sociology, 17, 105-131.  Agger, B. (1992), Cultural Studies as Critical Theory, The Falmer Press, London.  Bacchi, C. L. (1999), Women, Policy and Politics, Sage Publications, London.  Bosworth,  M.  (1999),  Resisting  Identities:  Agency  and  Power  in  Women's  Prisons,

Ashgate Dartmouth Publishing, Aldershot.  Bottomore, T. (1984), The Frankfurt School, Tavistock Publications, London.  Brah,  A.  (1996),  Cartographies  of  Diaspora:  Contesting  Identities,  Routledge,

London.

Burchell,  G.,  C.  and  P.  Miller  (1991),  eds,  The  Foucault  Effect-Studies  in   Governmentality: with Two Lectures by and an Interview with Michel Foucault,  The University of Chicago Press, Chicago.  Carter,  J.  (1998),  ‘Postmodernity  and  welfare:  when  worlds  collide’,  Social  Policy

and Administration, 32, (2), 101-115.  Chouliaraki,  L.  and  N.  Fairclough  (1999),  Discourse  in  Late  Modernity:  Rethinking   Critical Discourse Analysis, Edinburgh University Press, Edinburgh.

GREG MARSTON

314

Clarke, J. (1998), 'Thriving on chaos? Managerialism and social welfare', in J. Carter,  ed, Postmodernity and the Fragmentation of Welfare, Routledge, London.  Colebatch, H. K. (1998), Policy, Open University Press, Buckingham.  Corker, M. (2000), 'Disability politics, language planning and inclusive social policy',

Disability and Society, 15. (3), 445-461.  Culpitt, I. (1999), Social Policy and Risk, Sage Publications, London.  Dalton,  T.,  W.  Weeks,  and  J.  Wiseman.  (1996)  eds,  Making  Social  Policy  in   Australia: An Introduction, Allen and Unwin, Sydney.  Deacon,  A.  and  K.Mann.  (1999),  'Agency,  modernity  and  social  policy',  Journal  of

Social Policy, 28 (3), 413-435.  Dean,  M.  (1999),  Governmentality:  Power  and  Rule  in  Modern  Society,  Sage  Publications, London.  Edelman, M. (1988), Constructing the Political Spectacle, The University of Chicago

Press, Chicago.  Ellison, N. (1999), 'Beyond universalism and particularism: rethinking contemporary  welfare theory', Critical Social Policy, 19 (1), 57-87.  Fairclough, N. (1989), Language and Power, Longman, London.  Fairclough, N. (1992), Discourse and Social Change, Polity Press,Cambridge.  Fairclough,  N.  (1995),  Critical Discourse Analysis: The Critical Study of Language,

Longman, London.  Ferge, Z. (1997), 'The changed welfare paradigm: the individualisation of the social',  Social Policy and Administration, 31 (1), 20-44.  Fischer,  F.  and  Forester,  J.  eds  (1993),  The  Argumentative  Turn  in  Policy  Analysis

and Planning, Duke University Press, Durham.  Fitzpatrick, T. (1996), 'Postmodernism, welfare and radical politics', Journal of Social  Policy, 25 (3), 303-320.  Forester, J. (1993), Critical Theory, Public Policy, and Planning Practice: Toward a

Critical Pragmatism, State University of New York Press, Albany.  Fraser, N. (1989), Unruly Practices: Power Discourse And Gender in Contemporary  Social Theory, Polity Press, Cambridge.  Fraser,  N.  (1991),  'The  uses  and  abuses  of  French  discourse  theories  for  feminist

politics', in P. Wexler (ed) Critical Theory Now, Falmer Press, London, 98-117.  Fraser,  N.  (1997),  Justice  Interruptus:  Critical  Reflections  On  The  ’Postsocialist‘   Condition, Routledge, New York.  Fuery,  P.  and  Mansfield,  N.  (2000),  Cultural  Studies  and  Critical  Theory,  Oxford

University Press, Oxford.  Gibbins, J. (1999), 'Postmodernism, poststructuralism', in J. Carter (ed) Postmodernity  and the Fragmentation of Welfare, Routledge, London.  Ham,  C.  and  M.  Hill,  (1993),  The  Policy  Process  in  the  Modernist  Capitalist  State,

Harvester Wheatsheaf, New York.  Hastings,  A.  (1998),  'Connecting  linguistic  structures  and  social  practices:  a   discursive approach  to social policy analysis', Journal of Social Policy, 27 (2),   191-211.  Hastings, A. (2000), 'Discourse analysis: what does it offer housing studies?', Housing

Theory and Society, 17, 131-139.  Healey, P. (1993), 'The communicative turn in planning theory', in F. Fischer and F.  Forester,  eds,  The  Argumentative  Turn  in  Policy  Analysis  and  Planning,  Duke   University Press, Durham.  Healy, K. (2000), Social work practices: contemporary perspectives on change, Sage

Publications, London.

STRUGGLING WITH THE POSTMODERN CHALLENGE

315

Hughes, J. (1990), The Philosophy of Social Research, Longman House, London.  Jackson,  N.  (1999),  'The  council  tenants'  forum:  a  liminal  public  space  between   lifeworld and system', Urban Studies, 36 (1), 43-58.  Jacobs, K. (1999), 'Key themes and future prospects: conclusion to the special issue',

Urban Studies, 36 (1), 203-213.  Jacobs,  K.  and  Manzi,  T.  (2000),  'Evaluating  the  social  constructionist  paradigm  in   housing research', Housing, Theory and Society, 17, 35-42.  Jacobs,  K.  and  Manzi,  T.  (1996),  'Discourse  and  policy  change:  the  significance  of

language for housing research', Housing Studies, 11 (4), 543-560.  Leonard, P. (1997), Postmodern Welfare: Reconstructing and Emancipatory Project,  Sage Publications, London.  Lyotard, J-F. (1984), The Postmodern Condition: A Report on Knowledge, University

of Minnessota Press, Minneapolis.   Mann, K. (1998), 'Lamppost modernism: traditional and critical social policy', Critical  Social Policy, 18, (1), 77-102.  Marston,  G.  (2000)  ‘Metaphor,  morality  and  myth:  a  critical  discourse  analysis  of

public housing reform in Queensland’, Critical Social Policy, 20 (3), 349-373.   Newman, J. (1999), 'The Future of Welfare in the 21st Century', National Press Club,  Canberra.  O'Brien,  M.  and  Penna,  S.  (1999),  'Oppositional  postmodern  theory  and  welfare

analysis:  anti-oppressive  practice  in  a  postmodern  frame',  in  J.  Carter,  ed,   Postmodernity and the Fragmentation of Welfare, Routledge, London.  O’Neill, J. (1995) The Poverty of Postmodernism, Routledge, London.   Parsons,  W.  (1997),  Public  Policy:  An  Introduction  to  the  Theory  and  Practice  of   Policy Analysis, Edward Elgar, Cheltenham.  Penna,  S.  and  M.O’Brien.  (1996),  'Postmodernism  and  Social  Policy:  A  Small  Step   Forwards', Journal of Social Policy, 25 (1), 39-61.  Petersen,  A.,  J.  Dudley  and  P.  Harris  (1999),  Poststructuralism,  Citizenship  and   Social Policy, Routledge, New York.  Poynton,  C.  (2000),  'Linguistics  and  discourse  analysis',  in  Poynton,  C.  and  A.  Lee   (eds) Culture  and  Text:  Discourse  and  Methodology  in  Social  Research  and   Cultural Studies, Allen and Unwin, Sydney.  Rodger, J. (2000), From a Welfare State to a Welfare Society: The Changing Context  of social policy in a Postmodern Era, Macmillan, London.  Rose,  N.  (1996),  'The  death  of  the  social?  Re-figuring  the  territory  of  government',   Economy and Society, 25 (3), 327-356.  Rose,  N.  (1999)  Governing  the  Soul:  The  Shaping  of  the  Private  Self,  Free   Association Books, London.   Smith, J. (1998), Social Science in Question, Sage Publications, London.  Sotillo,  S.  and  D.  Starace-Nastasi   (1999),  'Political  discourse  of  a  working  class   town', Discourse and Society, 10 (3), 411-438.  Steele,  M.  (1997),  Theorising  Textual  Subjects,  Cambridge  University  Press,   Cambridge.  Taylor-Gooby, P. (1994), ‘Postmodernism and social policy: a great leap backwards’,  in Journal of Social Policy 23 (3), 385-404.   Taylor,  D.  (1998),  'Social  identity  and  social  policy:  engagements  with  postmodern   theory', Journal of Social Policy, 27 (3), 329-350.  Thompson,  S.and  P.  Hoggett,  (1996),  'Universalism,  selectivism  and  particularism',   Critical Social Policy, 16 (1), 22-43.  Torfing, J. (1999), New Theories of Discourse, Blackwell, Oxford.

GREG MARSTON

316

van-Dijk, T. (1990), 'Discourse and Society: a new journal for a new research focus',  Discourse and Society, 1 (1), 5-16.  van Dijk, T. (1998), Ideology, Sage Publications, London.  Watts,  R.  (1993,  1994)  ‘Government  and  modernity:  an  essay  in  thinking

governmentality', Arena, 2,103-157.   Weedon,  C.  (1997),  Feminist  Practice  and  Poststructuralist  Theory,  2nd  edition,   Blackwell, Oxford.  Wodak, R. (1996), Disorders of Discourse, Longman, London.  Wolman,  H.  (1981),  ‘The  determinants  of  program  success  and  failure’,  Journal  of

Public Policy, 1 (1), 433-464.  Yanow,  D.  (1996),  How  Does  A  Policy  Mean?  Interpreting  Policy  and   Organisational Actions, Georgetown University Press, Washington.  Yeatman, A. (1994), Postmodern Revisionings of the Political, Routledge, New York.

