Kim Beazley - Doorstop Interview Subjects: Fuel, Refugee Detention Centres, Appointment To The Pharmaceutical Benefits Advisory Committee, Western Australia Leaders Debate, Mandatory Sentencing, Dairy Deregulation

Transcript - South Perth - 1 February 2001

Printer friendly page

E & OE - PROOF ONLY

BEAZLEY: …massive broken promise and the fact that petrol prices are affected by the GST is another broken promise. What John Howard is doing today is taking a windfall from the pockets of Australian consumers, Australian consumers of petrol, and he is putting it in his war chest. What he is not doing and what he should do is to keep his promise on the GST and ensure that there is no GST impact on the price of petrol. What we will do in the Labor Party is move resolutions and legislation to give the Parliament a chance to renege on this latest increase, this unjustified increase, in the excise on fuel. And we strongly suggest to Mr Howard that he allows all those backbenchers that have been operating for nearly five years now as lions in their electorates and cowards in Canberra to be lions in both places.

JOURNALIST: Are you saying that you are going to give Parliament the right to overrule federal…?

BEAZLEY: That is what we will resolve. That is what we will put forward to the Parliament next week and we will press that right down to the Budget time. The time has come for the windfall to be handed back to ordinary Australian consumers.

JOURNALIST: Mr Costello is making a challenge to you this morning that - if you win government to repeal the excise.

BEAZLEY: What good will that do to consumers today? What good would that do? That is ten months away. We will have our GST and related roll-back provisions on taxation in place during the next election campaign but whatever we happen to do ten months from now won't help consumers right now.

JOURNALIST: Will you repeal that excise?

BEAZLEY: This is what I am saying right now. We are going to fight in the Parliament to have that latest increase in excise repealed right now. Ten months time is too late.

JOURNALIST: That naturally follows that you would do it in government. You would…

BEAZLEY: In government we will be putting forward a roll-back proposition on the GST and obviously petrol would be a matter for consideration in that roll-back. But what good is anything we say about what we will do in government do to consumers tomorrow, next month, the month after that or the month after that?

JOURNALIST: Peter Costello says that your administration introduced the excise, you actually reigned over 23 increases.

BEAZLEY: We had increases in excise and we whenever in the 1980s, there was a windfall, we passed it back to people. We passed in back, from memory, eight times, eight times we passed back that windfall. And life moves on, life moves on. In the early 90s petrol prices were nowhere near what petrol prices are now and we did not have a GST. There was no GST price effect on petrol when the Labor Party was in office. The situation has changed substantially. And in terms of the overall price of petrol and in terms of the operation of the GST. And everybody knows that most of this petrol price excise rise is GST related.

JOURNALIST: The Government promising to give country truck drivers more compensation for diesel fuel. Does that show that they are actually taking action on the problem?

BEAZLEY: They are running scared, there is no doubt about that. But how does that help the consumers of petrol in the country and in the city. You know, for every dollar that is spent on diesel in regional Australia $30 is spent on petrol. So what good does a concession on diesel - apart from admitting that they can do something about it - apart from admitting that, what good does that do an ordinary consumer of petrol in the bush or in the city?

JOURNALIST: Does world oil prices dominate the price debt in terms of that prevents the government from intervening?

BEAZLEY: The world oil prices are a factor but the GST and excise impact is another factor. While world oil prices are beyond the control of government, I accept that. Excise and GST are not beyond the control of government. They can do something about that and that is what they should be doing. And we will give those backbenchers - from the Liberal Party who have joined up in the serried ranks to oppose this increase in excise on fuel. We'll give them every chance to hold to the undertakings that they have made to their constituents and to put the pressure on this Government in the next Budget, hopefully well before the next Budget, to do the right thing.

JOURNALIST: Can the Government afford to forego further excise rises in the future?

BEAZLEY: The Government can afford to forego this excise rise and this is the point. This is the excise rise related to the GST. This is the excise rise coming in on the back of a very substantial increase in the price of fuel for ordinary Australians. We are having a surge in petrol prices now such as we have never had in the early 90s. The Government as a result of that surge in petrol prices has a massive windfall - somewhere between $500 and $1.5 billion and what the Government ought to be doing is passing that back.

JOURNALIST: But you said that you would repeal the excise if you come into government. In the next sort of rise is it going to be affordable?

BEAZLEY: What I have said is that we are going to be incorporating these issues in our roll-back provisions when we put them forward in the next election campaign. But that is ten months away and that is no relief for anybody now. Who knows what the situation will be with petrol prices ten months from now? None of us can predict that. None of us can foretell that. What we do know is that petrol prices are rising massively now and part of the reasons for them rising is a broken promise.

JOURNALIST: But there is no commitment here today to repeal the excise when you are in government.

BEAZLEY: The commitment from me today is that we will move legislation in the Parliament and resolutions in the Parliament to repeal this rise.

JOURNALIST: There is no commitment…

BEAZLEY: And the commitment we have is that when we do the roll-back we will of course incorporate consideration in relation to petrol. Don't be bluffed by Costello - don't be bluffed by him. He knows darn well that the Labor Party eight times handed back the windfall that they obtained when petrol prices rose in a way that gave them, gave the Labor Governments that windfall. We passed that back to consumers and there is no equivalent in the situation now where there is double taxation on fuel compared to the situation that existed in the early 90s.

JOURNALIST: You won't make a commitment today to reverse the excise?

BEAZLEY: I am making a commitment today that we are going to go into Parliament to reverse the excise on this petrol. That is what we will be doing.

JOURNALIST: But that is just this one rise that we are talking about. What about future rises?

BEAZLEY: This is the one rise which is directly related in its overall and massive proportion to the goods and services tax. This is the rise that should go.

JOURNALIST: You don't have the numbers in Opposition to have this repealed. The question is - if you are in government would you repeal it?

BEAZLEY: We do have the numbers in Opposition. If the numbers of people on the Liberal and National Party backbenchers who have said that this ought to happen actually vote with us in Parliament. So that is what we are going to crack on with right now.

JOURNALIST: On another issue Mr Beazley. What do you think about the Immigration Department's new policy of allowing untrained people to stab refugees with syringes?

BEAZLEY: There has to be a wholesale review of the conduct of this Government's administration and the private companies' administration of the situation of immigration detainees. We have to detain people who are illegally entering Australia. That has to be done but we don't need to destroy our international reputation or our own concern as a people for the decent treatment of folk who are in detention for whatever reason, for whatever reason. We don't have to walk away from our human values and there needs to be a full-scale royal commission onto the conduct of immigration detention centres in this country.

JOURNALIST: Mr Beazley, the head of the Pharmaceutical Benefits Advisory Committee is threatening to quit or walk out because the Government is considering appointing a drug company representative to that committee. Your response?

BEAZLEY: I can scarcely believe, but I ought not be surprised by anything that this Government does I can scarcely believe that they would put on to that absolutely vital committee somebody with such a massive conflict of interest. A massive conflict of interest. That committee is supposed to look dispassionately at the needs of consumers of

pharmaceuticals in this country. You can not possibly look dispassionately at that if one of its members has a vested interest in what the outcome of any decision is. If the Government is considering this it should back off immediately but it is of such a piece with this Government. This Government is for the big end of town. This is a government which will not roll down its limousine windows and listen to what ordinary people are saying to it. It operates for the big end of town on petrol. It operated for the big end of town on GST. It operates for the big end of town, apparently now, on pharmaceuticals.

JOURNALIST: If this appointment went ahead would it mean that the committee is more interested in the interests of the drug companies and not people in financial need?

BEAZLEY: If this appointment goes ahead I don't see how any other members of the committee can retain their places on it. These are every respectable people on this committee. They tend to be people with a very strong, they are and have to be, people with a very strong medical scientific background but independent of any interest in it. And I don't think that these very respectable people will allow themselves to be sullied in this way and if they were I think that they would be off it. And the consequence of that of course would be, that the absolutely essential character of that committee would change. A dispassionate, medical scientific view of what the needs of Australian consumers of pharmaceuticals are. And if that is intended that would be an absolute outrage and I see from reports today that the Government is not confirming or denying. That would be a very easy thing to deny - so it must be that the Government is considering it. They will lose their committee if they do and they will lose the confidence of the Australian consumer of pharmaceuticals.

JOURNALIST: Mr Beazley, what was your assessment of the television debate last night?

BEAZLEY: Well, I think, to use an American expression, that Geoff Gallop cleaned his clock. And I think that it will provide Geoff with enormous momentum both for his own launch and for the rest of the campaign.

JOURNALIST: What do you mean by 'cleaned his clock'? You caught us out…

BEAZLEY: Geoff comprehensively won and I think that his body language was terrific but more to the point the values that he espoused were terrific. And there was an exposure there of an awful lot of the nonsense that Richard Court has been going on with for some considerable time about his economic management. I think Western Australians knew that instinctively anyway.

JOURNALIST: Are you disappointed that Labor has endorsed the government planned expansion of the mandatory sentencing laws in WA?

BEAZLEY: We are opposed to mandatory incarceration, mandatory incarceration for juveniles. We believe that there has to be flexibility for judges to make determinations on that. Geoff believes that because there are supervision orders there are alternatives to sentencing that the West Australian acts comply. But I want say this about those particular detention laws. They don't relate to knocking over old ladies in the street who have their purses stolen to support a drug habit. They don't relate to them at all. There is no mandatory sentencing about what happens to old ladies that get knocked over in the street and have their purses stolen. They don't get knocked over in the street and have their purses stolen to have their car keys stolen. That is not what is going on. What is going on here in about 70 percent of the burglaries and I would suspect 100 percent of those incidences which so cause trauma

for elderly citizens and for women in this State is that a drug habit is being supported. And Richard Court has presided over a 300 percent increase …in West Australia and he has got no answers. He is not supporting programs to deal with the problem. He is not supporting police forces which need to have those dealt with. He is not supporting at all, as far as I can see, Labor's idea federally for a coastguard. You have got $23 billion coming in ….you can't tell me that within that $23 billion there is not enough money to support a coastguard.

JOURNALIST: Does Federal Labor still support…?

BEAZLEY: We oppose mandatory sentencing laws that impact upon the flexibility of judges to in the case of juveniles make determinations which include alternatives to incarceration. Now Geoff maintains, and he said this at the National Conference of the Labor Party, that in Western Australia, unlike the Northern Territory, which of course is vastly the main problem here, unlike the Northern Territory that there are alternatives to incarceration under West Australian laws. Now in the Northern Territory there are not but it is hypocritically administered in the Northern Territory. In the Northern Territory you can have a bloke who is a candidate apparently for the Country Liberal Party, or whatever it is that they call themselves there, the Country Liberal Party who can go into a hotel, apparently, and misplace - shall we say, four towels worth $100 - has nothing apply to him. But if you happen to be an Aboriginal kid who steals a pencil, and this has happened, an Aboriginal a kid who steals a pencil you go straight to jail. Now that is an utterly unacceptable situation. That is not the situation here in Western Australia, it is the situation in the Northern Territory and there are no alternatives to incarceration in the Northern Territory. There is, apparently, an alternative to incarceration here in Western Australia…

JOURNALIST: Mr Beazley, the dairy industry deregulation has given us cheaper milk but it has also hurt the dairy farmers' rights across Australia. What is Federal Labor's position on that?

BEAZLEY: We believe that what the Government should have done would be regulations to put in place appropriate regional policies to deal with those who were going to suffer from it. The Government did not do that. I am going to, in the course of a trip that I am about to make through some of the dairy producing areas in northern New South Wales, who along with the farmers in Western Australia have been badly affected but there are even larger numbers badly effected in northern New South Wales - I am going to listen to them about what has happened in relation to the impact of dairy deregulation on their communities and we will be introducing regional policies to assist.

JOURNALIST: What particular policies? What did you have in mind?

BEAZLEY: Well, I want to hear from them what they find are the gaps in what has been provided for them in terms of being able to restructure their industry. I can't pretend that I know. I need to be in consultation with them to get their views.

JOURNALIST: But in theory do you support deregulation of the industry?

BEAZLEY: The industry's regulatory structure was at all probability at variance with the Commonwealth Constitution in all probability in variance. But sooner or later somebody from Victoria, in particular, was likely to challenge what was happening. That having been said what is an obligation then on government is to provide decent resources for restructuring those who are associated with the industry. And we are just getting now

repeated calls, particularly from Western Australia and northern New South Wales from dairy farmers who have not received or found that the particular proposals of the Government don't help them at all. But I can't pretend that I have any of the answers to it at this point, I need to be in a position where I can consult with them and get a better idea of how exactly the dairy changes have effected them. So we will ultimately have plenty of time between now and the next election. We will ultimately have a regional policy associated with that but I am going to listen to them first.

Ends

Authorised by Geoff Walsh, 19 National Circuit, Barton ACT 2600.

