Minister For Immigration and Multicultural Affairs  Page 1 of 7

Philip Ruddock Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs Minister for Reconciliation and Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Affairs

11 September 2001 Press Conference

re: Federal Court decision on MV Tampa

QUESTION:  Minister, did the decision of the Federal Court catch you by surprise?

MINISTER:  Well I was aware that the decision was to be announced this week, early this week.  In that sense it hasn’t caught me by surprise.  But I am disappointed obviously with the outcome and the decision is one which the Government thinks ought to be appealed and will be appealed.  I can’t discuss without leaving myself open to contempt I suppose, the detailed reasons, but let me just simply say that we disagree very strongly.  We believe that the decisions that were taken all through this on advice from senior Commonwealth officers have been lawful, but we did take the view that for more abundant caution legislation should have confirmed these arrangements, and obviously if the Labor Party had acceded to that suggestion these matters would now be academic.  The further issue in relation to that of course is that the qualifications the Labor Caucus put on its support for that legislation of course would have meant that that legislation would not have been able to be used in relation to other arrivals which we have now seen.

QUESTION:  So has the court simply got it wrong?

MINISTER:  Look I can’t canvas, without risk of contempt, decisions of the court.  The Commonwealth Senior Legal Advisers told us that what we were doing was lawful and we believe that what we have done was lawful and we will appeal the decision.

QUESTION:  Do you regard the decision as a slap in the face?

MINISTER:  In this country people are entitled to take matters to courts in certain circumstances.  We are of the view that in migration matters the involvement of the courts over a period of time has not been helpful and we have sought to legislate in relation to those matters as well; and that legislation has been awaiting passage in the Senate because the Labor Party and the Democrats and the Greens have withheld consent to it.  It is one of the liberties that we have faced in dealing with these issues that we have had one hand tied behind our back when you need to have very firm decisions and you need to be able to send a very strong message to people smugglers who are trafficking in human beings and are in a very insidious business, and see it as being in their interests to keep the Australian market open.

QUESTION:  But this position is obviously not stopping the flood - it’s continuing.

MINISTER:  Well it depends what you think the flood is.  If the flood is 9,000 people which is of course the outcome of the reports that have come via the ABC from Indonesia, 5,000 people.  Other suggestions are that there are 4,000 people in Malaysia.  What you are dealing with is potentially double the number of people that we saw in the whole of last year, over the next few months - that’s what you are dealing with.  And you say it hasn’t stopped.  What I can say is that the very firm stance that we took in relation to Tampa has left many of the smugglers feeling very, very uncertain about the future of operations into this region.  What

Minister For Immigration and Multicultural Affairs  Page 2 of 7

they have been seeking to do is to test us now with individual boat arrivals to see whether or not we have a determination to keep this method of arrival in Australia closed; and already there are some reports of people who are talking about leaving Indonesia and looking at other avenues because of the firm stance the Government has taken.  And that message needs to be there and it needs to be clear, and it ought not to be compromised, and it needs the strong support of not only the Australian community but also all the major political parties in Australia to hold to it.

QUESTION:  At the end of the day these people have to go somewhere, and Indonesia has made it quite clear that it is not going to talk to you at all over these 130 boat people stranded on Ashmore Reef.  They’ve wiped their hands of it.  It’s not their responsibility.

MINISTER:  Look there are ongoing discussions with Indonesia and we are continuing those discussions.

QUESTION:  … their reaction and their lack of …

MINISTER:  Look, the fact is that this is a problem for them as much as it is a problem for us.  The best approach is one which enables us to work together and to talk to each other about the best way forward.  I would simply say that the more people are trafficked to Australia the more people will inevitably come to Indonesia.

QUESTION:  Have you (inaudible) approach you just mentioned that…

MINISTER:  Of course.

QUESTION:  What is it?

MINISTER:  Well we’ve put that approach to Indonesia and we will continue to put it to Indonesia.

QUESTION:  (inaudible)

MINISTER:  Well, no.  I think there are difficulties in dealing with Indonesia, if you are flagging in advance the position you are taking, and trying to push certain outcomes through the media itself.

QUESTION:  Minister what will happen to those people on board the Manoora now?

MINISTER:  Well the fact is we will proceed as before, when the appeal was being lodged. The orders that were given initially were orders that envisaged that there may need to be an appeal.

QUESTION:  So will they stay on the Tampa now, or will you disembark them?

MINISTER:  In operational terms I am not able to outline fully what will happen.

QUESTION:  So is the boat turning around and heading back to Australia?

MINISTER:  No.  The decision is being appealed.  The original orders which were acceded to by the Commonwealth envisaged that there may be a necessity to appeal.

Minister For Immigration and Multicultural Affairs  Page 3 of 7

QUESTION:  So does this mean that effectively while the appeal process takes effect, they will stay on board, they won’t be allowed ashore, they won’t be allowed back to Australia. They are going to sit on board?

MINISTER:  The original outcome envisaged that the courts needed to deal with these matters quickly; that we would not be bringing this group of people back while those matters still had to be addressed, and ultimately for the length of time the people remain at sea will be determined by the amount of time the courts and those people who wish to push these matters, take in relation to them.

QUESTION:  So can you say if the boat is continuing on course for Port Moresby?

MINISTER:  No, I can’t.  And I’m not going to try and comment on operational issues where I have no knowledge.

QUESTION:  How much is this costing the Government?

MINISTER:  I have seen some people making some observations about costs today.  The only point I would make is that the cost of continuing down the route we were taking with the detention regime, the ultimate costs to a humane refugee programme, that is clearly focussed on those who have a need for our support, the costs of supporting people in the Australian community, if they are ultimately able to remain here; all of those costs are far greater when they are incurred in Australia than when those costs are incurred abroad.  It is much cheaper ultimately to determine people’s claims in Indonesia, to determine people’s claims in Nauru, or in New Zealand.  In all of those places people’s claims are not delayed by judicial review, and the fact is that any approach which minimises the numbers of people who have access to Australia minimises cost.

QUESTION:  But how much more is Australia going to have to pay Nauru to take more refugees?

MINISTER:  I simply make the point that those costs are irrelevant in terms of the greater costs that are incurred if they are brought to Australia.

QUESTION:  Minister if one or two or even 100 of those refugees sitting on board the Manoora now decide that they want to get off, that they have had enough of being at sea..

MINISTER:  There’s provision under the agreement for that to happen.

QUESTION:  You can airlift them out immediately?  Where to?

MINISTER:  Some people indicated that they may wish to go to Nauru.  Others said they were happy to go to New Zealand.  Others I understand have said that they are happy to go home.  The agreement before the court envisaged that if people wanted to do that they could.

QUESTION:  When do you expect your appeal to be heard?

MINISTER:  Those matters are in the hands of the courts.

QUESTION:  Minister do you concede this situation is becoming farcical now?

Minister For Immigration and Multicultural Affairs  Page 4 of 7

MINISTER:  There is no doubt that people who had no interest, had no brief from the individuals involved determined to use our judicial review system to test the limits of that system.  Now if you want to say that’s farcical that is a matter for you.  I’m not, but it is certainly a matter that was determined by people who had no brief from the individuals involved, who elected themselves to take these matters to the court.

(Inaudible)

You haven’t got the answer that you wanted but that is the answer.

QUESTION:  I am saying that in the eyes of the world the fact that we’ve got these boat people wandering around the pacific in a containership - it is a battle ship - going hither and thither, it is becoming farcical in the eyes of the world.

MINISTER:  Look, I am not in any way influenced by what people tell me - the eyes of the world might be thinking. We are a country where people do have entitlements to go to courts, that that does produce some delays, and if you want to have a system where people believe in the rule of law, that is one of the outcomes.  But these matters could have been handled differently if the Labor party had supported our legislation to put these matters beyond doubt when we sought to do so - and I make that point very strongly and I add that the qualifications that the Labor party wanted to introduces would have enabled us to deal with Tampa - it would not have enabled us to deal with the following situations which have now emerged.

QUESTION:  On that point, you were saying that if you had that bill you would have been OK, Mr Beazley at the time said the Australian law as it stood was sufficient.  Are you saying that he was wrong?

MINISTER:  No - I am simply saying that the advice we had from Commonwealth officers is that the law sustained what we have put to the court - Mr Beazley said his opinion was the same as we were being given by Commonwealth law officers - and we still stand by that view.  But the point we made all along … the point …

QUESTION:  … the necessity to appeal, so you can’t have it both ways.  You have said you thought …

MINISTER:  I‘m sorry, no.  Look, if in litigation there is a possibility of two outcomes, you plan for those contingencies and it was certainly the case when the agreement in relation to the way in which we would address this matter would envisage an appeal.  An appeal could go either way - it could be an appeal by the Commonwealth or it could be an appeal by the other party.  But when counsel sat down and worked out, under instructions from the judge, as to the way in which certain orders by consent would be made it was envisaged that appeals either way could be possible.

QUESTION:  Minister, what have you been told about I guess the refugees on board the Manoora at the moment - have they had enough, what is their feelings at the moment - have they cheered this decision?

MINISTER:  Well, I wouldn’t know that and I’m not sure that they would know but …

QUESTION:  … you must be getting feedback as to the…

Minister For Immigration and Multicultural Affairs  Page 5 of 7

MINISTER:  I get feedback from time to time and I am told in relation to what is happening on the vessel that all is quiet and the people are in good health and they are been well cared for.

QUESTION:  Realistically how long can this go on for?

MINISTER:  You’re asking me?  I mean, these matters are not just in the hands of the Government.  They are in the hands of the courts.  They are in the hands of those people who brought the initial action.  Our view about the way in which this matter was to be dealt with was that these people having not entered Australian soil, not entered the migration zone, that these people should be processed elsewhere.  They should not get an advantage over leaving Indonesia where their claims were being considered in many cases by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, to have them considered under an Australian system that is far more beneficial.  That is the view we took.

QUESTION:  …if the deal is rejected, and where do you go from there?

MINISTER:  We have a view about what the law is, and we intend to appeal this decision because we believe the decision is wrong.  That is our entitlement.

QUESTION:  But isn’t it time just to let them in.  It is becoming an international farce isn’t it?

MINISTER:  No.  And if we were, it would be a signal to all the traffickers who believe that Australia is vulnerable to continue pushing at every turn on these issues.  Now let me just make it very clear what is at stake.  What is at stake here - are you here from the ABC?

REPORTER:  Yes.

MINISTER:  What is at stake here, having watched Four Corners last night, are the plight of the women and children of Afghanistan, who had no money to pay people smugglers, who might be able to be accommodated under a Refugee and Humanitarian programme that has special provision for women and children at risk, because those programmes go out the window when people who are free enough to travel, and have the money to pay, essentially take the places.  And that’s what’s happening.  Now if you think that’s a good way to go, then we roll over and say “Entry to Australia will be determined by those who are prepared to undergo a sea voyage, and have enough money to pay.”  And if you think that’s the right system you will barrack for those who want to unwind what we are doing now.  But if you think that a refugee system ought to be orderly, ought to be focussed on those people who have the greatest need for support, that’s where you think it ought to be focussed, and that people ought to wait their turn and be properly assessed, particularly where they are already in a situation of safety, then you would barrack for us.  This is the point I am making.  The fact is the way in which this issue is being sends a signal to these people who are trafficking in human beings, trafficking in human misery, trafficking in people’s disappointment, trafficking in their future as they see it.  Now Australia has had a very generous refugee and humanitarian programme.  We have been amongst the most generous countries in taking people for resettlement, and that programme is being demolished while these people smuggling operations go on.  It is not a matter of amusement.  It is not a matter of making light.  There needs to be a very firm message to those who are trafficking, and it only comes by being resolute on these matters.

Minister For Immigration and Multicultural Affairs  Page 6 of 7

QUESTION:  Minister can I ask - you said - Justice North’s judgement this afternoon said one of his main planks was the right not to detain citizens or non-citizens and you talked about the Bill that Labor refused to sign.  Do you see Parliament playing a role when it resumes and could there be any legislation to help save the …

MINISTER:  Well there’ll be legislation to deal with the question of what constitutes the migration zone, which would have some import in relation to these matters.  But the date from which that was intended to operate was 2pm on Saturday last, so it would not have affected the immediate decision; it could affect others.  In relation to the detail of what we appeal and the steps that will be taken, I’ll leave that to our legal advisers.

QUESTION:  Minister having copped a bit of a slap in the face by the federal courts, will the welcome mat ever be extended to these people now do you think?  Or will you simply say no, dig the heels in?

MINISTER:  You talk about a welcome mat.  We have no welcome mat for people who seek to break our law and arrive clandestinely.  We have a welcome mat for those people who are prepared to apply properly, recognising that there are 23 million refugees and people concerned in the world, that some have urgent need for help, and some don’t.  Now even if people get a refugee claim up in Australia, under a very relaxed system, it doesn’t mean they had an urgent need for a resettlement place.  And I go back to the point I was making before. There are not 23 million resettlement places being given by developed countries.  If people around the world are making judgements on Australia, let them first tell me how many people they are resettling.  Because if it is the United States they resettle per capita about one quarter the number that we resettle.  If it’s Norway we take 8.000, they take 1200.  If it’s Britain, they take none.  If it’s Germany, France, they take none.  There are only eight countries in the world that do it.  And we are arguing from a position of moral strength in relation to these matters, not moral weakness.  The moral strength is that we want to assist those people who have the greatest need for help.  The traffickers are identifying the people who are free enough to travel and have the money to pay, and they are the people that they are trying to push on to us, and in the end will take the resettlement places over the women and children that you would have seen last night, who are starving, destitute, had no money to pay and are never free enough to travel.

QUESTION:  Minister, what is the government going to do if you lose the appeal?

MINISTER:  Look, in relation to those matters, you deal with the present and we have made it clear that we will be appealing and will see where that leads.

QUESTION:  If everyone on board puts their hand up and says look I want out and you take them to PNG, effectively it makes the whole approval process fall over?

MINISTER:  Well, the decision was clear.  If people say they want to go to New Zealand and they elect to do so, if they say they are happy to go to Nauru and elect to do so, if some of those who have identified themselves as Pakistani say we are happy to go back to Pakistan, then all of that could leave you with a fairly small group of people in the end.  That is one of the possible outcomes.  I am not going to conjecture in relation to those because we don’t know what position they will take when they are aware of this decision.

QUESTION:  And Minister, you will abide by the appeal court’s decisions?

MINISTER:  Look, at the end of the day, the Government accepts the rule of law.

Minister For Immigration and Multicultural Affairs  Page 7 of 7

QUESTION:  (inaudible) … John Howard up in Washington?  (inaudible) phone calls?

MINISTER:  I have been in touch with his office, I don’t know whether they have spoken to him.

ENDS

