Immigration Policy In Australia - A Perspective

Date: 3 October 2001

Initial statements attributed to asylum seekers who refuse to leave HMAS Manoora, that they would rather return to Iraq and Palestine than have their refugee claims processed at Nauru, graphically illustrates two fundamental points in the illegal immigration debate.

The first is that these particular asylum seekers fear no immediate threat to their safety if returned to their country of origin. Their insistence that they be taken to Australia and not processed in a safe third country reinforces the probability that they are seeking to migrate, rather than fleeing persecution. The second is, that in claiming to be refugees, they have sought to inappropriately engage Australia’s protection obligations under the 1951 Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees.

The Convention was set up to provide an international protection system for those with “a well founded fear of persecution”. This has been interpreted to mean that a genuine refugee should seek asylum in the first country where he or she is safe then seek re-settlement or return to their country of origin if the danger is resolved.

The recent numbers of illegal boat arrivals seeking to enter Australia mainly from Afghanistan and the Middle East reflects internal upheaval in brutal regimes. Few would argue with the proposition that the estimated 7 million Afghan refugees in camps and on the borders of Pakistan are impoverished, in need of humanitarian assistance and desperately in need of resettlement.

It is therefore repugnant, that others who assume the moral and legal mantle of a genuine refugee, can travel freely, transiting several countries where they are safe, have enough money to buy passage on a boat, have sufficient information to ‘forum shop’ for a country that provides generous benefits and health care and a legal system that will most likely ensure they can stay, then arrive illegally and claim to be entitled to protection.

Australia is not the only country where the flow of unauthorised arrivals and the abuse of asylum procedures has simply overwhelmed domestic capacity to handle genuine refugee cases expeditiously and give them the priority they deserve.

Governments have responded to these pressures by intercepting asylum seekers and screening them in a third country rather than to allow arrival and access to that country’s jurisdiction and legal system.

Illegal immigrants from Cuba who are interdicted offshore by the US are processed at Guantanamo, the Mariana Islands and Midway and either given asylum in a Latin America county or returned to Cuba. In Europe there are similar procedures with Germany returning third country asylum seekers to the Czech Republic or Poland. The Dutch, Swiss, Italians and Irish have all returned third country asylum seekers to safe countries they have transited. Austria and Switzerland have procedures for asylum requests to be presented and processed at certain of their embassies abroad.

Australia’s tough new migration laws include provision for asylum seekers to be processed in Nauru, New Zealand and other off shore destinations.

The common policy intention underpinning off shore processing or screening in a third country is that a refugee will receive asylum in accordance with Convention obligations, but not necessarily in their country of choice.

Although this system of off shore processing may more quickly and efficiently separate the genuine refugee from the economic migrant, there is little doubt that the international protection system currently fails many refugees and is in need of urgent reform.

Recent attempts by the European Union to broaden refugee status to cover ‘non state’ protection including gender discrimination such as genital mutilation, have met with resistance from France and Germany whose veto would defeat the move. Although 137 nations are signatories to the Convention, there is no burden sharing or equitable distribution of the most needy humanitarian cases. Only ten nations, including Australia are receiving countries with a dedicated offshore resettlement program. This is a beacon to people smugglers and an open invitation to asylum seekers to simply elect the country where they intend to settle and arrive illegally rather than apply to migrate.

What is required is a major international re-examination of how best to manage the various categories of people who leave their own country. The challenge is well illustrated by the millions of Afghans who have left or who are trying to leave Afghanistan. They fall into three categories. The first is those whose personal safety is at risk because of their opposition to the Taliban or because of tribal or religious affiliations, such as the Hayaras.

It is likely these people would be accepted as refugees.

The second category is those who feel compelled to leave because of the threat of war but who would otherwise remain in Afghanistan. Subject to resolution of the conflict, they need temporary asylum.

If there is a change of regime it could be expected that many people in both of these categories will cease to be in fear of their safety and should be expected to return.

The third category simply want to better themselves and their prospects and are more accurately characterised as ‘economic immigrants’.

Incisive commentators have long recognised that the most effective way to help those in the last two categories is to improve local conditions and economic opportunities.

Australia is playing a key role in the provision of targeted aid to reduce the push factors that propel outflows from countries of origin and secondary outflows from countries of first asylum.

In addition to the annual contribution of $14.3 million to the UNHCR, the Government has committed almost $28 million since June 2000 for the humanitarian needs of displaced Afghans and Iraqi refugees in the Middle East and South East Asia.

Another response to a mass exodus is for the international community to provide temporary protection until the acute crisis subsides.

Following the Bosnian crisis, European Governments offered temporary asylum. During the 1999 Kosovo crisis, Australia was one of the countries that provided a temporary safe haven to Kosovars until the conflict was over and it was safe to return.

In a comprehensive analysis of asylum immigration and refugees featured in The World Today, Alexander Casselas points out that “repatriation, generally voluntarily with some integration assistance, is the key to the system”.

While providing temporary protection and repatriation, together with improving local conditions is the ultimate goal in stemming the mass movement of asylum seekers, other solutions are being canvassed.

With the E.U moving towards a common asylum system, one option being considered by the European Commission to meet the immediate crisis is a resettlement program under which those in need of protection or humanitarian assistance would be identified in their own region and brought to the E.U for resettlement.

Those with the greatest relative need must always first claim on Australia’s humanitarian intake.

Australia has accepted almost a million refugees in the past 50 years and offers 12,000 places each year under its humanitarian program.

(June 2000)

However the program has been undermined by irregular arrivals that have jumped to about 6,000 per year at the expense of offshore places.

The Government has rightly responded by strengthening our borders and control over those who seek to enter and live in this country illegally.

Australia must be part of an international solution to irregular migration. But in the meantime, maintaining the integrity of our humanitarian program is the most immediate means to ensure that those refugees who are resettled in Australia get the priority they need and the protection they deserve.

* Helen Coonan is a Liberal Senator for New South Wales and a member of the

Senate Legal and Constitutional References Committee that produced the report on

Australia’s refugee system - “A Sanctuary under Review” (June 2000).

