SPEECH The Hon. Peter Reith, MP Minister for Defence



14 Sep 2001 MIN 140901/01

TRANSCRIPT OF THE HON PETER REITH MP

ADDRESS TO THE AAA NATIONAL PARTY BREAKFAST

VICTORIA CLUB, MELBOURNE



Can I start by just acknowledging and endorsing Peter Nixon’s remarks about the last few days. I thought the speech by George W. Bush, the address by George W. Bush was an incredibly important speech by a leader at a time of national crisis. And of all the wonderful things that he said when he uttered words to the effect that freedom is under attack and freedom will be defended. I thought he went to the heart of the challenge to us all. And when he spoke about freedom being under attack his words resonated, I am sure, around the civilised world because freedom under attack in the United States is freedom under attack wherever freedom lives and prospers.

And so in the first hours of reports coming in from the United States not only did we activate plans in Australia, anti-terrorist plans put in place, greater security precautions and the like we also immediately sent across to the United States an offer of whatever assistance, literally whatever assistance that we could provide we were keen to do so. And those early responses have, of course, been more than reinforced by the Prime Minister’s remarks in the last 24 hours/36 hours whilst in the US of standing shoulder to shoulder with the US. Not only in a sense of deep sympathy and concern and anxiety about the loss of life but in our absolute and complete and total resolve to stand with the US, to work with the US to oppose these enemies of freedom in the days ahead.

I can report to you that from all the evidence, facts and reasons and others put to us by our advisers there are no special concerns in regard to security in Australia but that does not mean to say that the world is going to go on the way it has been going. I don’t think there’s any doubt that as we look to the future and make arrangements for security whatever the circumstances there will be a need for a heightened sense of the problems of security or lack of security in the years ahead.

That, of course, will unquestionably cover the whole range of security measures and it is a fact that part and parcel of the posture you adopt in regards to security must relate to the movement of people in and out of your borders. And so the question of border protection will be as important if not more in the future.

Let me then turn to the second matter which is worth referring to because it is a very current matter and that is the question of people smuggling to our north. The Government, as you know, has taken a very strong stand on that issue and I can tell you we will maintain that strong stand. We think we are right in the positions that we put and we are very determined to implement and have of course commits to implement a broad strategy for dealing with the problem of illegal arrivals into Australia.

Our political opponents accuse us of sort of making policy on the run. But, of course, they conveniently forget a whole series of measures some in the Parliament, some by regional action and the like which we have been taking now for some considerable time. For example, three of us a strong team went to Jakarta just recently to talk to our Indonesian counterparts about the questions of border control but the fact of the matter is Philip Ruddock, who was one of the three, was up there in June previously putting together and overall strategy. And that will continue to have an overall strategy as the way in which we deal with the issues.

We have been very opposed and are very opposed to the North decision. I believe that Mr Justice North’s decision in the Federal Court is bad for Australia. It might be good for people smugglers but it’s very bad for Australia. I am a respondent to those proceedings as the Defence Minister because we used the Defence Force, as you know, to go on board the MV Tampa.

In my view, if you can’t use the Defence Force to go onto a ship which has defied the lawful instruction of Australia and entered Australian waters, quite frankly what else can you use the Defence Force for? What else is a Defence Force for if it’s not to be and can be activated by the Defence Minister upon instructions from the Cabinet to defend the territorial integrity of this country? And that is a basic policy proposition which we will always advance, we will never take a step back from advancing that proposition. And we have put to the full Federal Court, and I talk in laymen’s terms, but we have put to the Federal Court that there are sovereign powers and executive government is entitled to employ and we believe that we did so properly and lawfully in the events surrounding MV Tampa.

I note yesterday that Mr Beazley raised the question and linked the question of the likely changes to security in the future to border protection himself in a ten point plan. It is worth referring to his ten point plan in regards to border protection because there he was yesterday suggesting that we revamp Australia’s border protection laws and he has the cheek to do so when only 10 or 12 or 13 days ago he was in the Parliament using his numbers to overturn a Bill proposed by the Government to do exactly that.

I mean, the hypocrisy of these people just leaves you absolutely breathless. Remembering of course two things that on the day that the Prime Minister announced that the action that we had taken when he announced that action at 2:00 o’clock at the start of Question Time, Kim Beazley got up and publicly supported him. He said: we support the action the Government has taken, this is the right thing in the national interest. Five hours later I sat in the Chamber and

would you believe saw the very same person say virtually exactly the opposite - exactly the opposite.

And when he gave his speech in the Parliament at 7:00 o’clock and said that they would not vote for our legislation because of the importance of that legislation a number of senior ministers, of course, with the Prime Minister sat down and said to ourselves what might we do to provide the Labor Party with some opportunity to change their position. In other words, what can we perhaps offer them that might try to meet their concerns to get this legislation through. And so we thought of various options and we went back with a very sensible option as a compromise to negotiate and that was that we would have a sunset clause in the legislation for six months or nine months, but a sunset clause. On the basis that look there’s a significant problem we have got today, we need to do something about it now, you have got concerns, fair enough but let’s at least put this legislation through. Let’s deal with the issues as they are now and six or nine months down the track in the cool light of day we can have another debate about it. If you don’t like it then fair enough, if you don’t like the way in which it has been used, fair enough. If you win the election you’ll have the numbers anyway. That is a very reasonable compromise. And were they prepared to negotiate? We got a complete and flat rejection from the Labor Party.

And I can tell you I am angry when I hear in the last 48 hours the Labor Party saying we are prepared to negotiate. I mean what a cheek. We put a proposition to them for compromise and they wouldn’t have a bar of it. And I’ll tell you why and that is because Kim Beazley does not have the guts to stand up in his own Caucus room and stare them down in what is the national interest. And it riles me when his friends in the Parliamentary Press Gallery say: oh what a man, what a man of strength is Kim Beazley that he can stand up against public opinion.

Now, what a sick joke. He can’t stand up against public opinion. The reason for it is simple, he is pushed around by his Caucus and he is unable to delineate the national interest and stand full square with it. And this is a very important issue, this is a very important issue and we intend to take the matters up further.

There will be more legislation for Mr Beazley in the Parliament next week. In particular one of the measures that we are going to introduce will be to change the nature and access of illegal arrivals by changing the status of Christmas Island and Ashmore Reef.

I was in Nauru the other day and I met with the representatives of the International Organisation for Migration. And I was very interested to hear one of the members of that delegation or group who are very, very experienced in these matters how strongly supportive they were of the actions that we are taking. On the basis that you have got a pipeline of people who want to come to Australia and until you put up the sign and make it clear that you have a firm position and you are not going to accept people who arrive without due process. Until you do that of course in fact you never meet the problem, you never stem the flow.

And this particular person referred to problems that the United States had had not exactly the same but of a similar nature with unauthorised boat arrivals into the North Marianas and people were going there because it gave them access into the US judicial system. And so what did the United States do? They legislated - they legislated. Well, we are going to legislate and we expect Mr Beazley to support the legislation that we are introducing.

Let me just turn now to just a couple of other broader matters as well because important as to all of these issues are clearly when there is a federal election which is due by the end of the year the Australian people will look across the political spectrum in terms of issues and they will make a judgement based on a number of issues and certainly issues of domestic economic management and the like.

Every election is important. Every election is like coming to a crossroads and having to decide well, will you go that way or will you go the other. And you don’t necessarily see a change overnight on the Sunday or the Monday after an election has been held if there’s a change in government but you put the other side in for a while and you’ll definitely see a difference which will build over time. And that is why every election is important and this one is particularly important as well. There are going to be a lot of issues I just want to refer to two - one is defence and the other is industrial relations.

In the area of defence, Mr Beazley yesterday proposed the establishment of a Coast Guard. This is a measure he’s been touting as an answer to the question of people smuggling. Except about 10 days ago when it suited him he was asked was it an answer to people smuggling and he said it wasn’t. So within a two week period he’d said it was the answer to the problem and it wasn’t the answer or coming out of the same mouth.

The question of people smuggling and the coastwatch is relevant to his policy proposition because his policy proposition somehow suggests if you had a better system as he would claim of coastal surveillance then somehow this would prevent people from coming into Australia. But of course the issue is not so much a matter of funding people, surveillance is not the issue. You know, with some of these boats they want to be found. You know, they call the Ashmore Reef the Ashmore taxi rank because people want to get there because they want us to bring them ashore. It’s not a question of surveillance as such which is the issue. The issue is whether or not you have a means of deterring people coming to Australia and whether or not you as a government have a resolve to turn people back.

Kim Beazley’s proposal for a Coast Guard would change the way in which we manage the system now. At the moment when it comes to surveillance on the high seas and in the coastal approaches to Australia we basically use the Royal Australian Navy. We have 1800 sea days by our Fremantle class patrol boats which at the moment we are out to tender to update and replace.

He is proposing to replace the Royal Australian Navy from this essential task of the maintenance of the defence of our northern approaches. In other words, he is saying that there is a new organisation that you could establish that would do a better job in deterring people coming to Australia than the Royal Australian Navy.

It is, when you think about it, it’s a quite incredible proposition. He is saying that somehow the Royal Australian Navy is not as good of defending Australia’s approaches as some new semi-bureaucratic organisation would be. Now, I say as a matter of common sense there’s no better deterrent, there’s no more efficient organisation for managing an operation like this than the Royal Australian Navy. And it is incredible that his proposition is to take the Navy out of the operations and send the Navy back to port and then employ a whole lot of people who will go

out basically under some new bureaucratic department to manage a function which I think the Royal Australian Navy has done very well.

I mean, if you are putting up a policy of deterrents, a sign which says look this is a very humanitarian country but we are just not going to let people in willy nilly what sign would most effectively provide that message? Well, I say a grey hull, the Royal Australian Navy not some Coast Guard run by an army of bureaucrats. And who else has said and come to such same conclusion, you know, in the debate about a Coast Guard in Australia? Well, none other than Kim Beazley when he was the relevant minister for defence back in the 1980s. He actually wrote a report which examined whether or not a Coast Guard would be a good idea and he concluded it was a bad idea, would reduce the effectiveness of the Navy and, of course, would cost a lot more and therefore should not be proceeded with. So here’s an idea which he has publicly himself demolished but today is publicly advocating and why because he thinks people hear the words Coast Guard, sounds like a great idea therefore it must be a good idea.

This is populism at its absolute worst. And, of course, it’s not a costless proposition. Don’t ask me what Kim Beazley thinks it would cost. Some of them have said it would cost nothing. Well, that’s always a bit of a longbow. Some of them have said I think it will cost $200 million. Well, that’s an awful lot of money from a political party that’s complaining about spending a few dollars on the operations that we have currently got to the north of Australia. But if you use the methodology he himself used to calculate the cost when he did this report in the ‘80s it would cost you a billion dollars and more. What, just to put the Royal Australian Navy back into port so that we can have an army of bureaucrats doing the job that our Defence Forces should do.

So we are going to fight on the Coast Guard proposition because it is not in the national interest, in fact, it would reduce our effectiveness. The second policy issue which I just want to briefly refer to is workplace relations and I want to give you two reasons, I think they are pretty simple reasons, why people should not vote for the Labor Party’s workplace relations policy.

The first is that they have a proposal to abolish the secondary boycott provisions of the Trade Practices Act. Peter referred to the work of the waterfront reforms. We are now at a national all time high - average 26 box movements an hour, container movements an hour. It was, as Peter said, something that the wharfies said could never be done. And they are doing that with about a third or a half less the people that they had before and on top of that they have got a hell of a lot more movements. So it’s a massive improvement in productivity.

But go back to the waterfront dispute. One of the incredible things about the waterfront dispute is that during that dispute the waterfront was never closed. And I invite you to think back a bit further to other waterfront disputes in Australia. And the characteristics of each and every one of those was that when the wharfies went out they all went out and the country was basically held to ransom.

In the old, bad old days, as John Coombs the former Secretary once said, "I used to be able to pick up the phone and 15 minutes close Australia down". That was his proud statement. In the waterfront dispute despite all of the issues the waterfront kept on working because P&O was able to keep going. And why was that, it’s as simple as this, there’s a $10 million dollar fine sitting behind those Trade Practices Act provisions and the wharfies are never so silly as to take on an Alan Fells in full flight.

Their proposal is to abolish the secondary boycott provisions of the Trade Practices Act. That is the Labor Party’s policy and that will go through the Senate. The Democrats don’t have any problems with that. They had some figures out the other day on industrial disputes. We have the lowest level in some areas of measurement of industrial disputes in Australia that we have ever had since 1913, since records were first kept. You know, quite a turn around to Bill Kelty. Remember at the Town Hall he said, there will be World War III - this was before the ’96 election - if the Coalition gets in there will be World War III, you’ve never seen such chaos was his prediction.

Well, of course, we haven’t had industrial chaos; we have basically had industrial harmony. Better than anything that we ever had when the Labor Party was in. So what is their policy solution to this relatively peaceful although rising levels in Victoria tells you what you get with a Labor government but leaving that political point aside what is their policy against this backdrop of undeniable, incredible success in getting industrial disputes down? Their policy is to repeal one of the very provisions that have actually given us this success.

It’s absolutely crazy. I mean, put aside party politics no-one in their right mind can possibly argue why this is a good idea. What they are going to do is…their answer, by the way if they were here is, they’d say: oh well look, we are repealing it from the Trade Practices Act but we are going to put it in the Workplace Relations Act. What a joke. Why are they doing it? Because of course that’s just a toothless tiger, they know that and that’s their little ploy.

The second thing just to give you a practical example of their policy prescriptions in workplace relations which is one of the few areas where they have a policy and the reason for that, of course, is that the ACTU have worked out what the policy is and told them.

The second area is that they are going to introduce something which sounds benign, it’s called the ‘right to negotiate’. The ‘right to negotiate’ is a right that collective organisations ie. unions will have under legislation introduced by the Labor Party. This is my practical example, take a business with 100 employees, 99 are not in the union, one employee is in the union. Under the ‘right to negotiate’ proposal the union representing that one employee will have a right and there will be obligations on the employer for them to negotiate with the employer on behalf of the 100. And this of course will place the union in an incredibly strong industrial position. The ‘right to negotiate’ will mean that they can then negotiate with the employer, secure a deal with the employer, foist it onto the employees and then to the 99 just to add insult to injury in a proposition also supported by the Democrats so it will get through. The union will have a right to impose a charge on the 99 who are not in the union, a charge which will be effectively a service fee from the non-union employees who never wanted a union in the first place, never joined a union in the first place, never asked the union to negotiate on their behalf, have an agreement foisted on them that they never asked for, they will then have to pay the union a service fee because the ACTU thinks that’s only fair if we negotiate a deal for you.

Now, this is a draconian proposition. It’s quite incredible in a free society that you could have a union appointed to represent you even though you don’t want to be a member of the union. And, of course, it will be a lever for just getting more people effectively to join the union. It’s just a back door method of compulsory unionism.

I think these are incredibly important issues. When you look at Australia’s economic performance in recent years one of the best figures to look at is our productivity performance. Now, why have we got a better productivity performance, because the system now basically says to people, they don’t all do it but many do, the system basically says to people look at the best way to run your business and the way in which you manage employee relations is for the employer and the employee to sit down together and work it out between themselves.

If you want somebody to represent you, fair enough but the basic idea is sit down and worry about your own problems, come to your own solutions and make your own business more successful as a result. And what is the Labor Party’s proposal? The Labor Party’s proposal is oh no you shouldn’t be doing that, the people who should do all the negotiation is some third party namely the union.

This is a return to an idea which Australia tried in the ‘70s and ‘80s and doesn’t work. And you know when the Labor Party left office in 1996 even they were saying it didn’t work. But, of course, they never had what it takes to tackle, you know, the institutionalised entrenched position of the trade union movement. I can tell you Kim Beazley will never have the ticker to do it in the future either because on this policy issue as with the Trade Practices Act, and with border protection etc. he’s not a man to stand up in the national interest.

I just say to you look back and say when the Labor Party was in they racked up, what, $95 billion dollars worth of debt or thereabouts, certainly what they left us. They left us with a $10.3 billion dollar deficit after the ’96 campaign when Kim Beazley was going around saying it was in surplus. I mean, he should never be elected to office again after that but I suppose it’s a political point. Pretty good point though.

They gave us the highest unemployment since the great recession. And, of course, for small business we had interest rates at 17 per cent. No-one should ever forget what those people did by way of economic mismanagement. And here they are, they have the gall to attack the Government’s record. This Government has given you low inflation, high productivity for workers. When the Labor Party was in from the start to the finish of the Labor Party’s period in office real wages for low income workers fell by five per cent. They were proud of it. I have got the speeches in my bottom drawer of ministers standing up and saying it’s a great thing in Australia, we have reduced wages as if that was the policy objective. The idea guys is to increase wages but make sure you can pay for it by higher productivity.

When you look at the record of this Government whether you are an exporter, whether you are a manufacturer, whether you are running a small business, this Government has done the things that needed to be done and this Government will do the things that need to be done in the future. Thank you very much.



[ends]

Receive media releases automatically via email. Register your address at www.defence.gov.au/media/mainidx.html

