Australian Labor Party   National ALP   Back

Kim Beazley - Media Conference - United States Strike On Afghanistan, PM's Attendance At APEC, Security, Border Control, Asylum Seekers, Bin Laden http://www.alp.org.au//media/1001/kbmcnsw081001.html

Tuesday, 09 October 2001

Kim Beazley - Media Conference Subjects: United States Strike On Afghanistan, PM's Attendance At APEC, Security, Border Control, Asylum Seekers, Bin Laden

Transcript - Sydney, NSW - 8 October 2001

E & O E - PROOF ONLY

BEAZLEY: It is quite clear from the breaking news overnight that a new phase in the international struggle against terrorism has begun. A foreshadowed phase with George Bush and Tony Blair announcing the fact that American and British forces are now actively engaging military targets in Afghanistan associated with the activities of the terrorist organisation al Qaeda and in degrading the military effectiveness of Taliban. So this is a much anticipated venture but it is also one in which the lives of our friends and allies are now at stake and engaged. We wish them well. We offer them our unstinting support and we hope for the success of their mission and we appreciate the care that they have taken to properly position this activity diplomatically and also in humanitarian terms. Unusually, this action involves parallel action to try to deal with what is undoubtedly going to be an appalling humanitarian crisis in Afghanistan this winter.

The Labor Party and the Liberal Party are as one in supporting the activities the of our allies and I again commit the Australian Labor Party to supporting the endeavour to deal with the international terrorist threat to all of us.

At midday today John Howard becomes the caretaker Prime Minister of Australia. He ceases to act with the full authority of the Prime Minister in normal times. And under caretaker conventions decisions that commit governments beyond the immediate days are taken traditionally on the basis of consensus.

I want to assure the Australian people that as the alternative Prime Minister I will be thoroughly engaged in ensuring, whenever I am asked, the safety of any Australian personnel that will be involved, and the firmness of a commitment of the Australian people to this right and just cause. It is important that the Australian people have that guarantee because of the particular phase of the electoral cycle in which we now find ourselves. So there will be strength of commitment as far as the Australian Labor Party is concerned in these troubled and difficult times.

Australian forces would only at this stage be tangentially involved. We have a ship in the Gulf and we have an ongoing intelligence arrangement with the United States, and undoubtedly that is engaged in these contemporary circumstances. But as the weeks roll by, then the possibility of other modest and appropriate Australian involvement is there. We have already given our commitment to these

commitments - to the allied, to the international effort, in the confrontation with terrorism.

These are difficult times. These are times which are not free, of course, of threat to the populations of those who are engaged. I am sure that the United States, the United Kingdom, have done the very best they can and others engaged have done the very best they can to minimise risks to their own populations. But this will require of all governments very, very high levels of vigilance so that the people of our countries can have confidence that they are secure while this action goes on. We think very particularly today of those who are engaged militarily. We think particularly of their families and the concerns that they will be feeling and our prayers are with them.

JOURNALIST: The Prime Minister said he got a call from Dick Cheney early this morning. Have you had any calls from or briefings from the Prime Minister's office?

BEAZLEY: No, I haven't had any. But that doesn't worry me in the least quite frankly. These are early days and as I said our involvement at this point of time is important but tangential to the exercise that is currently underway in the region.

JOURNALIST: Should the Prime Minister now go to APEC given what has happened obviously it would be an important meeting?

BEAZLEY: APEC is not part of command arrangements associated with this. Insofar as it has any diplomatic role, there are one or two nations at APEC who have been … involved in an intensive American diplomatic effort, I think particular of Indonesia. It is enormously important that Indonesia be kept constantly advised and informed about what is taking place. Frankly, that is something that the Americans will do, and have done. You would not say that that relationship built up by the Prime Minister with his Indonesian counterpart would be such that there would be a deal of a role that he could play there.

JOURNALIST: How were you made aware of this action taking place? What time was it? And even if even APEC isn't part of the command arrangements, don't you face a political problem with people saying you look petty in some ways, saying he can't go at such an important time?

BEAZLEY: Not in the least. The simple fact of the matter is that the command arrangements associated with this now reside in the coalition of forces that are directly engaged. Frankly, at the moment, that is principally the British Prime Minister and the American President. Others are being informed as the case effectively is prosecuted. We are tangentially involved as I said and that is evidence that I suppose that it was Vice President Cheney that rang Prime Minister Howard but nevertheless importantly involved and I would expect that over the course of the next few weeks, there will be ample opportunity for us to express our support and the strength of our support to the International Coalition effort. And as the Government, as I said, enters into caretaker mode, the fact that the Labor Party and the Liberal Party are as one on this is absolutely critical for the sense of security in our armed forces, the sense of security in our people and of course insofar as our allies rely on us to be reliable, it is important that they know that both the Labor Party and the Liberal Party in this election period are supportive of them to the letter.

JOURNALIST: … that for you to get domestic issues onto the agenda with this international event?

BEAZLEY: No, it is not, and one thing that I have been convinced of over the course of the last few days is that the Australian people and you in the media are capable of sustaining in parallel terms both a focus on the issues of security abroad, where the Government and Opposition, the Labor and Liberal Parties are

at one, and focus on the issues of security at home, a secure future for all Australians where the Labor Party and the Liberal Party are poles apart.

You see, this election campaign is not about the next three months, it is about the next three years. And the task in this election campaign is to convince the Australian people that you have solutions for the issues of security abroad and it is highly preferable that those solutions should be pursued on a bipartisan basis, as they are being, and that you have solutions for their concerns for security at home. Their concerns about their family living standards, the education of their children, the health of our Australian people. These are issues which will sustain themselves in parallel terms through the course of the next five weeks.

JOURNALIST: Mr Beazley, we saw our latest boat arriving yesterday and very emotional images of people throwing kids overboard. What should happen about that? What should you do?

BEAZLEY: I absolutely condemn the throwing of children overboard whatever point is attempted to be made by that course of action. And governments cannot and will not give in to blackmail by those processes. So that is to be condemned. It is an utterly unacceptable practice. It is also a measure of the extent to which this issue is not solved. Despite all the Border Protection legislation that has been passed, which we support, and does permit Australian Armed Forces to usher boats like this out of Australian waters, despite the effort to sustain surveillance in our immediate region, the boat people continue to come. Therefore, a permanent solution is required. Not a solution for the next three months, but a solution for the next three years. There is only one Party now offering a solution for that and that is the Australian Labor Party with two propositions. On the one hand in relation to surveillance, the creation of a coast guard that can keep this up for 52 weeks of the year, on the other hand in terms of an international agreement which will see the boat people returned to their place of embarkation, an agreement with Indonesia. What has become absolutely apparent over the course of the last few weeks and months is that only an Australian Labor Party government would be capable of negotiating such an agreement with the Indonesians.

JOURNALIST: Do you think it Australian casualties will be likely in this conflict?

BEAZLEY: It is possible, of those that are currently engaged at the moment, less likely, but there are a number of Australians, as I understand it, serving with units of the UK and the US in the region, the Government has made announcements about that in the past. They are possibly at risk and, of course, when ultimately Australian units are directly contributing to the conflict then the possibility of casualties is there. These are risks that members of the Australian Defence Forces enter into voluntarily, they are men and women of enormous courage. At the same time as they enter into that risk on behalf of their people and their country their families suffer and are concerned. And our prayers and our support are with them and their families.

JOURNALIST: … this morning's raids … faced by America getting other countries offside, they didn't get Bin Laden, does that surprise you…?

BEAZLEY: Of course, it doesn't surprise me at all. And nor have the Americans raised any anticipation in that regard. They have very sensibly cast their diplomacy and their expectations, they understand that they are not engaged in a short term activity. They understand that they are engaged in a complex, diplomatic, political, military task that will not cease, probably would not even cease with the capture or death of Bin Laden, if the truth be told. That network of his is much broader than simply he himself. So I

am enormously impressed by the sense of purpose and dedication, intelligence, caution and multi-layered approach of President Bush and Prime Minister Blair, and I am also impressed by the extent to which they have stressed, at least an effort to get to grips with what is going to be a massive and horrible humanitarian problem, this northern winter.

I cannot think of a set of circumstances in which people have been so well prepared. Now that doesn't mean that there's not going to be collateral difficulties. It doesn't mean that mistakes won't be made and it does mean that there has to be a very high level of vigilance in relation to the protection of domestic populations elsewhere and no doubt these are terrible calculations that are going on in the minds of themselves and their advisers and that makes it crucial that a country like Australia, and a political process like we have in this country, thoroughly grasps the complexity and is supportive in that context. We are not blind-followers, we are followers who are calculating the risks and understanding the risks and that is why I think it is so vitally important that there should be bipartisan support for that in this country and I think that it will strike people, particularly those who are reporting on this election campaign, how critical that bipartisan support is from 12 o'clock today. Because from 12 o'clock today decisions which forward commit the Australian people need, if the caretaker conventions are being observed, to be taken on the basis of a consensus and as far as I am concerned, I'm at one with my political opponents on this issue of international security, even though simultaneously, I'll be conducting a debate with him on domestic issue in which we are poles apart.

Thanks very much.

Ends Authorised by Geoff Walsh, 19 National Circuit, Barton ACT 2600.

