Australian Labor Party   National ALP   Back

Kim Beazley - Doorstop - Coalition Plans To Sell The Remainder Of Telstra, John Howard's Tax Cuts, National Rail Corporation, Defence White Paper, Bob Horne, Polls, Treasury Figures, Local Television Programming, Labor's

Frontbench

http://www.alp.org.au//media/1001/kbmcnsw271001.html Monday, 29 October 2001

ALP News Statements

Kim Beazley - Doorstop Interview Subjects: Coalition Plans To Sell The Remainder Of Telstra, John Howard's Tax Cuts, National Rail Corporation, Defence White Paper, Bob Horne, Polls, Treasury Figures, Local Television Programming, Labor's Frontbench

Transcript - Raymond Terrace, NSW - 27 October 2001

E & OE - PROOF ONLY

BEAZLEY: Peter Costello has let the cat out of the bag. He's named the date, he's named the price. He's completely exposed John Howard's and John Anderson's deception. If this Liberal Government is re-elected they will sell Telstra. All John Howard's promises that he's going to listen to the bush, he's going to listen to his backbench, you can forget about it. Peter Costello has let the cat out of the bag -named the date, named the price, expose the deception - they will sell Telstra.

Here is a fundamental point of difference. If the Labor Party is elected we guarantee not one more share of Telstra will be sold. If the Liberal Party is elected, they have guaranteed they will sell the lot. That clear point of difference is yet another element of this campaign which shows that the Labor Party and the Liberal Party are poles apart.

Tomorrow John Howard is going to promise a modest tax cut. But as he promises that modest tax cut, he is going to guarantee a crisis health, a crisis in education and a crisis in aged care. The Labor Party will be standing for decent investment in health, education, aged care, jobs, and relief for families with changes to the Goods and Services Tax. John Howard will promise a modest tax cut.

As he must know, as he does that, and slips out of Australian politics two years on, that he will have left behind him a huge crisis in health, aged care and education.

JOURNALIST: The Prime Minister is trying to put a brave face on. He said that this doesn't make any difference to the Coalition's promises that it won't be sold.

BEAZLEY: It makes a massive difference. You can't get out there and reveal, your date, reveal the price - nobody's ever done that in Australia before - reveal the date, reveal the price, and then say it's factored into your budget numbers. It means, obviously, they're going to sell to that schedule. It means that

absolutely obviously.

JOURNALIST: The National Party perhaps underestimates its power within the Coalition, then?

BEAZLEY: The National Party will be, if its re-elected, relieved and lie supine as the Liberal Party roles this one over them. That is their role. That is what they always do, and they will do it again now. They can complain and grizzle all they like about it but all of us in Australian politics have known what Peter Costello's revealed.

JOURNALIST: By September 30, you've got to sell the National Rail Corporation. Where does that fit into your budget bottom line?

BEAZLEY: We have accepted the place at which they've arrived at. That's not a problem as far as we're concerned.

JOURNALIST: With the asylum seekers, some of the relatives are in Australia on special protection visas. Some of them want to leave to go back to Indonesia to be with other relatives of those who may have drowned in this most recent tragedy, but are concerned they won't get their special protection visa back. Is that something you would support?

BEAZLEY: I actually haven't seen reportage on that, I'm sorry. I'll take a look at it and get back to you.

JOURNALIST: Just on Telstra, with the share price forecast … Peter Costello … out of that. How do you see a Labor Government not … of Telstra … future of that share price …

BEAZLEY: The thing I've noticed in all the polling I've seen, both ours and in public polling, is this: the people who are actually Telstra shareholders, by an overwhelming majority, don't want to see any more of Telstra sold. I guess if you happen to be a Tesltra 2 shareholder and you took a look at what Peter Costello is intending to do to you 18 months or two years down the track from now, in selling Telstra at $5.48 a share, that's about $1.90 below what you paid for it, you wouldn't thank him, and you wouldn't be wanting see those shares dumped on the market.

JOURNALIST: Are you optimistic that that share price could…

BEAZLEY: I don't make predictions about share prices. We didn't sell Telstra. That's the Government's case to answer. But our view is that the people are the majority owners of Telstra and they ought to stay that way. Telstra has an important nation-building task to perform and it should continue to perform.

JOURNALIST: Is this election a referendum on the rest of the sale?

BEAZLEY: I think it's come down to that. I think it has come down to that in regional Australia now. Everybody who votes in regional Australia knows that if you vote for the Liberals and Nationals, you're voting yes to the sale of Telstra. If you vote yes for the Australian Labor Party, you're voting no for the sale of Telstra.

JOURNALIST: How strong an issue do you think it is in regional Australia?

BEAZLEY: Massive. Everybody in regional Australia knows that if they are going to have an economic life, a family life and an educational life in the long-term that is affordable for their businesses and for themselves, they have to keep Telstra in public ownership. They know that. They know that decisions will be taken with technologies not yet invented, years from now, that if they're taken in the context of

what is purely commercially valuable to Telstra's board at any point of time, they'll miss out. They know that. They know that instinctively. They believe strongly, in regional Australia, that the rest of Telstra should not be sold. But it also has to be said that most Australians think that, too, whether they live in regional Australia or not.

JOURNALIST: Mr Beazley, you said this election has come to down to a referendum partly on Telstra privatisation. If the Government wins, then, will you abide by the will of the people on Telstra?

BEAZLEY: Labor will never support the privatisation of Telstra - never. We will never vote in the Senate for a single extra share to be sold. We never have and we never will. But you also need to recognise we spent 13 years in Government and not once in those 13 years did we have a Senate majority. The only way you can genuinely protect yourself against the sale of Telstra is to vote for an Australian Labor Party Government.

JOURNALIST: Mr Beazley, Alan Ramsey, in this morning's paper, quotes an unnamed Labor source as saying Labor's biggest problems across the board are in seats with high Anglo-Celtic populations. For instance, we are … in the Hunter Valley and out of Sydney. Can you comment on that, please?

BEAZLEY: I hadn't noticed. I'm not really a commentator on Alan. Alan's had a few views about me over the years and has written at length on those things and generally speaking, there's a name that gets attached to the end of these endless series of quotes, but on this occasion, not, I notice. I wouldn't comment on unnamed speculators.

JOURNALIST: (inaudible)

BEAZLEY: I think that what we're doing is gradually getting this election campaign refocussed on domestic issues. That's what I think we're doing. I think that people are beginning again to think through the issues of security at home. They've thought through the issues of security abroad, they're now starting to think through the issues of security at home. They do know that if there isn't some serious, but affordable, investment in health, education, aged care, and some decent relief on the Goods and Services Tax, then families will pay. And they also know that now, courtesy of Peter Costello, that another icon which most Australians hold dear - Telstra - will definitely be sold by our political opponents. He was trying to trap us, Costello. Understand where all this comes from. What Costello was trying to do was to undermine our Access Economics verified figures. He did not succeed. We are absolutely determined in this election campaign we're not going to break the bank. That's why we've chosen an economic analyst in Access Economics, trusted by both sides of politics. Indeed, John Howard has had frequent occasion to say 'trust Access Economics figures'. So, we have chosen to employ them on that basis of trust. Costello was trying to undermine them and failed. But what he did do was expose his Leader's deception.

JOURNALIST: Mr Beazley, today you handed out the job to Bob Horne as Parliamentary Secretary … One of the betting agencies now puts you in front. Are you still claiming to be the underdog?

BEAZLEY: I think you've seen most of the polling and I know I've sworn never to be an analyst but, and I'm a fighter here, but we're underdogs, there's no doubt about that. Polls go all over the place. But we have struggled through this election campaign to get those two issues equally on the agenda - security abroad, security at home. I think we're starting to succeed now in getting public focus on the security at home issues but we started a long way behind and we are still the underdogs.

JOURNALIST: Mr Beazley, just on the issue of trusting its economic figures, do you trust the Treasury

forecast in light of what they've been … provided by the Government in this election?

BEAZLEY: I simply have to. We have no alternatives. We have to have a common basis on which an election campaign is conducted. It used to be on the basis of the four-year projections of the previous budget. Now it's on the basis of the projections of what occurs during the first 10 days of the campaign. But either way, you have to have a basis on which you and your opponent conducts the campaign. So, I have no choice.

JOURNALIST: You also have to have a back-up plan …

BEAZLEY: I think in an election campaign the issues have to be simplified. You have to be focussed and you have to be trustworthy on the figures that you have. We are basing all our policies on those figures and our absolute determination to tell the Australian people that within the framework of those figures, we are sticking to our undertaking that we will not break the bank, that everything we promise will be affordable. I think it is interesting. I think this election campaign is now coming down to what it looked like coming down to two years ago. On the one hand monies from the surplus would be, by our Liberal opponents, spent on a modest tax promise. And on the other hand, the Labor Party would be putting forward policies on national investment in health, education and in ensuring that the GST is simpler and fairer. The difference, I guess between us is this: we know that our policies are aimed at a crisis and we know that if John Howard's modest tax promises are favoured we will confront a crisis nevertheless, irrespective, in health, education and aged care. You can't run away from that crisis any more. It's there, it dominates daily the front pages of our newspapers when elections are not on - day after day, crises in public hospitals, horror stories from nursing homes, crises in public education. You can't walk away from these things any more, but John Howard is.

JOURNALIST: Mr Beazley, are you ruling out a tax change, a tax cut of some sort of your own?

BEAZLEY: What we intend to do about tax, you have seen in relation to the Goods and Services Tax, that, plus a promise that we are not raising taxes.

JOURNALIST: Mr Beazley, the market is talking about a billion dollars from the National Rail Corporation sale - consolidated revenue or debt retirement. Which is the decision here?

BEAZLEY: We will take a look at what goes through on that but we have accepted the budget numbers on that matter and we will stick with those. Whatever is factored into the budget numbers in relation to National Rail, that is part of our bottom line.

JOURNALIST: It has taken three weeks to get the campaign focussed, or getting around to be focussed, on your issues, if you like. Have you got enough time left to get it to …

BEAZLEY: As I have said, I am now a fighter, not an analyst. You tell me, you are the analysts. All I can do is to keep positive, keep focussed on the things that matter to Australian people and keep fighting through.

JOURNALIST: When you are going to release your Telecommunications Policy?

BEAZLEY: We have already released quite a bit of it, as you will have seen in what we have had to say about Telstra. The most important promise that we can make in telecommunications is that we will not be privatising Telstra. So, that's out there but we will be releasing other matters in relation to communications later in the campaign.

JOURNALIST: … more specific beyond the White Paper on Defence policy …

BEAZLEY: The White Paper we accepted because the White Paper was basically our military strategy and our Defence strategy and John Howard reversed himself on a line that he had been pursuing to that point of time. The White Paper is critical in terms of strategy and generally in its approach to force structure, but it's not immutable. Within it and within the amounts, you can make changes. We have said, for example, that we are going to have to shift the numbers in the White Paper around to be able to accommodate an enhanced SAS, and an enhanced SAS in terms of accessing some of the Army's helicopter buy for long range insertion. You can do that within the structure of the Defence White Paper budget. You can shift those sorts of numbers around. In general, we support all elements of it but we also reserve the right to make those sorts of marginal adjustments within it.

JOURNALIST: (inaudible)

BEAZLEY: The AWAC's promises that are there in the White Paper - that we will stick with. It's overdue and over extensive and the decision should have been made five years ago. But we will stick with that.

JOURNALIST: Mr Beazley, the man standing beside you gained some national notoriety a few months ago as Bob the Printer over the amount that was spent by his electorate office on printing bills. The Coalition are again digging around, I believe, for figures to show that Mr Horne has spent more than most other MPs. Do you stand by his ..

BEAZLEY: He does keep his people informed. The arrangements that are put in place for Members' entitlements have been put in place by our political opponents and thoroughly utilised by our political opponents. But I tell you what's the difference between Bob Horne and myself and our political opponents on these matters, he and I believe there should be an independent auditor of Parliamentary entitlements, an independent auditor, and that that independent auditor ought to table both past and present Members usage of those entitlements on a six-monthly basis in Parliament. Now, they won't fess up to that but while ever they do, while ever they fail to support that proposition what you know is this: all they are doing is being out to get people without a solution.

JOURNALIST: As regards to the policy on aggregation, communications generally, with the local television programming and what have you -you would know that Prime Television here in the Hunter closed its news services in June - what would Labor do to make stations like Prime Television fulfil their licence conditions to provide local news and programming?

BEAZLEY: Television stations are obliged to stick with the terms and conditions of their licences and if they breach them it is a matter for the ABA. Now that you tell me that, Mr Smith will deal with the problem immediately.

JOURNALIST: Mr Beazley, … people were saying to you out there when you were walking through the crowd, what sort of issues were people raising?

BEAZLEY: Basically, industrial relations type issues. There are a lot of miners here who have done it tough in recent times in the disputes in coal in the Hunter Valley. There are a number of others there who were concerned about workers' entitlements. It's the big sleeper issue in this election, workers' entitlements. It is not talked about much in the pages of our newspapers but it is a deepening worry amongst ordinary Australians. A lot of them were asking me how we propose to structure what we are

doing with workers' entitlements and how it would be paid for and I was giving them information on that.

Then one or two raised aged care issues which is the substantial issue in the Hunter. There is a big shortfall of beds here - I got from some of the older people there - more particularly their kids raised that issue with me. The other was, wasn't I so proud to be the patron of the Newcastle Knights. There was one chap there who was introduced to me - if he had his day he would have been in the front row for the Knights and he played for Newcastle instead. He was introduced by Charlie Jones who is still alive, I'm pleased to see.

JOURNALIST: … announcements on local funding?

BEAZLEY: If you take a look at the sorts of things that we have been planning in relation to education priority zones, you can be certain that this is the sort of area that will attract an education priority zone. Regional aged care beds - 1200 shortfall here in the Hunter. You can be absolutely certain that this shortfall will start to be dealt with by the announcements that we have made in relation to provision of loans for nursing home beds and for additional resources to ensure quality nursing home care. That's important in the Hunter. You can also be certain, too, that for regional universities like the University of Newcastle, the promises that we have made on equalisation in terms of getting access to broadband and in terms of access to research places, will play heavily here, too. These are all things that are good for the Hunter, these propositions of ours.

JOURNALIST: …You have also told us that Stephen Martin would hold his position of Defence Minister etc. How much of the Ministry have you got sorted out already?

BEAZLEY: Well, pretty well the lot. There would be some minor adjustments but that's the principal difference between myself and Mr Howard - we have a team in place. You know who the Labor Defence Minister is going to be. You know who the Health Minister is going to be and who the Finance Minister is going to be. You also know who is going to be Prime Minister for the full three years of the Parliament. In Mr Howard's case, he can't give an answer to any of those questions.

JOURNALIST: So, no change on your frontbench?

BEAZLEY: I am happy with the way my frontbench has performed. There may be adjustments in terms of exact portfolio titles but all the main portfolios will stay as they are. I don't like speculating on those sorts of things though. Somebody asked me a question on that the other day, it might have been you, no it wasn't you. I don't believe in tempting the Gods.

Ends

Authorised by Geoff Walsh, 19 National Circuit, Barton ACT 2600.

