Media Transcript Minister For Foreign Affairs Alexander Downer

JOINT MEDIA CONFERENCE BY ALEXANDER DOWNER, MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS (AUSTRALIA), AND DR HASSAN WIRAJUDA, MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS (INDONESIA).

CANBERRA, WEDNESDAY 28 NOVEMBER 2001

MR DOWNER: Welcome to my friend and colleague the Indonesian Foreign Minister here to Canberra today to meet with me.

He will also be meeting with Senator Hill, the Defence Minister and tomorrow with a number of people.  And going to the Australian National University for a while and tomorrow afternoon meeting with the Prime Minister in Sydney.

This is the first senior visit by an Indonesia Minister in the life of the administration of President Megawati. We therefore particularly welcome this visit straight after our own federal election and after the reappointment or the appointment of the federal government.  We have had the opportunity to cover a wide range of issues that are of interest to Australia and Indonesia.  We have had a good talk about the issue of terrorism and both of us, in our own ways, our commitment to the struggle against terrorism.  We have had a good discussion about the issue of people-smuggling; the recognition by both of us that this is an issue which isn’t just a bilateral issue, this is an issue for the whole of the region.  It is an issue that Australia, Indonesia, Malaysia, Thailand, other countries all need to address and address together.

We’ve agreed that there will be a regional conference to address people-smuggling to be co-sponsored by us but particularly as an Indonesian initiative.  We welcome that and that is going to be held around February, some time in February; the exact date in February will have to be resolved but during the course of February.

We also welcome the establishment by the coordinating Minister for Security Yudhoyono of a task force to address the people-smuggling issue.  We welcome the campaigns that are now taking place to warn local fishermen particularly of the consequences of their boats being used by people-smugglers and the consequences for the crews of breaches of Australian law.  And we are also pleased with the progress that has been made in discussions over the last week between our officials on the upgrading of the extradition treaty between Australia and Indonesia, relevant to the issue of people-smuggling, relevant to other issues too because transnational crime more broadly is an enormous issue for the international community to address, and having an appropriately framed extradition treaty between us is an important component of that.

We have been able to talk too about other regional issues and I welcome the Indonesian proposal to have a trilateral dialogue between Australia and Indonesia and East Timor.  I think it is very important that all three of us have a good and relationship.  Actually that is going very well.  Tomorrow I will be hosting a visit to

Adelaide by Jose Ramos Horta the East Timor Foreign Minister so we are very close to the trilateral dialogue this week alone but in any case we are moving towards having a try lateral dialogue pretty soon.  Also an idea which has been around for a while an establishment of a West Pacific forum or West Pacific dialogue involving several countries of the West Pacific including Indonesia, Australia, New Zealand, East Timor is, I think, a very constructive idea and we look forward to taking that idea further during the course of next year.

But I’d like to ask my friend and colleague Dr Hassan, the Foreign Minister of Indonesia, if he would like to say a few words and then we’d be happy to answer a few questions.  We can’t for too long because we are running behind schedule, as you all know, and I need to get the Minister to his meeting with the Defence Minister, Senator Hill.

DR WIRAJUDA:  Thank you Alex, and colleagues and friends from the media. It is my distinct pleasure to be here in Canberra quite after quite a long absence.  My previous visit was six years ago and I am reminded by Minister Downer that my visit happened to be the first visit for a government member of President Megawati. We have discussed quite widely …and need to repeat because need Foreign Minister Downer has asked on my behalf in that matter and it’s reached quite an understanding on many issues and aspects that need to be followed up as part of our consistent efforts to enhance our bilateral relations further, especially given the visit of Prime Minister Howard, for us to increase our contacts and intensify our relations and I am glad I am here in Canberra.  Thanks Foreign Minister Downer and government of Australia for the warm welcome extended to me and my delegation. Thank you.

MR DOWNER: We really just have time for or five questions.

QUESTION: Dr Wirajuda, is Indonesia as concerned as Australia about the people-smuggling problem, there has been some talk that is not muck of a problem for you…

DR WIRAJUDA: From the very beginning our position is that with the question of people-smuggling or illegal migrant is it is an international problem.  Yes, Indonesia and Australia have such concerns because we hosted a few thousands illegal migrants in Indonesia and because we understand if Australia has strong concerns and the possible influx of illegal migrants to Australia.  But basically and consistent with our position that is an international problem and not a bilateral problem between Indonesia and Australia.  And so we took initiative to organise a conference involving countries of this nation, Australia, countries of transit, Malaysia and Indonesia, but also countries of origin.

QUESTION: What is the Indonesian government’s assessment of the actual flow of refugees at the moment.  Is there any indication that it might be falling off or increasing?

DR WIRAJUDA:  I sense that it is somewhat receding and perhaps this is related to the developments in Afghanistan.  Our discussion mentions that we have possible hope, perhaps with the hopefully good prospects of peace building in Afghanistan. These people have a notion to go back than to continue their journey to Australia.

QUESTION: Were their any discussions about Indonesia pursuing a quieter form of diplomacy and was any progress made by the both of you on a visit by the Prime Minister to Jakarta next year?

DR WIRAJUDA: We don’t need to say any more than what we have just practiced, practical, quiet diplomacy…

MR DOWNER:  We had a bit of a discussion about a possible visit by the Prime Minister to Jakarta and in the interests of quiet diplomacy the Foreign Minister will be talking to the Prime Minister tomorrow.

QUESTION: Indonesia has traditionally been concerned about boat people being left in Indonesia, vis-a-vis the Vietnam war experience.  Were you able to give the Prime Minister any assurances that Australia will ensure that it doesn’t happen again, if Indonesia decides to cooperate on the boat people initiatives?

MR DOWNER:  The situation now is not analogous with the situation in relation to the refugees from Vietnam at the end of the Vietnam war and an argument one could get into at great length, but obviously from Indonesia’s perspective there is some history there.  In relation to the large number of people who left Vietnam, who were stuck in the Indonesia  -well, for years and you can understand they don’t want to repeat that experience.  No-one wants to see that experience repeated.

The situation here now is that we have a people-smuggling racket going on and what we want to do is to try to close down an effective people-smuggling racket.  It is not analogous with what happened at the end of the Vietnam war and if we can successfully close down that people-smuggling racket then the pipeline won’t happen. The people won’t come down the pipeline and that is the important issue to try to understand here.  And we feel that slow progress is being made.  There are some signs now that the numbers coming through are declining.  These people come from a variety of different countries.  They don’t just, by the way, come from Afghanistan, which is sometimes portrayed: they come from South West Asia generally. They also come from Sri Lanka, Pakistan, Bangladesh, a number of different countries and the quicker we can close down this racket, the better.  And, I mean, I do very strongly agree with Hassan Wirajuda that a regional approach to this is likely to be the most effective approach to it.  That is if we can, as a region, close down on people-smuggling that is going to be much more effective than either of us can do bilaterally.

QUESTION: What do you think about that?  Are you concerned about a repeat of the Vietnam war experience?

DR WIRAJUDA: As Alex said, it is a different nature.  In Vietnam, it’s boat people situation, there was more involvement of Indonesia syndications in the case of illegal migrants.  But certainly the history, of Vietnamese boat people which took 16 years, from ‘89 to ’96, to settle the problems, it was quite a problem for us and certainly you don’t want to repeat that experience.  And knowing that of now we have our own displaced persons, the problems of around 1.2 million displaced persons.

QUESTION: Minister, could you tell me: does Indonesia - given that Indonesia has 1.2 million displaced persons of its own, what does Indonesia think about Australia’s so-called Pacific solution of warehousing asylum seekers around the Pacific while

they are assessed and does Indonesia have a view as to where those who are assessed as being genuine refugees should end up?

DR WIRAJUDA: I don’t have a specific view on the so-called Pacific solution. We know that a small percentage of these illegal migrants entitled to be classified as refugees.  According to UNHCR and especially UNHCR leaves us between 10 and 14 % as refugees and countries who are party to the convention should take these refugees.

QUESTION: Do you think Indonesia’s military ties with Australia might be restored down the track given that the United States now indicated it might be interested in restoring ties so long as the people involved in the East Timor murders are brought to trial …?

DR WIRAJUDA: I can say to you that there has been two meetings at senior official levels.  The first one was in Bali and second one was in fact took place here in Canberra

QUESTION:. What did they involve..

DR WIRAJUDA: Basically on how the two countries, Indonesia and Australia should renew or initiate defence co-operations

QUESTION:  Can I ask what discussions you had about East Timor and perhaps also of Irian Jaya.

DR WIRAJUDA: East Timor - well in the past year and a half we have been quite engaged ourselves directly with the East Timorese authorities and leaders on how to solve what we called residual issues.  Issues arranging from questions of settlements of assets for governments, companies state- owned and individual assets in East Timor.  The question of scholarships, we have granted scholarships for East Timorese students. Also we have set up a tri-partite arrangement with Japan and made arrangement as well as for more Timorese students to study at Indonesian universities.  We have talks on  border management and border crossings and access for people from both sides of the borders.  We have, of course, been working very closely with the East Timorese leadership on  how to settle East Timorese refugees in West Timor.  In the past few days Xanana Gusmao was in West Timor- in fact we were happy to have the personal involvement of Xanana Gusmao on this issue.  As Alex has just mentioned, we are developing tri-partite consultations and we hope the first meeting of this  tri-partite consultation could be held early next year

QUESTION: Was there any discussion about Irian Jaya  .

DR WIRAJUDA: Yes, Irian Jaya, we have had some talks. The Indonesian Government has been making quite serious efforts, extra mile I could say, by introducing special autonomy for Irian Jaya.  In fact our parliament has to approve the draft law for special autonomy  for Irian Jaya and in comparison for say Aceh, the draft law promulgated and is in place.  We hope, and in fact this law has been quite generous on the part of the central governments in term of delegations of more powers and authority to local governments, provincial governments and also in the form of revenue sharing. The Central government has agreed to provide the provincial governments some 70 per cent of the revenues from mining sector of Irian Jaya.  So it

is in this context that we have been hopeful that the special autonomy could be good basis for the kind of solution for Irian Jaya’s problems and in that context and in that we regretted the killing of  Theys Eluay and in fact we thought this unfortunate and stand in the way of I think a good path to solutions

QUESTION: Can you rule out any involvement, government rule out the militia was involved?

DR WIRAJUDA:   The matter is being investigated.  I can’t speculate on who was involved….

MR DOWNER:  Let me just finish on the issue of Irian Jaya so our position is clearly understood and that is that I have taken the opportunity today to reiterate Australia’s support for Irian Jaya remaining part of Indonesia for Indonesia’s overall territorial integrity and we are also very supportive of the autonomy package that has been put together by the Indonesia government and passed through the Indonesia Parliament.  I did raise the question of the death of Mr Eluay and the Minister has responded to me in the way he responded to you and the matter is being investigated. So I wanted to make clear our position.  One last question.

QUESTION: You said you spoke about that can you tell us how strongly the al-Qa’ida network or cells might be in Indonesia, what the government there is doing to address the issue? Has Australia offered any help and co-operation in that regard, for example in intelligence…

DR WIRAJUDA: That’s been very much in the news that al-Qa’ida has its’ network in Indonesia. Not to our knowledge.  Yes, we have groups who have radical leanings in Indonesia but these are very small groups and the main streams of Islam in Indonesia  is moderate Islam and we, our government, the community at large, condemn terrorism and we are working to get our own as well as in co-operations with other members of ASEAN on how to take a practical path, a concrete method to combat terrorism so that we work closely with friendly countries, such as Australia and United States on how to improve our capacity to combat terrorism.

QUESTION: You say that people smuggling is not a bilateral problem: does that mean you do not favour a bilateral agreement between Australia and Indonesia to stem the flow of people here as the Australian government has suggested?

DR WIRAJUDA: We have practical cooperation.  As Mr. Downer has just mentioned a few of it and we are planning to do more but as an issue basically it is an international issue that the solutions be an international one, rather than bilateral.

MR DOWNER:  We are not, by the way, just to make sure this isn’t misunderstood, we are not saying to the Indonesians we want to have one piece of paper signed by you and by us.  This is an agreement and this fixes the problem.  We have never said that.  That has never been our position.  Our position is that we want to build the co-operation between us and around the region, right across the range of different portfolio areas.  That is cooperation between immigration officials, customs officials, police forces, working together more broadly with United Nations institutions providing intelligence to each other on what the people smugglers are doing, how they are operating, making sure as best we can that people know that if they take boats to Australia, that is against the law and it brings with it a seven-year jail sentence.

It’s not one piece of paper we’ve ever been looking for, ever.  What we would be saying is we want a degree of co-operation region-wide including within obviously very importantly with Indonesia and I think during the course of these talks today we’ve been able to consolidate the co-operation between our two countries in trying to address this issue.  I don’t think one should ever underestimate how difficult this is. It is an enormous problem.  These people-smuggling syndicates are extremely well financed.  They make a great deal of money.  They are able to deploy those financial resources quite effectively and this is a difficult issue to take on but I’ve been very happy today with the progress that we have made.  It’s been another very good step forward.  Okay, we’ll just have to keep going.

Thank you very much.

ENDS

