Australian Labor Party   National ALP   Back

Simon Crean - Doorstop - Visit To Western Sydney, Union Representation, Small Business http://www.alp.org.au//media/1101/scmcnsw261101.html Tuesday, 27 November 2001

ALP News Statements

Simon Crean - Doorstop Interview Subjects: Visit To Western Sydney, Union Representation, Small Business

Transcript - Macquarie Links Estate, Ingleburn, Sydney - 26 November 2001

E & OE - PROOF ONLY

JOURNALIST: …(inaudible)…do you find Labor voters at a golf club?

CREAN: I know plenty of my mates who like playing golf and they vote Labor, so there is no reason why Labor voters shouldn't be golfers. But I think the important thing is that we have come out today because this is an area that Labor needs to win and to win it you have got to understand what the needs and aspirations are, and part of that means getting out talking to people. That is what we are doing. We have got the opportunity over the course of the next three years to win people in these areas over and that is what we are aiming to do.

JOURNALIST: What have you learnt so far?

CREAN: You don't learn everything in an hour and ...

JOURNALIST: You have been here two days.

CREAN: Two days, and we will keep coming back. The experience that I have in public life, shows me that you just can't turn up once - you have got to keep coming back. But coming here for the first visit I think is an important demonstration of our commitment to trying to understand and develop policy responses. We will do that and I think people will see the results.

JOURNALIST: …Labor has lost touch in areas like this?

CREAN: It is really interesting when you look at the demographics. Labor didn't lose seats out here - it is just that it is not winning any additional ones. And on the one hand it's about consolidating the base but on the other it is reaching out to those people who haven't been attracted to vote for Labor and understanding better and what it is that they need, what it is they are looking for, and how we develop policy responses to it.

JOURNALIST: … are you committed to reducing union representation or just reviewing it?

CREAN: I am committed to the Labor Party having as wide an input to its policy making process as possible. That means we are not going to be beholden to any one group in particular, including the unions. The task is to reach out to involve, to include, and to develop policy responses to the extent to which that succeeds the influence of others will diminish and that is our task.

JOURNALIST: What sort of message have you heard here today Mr Crean?

CREAN: The message that I have heard here today is that people are looking for differences from Labor. They are looking for a reason to vote Labor. They are not happy with the current Government, but they weren't convinced a change on the last occasion.

JOURNALIST: What didn't they like about Labor on the last time round?

CREAN: I think they are saying that they didn't see enough to make them shift. They wanted to stay with the current Government because there wasn't enough differentiation - our task is to make that differentiation.

JOURNALIST: Mr Crean what is the definition of an aspirational voter?

CREAN: I think every voter is an aspirational voter it is just that everyone has different aspirations, and that is to be encouraged. I think decent government has got to find the balance between the equality of opportunity, but giving the greatest prospect possible to everyone's aspirations.

JOURNALIST: Is it interest rates or petrol, what are the issues here?

CREAN: Interest Rates and economic management are an issue. The reason why they voted against Labor, the whole range of reasons as to why that didn't come for Labor, but I don't think, I don't think that this is a task that will be difficult for us. I think it is something that we have got to work on over the course of the next three years and we will.

JOURNALIST: …(inaudible)…

CREAN: I think that if we are going to review it we shouldn't go in with any pre-empted outcomes. Reviews mean looking at all of the circumstances. But what I am committed to is to widening, to other groups, the influence within the Labor Party. And if that succeeds it automatically means the influence of the existing groups diminishes. It's a consequence, but I think it is most important to get the structure and the process right first, rather than just think that by changing the rules, you've just changed peoples' perceptions. People have got to see that we are genuine at reaching out and understanding their needs and their aspirations, and that is what this exercise is about. You don't get that be a simple rule change. You have got to change people's attitudes. You have got to get them convinced you are serious and that is why I am here.

JOURNALIST: Why do you think immigration was a decisive issue in the election?

CREAN: I believe that the campaign that John Howard ran on the fear associated with the asylum seekers was the reason that they got over the line. I think that had we been able to keep the election on the domestic issues Labor could have got up. But, look, they've won you can't change that and whilst you can reflect on the reasons as to why we lost I think the most important task is work out how we can win the next one.

JOURNALIST: … Western Sydney voters are looking for some encouragement to vote Labor, that is not an issue.

CREAN: We have got to encourage them with positive policies. What we have got to be able to do is to lift the notion of hope and aspiration up over fear. That is what we failed to do on the last occasion so it is what I intend to succeed on on this occasion.

JOURNALIST: Are these people aspirational voters here?

CREAN: Everyone is an aspirational voter. I would want for everyone in our community to have aspirations.

JOURNALIST: What are these people aspiring to here then?

CREAN: I think these people are aspiring, like everyone else, to have to the best opportunity for themselves, to have hard work rewarded, and to be satisfied that Governments, to the extent to which governments can make a difference, in terms of social and economic infrastructure, that they are making the right sorts of decisions.

JOURNALIST: The man over there who was talking to you said he felt disenfranchised from Labor because he was singled out as an elite, and he was just a hard working guy, is that an issue out here?

CREAN: I think that the only party that has really ever stood up for hard working people is the Labor Party. That is a proud tradition. What we have got to do is to convince people that don't see themselves in the traditional working class mode but are nevertheless working people. We have got to reach out and understand better how we can appeal to them and how we can respond to their needs.

JOURNALIST: How?

CREAN: Well, that's part of this exercise today.

JOURNALIST: … suggest that Labor will exempt Small Business from unfair dismissal laws. Is that something that you are seriously suggesting?

CREAN: What we have committed to do is to really develop policies that support small business. That is why I've elevated it into the Cabinet. And small business can be the big determining factor on whether additional job opportunities are available. One of the most important things that small business wanted in the last election was to have the red tape burden lifted from them and we will be introducing initiatives to Parliament to do just that. We had the right policy to get that up and we will try and persist with it even from Opposition. As for the question of unfair dismissals I think we have got to get this into perspective: no one is arguing that small businesses shouldn't be able to dismiss people only that they shouldn't be able to dismiss them unfairly. That is what the legislation protects. Now we have got to get a balance between fairness and opportunity. This is a debate about fairness, nothing else. OURNALIST: …(inaudible)…

CREAN: I haven't seen the Government's legislation and if the Government's legislation ensures fairness for working people then we are prepared to have a look at it.

JOURNALIST: Two of the big hits in Western Sydney were the baby bonus and the first home buyers grant because that is what people are doing in western Sydney building houses and having children. Is

that a bit of a key for Labor to try and look at those targeted policies rather than…the elements like education?

CREAN: It has got to be a mixture of both. Families have got needs beyond their individual needs. They have got needs that go to the opportunity to their kids and knowledge that their parents who are aging are looked after adequately in aged care facilities. As I say people have different aspirations for different stages in life and I think that the challenge for political parties is to get that mix of policies right. The first time home buyers scheme, I might point out, was a response to the fact of not to doing something for families but saving a building industry that was in collapse. Collapsed because of the introduction of a new tax, a tax that hit the building industry harder than any other sector but a tax that nevertheless hit the economy. So I think we have got to understand that the first home buyers scheme was not in response to helping families but was a recognition and a counter measure because the GST had crippled, crippled the building industry.

JOURNALIST: Popular … build a house is people who live in them.

CREAN: Yes but I don't think that was the reason that this Government won. If this Government thinks it won because of economic management. If it thinks it won because the GST was a good tax. If it thinks it's won because it has done enough on education, then it has got a rude awakening coming. This is a government that has given up on doing anything more for health and education and aged care. It is a government that has got no agenda for the next three years and the Prime Minister admitted as much the other day when he said that he was setting up a committee that would tell him what he should do for the next three years. Labor did have a positive plan for the last election. It didn't succeed - it was swamped by the fear campaign. It is a mix of policies that met different aspirations in different ways. We have got to build on it better - we will - and this visit today will help in that regard.

Ends

Authorised by Geoff Walsh, 19 National Circuit, Barton ACT 2600.

