Australian Labor Party   National ALP   Back

Kim Beazley - Media Conference - Tampa, Border Protection Legislation //media/0801/kbmcact300801.html Friday, 31 August 2001

Kim Beazley - Media Conference Subjects: Tampa, Border Protection Legislation

Transcript - Parliament House, Canberra - 30 August 2001

E & OE - PROOF ONLY

BEAZLEY: Thanks for turning up. I'm doing the Caucus briefing today and you all have the Caucus resolution before you.

The first part of this week we supported the Government because we believed that this was the right thing to do in the circumstances that the Government was facing, the Australian people were facing, and the Government's own actions indicated. We supported the Government because it was acting in accordance with Australian law and international law. And it remains the case that where this ship should be is Indonesia - it remains that case.

We did not support the legislation last night because the legislation was not necessary. The legislation was not in the national interest, the legislation was draconian, the legislation was not a legislation about law but about suspending law. We have been supporting the Government on the basis that it was acting in accordance with Australian law. The essence of this legislation was to suspend all Australian law. That legislation is not in the national interest because it offends one essential part of the resolution of this problem. And that is, the respect in which this nation is held in the international community, so essential to ensuring that when we have problems dealing with the issues of the boat people, we have those in the region and internationally on our side.

This legislation would undermine the reputation of the Australian nation and the Australian people. The easiest thing for me to do as a political leader would have been to support this. But part of the job of being a Prime Minister of this nation is whatever the temporary aspect of public opinion might be your job is to look seriously at the national interest based on an understanding of the total picture in reaching a solution such as that that we now have in relation to MV Tampa.

That is why we voted against it. But because we believe there needs to be a solution, we have offered the Prime Minister and offered that to him last night to negotiate with him a solution that deals with the MV Tampa, provided at the end of the day there is safe haven for the people who are involved. I made that offer to him last night and that offer still stands. He came back with a proposition that we should simply sunset clause this after a period of six months. That does not deal with the problem. A law which suspends all laws is objectionable, whether it be sunset claused or not. As I said we remain open to

negotiation on this because we have sought bipartisan solutions. He has broken from that effort for bipartisan solution. He has done it not for legal reasons because, as he himself has admitted this morning and as he said to me last night, he was clothed with sufficient power, the Australian Government is clothed with sufficient power to do whatever it is he feels he needs to do to defend the national interest and to get that ship out of Australian waters.

He did not need the Bill to do that. The solution requires not this Bill. The solution requires an outcome in the neighbourhood. You could have knocked me over with a feather yesterday when in Question Time I asked the Prime Minister what had been the result of his discussions with President Megawati, the President of the nation where under international legal arrangements and obligations this ship should be. I thought that what I would get was a response - the normal one that an Opposition Leader would get, something like: 'I have had fruitful discussions with her but, of course, what passes between leaders of nations is not a matter necessarily for public display'.

Instead, what we heard from him was that he had no conversation with her. Now this has been alive as an issue for approximately a week now. It was known that this ship was sinking. It was known that it was headed towards Australia. It was known that there was a prospect it would be a rescue operation that would be conducted in either Australia's zone or Indonesia's zone.

It required the Prime Minister to indicate at an early stage that of course if this occurs in Australia's zone we will deal with the problem ourselves. If it occurs within Indonesia's zone we will help Indonesia deal with the problem. That should have been the discussion. The Prime Minister made a point after he got back recently from visiting President Megawati that they had fruitful discussions on resolving these sorts of issues. Well, this has been the first test of it and there is yet to be a prime ministerial call.

We know this: Even if that legislation were passed, even if we operate under existing legislation and order the ship from our waters, if it has nowhere to go it will be right back here. That is obvious. If it has nowhere to go it will be right back here. So what is the essential task? The essential task is not to give yourself the same sorts of legal powers all over again but to do it in the most objectionable possible way. The solution is to get the neighbourhood to agree. That is the solution. But as far as we can see the efforts of the Government on that to this stage have been paltry.

This is a leadership issue. I know that I am imposing on my party, in adopting this position of principle, a hard political ask and task. But you are not fit to govern this country if you are not prepared to take on a hard task when you know the national interest dictates that you should. And it does highlight the need for us here in Australia to comprehend that the solutions to the problems that we now confront with illegal migration have their domestic component, that is the right laws in relation to detention, the right laws in relation to the process by which people are processed, the right laws in relation to the establishment of enforcement and constabulary agencies like a coastguard. But it also required an approach to the nations in the region around us for a better international regime in relation to refugees and a better relationship with the immediate neighbourhood in relation to refugees.

Understand this: The last ten years 13,000 people have come by this process to Australia. At the same time of course in Italy they have had 400,000 Albanians and in Pakistan 3½ million Afghanistanees. But we have had 13,000 come by this process to this country. 2,000 occurred in the first half of the decade when we were in office and the relationships in the region were good. 11,000 have occurred subsequently.

Now if that does not indicate a problem that requires a solution which is not entirely Australian-based then nothing else would.

So we say this. A humane solution needs to be found. The right solution is that the people should go to Indonesia in accordance with rescue at sea requirements. The right solution, too, involves the safety of all those on board - the crew and the people who have been picked up by the crew and captain who is an innocent party in this particular affair. That's the right solution. It requires a diplomatic outcome and that is the challenge for this Government.

We stand ready to assist the Government in that regard and in the event of the creation of a safe haven to assist them legislatively if they need it. They, of course, say they don't. But if they persist in that particular view then that would be our approach.

As I said thank you for coming. If you have got any questions. . .

JOURNALIST:…Indonesia's Foreign Minister, Mr Beazley, has indicated that it's not prepared to take the boat, this has been a clear message from the Indonesian Government, from the Indonesian Foreign Minister. In that circumstance what should Australia do?

BEAZLEY: I don't think that they should take that at face value immediately. Not at all. I wonder, indeed, why Alexander Downer has been here for the last four days. I wonder why he has not been in Indonesia. I wonder why the Prime Minister hasn't got on the phone. You know when you do your analysis of the conduct of the policy of this nation it does a world of good for this country, if you inspect the internal processes by which decisions are taken and implemented, a heavy decision was taken by this Government a very heavy decision, involved in the rescue processes here. A decision which required the Prime Minister to spend at least as much time on the international airways as on the domestic ones. The international airwave that was important here was setting up a discussion with President Megawati. Now the notion that she is out of the country and therefore can't be contacted is an absolute nonsense. Unless she is in the middle of the Sahara without a mobile phone it is not an excuse. She is in a position to take a call from the Australian Prime Minister at any point in time and the Australian Foreign Minister has the right to visit the neighbourhood at any point of time. It is not a difficult thing to do.

JOURNALIST: But at the end of the day, are you prepared to acknowledge that Australia may have to take the boat people and process them in the normal way?

BEAZLEY: I saw your very good article this morning, Paul, but I don't believe we are at the end of the day. I am the Leader of the Opposition, the alternative Prime Minister in this country. What signals should I be sending? The signals of an analyst or the signals of a leader? The signals of a leader is this: The right place for these people to be is Indonesia. And I support every effort by the Government to get them there. What actually happens over the course of the next few days I cannot foretell. But from my point of view, as the alternative Prime Minister of this country, that is my position and that position needs to be understood clearly, publicly, and it is a position without caveats.

JOURNALIST: But Mr Beazley there is no incentive for the Indonesians to take these people and therefore it is very likely that having struck this stance they will dig in and not take them. What should the Australian Government be doing in that eventuality?

BEAZLEY: I saw the other day that the Prime Minister when he was asked questions similar to that on what he was prepared to do for the Indonesians said he was prepared to make financial assistance

available to them to properly look after these people. We already do through various international bodies pay assistance into that international arrangement that assists the Indonesians in dealing with humanitarian problems associated with refugees who may be coming to Australia on their own soil. I don't think for one minute in circumstances where we're prepared to provide humanitarian aid to the people of board the ship, as we should, that we shouldn't also prepared to provide humanitarian aid to them in the country where they are go.

JOURNALIST: But the Indonesians may not think that is enough. It may not be a question just at the moment.

BEAZLEY: That may be right but then my answer is the same to you as I gave to Paul just then. You can write articles about that, but I am the alternative Prime Minister of this country sending signals of the position of the Opposition. And my view is that we have here not a national catastrophe but a problem to manage and we are well short - well short - of having to answer the sorts of questions that you are asking. I'll take Louise and then I'll take you Fran. Louise

JOURNALIST: Would the humanitarian aid involve letting them off the ship to Australia?

BEAZLEY: As I said we think in the case of life threatening illness, of course people should be taken off and brought into Australia. But as I understand that does not apply to anybody in the circumstances at the moment. Were it to develop that of course would be the appropriate response in those circumstances, but that is purely hypothetical, that has not occurred but in a medical situation it might occur. But what we have got to fight for, and as I have said we are prepared to work through with the Government, is a solution on this. What we have got to fight for is that the initial legal situation which we have all signed up to for very good reasons, because that legal situation was a product of a horror show, 20 or 30 years ago when masters of ships were bypassing dying and drowning people because they had problems dropping those folk off. So we had an international regime negotiated that gave people zones and put upon them obligations and that's become the interplay between that and general treatment of refugees has been quite intense ever since. And it is a reasonable thing for Australia to demand that the operation of that law should be in its purist form. It's a reasonable thing for us to demand that and we are still in that situation.

JOURNALIST: You said … the situation therefore the humanitarian sort of deadline is hypothetical but when does that humanitarian deadline be not hypothetical. They have already been out there four days in the aegis of this debate how many more days do we just leave them floating off there, even if they are not next to dying?

BEAZLEY: I am not managing this crisis, I am simply trying to help. Now one of the things we know is this, that even if that legislation passed - legislation which the Prime Minister admits he does not need, and the Prime Minister either under that legislation or under existing legislation sent this ship out of the country - it doesn't resolve the problem until a safe haven for them is found. And all our efforts have to be devoted to finding that safe haven, which is what has to happen.

JOURNALIST: …still now bring them in and still work on the policy, which the Prime Minister says is medium to long term.

BEAZLEY: Because I think this, having arrived at that agreement after so much hard work on what various international obligations were, you ought to give it your best shot to see that that is achieved. Don't think this Government has been giving it its best shot. It knew from day one, and the Prime

Minister has admitted as much himself in Parliament, if you go back and read his words he knew from day one that the resolution of this problem lay in the neighbourhood not here. He knew that. But all his efforts have been devoted to an explanation of the Australian people here of the stand that has been taken and nothing has been done until yesterday by the Prime Minister on dealing with the problem where the problem was located. Now that is not good government.

JOURNALIST: Mr Beazley, you mentioned the coastguard, would a coastguard under a Labor Government be able to operate under the existing laws or would you need more legislation to deal with the problems like Tampa?

BEAZLEY: As the Prime Minister says the laws are adequate to deal with the problems of the Tampa. He said that to me privately and he said it publicly and the laws would apply to the operation of a coastguard. What a coastguard would probably do would be to keep more ships in situ if you like, in the immediate vicinity. A coastguard would provide you with an opportunity to explain, for example to the masters of those boats that are bringing people illegally to this country, what they face when they get here. We supported the Government when they changed the penalties in relation to masters and persons on board those boats from a couple of years in jail, which translated into usually a year and a bit and amply renumerated by the criminals who sent them out in the first place with a guarantee for their families, to potential penalties of up to 20 years in jail. Now a lot of them don't know that and a coastguard can at least in the first instance inform them of what it is that they confront, should they try to enter into Australian waters.

JOURNALIST: They do that now.

BEAZLEY: But what we need is more systematic approach to it, as I said a coastguard is not a resolution of the problem, it is part of a resolution of a problem. Central to the problem is our international diplomacy, central to the problem is getting that right… Firstly I'll take Mr Farr.

JOURNALIST: I think we are on the same course, but are you under any sort of pressure from Caucus to put some distance between the Opposition and the Government on this issue because of qualms over the full-bore support of the Government's initial stance?

BEAZLEY: No, every initiative that you have seen, every statement that I have made… I did an unprecedented thing last night. I don't think in a 100 years of Labor Party history a leader has walked into a Parliament and instructed his troops to vote against a Bill without Caucus endorsement in the first place. I believe that situation required leadership. Every position I have adopted has been what I thought was right in the national interest, including the offer of bipartisan support. Nobody operates in the political process on the basis of unanimity, nobody who operates in the political process has ever adopts a position which absolutely agrees wit. But I can tell you one thing: This motion that we passed today was a unanimous motion of the Caucus.

JOURNALIST: What do you think of papers and television, 90 per cent basically favouring Howard and huge volumes of people - 120,000 to one television station that normally might get five or six?

BEAZLEY: I understand their position completely. But I also understand that what they want is a solution. And that what the Prime Minister offered was not a solution. And that every now and then, when you've got a principle that you've got to act on, you've got act on it in politics. I don't for one minute think that this will be the issue around which the election evolves as a campaign gets underway. Other issues will come into play during a campaign. That is always the case. But I do think that the way

in which this has been handled most recently by the Prime Minister has been with an eye to that election in mind. That is not an adequate motive for dealing with the problems that we have here.

JOURNALIST: Are you saying it could be a trigger for an early election? Is that what you're saying?

BEAZLEY: I don't know whether it is or it isn't. That is a matter for the Prime Minister. And, frankly, to me that's irrelevant. I know I'm a political leader, but a political leader always faces a hard fight when a campaign comes around. There'll be swings and roundabouts in a campaign; issues which favour your opponents and issues which favour yourself. Your best course of action is to convince people that you're acting always in your perception of the national interest and principle. And that's what we're doing in this case.

JOURNALIST: Kim Beazley, why do you think it is that John Howard is insisting, or his fallback is the sunset clause and he won't accept the Tampa's specific clause.

BEAZLEY: Take a look at that legislation. That legislation is about the suspension of all laws. There is no other law in this country which does that. We passed, for example, recently, callout legislation that relates to protecting civil order and the Government from riot and revolution. There were more caveats in that legislation than there is in this legislation. Read the legislation. The legislation says in part 10, 'this Act has effect in spite of any other law - any other criminal or civil law elsewhere. . . .

'Proceedings whether civil or criminal may not be instituted or continued against an officer who takes action under Section 5 or 6 or a person who assists in taking action under Section 5 or 6 if the officer or other person acts in good faith.'

These are extraordinary legal positions. And, as the Prime Minister says, they don't resolve the issue. You don't pass legislation that brings yourself into international disrepute at precisely the point of time when you need international help to get a long-term solution to this particular problem. Therefore, I am not in it.

JOURNALIST: So, why do you think he's not going to the Tampa specific option?

BEAZLEY: The Tampa specific option is not this. You don't cure the problems that I've just talked about by putting in place sunset clauses or amending a word in this which simply says MS Tampa instead of everything else. You don't resolve the problem by dealing with that. If you have a problem about the questions of legality in relation to the rights or other issues of the persons on board, then we're prepared to talk through that sort of situation in the context where you found an alternative destination for these people. If he requires, and he says he doesn't, but if he requires additional law in relation to that, that's what we're prepared to negotiate about.

JOURNALIST: Would you be able to accept a situation where the ship was at sea for weeks in order to secure an agreement with Indonesia? Because that's what we could very well be facing.

BEAZLEY: Let's not speculate on what actually might occur. Let's say what needs to be done. What needs to be done is to find a solution with Indonesia. What needs to happen while we're finding a solution with Indonesia is that the people, crew and others on board the ship should be safe and secure. That is, whatever happens, whether they stay inside or go outside Australian territorial waters, that is what we should be concerned with.

JOURNALIST: So, which should they do? Be left inside, or be towed outside?

BEAZLEY: You can send them outside Australian international water, and they can come back inside Australian international waters. It is not a solution. The solution is to get a place for them to go. And it is irrelevant for that solution whether there are five nautical miles or 25 nautical miles, frankly. The Australian Government has a right to remove them at any point of time. It is not necessary for them to do that in the course of negotiating a solution within Indonesia. They are at sea, whether they're five miles out or 20 miles out. But, nevertheless, the Australian Government is capable of doing that, but that is not the solution.

JOURNALIST: What's your attitude to the dimension of this which is that these people are in sight of Australian territory, the captain says they are desperate and will take extraordinary action like jumping off or self harm if they do hit Indonesia. That's not an argument….

BEAZLEY: That is, I'm told, why the captain brought the ship from international waters into Australian waters. That is why he said he did that. I think that what needs to happen here, and the Government has said they'll do this, that every effort should be undertaken to keep people comfortable on board that ship while this issue is resolved.

JOURNALIST: Mr Beazley, in the Caucus discussion this morning, was there any concern expressed about the political wisdom in taking the stand that you've taken?

BEAZLEY: No. A number of people spoke, and I don't want to verbal them. I know that you will diligently go through your process of talking through this issue with them. I think that there is a realism in Caucus about the political consequences of this. But we joined the Labor Party to take these challenges on board. And we all understand that.

JOURNALIST: While these people are on this ship in Australian waters, do they not have a right to make a claim for asylum, given that there are Australians on board? And if so, shouldn't Australia now be hearing those claims for asylum? Isn't it in a sense too late?

BEAZLEY: The law on this is unclear. These are things that we're prepared to talk through with the Government. I've seen legal advice going both ways. One piece of legal advice that I've seen suggests that there is no officer on board that is operating with a legal obligation to present such a position to them. That's one piece of legal advice I have in relation to that. The point is, where they should be is Indonesia. What the Government should have been doing is devote the last five years, not to getting a political effect in Australia, but getting that outcome.

JOURNALIST: On the basis that everyone has their price, could it be simply that Australia hasn't found what the Indonesia price is yet. And on a point of principle, should a cap be put on the price we're prepared to pay to make this problem go away?

BEAZLEY: I don't think you need to be cynical about it. It's a cynical way of putting it. I think the Prime Minister has said already that he is prepared - he said this ages ago on the Mitchell program - that he was prepared to provide assistance to Indonesia in this regard. We already are providing assistance to Indonesia. It is a poor country and part of a solution obviously of getting a regional arrangement that suits us is of being prepared to consider assistance to them.

JOURNALIST: Should there be a…?

BEAZLEY: I am not in the business of putting caps on that. We have a particular problem that has to be

resolved and what needs to be done to resolve that problem should be done.

JOURNALIST: You talked last night about 'wedge politics'. What other issues do you think that the Government is playing wedge politics on and do you think race will be an issue in the election campaign?

BEAZLEY: Well, we have noticed a whole lot of things have come on board in the course of the last few weeks. For example, yesterday the cross media rules came on board. You know, after five years in abeyance they came on board in the last three weeks. We hear that they are trying to bring back something related to native title legislation. We hear that they are bringing back legislation in relation to union powers and industrial relations and, of course, there is this.

Now, I don't think anybody out there in the general community who sensibly conducts their own lives irrespective of what we do here in Canberra knows necessarily what is meant by the aficionado's phrase 'wedge politics'. But all of you know that. And you know darn well what bringing all of this on means at this point of time.

But I tell you what we are going to do: we are not going to be deflected by it. We are going to act on principle in these matters and this matter on all occasions.

I want to be fit to form a government. Being fit to form a government means knowing how to conduct yourself in a crisis, knowing that you don't panic. Knowing that when you are handling a crisis you go to first principles and first solutions and, frankly, now that we see this week unfold, nobody could look at what John Howard has done and thought that he has acted adequately as a Prime Minister in that regard, no matter what anybody else might think.

JOURNALIST: Has the Labor Party had a chance yet to look at some of the other policy changes being proposed by the Government? Say, in particular, the provision to remove a lot of the judicial determination in the overall refugee determination process?

BEAZLEY: Yes, we have had a chance to look at that, of course, because that has been around for a while. There is new legislation in which we have scarcely had time to consider that is related to defining a refugee. We note on that that Petro Georgiou on that particular piece of legislation suggested that if that legislation had been in place then Jews in Germany and the acts that applied there in the 1930s would not have found refuge in Australia. And if that is the case then it is utterly unacceptable. But we are always prepared to work through these things both in the judicial review area and in that area.

The government has said, themselves, that we agree with them on 90 per cent but it is the 10 per cent we don't agree on, we are always prepared to talk through that 10 per cent with them. We have supported them repeatedly with amendments on what they've tried to do in this area. We are developing our own views on how we might speed up the judicial process and it will be part of our policy on immigration and refugees for this next election campaign.

JOURNALIST: So when will you be making a decision Mr Beazley on your attitude to the Bill you just…?

BEAZLEY: We are in the process of doing that now.

JOURNALIST: Before this week is out?

BEAZLEY: I would doubt whether it would be through before this week is out but the intention is to debate it in the next sittings anyway.

JOURNALIST: You said there was some legal advice, could we obtain that?

BEAZLEY: No.

JOURNALIST: …(inaudible)…

BEAZLEY: You asked me, well actually Karen asked me, for a point on that and Karen asked me specifically in the context of whether or not rights had been accrued at this point of time. Well, we have legal advice on that going both ways - legal advice often does.

JOURNALIST: Isn't it the point of this whole move by the Government to stop these people from effectively being able to claim refugee status and you yourself say the law on this is unclear. Isn't that what the Prime Minister is saying - one reason why he needs this new law is to make it clear?

BEAZLEY: Well, we think at this stage of the game, at this stage of the process he doesn't have a problem in that regard - that is what we think.

JOURNALIST: Do you think the current law …the current migration Act and doesn't allow these people…?

BEAZLEY: What we have also said is that we are prepared to consider all these things legislatively within a framework, that there is an end point that involves somebody accepting these people in accordance with their international legal obligations. We are prepared to clear the way provided that is the end point. That is what I have said. And we are prepared to negotiate on that and I have said that to the Prime Minister I said that to him last night. Hither too they have not been interested.

JOURNALIST: In the meantime, we might be in breach of our international obligations but that doesn't matter, is that what you are saying?

BEAZLEY: I don't believe we are in breach of our international obligations at this point, no.

JOURNALIST: Mr Beazley, Mr Howard has said he introduced the legislation in the national interest. You have said that you oppose it in the national interest and you indicated today that you believe that the issue is part of a wedge politics. Is Mr Howard acting more in his own political interests than a national interest?

BEAZLEY: What other conclusion can you draw? When a Prime Minister says to you that he has sufficient legal powers, he has said that to me privately, he has said that publicly that he has sufficient legal powers to deal with this problem. In what other circumstances would a person introduce a Bill so likely to bring us into international disrepute, international disrepute when an international component has to be there for the solution to this problem over all. It has to be about politics - it cannot be about anything else. And it is not in the national interest if it makes it harder for us to resolve these issues internationally.

There is a lot of fish to fry on that front over the course of the next few years. It is a very moving feast and, in the course of that, what we require absolutely is an excellent reputation. We are entitled to an excellent reputation - we should keep that excellent reputation.

JOURNALIST: Karen's point there it is not so much an issue of them breaching international obligations …it is clear …asylum seekers in Australia …obligation …? Are you saying that you have got different legal advice…?

BEAZLEY: I don't that that position has been reached at this point - I don't believe so. But I am no legal manquÃÂ©. The advice that I have is that that is not the case at this point. I don't want to go into conducting an argument on legal detail. We have said that we are prepared to be part of the solution that sees people elsewhere. Take a look at the resolution if there is a legislative component of that then there is a legislative component of that.

But the point is that I don't think that we are there at this point. What we are here is with a real challenge to a Prime Minister of the Australian nation and that is how you get the right outcome in the region around us. Even if he drives this ship out of Australia, what is to stop it from coming back into Australian territorial waters at some other point and then driving it out again, and again, and again - you know, playing some form of nautical yo-yo?

This is not going to do Australia any good. What we need to do is to get a fix at the other end and all of John Howard's attention now should be entirely devoted to doing what he has neglected to do to this point and that is finding a solution in the immediate region.

JOURNALIST: Given the legislative impasse have you had any communication with Mr Howard or sort to have any communications with him since the Senate blocked the Bill last night?

BEAZLEY: Not since last night when I told Mr Howard that we weren't interested in the sunset clause. I told Mr Howard that we are open to negotiation on the points that are here in the resolution and there has been no more communication. The ball is in his court.

JOURNALIST: Mr Beazley you stress…your bipartisanship throughout this crisis would you be willing to go one step further in making a bipartisan approach to Indonesia?

BEAZLEY: Oh yes, absolutely. If we could be of any assistance in that regard, and some of our people have excellent contacts there, I would certainly be prepared to be part of that process.

JOURNALIST: And you personally?

BEAZLEY: And me personally.

JOURNALIST: If these people are genuine refugees and they are here now should they be sent to Indonesia which isn't a signatory to the convention and doesn't take refugees? Should they be sent there when they will take years to try and be resettled to another country?

BEAZLEY: I think you need to go back to first principles and that's why at this point I am so strongly of the view that we need to get an Indonesian solution, resolution in the region anyway. And that goes to the circumstances in which people pick up those in trouble at sea. We have negotiated an outcome which imposes on us obligations.

Whatever the status of people on board these ships, the obligation I believe is clear and that is: these events occurred in the Indonesian zone. Frankly, if these events occurred in the Australian zone my position would be the ship should come into Australia, discharge its human cargo here and we go through the normal processes of processing them here in this country. That is what my position would be.

But you can't have a hard won and hard debated and negotiated international agreement and regard it as a thing for trivial pursuit. You actually have to go through the hard yards of trying to make it work. And I think if you honestly review the last four or five days you have got to ask yourself a question as to whether or not your Prime Minister has had his priorities right. Whether or not your Prime Minister has been doing his job. And in these circumstances I think you would have to say that your Prime Minister has been campaigning and not working.

JOURNALIST: Do you think that the fact that the East Timorese elections are on this week are, contributing to the Government's reluctance to approach Indonesia with any boldness or strength?

BEAZLEY: You know, when I visited Indonesia last year, Laurie Brereton and I put forward to the Indonesian Government the idea of an Arafura Sea council. The Indonesian President at that stage, President Wahid, had his own view of the tripartite discussion between Australia, Indonesia and Timor. We urged the Australian Prime Minister not to stand on his digs about visiting Indonesia and waiting until Wahid came. It was what, about 18 months and then Wahid came from that point. If the Prime Minister had gone there who knows how much better things would have been now? Who knows how much better it would have been for a relationship on all of these fronts and including being able to excise the situation in Timor from a dominating feature of the bilateral relationship between our countries?

They were wrong then - and I said it then - they were wrong not to take up the opportunity President Wahid offered and they were wrong not to have as the first thing they did in this - not the last thing - the first thing they did in this a discussion with the Indonesian authorities which I think we knew this situation was developing, what, about a week ago maybe slightly less, but about a week ago, not to have been immediately on the blower wherever Megawati was. Not to have had the Foreign Minister actively engaged up there in reaching a solution, not to have had a package in place to encourage them to do the right thing by their international obligations is a failure of Australian public policy - no matter how popular it might be domestically - of truly major proportion. And the extent to which that failure took place did not become obvious until yesterday.

I must confess I was operating on the assumptions that there had been active high-level discussions with Indonesia. The Prime Minister revealed last night that there hadn't been. Yesterday he revealed that there hadn't been, and he said today that it would be another two days before he got around to doing anything about it.

Ends Authorised by Geoff Walsh, 19 National Circuit, Barton ACT 2600.

