

Minister asks Ballarat about Managing Migration

MPS 156/2001

The Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs, Philip Ruddock, will ask residents of Ballarat their views on the size and composition of the 2002-2003 Australian migration and humanitarian programs today.

"The consultations will give residents of Ballarat the opportunity to have their say on Australia's migrant intake for the coming financial year," Mr Ruddock said.

"There has been a lot of interest in the consultations in Ballarat and I look forward to meeting with people to help inform their views and listen to them. I particularly look forward to discussing their intake of skilled migrants," he said.

Ballarat, and other regional areas in Victoria, attracts a significant number of skilled migrants under the State/Territory specific and regional migration initiatives.

These initiatives include the Regional Sponsored Migration Scheme (RSMS) where a regional employer who can not fill the position from the local labour market sponsors the migrant.

"In 2000-01, there were 1,827 visas granted to migrants coming to Victoria under these initiatives, an increase of 10 percent over 1999-00," Mr Ruddock said.

The Minister launched his annual consultations in Sydney early this week and will hold meetings with State, Territory and local governments, business and industry groups, unions, environmental bodies, welfare organisations, refugee agencies, and representatives of Australia's migrant communities.

The consultation process includes:

a discussion paper raising issues on the size and composition of Australia's Migration ●￻￻￻

and Humanitarian Programs; a range of public meetings in capital cities and regional centres including Ballina, Kalgoorlie, Townsville, Launceston and Mt Gambier; ●￻￻￻

seeking written submissions from the Australian community; and ●￻￻￻ inviting discussion on migration issues on an on-line discussion forum. ●￻￻￻

"The meetings provide an ideal forum for all Australians to contribute their ideas and provides the Government with community views on issues regarding refugee resettlement and other humanitarian and general migration issues," Mr Ruddock said.

12 September 2001 Media Inquiries: Steve Ingram (02) 6277 7860

Media Release Index



