Transcript No. 2001/058

TRANSCRIPT of

THE HON PETER COSTELLO MP Treasurer

Budget Lock-up Press Conference Parliament House, Canberra Tuesday, 22 May 2001 4.40pm

SUBJECTS: BUDGET

TREASURER:

Well ladies and gentleman, perhaps, as per previous years, I’ll start with the charts first. This is a Budget which has been framed against a slow-down in the Australian economy in the current financial year but which forecasts a rebound in the economy in 2001-2002. We are forecasting in the current financial year growth of about two per cent on average and three and a quarter per cent in 2001-2002 and I think most private sector forecasters would probably be within the range.

It’s a Budget which is forecasting continuing low inflation, if anything with inflation to decline in 2002. We’ve had a one-off impact from the new tax system, which will wash itself out of the system and we expect that underlying inflation will be low in 2002 for a number of reasons. One is that the Australian economy, in my view, is now incredibly price competitive. We’ve said that petrol, which has been contributing to the CPI, will not be contributing; we expect that tax deductions will be subtracting from the CPI in the year ahead, in particular, the reduction in Financial Institutions Duty.

This is a Budget which is in surplus for the fifth consecutive year in a row. As you know the Government was elected in this year, in March of 1996, the last five Labor Party Budgets had been five deficits, totalling $80 billion of deficit. We have programmed to put the Budget into balance over two years, one, two. This will be the one, two, three, four, fifth surplus, consecutive surplus, in 2001-2002 and you’d have to go back pre-Whitlam to find five consecutive surplus Budgets. The surpluses that the Government has been running in previous years and this year have been directed towards paying off Government debt.

As we moved into the new tax system, we had transitional differences between what we call the fiscal balance and how we report the Budget on an underlying cash basis. The reason for that is essentially when we moved to PAYG for, that is Pay As You Go for companies, you had the delay from the system they were on, and they moved into the PAYG. And in accrual terms, two sets of liabilities became payable in this particular year 2000-2001. We gave companies two and half or five years to actually make those payments so they don’t actually make the double payment in the one financial year. But because it’s shown as accruing in that financial year, correspondingly revenues are low in the following two years. The actual cash position is that they pay over time, but that is the explanation for the variance between the fiscal position and the cash position over those years. And as you go through the transitional system you should expect them to move back into harmony.

With five consecutive surpluses we have now paid debt. The Commonwealth had a net asset position

pre-Whitlam, the Commonwealth moved into a debt position through Whitlam. It built up in the early years of Keating, was brought back in the late 1980s and then we had the five Labor deficits accumulating $80 billion, one, two, three, four, five. The Coalition was elected in 1996. We’ve had the five consecutive Budgets in surplus, one, two, three, four, five, and we estimate that we will have paid back $60 billion of Labor’s debt over our six Budgets. And we will have the debt to GDP ratio back around five per cent. Not quite as low as it was before Labor began the debt build-up of the 1990s, but back to five per cent. Forecasting future surpluses and the proceeds of privatisation would actually eliminate Commonwealth debt in future years. That depends of course on whether the privatisation proceeds and on the position of the accounts.

Put that into international perspective, Australia is paying it’s debt down to about five per cent of GDP. It’s good by OECD standards, good by US standards, although the Clinton administration had a program to eliminate net debt by 2010, so they would probably overtake us at some point in the next decade, but if we were able to maintain our fiscal position we would beat the United States in terms of debt position.

I’m often asked by colleagues and other people, ‘What’s the point of paying down all of this debt, what’s it actually do for you?’ What it does for you is it gives you the chance to invest in more important things. And if I could leave you with one thought, I’d like to leave you with this one. Before I became Treasurer we used to raise about $8 billion to service our debts. We spent as much servicing our debt as we spent on hospitals and schools. That was in 1995-1996. Because we’ve repaid our debts, we now need $4 billion less per annum, we need $4 billion less per annum; and we’ve got $4 billion more to invest in other things. And what I particularly would like you to see here is now our investment is hospitals and schools is about double our public debt interest payments. Before we came to Government it was about the same. So as we paid off debt, as we freed up resources, we’ve been able to invest in more important things. And the way I like to think of it is that public debt interest servicing past debts - that’s just paying for the past; investing in hospitals and schools and families and children - that’s investing or the future. And we’ve changed the focus of our fiscal policy from the past to the future, and I think it is something that this Government can be proud of. In relation to this particular Budget, I see this Budget as very much a continuation of the prudent economic management that the Government’s had in place since its election in 1996. On 1 July the big tax changes continue to roll with the reduction in company tax from 34 to 30 cents, the abolition of Financial Institutions Duty, the abolition of stamp duties on shares, the introduction of refunding for imputation credits, and a new measure which is announced in this Budget and wasn’t even guessed by any of you, I’m pleased to say, the bring forward of full input tax credits for business on motor vehicles, and that includes trucks. That was going to be introduced on 1 July 2002, it has been brought forward to midnight tonight. That will be a stimulatory measure, and that’s the reason why we’ve done it. And a stimulatory measure which won’t build in a structural cost for the Budget because it was factored into the Budget in the years ahead. A bring forward which will be stimulatory.

In relation to others measures in this Budget, we propose to pay pensioners and part-pensioners $300 tax-free before 30 June. We will be introducing the legislation tonight with the view to getting it through the Parliament by Thursday so we can make the payment to pensioners next month. It is something that will give them additional spending power and that will be consistent with a good economic outcome, and it is something that the Budget can afford, but most of all it is something they deserve. I think this time last year many of you said to me, well you’ve got a budget surplus of $2.6 billion and the spectrum sale of $2.6 billion, and some of the newspapers were unkind enough to headline the budget ‘dial a surplus’, well, as you know, the spectrum didn’t realise anything like $2.6 billion, it realised $1.1 billion but the surplus was still as strong, in fact stronger. And that is because the receipts, the revenue receipts,

particularly from companies were stronger than we’d forecast and out of that dividend we are now paying a one-off bonus to pensioners, to Prisoners of War, to the widows of Prisoners of War, to internees of the Japanese under Second World War and to their widows as well.

We are also cutting tax for older Australians from 1 July of last year. This is a retrospective tax cut. Their tax is cut as from 1 July of last year and they will be eligible for a tax refund once they file their tax returns after the end of the financial year on the 30th June. The increase in the tax-free threshold, the increase in the Medicare levy means that an older Australian, a qualifying older Australian, and this has a phase out, it doesn’t go to unlimited income earners; a qualifying older Australian pays no tax on their first $20,000. They have a tax-free threshold of $20,000 - no tax, no Medicare levy. And in addition to that if they happen to be couples, and it depends on whether you’ve got equal income or not, if you happen to be, it changes is what I’m saying, if you happen to be a couple you’ll get a saving on last year’s tax of $75 a week. These are very large tax reductions for older Australians and they compliment the pensioner bonus.

In addition to that the Budget introduces the biggest overhaul in welfare reform ever and commits an additional $1.7 billion over four years to that, which we expect and hope will deliver savings in the long run, as we encourage more people into work. It is a big up-front investment. The Budget makes our biggest investment in defence in twenty-five years, it makes our biggest investment in quarantine in response to foot and mouth disease, and it makes a very large investment in health. This is a huge Budget. There are measures in here for war widows, there are measures in here in relation to superannuation for over 55s. It is unquestionably the biggest Budget in terms of measures that’s been done at the Commonwealth level. It is a Budget which is directed, in my view, at a strong economy, at a just society, from a prudent Government which is continuing good economic management.

QUESTIONS and ANSWERS

JOURNALIST:

Treasurer, how confident are you that you will achieve that growth forecast of three and one quarter per cent given recent history?

TREASURER:

Well, I think most private sector forecasters are in the range of three to three and a half, and I think that’s probably, three and a quarter, is probably the average of the private sector forecasters, it wouldn’t be above average, could be marginally below average. We think that fundamentals of the Australian economy are sound. We have got a good Budget position, we have got a good debt position, we have got low interest rate regime, we have got a competitive tax system. We have had the transitional effect in relation to housing, which I believe, in the quarters to come will power growth, and we have had a growth in exports. A very significant growth in exports, partly a result of the New Tax System because we don’t tax our exports anymore, and partly the result of a super competitive exchange rate. So, I think that growth forecast is eminently achievable.

JOURNALIST:

Treasurer, you’re saying it is a big Budget, is it an election winning Budget and if you have your doubts how much more of the surplus would you be willing to sacrifice before the poll?

TREASURER:

Well, I don’t see, I think there was a feeling in some quarters that the Government was spending huge amounts of money. The Government, in this Budget, makes very sound inves

