Australian Labor Party   National ALP   Back

Kim Beazley - Labor's Commitment Against Terrorism, Refugees, Ansett //media/0901/kbmcact130901.html Friday, 14 September 2001

Kim Beazley - Media Conference Subjects: Labor's Commitment Against Terrorism, Refugees, Ansett

Transcript - Parliament House, Canberra - 13 September 2001

E & OE - PROOF ONLY

BEAZLEY: I don't know about the rest of you, but I just feel the most desperate sadness today. The situation is getting worse. It is not getting better. As we hear of the greater and greater numbers - not just of missing Americans but missing Australians and other nationalists - we all do come to understand that this is as much a fight and a problem for Australia as it is for the United States. It just emphasises the point that I and members of the Government made yesterday that this is something that involves us all and the response should be from all of us right now to the issues that are confronting the American Administration.

Yesterday I committed the Australian Labor Party to support the efforts being made by the United States first to understand who was at the bottom of this and establish guilt and then establish those who were associated with that by harbouring the terrorists. And I committed too the Australian Labor Party to supporting a response to the eventual conclusion of findings in that regard.

Today I am releasing - as we are now contemplating a different world, a world in which the primary security issue confronting all nations is the issue of transnational crime and terrorism - I am putting forward from the point of view of the Australian Labor Party a 10-point plan to help us to get to grips with this.

The first element of the plan is that we should sign and ratify the conventions operating now internationally which have been negotiated over a period of time and concluded in 1997 and 1999 to deal with an international response to terrorists bombing and a convention dealing with an international response to terrorists financing. The US and UK have ratified these agreement - Australia has not. Legislation should be implemented immediately in order to bring us into line with responsible nations in the international community who are taking this fight seriously.

As far as domestic issues related to terrorism are concerned we should now, I believe, look at the UK Terrorism Bill 2000. Some of its provisions are not appropriate to Australia - some of it is. But I do offer the Government the earnest preparedness of the Australian Labor Party in these final weeks of Parliament to sit down and talk that through with them. If it is not capable of completion by then, unlike the other bills which should be capable of completion by then, then, of course, that would be part of our

response should we get elected to office.

We also here say that we are prepared to join a permanent international coalition to deal with the issues of terrorism. It will mean a substantial upgrade of our capabilities, some reorientation in our defence budgets and in our budgets generally towards the international component of law enforcement and towards those capabilities in our Defence forces - both intelligence and in response terms like the SAS that are most likely to be the principal contributors to an international terrorist response on an ongoing basis.

We clearly also need to upgrade our airports' security. I think arguably our airport security is better than that in the United States but by no means could it be regraded as perfection. Quite evidently the overwhelming proportion of movements that take place internationally by terrorists and terrorist organisations occurs through the use of false documents - these are based on false documents through airports. Terrorists move rapidly, they seek the rapid means of communication to do so and that puts a premium on effective surveillance at airports and in the customs and immigration processes associated with them.

Another element of the response is to put at the highest possible level of our diplomatic relationships the development of a local regional response to put this at the centre of the ASEAN regional forum to ensure that we now get back on to a good footing with all our neighbours, in particular, Indonesia so that we can jointly respond to what is now a threat to us all. It is very difficult to have good security relations in a region without a good relationship with our nearest neighbours.

I reiterate again our view that a Coast Guard has to play a role in all of this. We have to be able to do things affordably. There is going to need to be some reprioritisation of the Defence budget to be able to deal with the broader intelligence and response issues. We cannot afford to have highly expensive operations out there permanently. We must be able to go for a more extensive and unit-for-unit cheaper operation such as a Coast Guard would provide. And as far as internal governmental activities are concerned, there clearly needs to be a focus on the Cabinet National Security Committee away from just simply the foreign diplomatic and foreign policy and defence policy type issues to using that committee as, if you like, the focal committee in government for dealing with what is now clearly the most important international security problem that all nations, including Australia, confront. Thank you for your attendance.

JOURNALIST: …given that so many countries, including the US and the UK, have signed them and it didn't do anything to stop the attack that we have just seen. What makes you think Australia signing them is going have any effect on people that are prepared to, you know, drive planes into the World Trade Centre?

BEAZLEY: One of them has not been implemented because not enough have ratified it. One of them has been implemented. We are going to require a whole variety of responses. The point about our responses is that, while there is going to be a capacity continuing for terrorists' action, you are going to be that much better equipped to deal with it and that much better equipped to minimise it. One thing is amply clear: the United States and the UK take the issues of international terrorism very seriously - far more seriously than do most other countries. And, frankly, if the United States and the United Kingdom think it is important to negotiate these agreements given the scepticism which has prevailed in American administrations recently about international agreements, it surprises me to find that we are not among the signatories. We should be now. Whilst it will not, of course, be the be all and end all of the terrorists'

response - not by any means would it be the be all and end all of that - it is clearly considered sufficiently significant by the US and UK administration to be part of it and I see no reason why we shouldn't be.

JOURNALIST: Peter Reith said today that security and border protection go hand in hand and that is one reason that the Howard Government has taken a very strong stand on the issue of border protection at the moment with the Tampa and everything else. I mean, you seem to be agreeing with that but he also said that the US senior level said very recently, just a few days ago, that it is important to tighten up entry into Indonesia otherwise it could be used as a launching pad for terrorists activities. Is that what…?

BEAZLEY: I absolutely agree that border security is at a premium. Border security is a complex matter. Border security and, in particular, the airports is a very substantial issue. Border security at sea is important too - even though it is less likely that terrorists would choose to travel by that mode. That is why you need a Coast Guard. You also need border security legislation that works in the circumstances in which you are likely to find yourself. And I welcome the attitude that was adopted by acting Prime Minister Anderson when he conceded effectively that in the latest particular incidence the border security legislation that they attempted to pass was irrelevant but offered to be responsive to bipartisan support for a resolution of those issues. I have subsequently written to him suggesting a preparedness on our part to enter into discussions with him.

Now, as regards to the situation to which Peter Reith referred, my first response to that would be: does that not absolutely demonstrate the importance of a reasonable discussion with Indonesia such as we have not been able to have recently. And, secondly, there was some linkage in the remarks that he made today between the issue of illegal migration and the possibilities of Bin Laden cells operating in Indonesia and other countries in the region.

I must say I have received, and so has Steve Martin received, intelligence briefings in relation to the threats. And that wasn't mentioned to us in any of the briefing. So Steve Martin has corresponded with Peter Reith asking us and given that we were briefed yesterday, asking us what evidence has emerged since then that in one way or another links the question of the possibility of Bin Laden cells to anything that is going on with the possibility of the organisers of illegal boat entry to Australia and we would wait his advice on that matter to see what it is that he has to say about it. But irrespective of that, even if the issues are joined or separate, they are issues that must be taken up between us and the Indonesians and just point to the importance of a good relationship with them.

JOURNALIST: There have been reports of attacks on Muslim groups and Arab groups in Australia. Who do you think is responsible for stirring up that kind of hatred and what should be done about it?

BEAZLEY: Look, I don't know, I wouldn't accuse anybody of stirring it up. But what I should say is this: let us all take a leaf out of Mayor Giuliani's approach. This is the bloke, even though this issue effects us as there are now a large number of Australians clearly missing, we do nevertheless pale by comparison to what is being experienced by the constituents of Mayor Giuliani. Mayor Giuliani said this: 'All of us New Yorkers are in this together, Christian, Muslim, Jewish, whatever particular background'. So are we Australians. We need all our reserves of unity to deal with this problem as the years go by. One of the clear failings in intelligence at the moment is, despite the technological excellence that we have, it is clearly difficult for us to penetrate networks. We are going to need the aid of patriotic Australians prepared to support the national interest of all cultural backgrounds if we are going to be able to deal with these sorts of problems effectively at our end - in just the same way as the United States needs the patriotic support of all Americans no matter what their cultural background is to deal with these

problems.

I tell you this: when I was Defence Minister, and more particularly subsequently because there has been a surge since then, I have been impressed by the way young Arab-Australians have been prepared to join our Australian Defence Forces and participate in the sorts of concerns that we have - and some of them are members of the SAS as I have occasion to know. It is time to accept the patriotism of all Australians unless proven otherwise.

JOURNALIST: Do you think with his comments this morning that Mr Reith has played politics by linking the boat people to the terrorist incident?

BEAZLEY: Well, I do want to find out because I have not been briefed on such a thing. And I though I had had a complete briefing, I do want to find out what he is talking about. There may be new information that arrived between 5 o'clock last night and 9 o'clock or 8 o'clock this morning of which I am not aware, and I would appreciate knowledge of that. Steve Martin has written to him accordingly. There maybe that information available in which case it would be inappropriate of me to accuse him of playing politics.

JOURNALIST: …play politics on this…?

BEAZLEY: I hope not. Firstly, starting with the issue in relation to immigration and now with this we in the Australian Labor Party have not sought to play politics with it. We understand that the unity of all Australians is necessary to deal with the crisis. The decency that lies at the heart of the average Australian, the wells of decency, need to be appealed to in moments of national crisis, or moments of a national problem. We have attempted to conduct ourselves in an appropriate fashion in regard to that, and we still stand ready to do it. It doesn't mean that you surrender your brains or your principles but it does mean that you are prepared to sit down with the other side in politics and arrive at conclusions.

Should I be fortunate enough to be elected to office in two or three months time on these issues, frankly, I would be absolutely committed to a bipartisan approach. I would not move without at the least the consultation with my counterpart. I think that is the only way you can deal with it. You know, the Americans do that - they do disagree on a partisan basis but they always start with a basic principle that bipartisanship is better and try to get to that point.

JOURNALIST: Mr Beazley is there, though, an element of politics in this statement today for you to be able to show that if you were in Government you too could deal with issues like this and did you inform the Government of this statement before you put it out?

BEAZLEY: No, because what I am doing here is putting forward a set of useful suggestions and what better time to produce a set of useful suggestions than when we are all sitting around trying to think about where we should be going. I cannot see that there is a single proposition that I have made here, with the possible exception of one, which the Government would have the slightest difficulty with. And the one with which they would have the slightest difficulty with is the one in which we have been having a brawl for the last two years. So it is a bit neither here nor there really and that is on the question of a Coast Guard and what is the appropriate role for it. The rest of this, why on earth would the Government object to anything on this list, given the things that they have been saying?

JOURNALIST: Would you like to show with this that you, too, if you were Prime Minister are capable of dealing with this sort of situation?

BEAZLEY: As Prime Minister I would be capable of dealing with this situation. I have dealt with these situations before as Defence Minister of this nation. I, for example as Defence Minister of this nation, had to renegotiate, along with Bill Hayden, the entirety of the Australian/American relationship after ANZUS somewhat fell apart when the United States and the New Zealanders determined no longer to talk on security issues. Myself and Bill Hayden renegotiated that, ironically in the same place where the original ANZUS agreement was signed in the Presidio in San Francisco in 1986.

I had to deal with these issues when the Iran/Iraq war spilt over into the attacking of tankers going through the Persian Gulf and the United States decided to flag Kuwait tankers. And I got involved in some degree of controversy in my party when I decided we should support the efforts by the United States in that regard and we made a small contribution to the effort that they made in guarding those Kuwait tankers that were so important to the oil supply.

I have been there before and I confidently, reluctantly, but nevertheless confidently, expect that should I be elected to office I will be there again. I would expect that should that be the case, when we come to do things like anti-terrorism Bills domestically, when we come to doing things like ratifying international agreements related to it, when we structure our Defence forces with a higher orientation on dealing with these sorts of matters, that everything that I do would be at some point of time involving consultation with my political opponents. It doesn't necessarily mean agreement, you can't always agree on these things. But at the very least if you are concerned about national security, you want an educated Opposition, always and an Opposition that at least feels that it has had a part of the process.

JOURNALIST: Mr Beazley, you mentioned the ANZUS Treaty. The National Security of Cabinet met today, it's going to meet again tomorrow, it's looking at the ANZUS Treaty. Is there anything in that Treaty, given that the US is now being attacked, under that Treaty that needs to be invoked or formally brought to bear?

BEAZLEY: The ANZUS Treaty does several things, it is not as tight as NATO. The ANZUS Treaty has a clause within it from memory which deals with the character of an attack, and certainly an attack upon a metropolitan centre in one of the powers activates it. Without question there has been an attack on a metropolitan centre in the case of New York and Washington. Then the ANZUS Treaty says that having being established, all parties will respond to the situation in accordance with their own determination - or words to that effect. The ANZUS Treaty is there covering these activities but it also makes provision for individual response. So my view on it is this, I haven't said that we should support the efforts of the United States to establish responsibility here, and then to respond to the establishment of that responsibility with armed action because of the ANZUS Treaty. I have responded to that because I think it happen to think it is right to respond to that and that we are friends of the United States and allies of the US and we should respond. Likewise, all the things that I commit myself to here, you'd do whether or not there is an ANZUS Treaty. It just happens to be the major international security problem that we now all confront.

JOURNALIST: Mr Beazley……….talking about Australian with different ethnic backgrounds working…….just to be clear are you talking about spying and informing?

BEAZLEY: You could put it pejoratively like that and it's fine but an intelligence community… If you look at the way in which intelligence collection has gone, and it's good, over the last two decades, more, really, it has been steadily moving in that direction ever since the ultra activities of World War II, but

increasingly it has become technological. Increasingly, that component of it - while it is still there, that is based on human intelligence, that is, knowing what Fred is up to has diminished as a component of the way in which we do intelligence - the premium is now on technology. We are very actively involved in that with the United States, as I am sure you all understand. We still do have human intelligence operations and it is true, it relies on the gathering of information from people who have reason to know by some connection with some part of another government or a group's activities and one of the things that gives you the capacity to do that and gives us a special advantage here is that terrorist groups are manifest in many societies and many different ethnic backgrounds. But almost all of them have representatives of those ethnic backgrounds, not representatives of the terrorist society, representatives of those ethnic backgrounds here in Australia. They are good patriotic Australians. Why should they not be involved?

JOURNALIST: Do you have any reason to believe, or are you concerned, that there may be some links in Australian communities with terrorism nationally or internationally. Is that….concern?

BEAZLEY: That's a hard question for me to answer, Ian, because I actually know the answer to it and I can't answer it because you don't confirm or deny any particular set of issues. Can I simply say this, that there is nothing that I know, or nothing that you could not foresee with the future, that indicates it would not be commonsense on our part to maintain good cohesion in our society where we take at face value each other's patriotism as far as our ethnic backgrounds are concerned and use all the reserves of patriotism that lives within all our ethnic groups in a commitment to Australia to be part of a process of solving any conceivable impact of terrorism on us.

JOURNALIST: Last year's Defence White Paper referred to terrorism specifically in two areas. Both times it made the point that these operations other than war were not the responsibility of the Australian Defence Force to combat. Do you think that there is a need for a security review, a broader or overarching security review? And is Australia left vulnerable until this actually takes place?

BEAZLEY: If you look at the Defence White Paper, if you look at the way in which - I'm not saying this in a partisan sense, by any means, so please don't assume that I am, if you look at that there clearly are gaps here. There is a role in counter terrorism, always has been, in regard to the SAS. There is a role in the activities of the Defence Department because they have particular intelligence responsibilities which go to supporting facilities and activities which, while may be oriented in the first case to being the intelligence back up for a defence effort in war, nevertheless, in time of peace, is part of the intelligence gathering capability of the Australian nation and our cooperative endeavours with the United States.

So, there is already a substantial component of our Defence activity, and some component of our Defence forces which are associated with dealing with the issues of terrorism. You've got to get your ducks in a row. You don't want to get involved in things you don't need to be involved in. It may not be that Defence is the most cost-effective way of handling it. That's one of the reasons we support a Coast Guard - free up Defence resources to do things like Aegis type destroyers instead which is much more of a heavy capacity in our Defence forces which we need anyway.

It also is the case, nevertheless, that substantial parts of our Defence activity must now be related to counter terrorism generally and it must be seen as part of the total Australian picture. The Cabinet Committee must operate in a coordinating role in that regard. The relationship between the Defence forces and the international component of our police forces - and the domestic component of that, for that matter, has to have an upgraded capacity as far as meeting the threat of terrorism is concerned.

JOURNALIST: Are you worried there's not enough…at the moment?

BEAZLEY: Obviously. We're not the only country that's talking about that now. This is obviously going to be a big part of the American debate over the next few months.

JOURNALIST: Mr Beazley, the latest announcements that you've made today, and the events in the United States in the last few days, do they make it more likely that Labor will support the Government's legislation coming up in the next week to make it harder for illegal asylum seekers to get into the country?

BEAZLEY: We approach all legislation on its merits. We have already had discussions on those Bills. We have said that we support a less cumbersome appeals process and that we have, if the Government is correct in the other Bill which deals with its argument that it conforms with our international obligations under the UNHCR, we'd be disposed to support that, too.

JOURNALIST: Is that the…?

BEAZLEY: That's right. So, those are positions, I might say that our front bench arrived at well before the events of the last few days. But we are not going to support bad law. One thing that the judgement made amply clear on Wednesday is that that law that, had it been passed, would have been irrelevant to the findings they made.

Ironically, if they'd actually listened to us and effectively gained themselves legal cover on a transit arrangement to a safe haven, which is what they had on offer, they would have not been afflicted by that judgement.

That just goes to show you don't want to rush. For example, the propositions I've got up here. I believe we can go immediately to ratifying those two international agreements. Why? Because our principal allies have signed them and they have been debated and negotiated over a four or five year period. They are known. There is no rush engaged there.

In relation to domestic terrorism, and to look at the British Bill, that may take longer because the British Bill has a particular application to the UK that arises out of their circumstances with the Irish Republican Army. It's very important to look at that from the point of view of whether or not all of that is applicable in the Australian circumstances. That may not be possible to do in the basis of next couple of weeks, probably not. But a start should be made.

We think that where you can act quickly, you should. Where you ought to act with deliberation, then act with deliberation. We will view any Government legislation put before us in that regard.

I'm not going to offer myself to the Australian electorate on the basis that I'm a bloke who is easily panicked. I happen to know a great deal about this area as a result of having spent a considerable amount of my political life handling it. I think that I and my colleagues are capable of making sound judgements on what is a product of panic or political opportunism and what are real solutions.

JOURNALIST: Mr Beazley, some Palestinians yesterday were celebrating the terrible violence - on the West Bank. Do you think that in many ways the Americans might overreach if they become too violent in their response because a lot of these problems are diplomatic in origin. They say that the United States has backed Israel on the West Bank. Other groups in the Middle East say that Western power there is

backing their impressions. Isn't violence just one part of a bigger solution?

BEAZLEY: I deprecate celebration of these affairs. That's shocking. And one of the reasons I'm concerned about the way in which some Australians have been treated over the course of the last couple of days is whenever I've seen a spokesperson for the Islamic communities, their sorrow at what has happened to Americans and their fellow Australians is evident. Therefore, in no way deserving of the sorts of things that have happened over the course of the last couple of days.

With regard to the issues of an American response, thus far I've been enormously impressed by the deliberation of the American leadership - the concern to get their facts straight. The concern to get a clear-cut understanding if what is actually happening and not to go off half-cocked. In that set of circumstances, I've got to say, I'm confident that they'll arrive at a reasonable conclusion. That is not to say that they're going to arrive at a conclusion that everybody agrees with or that there'll be people with bitterness in their hearts who feel that attention has not been paid to their problems.

But the United States is in a situation where it has to respond to what has been offered it. As far as the issues are concerned in the Middle East, what you hope and pray for is that sooner or later you can get a peaceful solution to all of that that settles the hearts of all those who are engaged. But in a sense, that's not going to occur in the course of the next few weeks, I'm afraid to say. I think that the US response, from all that has been said, is going to be evidence based and calibrated to an appropriate response.

The fact that George Bush is now engaged in coalition building. The fact that that involves talking to moderate Arab States and others is an important indication. It's rather like the way his dad did the Gulf response. It's evident that what you're not going to see here is simply just an exercise in a unilateral punishment. It's going to involve lots of others as well.

JOURNALIST: Just back to border protection for a moment. The Government keeps saying, it's saying too again today on a number of occasions, that the Border Protection Bill, the one you said was bad law, would have prevented the situation we have in the courts at the moment because it would have prevented anyone taking action on behalf of others. That was one part of the Bill. You keep saying categorically it would have had nothing to do with it. Their legal advice from the Solicitor-General is different.

BEAZLEY: No, they're quite wrong. And they know they're wrong, too. Anderson knew he was wrong. It protects you where you're trying to drive a ship out of your waters. But if you've taken people off a ship, you have put them in confinement on another ship, you're taking them away for other purposes to a safe haven, there is nothing in the Bill that dealt with that. Those are the circumstances that the Federal Court was dealing with, which is why it was not applicable to that. But it is the circumstances in which we offered them support and which they set that support aside.

While it would have covered the Government in ordering the Tampa out of Australian waters, it was amply clear the Government was never going to do that. Once the Tampa was in Australian waters they had no coverage for anything else.

It was bad law. It was bad, hasty law that did not apply to the circumstances which they subsequently found themselves confronting.

I was well aware, as you know, at the time that you do put your party's reputation on the line. But I can do no other than this. I want to be the Prime Minister of this country. People need to comprehend, if they're dealing with me, that they're dealing with a person capable of mature and not expedient

judgement. I will not pass laws that are a product of that expediency that do not achieve the objectives that they should achieve and threaten some very basic principles on which our judicial system is based. You are not going to see me as a Prime Minister put in place a law to override all other laws, civil and criminal. I won't do that sort of thing.

People may need to make a choice about that - whether they want a Prime Minister who will do that, or whether they don't. I'll be on the side of take the view that they don't want Prime Ministers to put in place laws that override all civil and criminal laws.

Frankly, that's a debate for another day. We're mixing up two quite separate issues here, if the truth be told. We're trying to mix up an issue that deals, as we must deal with, those who want to come into this country illegally. We must block that and prevent it.

But when you're dealing with a terrorist, a modern terrorist, the image of the modern terrorist is a bloke in a business suit with a good haircut, with a set of impeccable documents. The only problem with them is that they're false and with an Australian visa stamped on it or on it or an American Visa stamped on it -business, tourist or something. That person will be well monied and well heeled and well skilled and he will walk through that airport, these days, like a hot knife slices through butter. And that is the problem that we're dealing with and we must deal with.

JOURNALIST: We're close to an election and as a historian you must be aware of how governments travel in periods like this throughout history. How has this whole affair affected your own prospects.

BEAZLEY: There is no doubt when people feel a sense of insecurity they, in their voting habits, have a tendency to respond accordingly. I also know this - that during the course of an election campaign, no matter where it starts, it becomes multi-issued. And I know that there is a high level of dissatisfaction in the Australian community about many of the things that are happening to them in their lives. Be it in their health care, be it in their aged care, be it in what's happening in their schools and a vision for the future. And I also know this. That if anybody in politics has a background to handle these issues, I'm among them. I'm among them. And at least I can go to the Australian people on the basis that as the fellow who renegotiated AUSMIN and has had a considerable background over the years in these affairs, I can be as trustworthy as anyone else in handling it.

JOURNALIST: Mr Beazley, the Australian Mint has done a substantial amount of work printing banknotes which can't be counterfeited. Do you think any of that Australian technology can be applied to visas or passports? Is there a role for Australia there?

BEAZLEY: That's a very good idea. Thanks for the idea. We'll take that on board and make an 11-point plan. If we've exhausted ourselves on terrorism, I think we've got Ansett for questions.

JOURNALIST: Just the New Zealand Government this morning announced that they would put in about $500 million to Air New Zealand and do you think the Australian Government should do something like that to Ansett. Extend a credit facility or something?

BEAZLEY: I think we should assist the Administrator. We've got to do something about saving jobs. Now naturally in Opposition, while people may alert you to a problem, they don't alert you to the detail and we're not across the detail of this. John Anderson has had the detail of this for a few months and you've got to say he's made a botch of it. And we've got 16,000 jobs at stake here and regional services. I am hopeful that in the process that is being gone through we'll be able to save an awful lot of them and

I'm hopeful that they'll be some white knight who's capable of picking up the Ansett operation and keeping those jobs. And I'm hopeful that if there isn't the Government will at least be prepared to consider Labor's constructive suggestion for legislation that guarantees everybody's entitlements. I think we're in a different position from the New Zealand Government, but we're not in the different position in trying to secure an outcome that protects jobs. I guess the starting point, that might have been a solution a few months ago, the starting point now is to assist the Administrator in coming to a conclusion that keeps jobs and if that involves some subvention, I wouldn't put a dollar amount on it. I don't know enough from where we sit. We're not well briefed enough from where we sit but if it involves some subvention then we ought to be prepared for it.

JOURNALIST: Air New Zealand said this morning apparently that two days ago they did put a proposal to the Government requiring minor financial support to keep it going while it was restructured and within hours the Government rejected that. Should the Government have given it greater consideration even if it meant taxpayers dollars that might eventually ended up still going bust?

BEAZLEY: If those points are true about the minor and the reconstruction then that's tragic.

JOURNALIST: Does this tragedy have any special meaning in that Mr Anderson really was acting with the degree of scrutiny that he should over the collapse of Ansett and is that something that you'll be pursuing next week in Parliament?

BEAZLEY: We'll obviously be pursuing the issues relating to Air New Zealand. It's for you analytically to make a comment like that. I know you, and I know all of you are just overwhelmed by what's happened. The last few days, how could anyone complain about the media paying attention to that and not anything else? Even though the prospects of the loss of 16 000 jobs in this country are horrible enough and deserve a bit of attention. You can't say that the media has treated the issues that have emerged in the United States inappropriately, they haven't.

JOURNALIST: What steps should John Anderson have taken a few months ago to prevent this from happening?

BEAZLEY: I think he should have taken the Singapore bid seriously. We only had the outskirts briefing of all of this and we were aware that there were some problems associated with it. They, however, had entered into detailed discussions and now that you look at Ansett's situation and when you contemplate that three or four months ago that Singapore Airlines was prepared to take that off your hands - you just weep.

JOURNALIST: …support for that?

BEAZLEY: No, we didn't know enough about it. I mean, you don't know enough about it when you're in Opposition. They come around and give you a heads up - 'we're talking to the Government about X, Y & Z'. But, naturally, the detailed briefing is for the people who actually have the capacity to assess it. I mean, what are we in Opposition? We've got a few good staffers, but that's the end of the matter. They've got available to them the total resources of government. It's to them that they went - and they wanted a solution negotiated with the New Zealanders - and it didn't happen.

JOURNALIST: …highly unlikely Singapore would have bought Ansett once it had started doing…I mean, Qantas….

BEAZLEY: It's very attractive to…and of course, the airline is in a worse position now than it was then. It's got to be said, access to those gateways around Australian domestic airports has to be attractive to an airline like Singapore Airlines - it has to be. Maybe it would have been an on-balance decision for them. But they certainly seemed pretty willing. And it's not as though they were suddenly converted to it, because I can recollect that before the New Zealanders exercised their option, Singapore Airlines was in it for Ansett at a much earlier phase. So, it's not something they thought up at the last moment. They must have been thinking about it for a long time.

JOURNALIST: What about the entitlements of workers who…. several hundred at least….

BEAZLEY: You despair in Opposition every now and then. We have had a solution before the Government for two years. If they'd implemented our solution, you wouldn't be asking that question at this meeting here today. It's still there for the Government. But the Government is going to have to give some pretty serious consideration to the problems that may be experienced by workers. It would be much better for the Government if, for example, that Air New Zealand offer that you mentioned just then about a minor subvention combined with a bit help in picking an alternative to take up the position. You've got to say that the cost of that may pale into insignificance against the costs of picking up the tab if it comes to that.

Ends Authorised by Geoff Walsh, 19 National Circuit, Barton ACT 2600.

