1

MEDIA RELEASE The Hon Simon Crean MP Deputy Leader of the Opposition and Shadow Treasurer

TRANSCRIPT OF ADDRESS TO ANSETT AND GATE GOURMET WORKERS RALLY SYDNEY, 20TH SEPTEMBER 2001

E & OE - PROOF ONLY

Subject: Ansett crisis

Thank you very much. As indicated, I was called last night and I said that I would try to get here if I could and I’ve got here.  Your cause is our cause.  What you represent can happen to any workforce around the country and if you don’t believe it, look at what happened to Pasminco over night.

This is a Government that says the economy is running well.  If it’s running well, what’s happened to HIH?  What happened to One.Tel?  What happened to Ansett and all the associated companies and what’s now happened to Pasminco?

I’ll tell you what’s happened, we’ve had a Government that’s been asleep at the wheel.  It had the warning signals about HIH and did nothing.  We know that Joe Hockey knew of the problems back in November and yet did nothing until it collapsed and we’ve got the opening of the Royal Commission yesterday into the circumstances surrounding that collapse.

Similarly with Ansett, we tabled in the Parliament, on Tuesday, a letter that Ansett had written to the Government on 14 August, saying unless steps were taken, significant parts of the group, the Air New Zealand group, would go under.  That Ansett was in serious strife and they implored the Government for support.  That was 14 August - the Government still did nothing and that’s a letter that we have tabled.

But also, we now know from questioning in the Parliament that on 27 June, Ansett met with the Prime Minister and John Anderson, as Minister for Transport, and presented them a document that showed them that Ansett was losing $18 million a week.  That was on 27 June - and they didn’t do anything then.

Interestingly, under pressure in Question Time, what we forced the Prime Minister to disclose was that when they were considering Ansett’s position on 27 June, whose brief were they following?  Not Ansett’s brief, not the brief that showed they were losing $18 million a week, no, they were following Qantas’ brief - Qantas who said Ansett couldn’t go under.

2

Now This is a Government, therefore, that’s been pursuing a Qantas interest, not a national interest.  A Government that said, ‘yes, we want two airlines in the sky and one of them has got to be Australian owned”.  Fair enough.  But its dithering has meant it’s got one airline in the sky and it should have the other one up there.

We also found out yesterday that the Minister for Tourism doesn’t think there’s a problem going on out there.  What sort of ineptitude is this?  The Minister for Transport but takes no action.  A Minister for Tourism who can’t see what’s going on around her, simply says, ‘there’s a blip going on’.

Exactly!  Some blip!  Do you consider you’re just a blip?  She certainly does, as she does, not only with the 70,000 workers who have suffered directly as a result of this Ansett collapse, but the impact on the total Australian tourism industry.

In my home state of Victoria, they’re saying 3,500 beds are lying idle as a result of this dispute.  Think of what that does to the economy.  And yet this Government - asleep at the wheel doing nothing.

What do they do when the going gets tough?  They did do something, they put a tax on the very industry that’s suffering.  What sort of solution is this?

The point I’m trying to make about this is the Government has been asleep at the wheel. But, significantly, Governments make a difference in these circumstances.  Where this Government has failed is on three fronts.  The one that I’ve just outlined - asleep at the wheel.  The other, that it does not have in place a scheme to protect workers’ entitlements if something does happen and I’ll come to that in a minute.  The third thing that they’ve failed to do, so to actually, having stuffed things up, they haven’t got a revival strategy. They haven’t got a mechanism by which they can get the airline back in the air.  We saw Jackie Kelly’s solution yesterday - bring in foreign carriers and bring in foreign crews.

I tell you what this country needs, this country doesn’t need a foreign solution, it needs an Australian solution.  It’s got Australian crews and Australian aircraft sitting there waiting to fly again.  They’ve got Australian service support, the group that you represent here today, who are also prepared to go back to work to service those aircraft.

If there’s a will, there’s a way and the way ahead is to get you guys back into work.

What that means, and what Labor has been calling for is for the Government to actually convene a roundtable conference.  Get some people together who are actually prepared to knock heads together.  People who can look to options in terms of getting the airline flying again.  We know the Administrator and the ACTU are trying their best.  But, quite frankly, there’s got to be other options out there and we should be investigating all of them.  But the Government has to play that role.  It has to play a facilitative role because it may have to play a backing role.  Just on that point, we were told when we said on the weekend that the Government should be prepared to inject some money into the airline to

3

keep it afloat, to keep in the air, the Government said, ‘that’s not our role’.  Why isn’t it their role?  This is a national institution.  This is the lifeblood of a nation.  This is significant competition for people who use airlines every day of every week and those who need it to visit their relatives and the like.  The Federal Government has responsibility for aviation policy in this country.  Quite frankly, it’s about time it started to govern.

Let us hear none of this argument that there isn’t any money.  We were saying that we believe it would cost about $100 million.  They said they couldn’t afford it.  But they’re already racking up more than $400 million in securing your entitlements.  That’s a $400 million bill to ensure you don’t work.  We were talking about a $100 million that would have ensured you got work.

What’s the better alternative?  Where’s the commonsense in that?  What sort of a Government has got a mentality that we should spend more to keep you out of work than to keep you in work.

They’re insensitive.  They do not have a clue when it comes to recognising a proper solutions.

I tell you what we would do if we were the Government.  We would convene a roundtable conference.  We’d get someone like Bob Hawke, or an industrialist around the table.  We’d invite all the interested parties and we’d say, ‘what’s needed to get this airline going again?  What’s needed to get the jobs back for the people who were suffering?  What’s needed to connect this country again?’  That’s what leadership is about and that’s what governments should be about, and that’s what Labor would do if we were the government.

I want to come now to this question of entitlements, because this is terribly important to understand.  Rallies such as this, you’ve got to keep going.  You must keep the pressure up.  Why?  Because this rally today has worked for you already.  Up until yesterday, and we asked this question in the Parliament, ‘OK, Prime Minister, you’ve introduced a scheme that covers the Ansett workers.  Does it cover all of the other companies that relied on Ansett?’  The Prime Minister’s answer was, ‘it only covers the wholly owned subsidiaries’.  We specifically asked the question, ‘does it cover GateGourmet?’ and he said he didn’t think it did.

It didn’t until last night.  It didn’t until you organised this rally.  Now, as I understand it, and we’ve still got to get confirmation of this, Tony Abbott, that friend of the workers, the one who brands you, not friends of the nation, but indeed, traitors.  That’s Tony Abbott’s view of the workers of this country.  As I understand it, he was ringing around last night saying the Gate Gourmet workers are included in the scheme.

We certainly need it in writing.  But the point I’m making to you is that it’s a significant advance.  You ought to be congratulated for it because your action, your solidarity has delivered.

4

That solidarity has to be maintained.  It’s not just the Gate Gourmet workers.  It’s terrific to see Ansett workers here today because they’re part of this struggle with you.  There’s a wider struggle out there because there are other companies, there are other businesses that face the same insecurity as you.  Entitlements is one thing, but jobs is the real issue. That’s why the solution that I put before is what they’ve got to pursue.  In the meantime, let’s make sure we get the security in terms of entitlements as well.

We do have to get it in writing and we do have to understand what it means but let me make this point.  The Government is saying, as I understand it, that you will be guaranteed 100 per cent statutory entitlements.  What do statutory entitlements mean? Good question.  I tell you what you haven’t got guaranteed - that’s 100 per cent of your award entitlements and that’s what you should have.

The question that John Howard and Tony Abbott have to answer is: does this scheme guarantee you 100 per cent of your entitlements, or not?  Simple question.  Can they answer it?

The scheme that Labor has got in the Parliament which the Government will not vote on, does include a capacity to pay 100 per cent entitlements.  We have put a Private Member’s Bill into the Parliament because there are too many of these things happening. These are not just one-off things.  A Government that claims to be running the economy well when all these companies are collapsing, can’t be doing too well in my book.  But if in fact these things are happening we need to have a scheme in place that guarantees 100 per cent.  Again, it’s only Labor that’s promising such a scheme.  We’re trying to get it up in the Parliament from Opposition, but they keep knocking it off.  The only way we’ll get it up in the Parliament is if we’re the Government of the country.

One final point of legislation that I think is important for you to understand.  This is not the first time this Government has thrown a complete workforce to the wolves.  They did it in the Patrick dispute.  Do you remember that one?  Where they legislated at midnight. The quickest piece of legislation ever drawn up in a Cabinet room, to actually justify the sacking of an entire workforce.  Not only did they legislate to back the sacking of the workforce, they sent the dogs in and the balaclava hoods in at midnight.  You all remember the imagery.

What Patrick has done just before that dispute started was a very clever legal device. They took the whole of the workforce and they put them into a company, newly structured company, a shelf company, a $2 company that had no assets.

This is an important point to understand because it’s again where governments can make a difference.  What the Government condoned was a circumstance in which a corporation asset stripped itself and left the company employing the workers with no assets to pay any of their entitlements - and the Government backed it.  What Labor did was to introduce legislation in the Parliament, and we’ve reintroduced it this week, to change the

5

law to prevent that happening.  No more asset stripping.  No more shell companies into which the workers’ entitlements simply disappear.

Interestingly enough, if that legislation had been passed, the Government could have used it today to pursue Air New Zealand for the workers’ entitlements in Ansett - the $600 million that is their entitlement but which at the moment doesn’t exist in Ansett’s books. If the legislation we had moved had been passed, they could have gone after Ansett.

I heard the Treasurer the other night on television saying, ‘we will use every law available to us to get the Ansett workers’ entitlements back from Air New Zealand’.  I say to the Treasurer, the law doesn’t exist, Treasurer, but it can if you vote with us.  So, we’re going to give them the chance again.  We’re going to introduce this legislation and we’re going to make it retrospective.

Under stand the significance of that.  We’ve got a Government that’s prepared to introduce retrospective legislation in relation to refugees and illegal boat people.  It’s prepared to introduce retrospective legislation to keep people out of the country.  Will it support retrospective legislation to keep people in work?  That, too, is what we’ll be pursuing in the Parliament.

As indicated at the beginning, I’ve come down here this morning.  Quickest flight I’ve ever had into Sydney Airport, I think, this morning.  Very easy flight in this morning which goes to show how much the market has dropped off.  There’s no blip there.  I’ve never had that sort of entry into Sydney for a long, long time.  But it just shows what’s happened to our aviation industry and those of you who have been demonstrating out there will just know how quiet it is.

The Parliament is on again this afternoon.  This issue we have dominated the Parliament on in the last two days and we’ll do it again today.  We will be back in there taking up these issues today.

We’ll be taking up the issues of the workers’ entitlements.  The Pasminco dispute today, Pasminco has also been put into administration.  Are its workers’ entitlements covered? We don’t know.

What sort of adhockery is it that to get even anywhere near something covering your entitlements, you’ve got to come out and demonstrate?  This should not have to be the case.  There should be schemes place that protect your rights.  This is not a new claim that a union is making, it’s a claim for your entitlements.  It’s your money guys.  That’s what you’re after.  And you shouldn’t have to have special legislation after the event to achieve that outcome.  This should be secured by law and Labor will pursue that issue to ensure that that law exists.

We’ll be pursuing the workers’ entitlements.  We’ll be pursuing the Government on its state of knowledge because it’s been negligent in this exercise.  It’s listened to one source of advice and that’s inadequate for any Government.  Sure they’ve got an obligation to

6

look at the interests of Qantas.  Of course they do, because Qantas is an important part of our aviation industry.  But don’t tell me if you’re the Government of the day, saying that you’ve got the interests of both airlines at heart, don’t tell me that you’re taking best advice when all you’re doing is relying on the Qantas brief.  They’ve got to adopt a national brief, not the Qantas brief.  There’s too much evidence around that what they’ve been doing is pursuing the Qantas option.  The Prime Minister himself has said on the record in the Parliament, yesterday I think it was, he said he made no apologies for pursuing the Qantas option.

I tell you what, he should have been pursuing the Ansett option with the same degree of vigour.  He’s got an obligation to all workers in this country, not just the companies. He’s got an obligation to listen to the workers, not just the management.

This is a Government that’s out of touch with its workforce.  It’s out of touch with ordinary people.  It’s a Government that thinks it’s got an economy bubbling along.  But what sort of economy is it when you’ve got people being thrown out of work overnight with no explanation from the Government and no solution from them.

Governments do matter.  But this Government has been found wanting on three counts: asleep at the wheel, no scheme to protect your entitlements and no solution once it got itself into difficulty.

What I’m saying to you is: Labor wouldn’t have allowed this situation to have happened, Labor’s scheme to protect workers’ entitlements would have been in place and if indeed there was a crisis circumstance like this, we’d roll up our sleeves and get our hands dirty get a solution because the key issue here is getting your jobs back, getting an airline back into the air, getting the economy ticking over again.

That’s in all of our interests.  Continue the struggle for that.  Don’t underestimate the extent to which your actions, your rallies, your solidarity has been forcing the Government’s hand.

We’ll keep them under the microscope in the Parliament.  But you keep the pressure on in the streets and the walkways of the country because if you don’t, you will lose.  Labor will be there behind you and we look forward to continuing to work with you over the coming weeks.  This is a challenge for all of us and we’ll stand shoulder to shoulder with you.

Thanks very much.

ENDS

