Future Directions in Labor Foreign Policy

Mr Kevin Rudd MP

Shadow Minister for Foreign Affairs

An Address to the Australian Fabian Society

Victorian Trades Hall

Saturday 4 May 2002

This coming week it will be six months since we lost the last Federal

Election. This was the third election on the trot.

More disturbingly, it’s the fourteenth election we have lost since the war -

compared to the seven we have won. Over that fifty-seven (57) year period,

we have been in power for twenty years, our opponents for thirty-seven

(37).

In relative terms, our comparative performance against the conservative

parties becomes worse when once we include the pre-war period as well.

The combined Prime Ministerships of Watson, Fisher, Hughes (prior to

Ratting), Scullin, Curtin, add only another eleven years to our tally,

meaning that we have been the Government of this country for less than a

third of it’s federated history.

(2

So why are we the oldest Australian political party by a country mile, we

haven’t exactly been electorally it’s most successful.

Political and Party historians debate the reasons for this.

One is because of our history of splits - three times in a hundred years

isn’t bad going.

Another has been the electorate’s view on at least two occasions that we

were to be held electorally responsible for the two largest external

economic shocks of the century; in Scullens case, the depression; in

Whitlams case, the first world shock.

A third reason, relates to foreign policy.

Prior to the 1950’s foreign policy was not viewed as a political liability for

Labor. We should remember that during both World Wars,  the Australian

people turned to Labor for leadership. When the business got serious,

Fisher replaced Cook just as Curtin later replaced Menzies and Fadden.

Things changed, however, in the post war years. During the Cold War,

Menzies and his successors convinced a generation of Australians that we

(3

could not be trusted on the Soviet Union. We could not be trusted on

China. And we could not be trusted on Vietnam.

Howard, our Menzie in pretender, is not adverse to employing the same

routine. Could Labor be trusted on Asia? And more recently could Labor

trusted on border security? Or even terrorism?

One thing is for certain. If the post-war conservatives have a consistent

and continuing pathology it is this: when all else has failed, and when

your domestic political stocks are very low, when the hospitals are in a

shambles, the universities are falling apart, there is always old faithful,

the foreign policy threat from without.

Our challenge today, and in the period ahead, is to deny them that

opportunity by denying that space.

This will not be easy because the politics of fear are often more potent

than policy of reason. But that is the task ahead of us and we must rise to

it.

I believe we can. And the only we can is by engaging the debate - not

hiding from it. Latham argued this on domestic policy in Sydney on

Wednesday. I argue the same on foreign policy in Melbourne today.

(4

We must expose foreign policy fraudulence when we see it - and under our

current fearless Foreign Minister, there is a bucket load of it about.

Just as we must argue the alternative when an alternative must be

argued.

All of which is a particularly long winded way of saying that a debate on

the nation’s foreign policy no longer belongs at the political margins. It is

not simply the stuff of interesting academic seminars. It is central to the

nation’s future. Under this most expedient of Prime Ministers, it lies front,

centre and core to his governments and his party’s re-election strategies.

So we have no alternative but to engage it.

The foreign policy of a nation is best defined as the articulation of that

nation’s interests and values, in the international domain. This

articulation may be achieved by either declaration or action or both.

Some argue that foreign policy that has a self contained logic, that it

operates within a self contained domain and that in dealing with

conflicting interests between states we should therefore be unconstrained

by the values we seek to apply to our political processes within states.

(5

This is a conservative view of foreign policy. It is a view whose

fundamental premise is that foreign policy is an inherently amoral

enterprise. And to the extent that morality is alive in any aspect of public

policy, it is a morality confined to our territorial limits. According to this

view, the world beyond is a brittle and barbaric place which should be

dealt with accordingly. In fact the prospect of actually improving the

international order is not part of the conservatives vocabulary. Even less

does it form part of the conceptual architecture of their foreign policy.

Labor has a different view.

Our view is that foreign policy, like domestic policy, is about both interests

and values. Our view is that the interests and values that we seek to apply

to our domestic processes are equally applicable to our international

processes. Our view is that there is a continuum.

For example, when we speak in our domestic dialogue about the

importance of a safety net to protect the weakest and the most vulnerable

in our society, there is no huge leap of logic that prevents us from

applying this principle of the “safety net” to the protection of the weakest

and most vulnerable states within the international order as well. It

applies to small states who cannot defend themselves against the strong,

just as it applies to poor states that cannot break out of the poverty cycle.

(6

All those who our Foreign Minister delicately refers to as “busted-arse

countries”.

There is another reason why both interest and values should be alive in

both our domestic and foreign policy debates. And that is the convergence

of what for a century or more we sought artificially delineate as “that

which is domestic” and “that which is foreign”. If the events of September

11 demonstrate one thing alone it is that the demands for national

security can no longer respect of the artificiality of the divide between the

domestic and internationals. For example, the terrorism the twentieth

century is no respecter of the neat delineations of the machinery of

government of the twentieth century.

Similarly with economic globalisation. How do we continue neatly to divide

that which is domestic from that which is not. This is a profound

challenge to policy makers everywhere. So any attempt to sustain the

artifice of what international relations theorists would describe as the

“great divide” between the foreign and domestic collapses in the face of the

unfolding reality before us all.

Against the same logic, it becomes equally pointless to quarantine from

our discussion of foreign policy the interests and values that historically

shaped are approach to policy questions at home.

(7

That is not to say that this is a simple exercise.  It is not. We will often

find that our interests and values are in conflict with one another. For

those of us who are social democrats there is nothing new to this. The

task of politics is to reconcile those conflicts when they arise. It is not to

pretend as conservatives often do, that those conflicts do not exist.

What then are the critical interests and values that should govern the

future direction of Australian foreign policy.

I argue there are five;

Labor is committed to a secure Australia.

Labor is committed to a competitive Australia.

Labor is committed to a compassionate Australia.

Labor is committed to an Australia that is comfortable with its neighbours

and engaged with its region.

(8

And Labor is committed to an Australia that can once again hold its head

high in the forums of the world and we once did.

To some, these interests and values may seem unremarkable, even

common place. The truth is that each involves a body of work which is as

complex as it is formidable. And the complexity derives from the

uncertainty of the international terrain in which we must now operate; not

just a post cold war world but now a post September 11 world as well.

There will of course be areas of agreement with the Government. Of course

from a national interest point of view this is entirely desirable. A nation of

limited critical mass such as our own should have a bipartisan foreign

policy.

However, bipartisanship comes at a price. And that price is a broad

consensus on the direction in which we seek to take nation - and the

interests and values that shape that direction.

By in large we had such a consensus from the mid-seventies to the mid-

nineties. Whitlam had constructed a new paradigm for Australian foreign

policy in the early 70’s characterised by a continued alliance with the

United States but an increasingly independent foreign policy posture in

Asia. This “Whitlam Doctrine” formed the basis of the subsequent foreign

(9

policies of Prime Ministers Fraser, Hawke and Keating and Opposition

Leaders Hayden, Peacock and Hewson.

In the last several years, however, this consensus has begun to unravel. It

has become fragile, brittle and at times has verged on cracking altogether.

It needs to be recorded formally that the breaching of this consensus and

the breaking of this bipartisanship has not occurred by accident but by

design.

And not by our design. Rather by design and conscious political decision

on the part of our opponent.

If there is a central reason why this has occurred, it is this; sometime

during the 39th parliament, the Liberal Party of Australia decided to make

foreign policy the tool of domestic party politics. The father of modern

strategic theory, Von Clausewitz, said famously that war was simply the

continuation of diplomacy by other means. John Howard has now added

to Clausewitzean theory whereby foreign policy is not merely the

continuation of electoral politics by other means. This, I think, is what we

should properly call “the Howard Doctrine”.

Under this Howard Doctrine, Hansonism could be embraced.

(10

Under this Howard Doctrine, Tampa could be prosecuted.

Under this Howard Doctrine, our international relations could be

“rebalanced” away from Asia and towards the cultural half of Western

Europe and North America.

The common denominator to all three of these re-positioning is that they

have been driven exclusively by the domestic political imperative rather

than being subject to anything approaching rational foreign policy

analysis.

In fact it is probably quite wrong to try and engage explicitly as part of a

considered foreign policy debate. Because each has been conceived as a

crude exercise in partisan politics driven Marx Texta qualitative research

and key lines and themes.

But it goes deeper than this as well. What our political opponents have

done in this country is plum the depths of the deepest fears of the

Australian political physic.

In many respects, they have been both pioneers and pathfinders for their

conservative confreres in Europe - politically as we survey the political

landscape in Italy, Austria, Norway, Denmark and France. Not to mention

(11

what might soon happen in Germany where the CDU candidate for the

Chancellorship has reportedly campaigned on a slogan of “Kinder Statt

Inder” which, roughly translated, means children not Indians. I believe Mr

Stoiber was referring to the future manpower needs of Germany’s ITC

sector.

Make no doubt about it, the politics of the “Kultur Krig” are alive and well

across Europe and the emerging political fault lines are no longer those of

ideology and gender but rather those of identity, race and culture.

But where John Howard’s have been true pathfinders has been

incorporating the politics of this undeclared “Kultur Krig” into the main

stream policy of a nation’s main stream centre right party. Cherac has not

done so. William Haigh, while tempted, did not do so although Schtober of

Bavaria is showing less signs of restraint.

In fact, up until now, the politics of this undeclared cultural war around

the issues identity, race and immigration have been confined to far right

parties who subsequently found themselves in coalition with a series of

main stream centre right parties.

John Howard’s Liberals, however, have done the full monty in one fell

swoop. And who knows where they might go to from here.

(12

In this country, as in much of Europe, the term “asylum seekers” has

become a symbol, a youthinism, a lightning rod for the entire debate.

Hansonism was a crude, blunt instrument. Asylum seekers, by contrast,

are a much more rapier-like instrument in creating a much more neatly

exploitable set of physiological fears and political possibilities.

Of course this provides fertile soil for the future. And we on our side of the

political divide would be extremely foolish not to recognise the dangers

which is supposes for us in the future. These fears are potent and, if not

handled properly can be politically lethal.

There is, however, a fundamental flaw in this strategy. And the flaw is that

our opponents offer no long term policy solutions to the political fears that

they fan. That’s what happens when you are engaged exclusively in an

enterprise driven by politics and not by policy as in increasingly the

pathology of this government. Or as one Canberra-based strategic analyst

said to me recently:

“there is an almost un-erring mathematical principle at play with the

conservatives in Canberra. Whenever they talk up the external threat, they

look closely at the defence budget because what invariably happens is that

is then goes down”.

(13

It is important, however, that we know our enemies. And it is an enemy

whose overriding philosophical principle has become expediency. And

tragically our country’s foreign policy has not escaped becoming a

casualty of this overriding political strategy.

What, we may well ask, has our fearless Foreign Minister been doing while

all this has been going on? The short answer is that Alexander Downer

has been MIA - missing in action.

Foreign Ministers are supposed to be keepers of the gate. They have in my

view, a responsibility not dissimilar to that of Treasurers; their job is to

look beyond the political ruck and to protect the national interest from the

ravages of various of their domestic policy colleagues. In the case of

Treasurers it is to defend our public finances against the enthusiasms of

spending ministers in pursuit of some grand political scheme. In the case

of Foreign Ministers, it is to protect our enduring international interests

and our international reputation against the ravages of domestic Ministers

who would ravage these in pursuit of some local political advantage.

Our Foreign Minister has failed this test. There is a danger in this country

that we simply ridicule the Foreign Minister of some sort hybrid of Bill

Bunter and Bertie Wooster. Whatever Alexander’s eccentricities on this

(14

account, they are of minor importance. His major failing is that he has

nothing to prevent the assault on the nation’s international standing by

his Prime Minister, his party and some of his more politically drive

parliamentary colleagues.

Alexander has simply been missing in action.

Missing in action over Hanson.

Missing in action over Tampa.

And now missing in action over his Prime Minister’s determination to

disengage from Asia.

Alexander Downer will be recorded in the history as one of our country’s

longest serving Foreign Ministers. He will also go down in history as one

our weakest.

He was simply not around when his country needed him most. In fact, on

some things I fear he has been quietly cheering from the side lines. A pity

he had not read more Rudyard Kipling and “Feats of Derring-do”.

(15

Our job for the years ahead is to engage the debate and we must be

intelligent in the way in which we go about engaging the debate. Foreign

Policy under the Howard Government has become a synonym for wedge

politics. It is not if the government is in the business of having a genuine

intellectual exchange about alterative foreign policy visions for this

national and world of the twenty-first century. No we must enter this

debate with our eyes wide open because in the mind of this government it

is more and more a debate about code language politics than it is about

the finer points of policy differentiation.

We should not, for example, simply deliver up to the government the sort

of responses the government would wish us to deliver up. We must agile in

our thinking. We must be innovative in our language. We must be forensic

in exposing not so much as what they as what they mean. We must be

clear in our policy. And we must be resolute in the interests and values

that we apply.

Labor first and foremost is committed to a secure Australia. Security is

fundamental to our independence. Security is fundamental to our

prosperity. Security is fundamental to our capacity to deliver a just

society.

(16

There is a danger in the politics of this country that we sometimes

concede the concept in the language of security to the political right. There

is no rational reason we should do so. Even less is there any reason of

principal that we should do so. To live securely, and to know that our

nation lives securely, is a legitimate interest of all those Australians we

seek to represent in the Parliaments of this country.

Our political opponents would have us believe that this is their natural

terrain rather than ours. They are wrong. And our task is to prove that

they are wrong.

Because as with most things in the public life of this nation, the

conservatives are long on the rhetoric of security but continue to fall

considerably short on the reality.

The national security challenges this country are now complex than they

have been at any time since the Second World War.

The threat spectrum we face is in fact broader that at any time in our

history.

(17

We must remain alert to any challenges to our military security as we live

within a region which contains with it a large number of unresolved

territorial conflict.

However the threat spectrum we face is far broader than classical military

security.

We must be mindful of the threats posed by global terrorism and firm in

our resolve to confront such threats.

We must be mindful of the continuing threats posed by weapons of mass

destruction, particularly those within our own region and particularly

those in the possession of states who are party to unresolved territorial

disputes.

We must also be mindful of threats to our civil infrastructure - our

telecommunication, transportation and communication systems.

We must be mindful of the threats posed my communicable diseases -

both new and old.

(18

We must be mindful of the threats posed by unlawful international people

movements, or the international narcotics trade, and of international

organised crime.

What the conservatives offer in the face of these threats to our security is

fear. They offer little by way of durable policy. They offer less by way

program and, despite the rhetoric they offer even less by way of resources.

Those who doubt this, just take one cold hard look at the state of the

capital budget of the Australian Defence Force. It has been bled dry by the

explosion of personnel and operating costs to the extent that we are

fundamentally compromising our future military capacity.

The good thing about Labor is that we have always been a practical lot.

That is why I believe our people turned to Curtin and Labor in 1941. To

deliver national security to the nation in those darkest times, Australia

had to look beyond the square. Menzies and the conservatives resorted to

the rhetoric of empire. Curtin and Labor looked to the reality of US

military and naval power. And so Australia was saved.

Similar thinking outside square is required today. Old formula for dealing

with new threats will need to be re-appraised. New approaches will need to

be adopted. And that is one of the tasks that lies ahead of us over the next

(19

two years as we seek to give policy expression to this core concept of

security.

A second interest and value we have as a Labor party is our commitment

to a competitive Australia. We must be competitive in order to survive. We

must be competitive in order to prosper. And we must be competitive in

order to deliver through our prosperity the resources we need to assist the

vulnerable and the weak and to enable those we can be strong to become

strong.

The conservatives have been schizophrenic on this concept of a

competitive Australia since Menzies and McEwan. The crude summary

was something like this:

Labor had to be competitive while capital remained idle, languishing

behind a tariff wall.

Once again, Labor demonstrated that we can be an innovative lot. Had

Hawke and Keating not internationalised the Australian economy during

the 1980’s the Asian financial crisis would have created an Australian

Argentina by the 1990’s.

(20

But we have not reached the end of the road. There is much more to do.

There will always be much more to do. A competitive Australia means we

must be active not passive in our multi-lateral trade diplomacy. It means

we must be active not passive in our efforts through the international

financial institutions to shape and reshape the international financial

architecture.

A competitive Australia also means that we must be active not passive in

the massive challenge of national capacity building - most particularly our

knowledge industries; most particularly the generators of knowledge, our

schools; our universities and our research institutes.

Labor is committed to a secure Australia.

Labor is committed to a competitive Australia but Labor must be equally

committed to a compassionate Australia.

Labor can never be indifferent to violence and suffering beyond our

shores.

From Evett to Evans, we have been committed to an Australia that sees

itself - that defines itself - as a good international citizen.

(21

The conservatives were once quietly disdainful of our historical

predispositions in this direction. In recent years, they have become openly

disdainful. They are increasingly exhibit a culture that says “that unless

our immediate interests are at stake, the world beyond our shores is of no

intrinsic interest to us”. The conservatives treat the High Commissioner

for Human Rights with open contempt.

They treat the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees with open

contempt.

They treat our other obligations under international humanitarian law

with an indifferent bordering on contempt.

They regard the multi-lateral system in general and the United Nations in

particular with suspicion bordering on hostility.

They dispatch junior ministers to UN Conferences whereas the Europeans

(who they say they seek to emulate) send Presidents and Prime Ministers.

They did so recently at Monterey. And they will do so again next week

at…..

I don’t know about you folks but the thought of Larry Anthony

representing Australia at the United Nations is just plain scary.

(22

And finally there is the collapse of our official aid flows - reaching 0.5% of

GDP under Labor and collapsing to 0.29% of GDP under the

conservatives.

Whether the conservatives recognise this or not, what this demonstrates

collectively to the rest of the world is a hardening of the Australian heart.

Our challenge in the period ahead is to turn this around.

Our challenge in the period ahead is to demonstrate to the Australian

body politic that compassion is not a sign of weakness but a sign strength.

Our challenge in the period ahead is to cause  Australian’s once again to

feel pride in being compassionately engaged in the suffering of others.

I argue that this is a very Australian thing to do. Just look what happens

when a bush fire next hits an Australian country town or even

metropolitan Sydney.

We are governed by a party that is indifferent to a long standing

Australian tradition of international humanitarism (both public and

(23

private). Our challenge is to restore that tradition to its proper place in our

national political culture.

Labor is also committed to an Australia that is comfortable with its

neighbours and comfortable with its regions.

It is for this reason that we have been long committed to a policy of

comprehensive engagement in Asia. This is not the product of some misty

eyed sentimentalism as our opponents some time infer. Nor is it a product

of our denying the western cultures and civilisation from which we

predominantly derive. It is none of these things.

Labor’s commitment to comprehensive engagement in our region is based

on two very simply propositions. We believe that if you have good relations

with our neighbours, it is good for our security interests and it is good for

our economic interests.

Secondly, and conversely, we believe that if you have bad or indifferent

relations with your neighbours the reverse applies. In their heart of

hearts, the conservatives of this country have never been comfortable with

the neighbours the geography has assigned us.

(24

Where Labor has seen opportunity and challenge, the conservatives have

seen difficulty and threat.

If the conservatives had their druthers in their heart of hearts and in their

mind of minds, they would ideally prefer this continent to have been towed

10,000 kilometres to the north east and be located somewhere at about a

mid-point between Hawaii and California.

But the debate between Asian engagement and disengagement has taken

a new and dangerous twist. The Prime Ministers most recent language

about rebalancing “our relationships between Asia on the one hand and

North America and Europe on the other” is code language for something

much deeper.

There are echoes of Hansonism and Tampa in all of this. It is intended to

send a subliminal message to the Australian people that the region of

which we are part is one which we should fear.

Our argument is that this does the nation a profound disservice. What our

Prime Minster fails to comprehend is how this code language is

interpreted across the capitals of the region.

(25

He failed to comprehend (or did he fail to comprehend) how the Hansonite

embrace was seen across our neighbourhood. He failed to see how his

proclamation of the Howard Doctrine would be read by our neighbours

and he has failed in just the last few days to comprehend how our

neighbours would see the government’s decision to abolish a long

standing and bipartisan program to educate our children in the languages

and culture of our region.

Remember also this is the government that destroyed Radio Australia.

It is also the government that destroyed for a season Australian Television

International before being humiliated into its reconstruction and relaunch.

The task ahead for Labor, therefore, on this score is a daunting one. The

damage has been extensive and the brand name has become tarnished.

But our core challenge is to argue the case to the Australian people that

disengagement from Asia will occur at a price. It will cost us in terms of

our security. It will cost us in terms of our economy.

We must also explode the mythology  perpetrated by our opponents that

our relations with Asia and our relations with America constitute some

sort of crude, zero sum gained. They do not. And if evidence is needed of

(26

this is, we need look no further than the Hawke and Keating governments

when a robust relationship with the United States was complimented by a

comprehensive policy of engagement with the region.

Labor is capable of walking and chewing gum at the same time. Even if

the conservatives find this a arduous and difficult task.

I suspect however that the task is neither arduous nor difficult. Rather, it

is a task they would prefer not to discharge because their political

strategists advise that it is unwise to do so - and far better to try and

wedge us once again on the way through.

I do not intent to allow that to occur.

Finally, Labor is committed to an Australia that can once again be

properly proud of our standing in the community of nation.

Australians have a proud history of international engagement. We have

played our part militarily when we have needed to do so. And we continue

to do so today. We have played our part in disarmament. WE have played

our part in peace processes like Cambodia. We have played our part in

building the institutions of this region which until a decade or so ago

effectively had non.

(27

As a consequence, ours was a voice of reason, of commitment, of

humanity - and one therefore listened to with respect.

I say with great sadness that that is no longer the case.

It gives me absolutely  no joy to see the incremental shredding our

international standing. It is a process that has gathered pace over the last

several years.

Not everyone around the world paid attention to Hansonism or our Prime

Minister’s partial embrace of it.

They did, however, pay attention to the Tampa. The world saw it day in,

day out, week in, week out, on television screens and newspapers in every

capital around the world.

It was not a pretty picture. It conveyed an image that none of us in this

room would admire, very few of us recognise and certainly none of  laud.

Which is why the Prime Minister’s recent pronouncement in his address to

the Federal Council of the Liberal party that Australia’s international

(28

standing is now higher than at any stage since Federation is either self

delusion at its worst or the most purple form of propaganda at its best.

Labor, therefore, has an important repair job to do. It is important that we

do so in terms of our national self respect. It is important that we do so in

terms of the image we have of ourselves as Australians. But it is equally

important that we do so in terms of our ability in the future to

successfully to prosecute our interests.

What puzzles the world most is how the Australia of the Olympics, the

confident and creative country of September 2000 became a country that

gave us the Tampa phenomenon in September 2001.

The truth is that our international stocks rode high after the Sydney

Olympics. We had created a positive goodwill for ourselves around the

world upon which we could draw down in the pursuit of our interests.

Much of that goodwill has now eroded. And there is much less to draw

down upon in capitals around the world - and in the multilateral

institutions of which we are members.

Of all the tasks that like ahead of us, this is perhaps the most daunting

one.

(29

Our foreign policy vision for Australia then has these several ingredients.

A secure Australia. A competitive Australia. A compassionate Australia.

An Australia comfortable with its neighbours and its region. And an

Australia once again proud of its standing in the world.

These are the interests and values that we will use to shape the details of

our policy program in the two years ahead.

There will be much hard work to do. A combination of policy research and

development on the one hand. And of public debate as we take the

argument up to the other mob on the other.

Alexander Downer has announced that he will be developing a new foreign

policy white paper in the period ahead. I wish him well in that task. But I

have grave doubts about some of the forces that will shape it - not least

his own Prime Minister and his own party.

For this reason we need to map out our own blueprint for the future.

So today I am announcing the Labor will develop its own foreign policy

white paper for release by July 2004.

(30

I hope this might be a basis for brokering a return to bipartisanship.

But if not, will provide a basis for a clear articulation to the Australian

public where we agree with this government on Australia’s future in the

world and where we disagree and why.

I invite each of you to join in this challenge with me. It will not be easy -

not least because our resources compared with those of the government

are thin indeed.

But our heart is large. We have ideas to harness both from within the

party and beyond and we have energy which derives from our

commitment.

A commitment to a new Australian foreign policy that we can all be proud.

