1

LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION

TRANSCRIPT OF DOORSTOP - MELBOURNE - 8th JUNE 2002.

E & OE - PROOF ONLY

Subjects: Further excision of Australian Territory.

CREAN: This decision by the Government is a dangerous decision. It’s an invitation for illegal boats to head to the Australian mainland. What makes the Government think that simply by excising islands that are so close to the mainland that those boats won’t head for the mainland of Australia? And if they do, what’s then next? What do they start excising on the mainland? Do we end up with a new Brisbane line? This is a Government that has not thought through the issues. It wants to raise fear but it provides no solutions. We need a sensible approach to protecting our borders. This decision of the Government seems to make no sense and in the absence of explanation by the Government as to why we need it, one can only question their motives. Well I notice today that the Prime Minister, having introduced this regulation has left the country. I asked him yesterday for access to a full briefing on why this decision was necessary. I’ve still not had a reply and he’s left the country. If he’s serious about getting sensible policy out he should be talking to me not just escaping the country.

JOURNALIST: Why do you think the government is proposing this now when no boats have come this year so far?

CREAN: Because it’s trying to raise fear in people’s minds in the same way as it did post-Tampa. This is a Government that deceived the Australian public around the incidents surrounding Tampa. It’s kept keeping in the dark as to what the real solutions are and now it’s raising a fear campaign again without any proper explanation. The Australian public deserves better and I’m demanding better and I expect to get better. The Prime Minister must give us a full briefing on why this unprecedented decision is justified.

JOURNALIST: Will the ALP formally oppose the legislation?

CREAN: That depends on what comes out of the briefing. But from what we know to date, my very strong inclination is to oppose this regulation. But I’m prepared to hold final judgment on that until we get the

2

final briefing. Now why is it that the Prime Minister won’t give us that briefing? Why is it that when he gets a request from me as soon as I become aware of this decision, then he gets a request from me for a full and detailed briefing as to the circumstances justifying it, not only doesn’t he respond, he leaves the country. That’s not good enough Prime Minister. The Australian public deserves better and I deserve better.

JOURNALIST: Mr Crean, the Democrats aren’t waiting for a briefing, why do you need to wait?

CREAN: Well the Democrats can make whatever call they like, but I’ve always believed that these issues need to be treated on their merits and on the facts known to us. We know that the Government last time misled the Australian people and the Labor Party on the true facts. We’re not going to fall for that again. But if there are valid reasons let’s hear them from the Government. Not just a scare campaign, not just the rasing of fears but let’s understand the reasons as to why this decision is justified.

JOURNALIST: What would you call a valid briefing?

CREAN: I want to know the full facts as to why we suddenly need to excise every island between Broome and Townsville on the Australian coast from Australia. What’s next? Tasmania? Phillip Island? Rottnest Island? Let’s understand what the Government says justifies this extraordinary step. They’ve got to make the case. I’m not going to respond to hypotheticals.

JOURNALIST: The Prime Minister was asked in a press conference what evidence did he have that there’s more boat people on the way, he then cut short the actual press conference and just walked off.

CREAN: Yes.

JOURNALIST: What do you think he says by his actions?

CREAN: Well the Prime Minister is simply playing a fear card and he’s not prepared to answer to the Australian public. That’s not good enough. A Prime Minister that raises fear and leaves the country is a Prime Minister not deserving of public support. He has to stand and answer and I’m demanding from the Acting Prime Minister access to that full briefing upon which we will make our final judgment.

JOURNALIST: …no reason, that it is basically a fear motive?

CREAN: Yes, that is my very strong view and they played the fear card back in August. They know it worked for them because it won them an election. They’ve got no other agenda so they’re raising the fear card again. That is not good enough for the Australian people. They deserve better, they

3

deserve proper and true access to the facts. They shouldn’t be hoodwinked again.

JOURNALIST: The Prime Minister says you are, if you oppose this and if the Democrats oppose it, that is encouraging people smugglers…?

CREAN: This decision of the Government encourages the people smugglers to head to the Australian mainland. That’s what it does. Just look at some of these islands. These are islands that are less then two kilometres from the Australian mainland. They are, for all intents and purposes, are part of the Australian mainland. If the smugglers are heading to the islands, why wouldn’t they go the extra two kilometres and get on to Australian soil? This is what’s so ridiculous about the Prime Minister’s argument. This is an invitation to the smugglers to head to the Australian mainland. This is why it such a bad decision.

JOURNALIST: Because of your refusal to immediately come out and support this, the Government, the Prime Minister has this morning accused you of shilly shallying. Are you a shilly shallyer on border protection?

CREAN: The Prime Minister with the stroke of the pen has excised people and islands from the rest of Australia and has now fled the country refusing to explain why it’s needed. The country deserves better. This is a Prime Minister raising fear and fleeing the country without explanation.

JOURNALIST: Does this put your credibility on border protection at stake if you once again don’t follow the Governments moves?

CREAN: The Prime Minister’s credibility is at stake, the Prime Minister has no lasting solution. The Prime Minister has only a fear campaign and rather then stay and explain it he’s left the country without explanation.

JOURNALIST: (Inaudible).

CREAN: Because I am only going to make that final decision based upon full knowledge of the facts. If the Government need to take further steps let them come forward with the reasons, convinces me that this is a smart decision. To the contrary, I think it’s a dumb decision. It’s a decision that’s going to encourage the smugglers to head to the mainland of Australia. The very thing the Prime Minister says he’s trying to discourage, he will in fact encourage. Now if he’s got reasons, if there’s justification, let him be honest enough to own up, not just turn up to a press conference make an announcement and then answer no questions and then get on a plane for the next twenty four hours and be out of circulation without having ever responded to my request for a full briefing. What’s the Prime Minister got to hide? I believe that he’s raising fear in this circumstance. I want to know what the justification is for this unprecedented decision in excising significant parts of the country from the rest of Australia and until he tells us why we

4

can only question his motives. And it goes back to what he did in relation to Tampa, and the ‘Kids Overboard’.

JOUNALIST: (Inaudible)

CREAN: No, that’s not the least. What they must do is give me access immediately to a full briefing on what justifies this measure. When I’ve got that full briefing I’ll have more to say, but in the meantime this is a Government that stands condemned for having announced a decision without any justification, a decision which encourages the smugglers to head for the mainland, a decision which gives no justification to the Australian people as to why it’s been taken and in circumstances in which having announced, the Prime Minister leaves the country without answering any questions it.

JOURNALIST: Perhaps its an admission that the only reasons the boats haven’t been coming so far this year is because it’s been the monsoon season, not because of the Government’s hardline stance and despite that stance the boats will keep coming later in the year?

CREAN: I don’t know. Only a full briefing from all of the agencies involved, all of the intelligence gatherers can address those questions. That’s what I’m asking for, I’m entitled to it, but most importantly the Australian people are entitled to it. They’re sick of the fear campaign, they’re sick of the deceit, they deserve better and I’m insisting that they’ll get better.

(tape break)

ENDS

