

MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS  HON ALEXANDER DOWNER, MP

TRANSCRIPTION: PROOF COPY E & OE

DATE:  Dec  29th 2002

VENUE: Stirling, South Australia  TITLE:   North Korea/Zimbabwe World Cup

Downer: We are obviously very deeply concerned about the decision by the North  Koreans to expel the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) inspectors  from North Korea. This is yet another step in the wrong direction by the North  Korean administration. Inevitably now this will go to the United Nations  Security Council - the IAEA will take this matter to the Security Council and  there’s clearly a prima facie breach now of North Korea’s obligations under  the Nuclear Non-proliferation Treaty and that’s a matter that will have to be  considered by the Security Council.



I spoke for about half an hour last night with the US Secretary of State, Colin  Powell, who called me to talk about the situation in North Korean and I took  the opportunity of putting a number of different views that we have on this  issue. He explained the United States position very clearly to me. I am not  going to go into the details of the discussion but I would just make this point,  the important thing is that there is an appropriate degree of cooperation  between the major players in this crisis - the United States itself, South Korea,  Japan and also China and Russia, and countries like Australia. We particularly  hope that China can continue to use its good offices to encourage the North  Koreans to desist from going down this dangerous path. As for the Russians, I  think it’s important that Russia plays and active part as well in trying to exert  pressure on the North Korean administration.

We’ll have more to say in the next couple of weeks on this issue in relation to  Australia’s role. But certainly as far as Australia is concerned we see it as  important that we remain actively engaged on the issue as a significant power  in the region and as a country that has supported the Agreed Framework and  the Korean Peninsula Development Authority, as well as a country that has  diplomatic relations with North Korea which we intend to maintain - I think  it’s appropriate that we should be active in trying to help the international  community address this issue. But ultimately, nobody is looking for free-ranging by any country - we are looking for appropriately coordinated  approaches and there certainly will now be a greater role for the UN Security  Council in the next few months.

Journalist: Do you think North Korea is now a bigger threat than Iraq?

Downer: I don’t think you can make comparisons in a simple way as, I am sorry to say,  some people do. They are similar and they are dissimilar situations. They are  similar in one important respect and that is that here are two countries with  administrations that cause us very deep concern, with very poor records on  human rights, which have aspirations to develop Weapons of Mass  Destruction. In the case of Iraq, we’re sure that they have chemical and



biological weapons, has plans to build nuclear weapons. In North Korea’s case  it may have one, two or three crude nuclear devices already and it is giving an  indication that it wants to develop a nuclear weapons capability of greater  sophistication. And I think one of the great issues of the era is countries with  dangerous regimes developing Weapons of Mass Destruction. Countries with  appalling human rights records, countries such as Iraq, not so much North  Korea in recent years, but Iraq over time which have a record of aggression  towards their neighbours. Once these people get Weapons of Mass  Destruction, they are able to use these capabilities; it massively enhances their  power and the risks to the international community. And the international  community has to be prepared to try to address these issues - there are  different ways of addressing them but it has to be done.

Journalist: What role is Australia playing in dealing with North Korea?

Downer: We are obviously playing a fairly intense diplomatic role at this stage. We  have been discussing both at my level and at officials level the situation fairly  intensely with the Americans and also with our regional partners, with the  Japanese and the South Koreans and so on. We need to make sure we have a  coordinated approach as an international community. We’ve also very much of  the view that the Chinese and the Russians need to be very actively engaged in  placing pressure on North Korea because they are the countries that in our  judgement have the greatest influence over North Korea.



Journalist:  The Opposition have criticised you for taking a soft approach and not sending  the Beijing Ambassador to North Korea…?

Mr Downer: I think the Opposition during the summer holidays will do what it can to try to  get media coverage.  We’re very actively engaged in these issues. I don’t think,  two things, I don’t think it’s worthwhile publishing and publicising every  initiative we’re taking because that obviously weakens our capacity to achieve  results: and secondly the Opposition has had the whole of 2002 to ask  questions in the Parliament about North Korea and has the record of asking, to  the best of my knowledge, not one single question on North Korea. The  Opposition has shown no interest in North Korea in 2002 and we welcome, on  the eve of 2003, a greater interest by the Opposition.  We look forward to them  getting involved in that issue next year. Last year they said we were too strong  on Iraq, now they say we’re too weak on North Korea - you kind of get the  impression that whatever we say they’ll take a different position. The  important thing for them is to try to find some intellectual framework and stick  with it and explain to the Australian people that they believe in something,  rather than just putting out press releases.



Journalist:  Would you consider sending the Beijing Ambassador to North Korea?

Downer: I am not getting into canvassing different things that we can and can’t do. We  are obviously coordinating what we do with our partners in the region and with  the United States, and a whole lot of free-ranging initiatives just to get  publicity are going to be exactly the wrong approach by Australia. We will  play ourselves out of trying to help resolve this problem in North Korea if we  are going to get into an array of publicity stunts as suggested by the  Opposition. I think the important thing is that we privately pursue our



diplomacy; we’ll make appropriate announcements at a suitable time. We  won’t be making announcements at an unsuitable time.

Journalist: Minister if I could change the subject, what is your response to the Baxter  Detention Centre incident?

Downer: As I understand it very substantial parts of the Baxter Detention Centre has  been burnt down and if this is as a result of an act of sabotage then that will, I  think, appal the Australian people. I don’t think the Australian people will  appreciate detainees or whoever it may be, others perhaps, being involved in  acts of arson. But as I understand it, there are some early indications that may  be the case but that is not conclusive yet and it’s a matter of ongoing  investigation. But, you know, people want to come to Australia, there are  appropriate ways to come to Australia. Where people are found not to be  genuine refugees they are entitled to return back to whence they came and if  they refuse to do so, they are likely to be kept in a detention centre. And if  detention centres are to be damaged, however that may happen, either wilfully,  which is particularly reprehensible, or by accident which can happen, it is not  going to change the Government’s policy.



Journalist: The Premier has said that if this was arson the people should face the full force  of the law and possibly even be deported, do you support that?

Downer: Well it is nice of him to say that they face deportation, because typically they  are in a situation where they are.  Of course we don’t know exactly who did it,  if it were done by the detainees themselves, then typically, it is not true  universally but typically these are people who we’ve said should be deported  and who have refused to leave the country. So I appreciate the Premier’s  comment. And I must say, of course, if this is a deliberate act of sabotage then  those responsible should face the full force of the law and Australians expect  all people in this country to be equal before the law.  People, who go around  burning down public property, if that’s what’s happened in this case, will have  to face the full force of the law.



Journalist: What is the Government’s position on World Cup Cricket matches in  Zimbabwe?

Downer: About a week ago the International Cricket Council (ICC) issued a statement  saying that its view was that the security situation in Zimbabwe was adequate  at this stage for the World Cup matches, of which there will be six, to proceed  in Zimbabwe. For our part, look we accept that this is a decision for the ICC  and in relation to our own team, the Australian Cricket Board (ACB) - we’re  not telling the ACB what to do, it’s a matter for them - but we are entitled to  an opinion and the Government’s opinion is that it is very regrettable that these  international, high-profile cricket matches are going to go ahead in Zimbabwe.  They will be used by President Mugabe for propaganda purposes within his  own country. This is a man who has not only stolen an election, who’s not only  defied the will of the people and made a laughing stock of the electoral process  in Zimbabwe, but this is a man whose policies are responsible for half of his  country’s population suffering from starvation or malnutrition. Now this is  simply an appalling regime and the international community, whatever role  people play in international life, need to understand the gravity of that



situation. But at the end of the day this is a matter for the ICC and ACB and  we are certainly not going to intervene and stop the Australian cricket team  from going so that if the Australian cricket team doesn’t play and all the other  teams do then the Australians will be penalised in the World Cup competition.  It is a matter for the ACB to judge and it is a matter for the ICC. But we are  very concerned about the decision.

Journalist: So you won’t follow the British Government’s lead overnight of putting  pressure on the English team to pull-out?

Downer: I think if there is going to be any pull-out, all teams should pull out, I mean if  the Australian team pulls out alone the impact of our pull out would be  obviously limited because there would be a whole lot of other teams, in fact  my guess is there would be ten other teams that would nevertheless go to  Zimbabwe, so the propaganda win would still be there for President Mugabe  but the Australians will default and lose points in the competition. I think a  more sensible approach would be for the ICC to have another look at this issue  and for the ICC to understand that there are a lot of governments, the British  Government and the Australian Government included, that are disappointed  with the decision that they’ve made. We acknowledge their right to make the  decision, we acknowledge that. But we are disappointed because we think that  President Mugabe will use this as propaganda win for his own regime, a  regime that has stolen an election and punished half the population through  policies which have led to food shortages.



Journalist: So you don’t see yourself putting pressure on the ICC or is it too late?

Downer: It is not too late no. Certainly the Australian game is at the end of February and  the other games are around that time and I hope that the ICC will keep the file  open and make sure that they look at this issue day by day. But the British and  Australian Governments have a strong view on this and I’d like to feel that the  ICC would take those views into account. There are other governments, there  are other cricket teams of course, but I want to emphasise this is a matter for  them and a matter for the ACB, it’s not a matter for the Government, we won’t  be making the decision for anybody here but it is a decision that we would  regard as regrettable.



Journalist: Does that mean that you will go again to put more pressure on them….?

Downer: Well, pressure…we are certainly letting them know what our views are on this  matter.

Journalist: On the Government’s anti-terrorism campaign, the Muslim community has  said to day that they feel targeted…can you reassure them that they are not?

Downer: Of course they are not being targeted by the ads; we’re not targeting any  ethnic, religious or racial group in Australia at all. We never would. We never  would and it would be very wrong for any Government to do that. I mean one  of the glories of Australia is the success of its cultural diversity. These aren’t  ads that are targeting any ethnic groups, these are ads that are making I think a  very intelligent remark and that is that people shouldn’t be alarmed, there  shouldn’t be a sense of panic in the community but people should be aware,



Inquiries:  (02) 6277 7500 5

watchful and just conscious that we do live in a new era now, a much more  dangerous era, and terrorist attacks are more likely now than they would have  been a couple of years ago and we just need to understand that. People should  be cautious and on the look out but we’re not targeting any ethnic community  within Australia and I think it is important that they understand that.

Journalist: Will there be penalties for false reports?

Downer: How could you ever administer a system like that? It is just beyond the  capacity of humanity to administer a system like that, I mean, what is a false  report? If somebody is concerned about a car which is left unattended in a busy  place for a couple of hours, it looks suspicious, they report it, and that’s what  they should do, and in those circumstances it is found that there is a perfectly  logical explanation of why the car is there, you wouldn’t put somebody in jail  for that.



Journalist: I think there is concern that some of the reports might be motivated by racism.

Downer: I don’t think so. I don’t think people should assume that the vast majority of  Australians are remotely racist. I don’t think Australians are racist people at  all. I think they are good-hearted and they are people of very goodwill and a  great sense of decency. At the end of the day you have to depend on the  common sense of the community, this is a country that has demonstrated for  the last hundred years and enormous amount of common sense and I think we  can safely depend on the common sense of the Australian people.



ENDS…………………………………………………………………29 DECEMBER 2002

