LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION

TRANSCRIPT OF DOORSTOP, WESTMEADOWS, MELBOURNE, 28 JULY 2002

E & OE - PROOF ONLY

Subjects: National Tree Day, Democrats, Telstra, New Zealand election, paid maternity leave

CREAN: We’re here today helping the volunteers who are helping replant Australia.  It’s not only helping them in their volunteer work, it’s helping them in that task.  The best way we can help the volunteers and save Australia is to stop land clearing and the Labor Party is committed to halting land clearing.  Working with State Governments to achieve that objective, setting standards, setting objectives and using the funding arrangements and the leverage of funding arrangements to achieve it.  It’s about time the Government got behind to end land clearing.  We can have these days to replant but we’ve got to save Australia, not spend it.  And the best way that can happen is a partnership between community and government whereby the community continues doing this good work and government plays its part by policies that halt land clearing.  We’re handing out a petition today, circulating a petition, calling for the end to land clearing and we’ll be tabling that when the Parliament resumes in a few weeks time.

JOURNALIST: …(inaudible) …

CREAN:  We’re seeing major loss.  If it goes unchecked we will be adding to the greenhouse problem.  It’s not only restoration of vegetation that’s protecting our environment, but the magnitude of this problem cannot be overstated.  We have to end it, we have to end land clearing but we have to get back to the position of revegetation.

JOURNALIST: Mr Crean, what are your thoughts about the events of the last week and whether the Democrats might be going?

CREAN: Well what it does is it changes the options for the Government in relation to the Senate.  But that will only happen if Meg Less and Andrew Murray decide to stay in the Senate as Independents.  Both of

2

them signed pledges that if they resigned from the Party they would resign from the Senate.  Both of them should honour that pledge.

JOURNALIST:  Now you’ve spoken to Natasha, what did they have to say to her?

CREAN: Well, I spoke to her on her return just to see how she was going in essence.  We keep in regular contact but that was the only purpose of the conversation.

JOURNALIST: Do you want to form an alliance maybe?

CREAN: No, we are clear in terms of where our alliance is.  We are a united Party.  Our alliance has got to be with the Australian electorate by putting forward policies.  We’ll work with all of the Parliament to achieve that objective and now that there appear to be more Independents emerging, clearly that task, whilst it opens up more options for John Howard, it does for us too.  I see a lot of speculation about Telstra but it was interesting to note that Meg Less, this morning, said that her vote will not see the sale of Telstra. It’s interesting that she is holding to her pledge on Telstra but to complete the circle she’s got to hold to her pledge about sitting in the Parliament.  She undertook that if she resigned from the Party she would resign from the Parliament.  If she really wants to present a clean slate that’s the next step that she and Senator Murray need to take.

JOURNALIST:  … (inaudible) …

CREAN: According to her own standards and her own principles. The Australian public deserves trust in the commitments that people standing for office make.  It’s interesting to note that in relation to Senator Lees 82 per cent of her vote was above the line.  In other words, for the Party.  If you only went on her personal vote at the last election she would have done her deposit.  So, this argument that she was elected by the electors of South Australia is only true because they voted for her Party.  And they voted for her Party then because she was leading them, because she said that if I resign from the Party I’ll resign from the Parliament.  Now she has to honour that pledge.  I think that people have seen too many broken promises from the Democrats in the past, they don’t want to see any more.  If they have confidence in the Party in the future those that have been associated with it recently have got to honour their commitments.

JOURNALIST: In the context of why we are here today, do you see the Democrats fading and the Greens rising as the major political third party?

CREAN:  I think the issue of revegetation, of greenhouse, of environmental issues, is of major concern to the Australian electorate.  People can represent them through single issues or they can represent them, as the Labor Party does, on a multidisciplinary basis.  Labor has the unique

3

opportunity to forge a partnership with State Governments to address this issue.  The Federal Government alone can’t solve the problem of salinity, can’t solve the problem of Greenhouse, that’s the work of other governments. Labor’s the only party prepared to work with State Governments and through the international forums to achieve those objectives.  We will ratify the Kyoto Protocol because it’s necessary for us to have a seat at the table.  It’s no point in committing to the targets if you’re not going to get benefits as a result, if you’re not going to try to draw more people in.  And so we will sign, we will ratify Kyoto, we will commit to a strategy for addressing salinity, which is a huge problem for this nation and we will, with that, address the issue of the halt for land clearing.

JOURNALIST: Are the problem for the Democrats at the moment good news for the Greens.

CREAN: Not necessarily.  I think that the Greens need to represent on a range of issues and they need to show a preparedness to work with others to achieve the objectives.  I think that’s a challenge always.  I don’t think the current circumstances with the Democrats change that dynamic one bit.

JOURNALIST: If Murray goes this afternoon, and we can safely assume that he will, what impact do you see that that will have?

CREAN: Well, clearly, it’s more options to the Government in its legislative program but it also gives Labor more options.  I think that the issue with Senator Murray and Senator Lees is one of trust. They made a pact, a commitment to the Australian electorate, that if they resign from the Party that elected them, they would resign from the Parliament.  Now, in Senator Murray’s case, he’s only been in 28 days into a six-year term.  I mean, what sort of abuse of trust is that in relation to the Australian electorate?  He promised that, if elected, he would serve as a Democrat. If he wasn’t going to serve as a Democrat he would resign from the Parliament. That’s the only honourable step that he can take.

JOURNALIST: Is this a welcome break to the pressure that the Labor Party was under in the last couple of weeks? You must be loving this weekend?

CREAN: Well, I’m loving this weekend because we’re doing good work, I’m loving this weekend this weekend because I want to get to see the Kangaroos this afternoon.  They’re in good form so hopefully it will be a good day for us against the Bulldogs.  But we will persist with the tasks at hand and so far as the issues surrounding the Democrats are concerned, we will see how that will unfold, but I think there are always interesting challenges.

JOURNALIST: … (inaudible) …

4

CREAN: The New Zealand election and I congratulate Helen Clark on her victory.  But the great lesson of the New Zealand election was that she came home on issues of health, education, work and family, and crime.  All Labor Partis are campaigning on those issues and I think that’s what matters to the Australian people and we’ll put forward constructive policies in that regard.  It’s also very interesting that until this election there were only three countries in the world that didn’t have paid maternity leave, three democracies, the United States, Australia, and New Zealand. Now there’s only two.  It’s about time John Howard got onboard and supported paid maternity leave instead of just saying he will look at things  Why can’t he make up his mind?  Why can’t he accept that it’s a good thing to do, to give people choice between work and family and assist them to make that choice and get the balance right.  It’s about time he made up his mind.

JOURNALIST: What would you say about a mothering allowance.  It wouldn’t be discriminatory, it would go to all women with children under the age of five.  Would you support that?

CREAN: Well again, I would like to see the details that they’re proposing.  Of course, we’re looking at a whole range of options but it’s the question of affordability, it’s the question of whether the existing programs are working.  I think, quite frankly, if he’s looking at it, it’s an admission that his baby bonus, which has really turned out to be a baby bogus,  is not working.  And I think it’s an admission that the program that he went to the last election on was ill conceived and he’s got to change it.  But the point I make, Charles, is that they’ve been in office for six years now.  You would have thought they would do more than just look at things.  It’s about time it made up its mind.  Labor’s made up its mind.  We will support paid maternity leave.  It’s prepared to look at a wider range of issues associated with how you make it easier to get the balance between work and family life.  We’ll look at a suite of measures.  But the key commitment is paid maternity leave. New Zealand went to the polls on it and got returned.  It’s about time Australia got the same entitlement.

JOURNALIST: Back to the Democrats, briefly.  You mentioned that it would be of assistance to the Labor Party as well, their internal woes. How specifically will that help?

CREAN: I think it goes to their question of trust.  At the next election if people can’t believe what Democrat candidates go to the election saying to the people they will honour, why should they vote for them?  I mean, democracies give people a choice every election, they give them a score card, they give them the opportunity to determine whether they think people who stood last time have delivered.  The Democrats we know broke the promise on the GST and as a consequence of that, these problems began for them.  They can’t continue to break promises otherwise they will lose the trust of the Australian electorate.  The extent to which they lose the trust, there could be advantage for the Labor Party, that’s the point I’m making.

5

JOURNALIST: Did you guys lose the trust in the last election or should you be reflecting on yourself rather than giving advice to others?

CREAN: We didn’t get enough seats to get us over the line in the last election.  And the reason for that was because the focus of the election was not around the issues of health, education, work and family, crime, the issues that I say determined the New Zealand election. But it was a campaign that John Howard ran of fear over hope.  It was associated with the Tampa and the question of asylum seekers.  I think that we’ve got to get the focus back on the real issues and if we get the focus back on the real issues I think we can gain the trust of the Australian electorate next time round.  There’s no point complaining what happened at the last election, we’ve got to look to the next one.  But we need to gain the trust of the Australian people and we’ll do it around the policies that I’ve outlined.  But we won’t break promises.  On the question of Telstra, the Labor Party said last time that it would not sell any more of Telstra.  The Labor Party is the only party that can be believed to deliver on that promise.

ENDS

