Senator Andrew Bartlett  Australian Democrats Immigration Spokesperson

7 May 2002                          MEDIA RELEASE                                      02/216

http://www.democrats.org.au/

Minister covers up truth

The Australian Democrats today called on the Minister for Immigration to come clean about his humanitarian program intake for 2002-03.

Democrats’ Immigration spokesperson, Senator Andrew Bartlett, denounced the announcement by the Minister for Immigration, Philip Ruddock, that the Government will give priority to those in greatest need of resettlement, as blatant propaganda.

“Minister Ruddock is shameless in the manner he misleads the public, seamlessly blending the line between truth and fantasy,” Senator Bartlett said.

“It is time the Government came clean about the impact temporary protection visas will have on resettlement of refugees. For too long Minister Ruddock has perpetuated a myth about assisting those most in need.

“One of the most important facts to note in this new program is the reduction in refugees we are resettling.  The introduction of temporary protection visas for offshore refugee claimants has ensured that Australia is no longer resettling those most in need.

“The 4000 places set aside for offshore refugees will result in almost 4000 people on temporary visas in Australia, with little prospect of permanent resettlement.”

Senator Bartlett said the Minister claims that Australia’s ability to provide protection to refugees has been threatened by unauthorised boat arrivals, ignoring the reality that the majority of these people have been found to be genuine refugees.

“The Humanitarian program which will take 6000 people is made up of people in refugee like situations who are healthy, young, have links with Australia, and can afford to pay for their flight. Whilst they are deserving of resettlement, they should not be pitted against those who have attempted to arrive by boat or who are forced to flee to second and third countries in pursuit of safety.

“The Refugee Convention defines a person as a refugee whether they have travelled to a country without immigration clearance or whether they are handpicked by Australian officials in a refugee camp.

“This program creates two queues for genuine refugees, the ones we want to stay in Australia and those we decide are not worthy despite their status or need,” Senator Bartlett concluded.

For interview: Senator Andrew Bartlett on 0418 743 789 or (07) 32527101

