LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION

TRANSCRIPT OF JOINT PRESS CONFERENCE WITH THE HON BOB HAWKE, AC, THE HON NEVILLE WRAN, JENNY MACKLIN MP, & GREG SWORD, NATIONAL PRESIDENT OF THE ALP, PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA, 9 AUGUST 2002

E & OE - PROOF ONLY

Subjects: Hawke/Wran Review of ALP

CREAN: When I announced the review that Bob and Neville have undertaken, I said that I wanted to modernise the Labor Party. I wanted to make it more inclusive by reaching out to more people in the community. I wanted to give the Party members a greater say through new democratic rights and a better ownership of the Party. I wanted to offer the Australian people the best candidates by rewarding those candidates not the branch stackers. And I wanted us to restate our relationship with the trade union movement based on issues of policy and inclusion not just proportion of conference.

Today’s report provides a blueprint as to how those reforms can be achieved. They are the most significant reforms to the Party since Whitlam and they’ve come through widespread consultation with the rank and file membership. Over 2000 participants, 700 submissions, consultations through the whole of the country, regional as well as city. The truth of it is party reform is hard and many of you would be aware as to how hard is it because you write about it constantly. But as hard as it is it has to be done and I’m determined to achieve it. And why? Because this isn’t just about reforming the Party it’s about reforming politics in this country. The same principles that I’m applying to party reform, I will apply to government. Because I think that people have lost their trust in politicians. I want to restore it and I want the Labor Party to lead by example. My commitment to the Australian people is this; to be open to them, to be honest with them and to treat them as equals.

We can’t talk about equality unless we practice it ourselves. Governments don’t have all of the answers but they can make a difference, but they’ll only make the real difference if they’re genuinely inclusive. People are sick of the bickering and the point scoring because they just want results and they expect their politicians to deliver those results. It’s interesting because the

2

liquid natural gas announcement is a great example of where both sides of politics working with industry together can achieve great benefits for the nation and I want to encourage more of that. A new style of politics built on partnership and inclusions and involvement with the people.

This detailed report shows how we can do it within the Labor Party and I’m determined to have implemented at the Special Rules Conferences the rules necessary to implement the recommendations that have been made by Bob and Neville. I pay my gratitude to them. I’ve already had the opportunity to do this at the executive but publicly they’ve done a fantastic job for us. They’re two of our most successful leaders. Both of them have understood the importance of inclusion and the need to move with the times. Not to forget our roots but to build upon them. And it’s those messages contained in this report that really reflect not just their recommendations as to where we should go but recommendations based on very wide consultation. So it’s not just my appreciation to them that I want to extend but to all of those Party members who have participated in this process. This is a great report. It’s well written, it’s distilled the issues. It doesn’t beat around the bush, it restates the strength of our relationship with the trade union movement but it talks about greater empowerment of the party membership as well. It talks about establishing the relationship with the trade union movement at different levels not just the notion of representation at Conference. It talks about the need for greater inclusion, greater involvement. It gives us recommendations to weed out the branch stackers and that I think is fundamental in restoring an integrity of trust with the Australian people that we can manage our own affairs with honesty, that we can give ownership to our own people, that we can genuinely include. If we can show that as a Party we’re prepared to embrace those values, I believe that the Australian people will support us in greater numbers. But of course that’s the end result of all of this.

A modern Australian Labor Party for a modern Australia. An inclusive Australian Labor Party for a more inclusive Australia. A greater ownership to the people who we argue decisions have been made in respect of, and this report gives us the opportunity for it and I urge those in the Party, particularly to read this report to see what their contribution has delivered and importantly get behind the push for the recommendations to national Conference that will give effect to it.

Bob and Neville have done us proud, they’ve reflected the Party memberships aspirations, our task is now to implement them. And it’s upon those recommendations it’s around those recommendations that I will be taking the argument to the National Conference.

JOURNALIST: Mr Crean, what sort of target would you personally like to have to increase the number of women into the Labor Party?

CREAN: I want to get more women into our Party and into parliament through our Party, that’s my commitment. I think it’s very

3

interesting that if you look at when the rule was written for the 35% target back in 1994, what’s happened since then, the number of Labor women in Federal and State Parliaments has doubled, it’s doubled. Over the same period the number of Coalition women has gone from 82 to 65, it’s reduced. We have met the 35% target and I believe that the 35% rule was an important step in changing the culture in terms of the Party in approaching and supporting more women candidates. It’s important to understand this. I also believe that there are other ways to get increased involvement of women and it’s those discussions that I want to have with my colleagues between now and the Rules Conference as to how to achieve it. I don’t believe that the quota itself, or the nomination of a figure, guarantees you a result. But have a look elsewhere in the report, where the leader of the Party, me, is given a greater say through consultations in urging the type of candidates we need to represent us. There are other ways to achieve increased female representation in the parliament and I think that we’ve got to turn our minds to putting those forward.

JOURNALIST: Moving away from those specific targets?

CREAN: No, when the target was set last time it was seen very much as the maximum that could be achieved. What this report says is, it’s now the minimum and we want more. We’re going to build upon it. We’re going to encourage and achieve more women in the national Parliament. The mechanism by which we do it will still be talked through but my commitment is to get more women into the Parliament.

JOURNALIST: Mr Crean, that mechanism that you just referred to about consultation about candidates, does that give you, as the Leader of the Party, … campaign director the authority or the power to override decisions that are made by State branches or by local branches about the preselection of candidates?

CREAN: It gives us a direct consultation in it and I think that for those who understand the way in which the Party does operate in the modern environment that consultation, that role of consultation is terribly important. I don’t want to stand here and claim veto rights or imposition rights. That’s not the way I would run the Party. It runs counter to the notion of inclusiveness. I will have my views. What I want is the ability to forcefully argue them. And I believe that if I’m given the opportunity as these rules do, I think that I will exercise it.

JOURNALIST: From your earlier comments are you saying that you accept all of the recommendations and if that is the case do you agree that factionalism is a major problem fro the Party?

CREAN: I believe that the issue for the Party is how to give greater ownership to the rank and file. I believe that the issue for the Party is how we can reach out to a broader base and lift our primary vote. I believe

4

that an important part of consolidating our vote is restating the direction and the issues and the policies that we together with the trade union movement jointly pursue in the interests of working people. I believe that the Party has to reach out to other groups in the community and represent more effectively on the ground the agendas, the aspirations of communities and that’s why I want people standing for us who don’t just hold a Labor flag but they’re champions for their community as well. I believe that that development of commitment through partnership around issues and candidates prepared to support those issue is the important way forward for us.

JOURNALIST: … that factions still have a central role though, in the organisation of the Labor Party?

CREAN: The factions are going to continue to play a role in any political party. Let’s not kid ourselves about this. The report acknowledges this point that you are, within a political party, always going to have groupings of people around what they see as their common interests. So that’s not unique to the Labor Party now, it’s been there through its history and it exists in every political party in the country. What I’m saying though is that the factions have to work towards a more inclusive party, they have to embrace these principles too. They’ve go to understand that the direction, the thrust underlying these recommendations, they need to operate under as well.

JOURNALIST: Do you support everything in this?

CREAN: I will be, well that’s an interesting question. I support the thrust of all of the recommendations and want to see drafted, rules that reflect those recommendations.  Now of course if you look at the recommendations, and no doubt you’ve had time, in relation to …take the composition of the Conference. This does not prescribe a model and that’s because those issues still need to be talked through. But the thrust of what’s involved in this report, we need to get behind and draft rules accordingly.

JOURNALIST: … Mr Crean, at the National Conference would you like to see it doubled?

CREAN: I want to see it at least doubled. The question of the size is going to be a function of those discussions that talk about the most appropriate model to construct a National Conference. But can I also say this, it’s terribly important to understand, it’s not just the National Conference that I want increased in size, and it has to be increased significantly, I want the State Conferences increased, because I want the ability for rank and file members, I want to make it easier for them to participate in Labor Party forums. And there’s also another important recommendation here, which I do strongly support and that is the policy development process. We’re talking about one national policy committee but it will be charged with the task of organising policy forums around the country to which every member of the

5

Party will be invited. This is a genuine opening up of the policy development, not just the conference structure that we’re talking about in these reforms.

JOURNALIST: ... Mr Crean, will that have any impact on the way that the Federal Parliamentary Labor Party implement policy and will it act as some sort of extra Parliamentary brake on the Parliamentary Party in terms of implementing policy?

CREAN: I see it working in tandem with it. I see this has got to be a, if we’re genuine about saying that we want to open up the Party, people have got to take regard of what the Party members are saying. Now of course there will be differences of opinion and they will be argued through, but I would see the structure as being one in which the Party participation is genuinely opened up and is genuinely taken account of.

JOURNALIST: Given that you’re talking about new candidates, new and exciting candidates, presumable a lot of them won’t have been in the Labor Party a long time. How important is loyalty now, in the Labor Party? What about the people who’ve served their time, how important is that?

CREAN: Loyalty’s not just important to the Labor Party. It’s important to society. It’s important to your country. I don’t think there is a higher quality then loyalty. But I don’t think loyalty is determined by the length of time you’ve been in the Party. I mean take for example people who are in professions or in jobs where it may not be appropriate for them to be a member of the political Party. They can subscribe to the same values as that political party and in the end that ought to be the test. Now we always have had benchmarks, I suppose, by which those things can be judged but if there are circumstances that require it to be considered differently then there should be mechanisms that enable that to happen.

JOURNALIST: But there’ll be people who’ve given their lives to the Labor Party who say that’s not fair.

CREAN: I thank that what people, people who have given their lives to the Labor Party, I’ll tell you what they’ll say is fair - when a Labor Government is elected and what these reforms are about is getting a Labor Party elected. When people say, what’s in these reforms for me? I say a Labor Government.

HAWKE: Simon, can I just add on behalf of Neville and myself, as you will have gathered we had the opportunity to listening to a lot of Labor Party members and we didn’t get that impression. Their view is that they want the Labor Party to become as effective as it can be both in terms of attractiveness for its membership but also attractive to the community to facilitate the election of as Labor Government. And they are not unhappy with the idea of attracting into the Party, as candidates, people who will have a special quality in that respect.  And I just like to make the point, you shouldn’t

6

just talk about stars ... football… you know a sporting star or some other star. When an attractive quality, a vote getting quality in an electorate can rise from a person who’s not some national known figure but who has been a very effective worker within that community, who’s been a contributor to the community and is respected and our party members didn’t express to us a view that they were unhappy about attracting those sort of people as candidates.

JOURNALIST:  (Inaudible) back to the Accord sort of approach to the Labor Party?

WRAN: I think it’s an opening up of the Labor Party and while the issues that Mr Crean has mentioned and with … to us as the evil of branch stacking for instance. The wider membership and the more involved the membership in policy making in the administration of the Party, through the National Conference, … having access to the Policy committees and in terms of their actual numbers, and the less likelihood there is for any group or groups to form cast iron factions which dominate the activities of the Party. So I would not talk of it terms of consensus but rather in an opening up of the scope for the members of the Party to actually participate in the affairs of the Party.

JOURNALIST: Is there a risk of opening it up too far and then encounter problems similar to what the Democrats are experiencing at the moment?

WRAN: I think you’re going to have to wait a long time before we get to that.

JOURNALIST: Can I ask Mr Hawke and Mr Wran what you would see as the consequences of the Party if it doesn’t act on your report and …

HAWKE: Nothings changed. The old Hypo’s come up, don’t they? Hypothetical, and it’s an irrelevant hypothetical because they will act very substantially on what we’ve done. I’m confident they are such brilliantly thought through and articulated proposals and they came from all such an intelligent group of people so brilliantly lead by Mr Crean that I have total confidence that they will be very substantially implemented. Therefore I do not address that irrelevant hypothetical…

JOURNALIST: Mr Hawke, would a man like Ben Chifley get into the Labor Parliament as a Labor Party Representative today and would your recommendations mean that someone like that would be more likely to get in in future?

HAWKE: Well look, what you’ve got to do if you’re going to really intelligently think through the implication of that question is to remember, I don’t mean that rudely by the way, I don’t genuinely, but you’ve got to think

7

through, in Chifley’s time, the opportunity for people to go on to, even finish their secondary education, go to university was extraordinarily limited. I mean let me just give you my quick recollection. When I went to the ACTU in 1958 for a meeting in Canberra, I was doing a PhD here in Canberra at the ANU, I went down there and there I met this range, and this is not sexist, I mean because there was no women union trade union officials then, this range of extraordinary men, great talent, who would have been professors, doctors, engineers, but they’d never had the opportunity and so there they were in the Labor movement that way.  Now it’s a different law now, I mean you’re getting a greater range of opportunity.  Ben Chifley of the 1930’s, if he was coming through now he wouldn’t be an engine driver.  Do you see the point I’m making?  See we’re not excluding engine drivers but just talking about a different world, different opportunities and our Party will welcome the young man or woman who goes through secondary school, goes to TAFE, gets a technical qualification, becomes a trades person.  Those people have got just as much a contribution to make in my judgement, as your professor or your doctor.  It’s simply that we want to say in our recommendations that we want to attract the best possible candidates.  He may be a professor, he may be a doctor, he may be an engine driver, he may be an electrician, but let’s attract the best.

JOURNALIST: Mr Hawke, you were responsible for in many ways for formalising the factional system within the Party when you were Prime Minister.  I was just wondered whether you feel that that process started something that went too far …

HAWKE: We actually say that.  I think you’ll find in the report we say that somewhere.  I think you’ll find that initially formed a rather useful mechanism and was also tended to be around issues but that has faded.  It’s now become much more a question for small fiefdoms concerned with power.

JOURNALIST: Did you ever foresee that when you were Prime Minister?

HAWKE: When I was Prime Minister I was quite happy about the faction system.  You knew there was a whole lot of ideas out there and I didn’t have to go and talk to 80, 90 people.  I’d say I know there’s a person there who would represent and say that’s what they think.  I said well come on now this is what I think, this is what I think ought to go and it was done. It was a very effective mechanism, a quite democratic one.   People had their view, they expressed it in the faction, they came to me and we sorted it out. But what we’re saying now is it’s changed from that.  It’s more now about, as I say, factions have broken down into smaller parts, into fiefdoms and it’s more about power and that’s what the Wran and Hawke recommendations are about trying to make sure that it’s the interests of the Party that’s put first not the pursuit of the powers of particular little groups which happens too often.

8

JOURNALIST: Mr Crean, when do you think this will start to translate to better support for Labor in the polls?

CREAN: Well look, I see this as a fundamental building block not just in terms of Party reform but for the message that I talked about before.  I think that the development of policy and the differentiation between us and the Government whenever we’ve been able to get that sort of a message up we’ve done well in the polls quite frankly.  Look at them just after the Budget at the end of that period for example, look at them in circumstances in where we’ve been out arguing things like paid maternity leave, protection of workers entitlements, protecting kids and giving security to parents in terms of the child sex abuse issues, a whole range issues that we’ve had out there.  So I’ve set a timetable, I’ve set a task in terms of Bob and Neville to come forward with the recommendations.  I knew that this was going to take and involve some pain, I said at the outset that Party reform is hard, for the oldest political party in the world it’s even harder; the oldest political party in Australia it’s even harder, close enough to in the world.  But because there are entrenched interests and everyone is going to look at it from their perspective, my challenge to them is look at it from the broad membership perspective, look at it in terms of a greater empowerment, a greater ownership, a greater inclusion.

Now, I believe quite frankly that looking at it from that perspective as we go through Party reform is going to be fundamental to the way in which we approach policy development down the track.  Jenny’s been coordinating the policy review but you look at the forums that we’ve been conducting around the country in relation to broad issues, specific issues, we’ve been doing it in relation to asylum seekers for example.  This is the approach I want us to adopt, not just for ourselves, but for the country and therefore I think that what we’re going through now will pay big dividends.

JOURNALIST: Mr Crean, what’s your message to the ruling Party machine in Sussex Street who appear to have picked up their bat and ball and gone home especially over the issue of the 60:40 rule?

CREAN: Well, that’s your interpretation, Brad, and you’re entitled to it.  If you’re …

JOURNALIST: … (inaudible) …

CREAN: I’m sorry.  It’s your interpretation, you’re entitled to it. It’s not my interpretation.  And I’ll continue to consult with all units of the Party.  I’ve had a number of discussions, as you know, and continue to do it. But I think the important thing is for them to read the detail of the report, not reports of the report.  And I think you said you had a copy of it at one stage - not in the early edition you said that - you had the package.  Well, as you can see now, you didn’t have the full package and I think that when people read the report and see the context in which it’s put, the commitment to the

9

relationship with the trade union movement.  But, as part of that, a Party big enough to strengthen its relationship with the trade union movement, if you like, by the consultative processes around issues - because that’s what matters to trade union members, it’s the issues that we represent but at the same time, open up and be more inclusive to others.  I don’t think they’ll be as fearful as they might have been if their interpretation of what the report contains.  But we’ll wait and see.

JOURNALIST: Mr Crean, has this process damaged your relationship with sections of the Party, including some of the biggest unions in the country?

CREAN: Well, you know, I think that I’ve been around in politics long enough to know that today’s friend can be tomorrow’s enemy and the next day’s friend again.  Things and relationships can change pretty quickly and I think the great thing about the Labor Party is that, with a few exceptions, grudges aren’t held for any inordinate length of time (laughter) with a few exceptions!  I’m not one of them, I might say, that holds grudges. And I think that people I’m dealing with now, I’ve had to deal with previously in another role as leader of the industrial wing of the movement and now the political wing.  And I think that there’s a lot of understanding in terms of integrity of the relationships that will matter in the end.

JOURNALIST: …(inaudible) …

CREAN: Two months.

JOURNALIST: Are you confident, Mr Crean, that you’ll have the numbers on the Conference floor in early October?

CREAN: I am determined to get this reform package through and I will succeed.

JOURNALIST: Will you succeed on 50:50?  Are you confident of that?

CREAN: Yes.

JOURNALIST: Mr Wran, earlier in this process, at a State Conference in NSW, you said that you couldn’t understand why people were even talking about the 60:40 rule … recommendation is to, as far as the 60:40 is …  What were you saying at that time and what has changed?

CREAN: Whatever I was saying, either wasn’t understood correctly, or alternatively, I didn’t say it very clearly.  What I was really saying was, I didn’t know what the argument was about between some of the unions and the Labor Party as to whether it should be 60:40 or 50:50 because it didn’t matter.  The unions were an integral part of the labour movement and well, if the 60:40 or 50:50 they’d remain an integral part of the labour

10

movement and we shouldn’t be tearing each other apart with an issue which the general public doesn’t understand - whether we’re talking about six to four against the field or even money the lot.  That’s what I was endeavouring to say at that Conference and I’m glad you’ve given me the opportunity to elucidate my true meaning.

JOURNALIST: Mr Crean, will these reforms bring an end to branch stacking within the Labor Party?

CREAN: There are significant recommendations in this report that will end the benefit to branch stackers.  I think the most important reform that will stop the branch stacking is the requirement for people to not be able to vote in a preselection for the Party unless they can vote for that person in an election.  So, the electoral roll will form the basis of an entitlement to vote in a preselection.  The recommendation is there to stop the en mass enrolments, the requirement for authentication in terms of signing the membership application, and the ability for the complaint of branch stacking to be referred, referred for consideration and overturning of the decision.  I think that these are terribly important reforms and you know, it’s only the Labor Party prepared to embrace them.  There are stories daily in the paper about the problems of the Liberal Party with branch stacking difficulties - in Queensland, in Tasmania, in Western Australia, just to name the recent ones. I said before that people have lost their trust in politicians and I think we’ve got to rebuild it.  One way to start rebuilding it is to build integrity back into our own processes and these recommendations lay the ground work for that. The challenge to the Liberal Party is to do likewise.

JOURNALIST: Can I ask, on the recommendation about reviewing or monitoring the performance of sitting MPs … seats, what would happen if their performance wasn’t adequate, would they have to … out if they weren’t performing?

CREAN: Well, you see, I think, Mike, this is the interesting question.  You look at a party selection at the moment and the sitting members there - and people don’t think the sitting member’s necessarily up to scratch - but no-one’s prepared to bell the cat.  Because they have the sort of - what Karen was talking about a bit earlier - the sort of loyalty, the belief that they’ve done a good job and they shouldn’t be humiliated and pushed out.  And I think that’s a problem.  Now, you can’t have a rule that says you can only serve two terms, for example, unless you’ve got on to the frontbench.  Because, as Bob has indicated, we are looking for candidates who may be the best representative for a seat but never aspire to a ministry because they want to serve their constituency and serve it well.  There are many examples of those sorts of people.  And, so, as always with these things, there’s no easy rule that can mandate for a one-size-fits-all circumstance.  The purpose of the review is to make people less worried about belling the cat.  That’s what it comes down to.  If a person’s performance is being put under scrutiny and that’s widely considered through

11

the branch structure, the federal electorate structure, or the like, people can start to make decisions as to whether they’ll contest that preselection.

JOURNALIST: Mr Crean, at the same time as you’re endorsing this report which seeks to open the Party to more grassroots rank and file members, the NSW Branch is giving big business privileged access to Mr Carr and other State Premiers for a fee of up to $100,000 under this new business dialogue.  Do you think that’s appropriate, given what you’re trying to do to the Party organisation of the structure?  Do you think that’s appropriate?

CREAN: I think what’s appropriate is that people who are elected representatives should be available to people that they claim to represent without fee.  That’s what I think is appropriate.  Now, it’s very interesting that you talk about that.  I mean, it just so happens that the Cabinet, the Federal Cabinet, is meeting in Cairns next week and people are being invited to dinner at $2000 a plate.  Well, I tell you what, I’ll be in Darwin the same day at a community forum where I won’t be charging a thing because I happen to believe that elected representatives should be available to their people.  I don’t see any connection between payment of money and access - none at all.  There shouldn’t be in our political system.

JOURNALIST: So, you don’t support the NSW Branch?

CREAN: That’s a different question.  The NSW Branch, any branch, is entitled to raise money provided it’s disclosed.  And these rules, these recommendations, actually call for stricter disclosure.  It’s only the Liberal Party that still gets away, through the McCormack Foundation and Greenfields, with non-disclosure.  And I think, in the end, people understand that political parties need to raise money to run campaigns.  What they want though is to know where that money’s come from.  That’s the key and it’s disclosure that’s the key issue.

JOURNALIST: Mr Crean, … preface the report has fairly strong things to ay about asylum seekers in that issue.  What’s your response to the recommendations there …

CREAN: Well, as you know, we’re going through a major review and I’ve already indicated a number of changes that we would make in relation to the treatment of asylum seekers.  I’ve noted the comments, the ones in particular in relation to Christmas Island, for example, and I think it is worthy of consideration but it, like others, because we are an equal Party, will be taken into proper account by us when we come up with our final decision.

JOURNALIST: I should ask Mr Hawke about it - why that was put in there and what …

HAWKE: Because, and I think we actually say this, the policy issue that came up more than anything else as we travelled around Australia, was

12

this one.  We thought it was unfair to the Party membership if we’d be going around listening to them and what they’re expressing their concerns, if we didn’t reflect what had been a major issue they’d raised.  And so, while we both absolutely respect that Jenny has the responsibility for the review of policy, we thought it appropriate to raise that issue and make our observations upon it but not with any attempt - because we can’t pre-empt policy - there is a friendly helping hand.  That’s the sort of guys we are.

JOURNALIST: You say in the report that the links with the union movement weren’t a factor in Labor’s defeat.  What, through your consultations, do you think were the major reasons for Labor’s defeat at the last election?

HAWKE: Well, you’ve heard my views.  Do you mind if I go first.

WRAN: I don’t mind.

HAWKE: You go first.  I went first last time.

WRAN: There is no doubt in the world Tampa was the cause of Labor’s defeat, the cause of Labor’s defeat, firstly, because of the … altogether dishonourable way, the factual situation was handled by the Government.  And secondly, because Labor stumbled in making an adequate policy response to the issues that Tampa gave rise to.

HAWKE:  I would say Tampa and September 11th.  In political terms, you’d have to … if there’s a God, he’s a bloody Tory.  Really, you couldn’t, from the point of view of concern, … was running a campaign, you have a situation where you create Tampa, it was an absolute creation, a deliberate perversion of politics by the Howard Government raising all the questions of security and then out of the clear blue sky you had September 11th and Labor had no hope.  I mean, the facts are very simple.  The public polling, Labor’s polling, and the conservative’s polling, not just at the beginning of the year you had us winning by a landslide but up until pre-Tampa we were winning.  Tampa, like that.  And whatever you say about the election campaign, the fact is that our vote came up marginally during the campaign but we were absolutely knocked out by Tampa and September 11th.

JOURNALIST: Mr Crean, can I just ask you, in terms of recommendation 12 on the Party that’s encouraged to be members of the union, there is an argument that if you’re trying to modernise the ALP, well just get rid of the broad intervention which has been in place that you have to be a member of the union, or relevant union, I think, … join the ALP.  What’s your view on that.  Would that rule just be scrapped altogether or …

CREAN: Look, I don’t know anyone that’s been forced to join a union or be denied membership of the Labor Party.  And, I mean, what are you saying?  That they shouldn’t be encouraged to join a union?  I mean, …

13

but that’s all the rule says.  Now, so far as the issue is concerned about employers being required to sign up members into the union, that’s against the law and we don’t support that.

JOURNALIST: Can I just make a point on that union membership issue. As Neville and I go to this in the opening, there cannot be emphasised enough that in respect of every Australian, virtually, the wages and conditions of employment that they enjoy are there as a result of the hard work, commitment, and financial outlays of the trade union movement, everyone, every employee in this country is indebted to the historical efforts of the trade union movement to raise wages and conditions of employment and therefore there is nothing dishonourable in a Labor Party suggesting to those who want to join it that they should be members of a trade union.

JOURNALIST: On that point, Mr Crean, do you think these recommendations will increase or diminish the influence of the union movement on the Labor Party.

CREAN: I think that the relationship and the involvement of the trade union movement, I hope, is strengthened in the policy input area.  And that’s where I want it strengthened - in areas that are of common benefit to each other.  But you see, Paul, I believe, and this is where I think the debate is a phoney one. In the way in which Neville has talked about it, what really matters in terms of the relationship is what we go forward together, not what proportions exist at Conference.  And my argument as to why 50:50 has got to be there goes to the equality argument - if we want people in they come in on an equal partnership, not a minority partnership.  That’s the argument for 50:50.  It’s not intended to diminish the role and contribution of the trade union movement to the Labor Party.  I can’t imagine a Labor Party that hasn’t got a relationship with the trade union movement.  But I want it to be a strong meaningful one in the way it was in the 80s.  That’s what we’ve got to get back to, a redefine because things have moved on since the 80s and that’s why Louise’s question … I don’t think we need another accord because the accord was appropriate for the 80s but there whole workforce has changed since the 80s.  We’ve got to move with it.  But we still need to have a relationship that together represents the interests of working people and we will.

JOURNALIST: … what role Mr Wran and Mr Hawke will play in bringing these recommendations to …

CREAN: They said if I commit them to anything more they will strangle me.  So, no, they’ve had all the responsibility and all the care.  The trouble is that they - and this is understandable - they don’t have the same understanding of detail of the Party rules that some others do - those that sit around the National Executive and of course giving effect to these rule changes requires a technical dimension.  So, Bob and Neville have completed their task and they’ve done a magnificent job.  My task is to get

14

recommendations up that give effect to what they’ve put to us.  And in the process of that, there will be discussions, as you would expect, but those discussions will be tested at the National Special Rules Conference in October.

JOURNALIST: Mr Hawke, if Tampa and September 11 were responsible for Labor’s election loss -

HAWKE: Do you question that?

JOURNALIST: … (inaudible) …

HAWKE: As they were.

JOURNALIST: is it necessary then to reform … was this reform necessary? … another election …

HAWKE: No, no, no.  The fact is that we lost the election and that is the third election is a row now - ’96, ’98, and 2001.  Why we lost is interesting but that has put this Government back into power with the opportunity of consolidating itself if it can.   Now, the Labor Party that has lost three times in a row has got to address the issue of how does it optimise its chances of winning.  But may I say that even if Labor had won, it wouldn’t have been a bad idea to have an inquiry anyway because it didn’t mean just because we won, therefore we’re satisfied with the nature of the Party.  Why shouldn’t we try and do better?  It was more important because we lost but I wouldn’t have been regarding it as irrelevant to have an inquiry to modernise the Party structure even if we’d won.

CREAN: It’s very interesting that the Liberals, who did win, themselves are conducting their own inquiry but it’s not public.  It’s been commissioned through the Menzies Research Foundation as to why they’re losing membership and why they can’t attract good candidates.  So, the point is, all political parties have got to move with the times whether they win or lose.  And I’m determined that we move with the times, so far as the Party’s concerned, because that’s a very important signal to the rest of the community as to where we stand as a political party for them.  John Howard’s the one that is not prepared to take any initiatives except commission a secret report and ignore all of the problems of branch stacking that are confronting his Party in just about every State in the country and is the reason why they can’t win a government in any of those States or Territories.

JOURNALIST: Mr Crean, who’s now responsible for producing the draft rules to be considered in October?

CREAN: Well, our rules require that the National Executive put forward recommendations to the Conference and a sub committee’s been established that has got the task of doing that to put to the National Executive to, in turn, put to the Conference.

15

JOURNALIST: Who’s on that sub committee?

CREAN: We can get you the detail of that.  I haven’t got them with me.

JOURNALIST: Mr Crean, are you at all concerned that this idea of at least doubling the size of national conferences - it’s a fair old size already, I would have thought - wouldn’t it turn it into something quite unwieldy that would actually end up having to be controlled by factions anyway?

CREAN: No, I do not see anything wrong with creating an environment in which as many people who want to can participate it in.  And, I mean, we’re talking about delegates who will make the final decisions, but I’d like to see these conferences actually open to Party members to come along, treat it as an education program, understand the policies better, understand the direction in which the Party’s going.  I want to open the Party up.  I’m not frightened of big conferences.  Bob and I have been part of big conferences that elected us presidents of it on previous occasions.  The numbers, the size of them never worried us.  And I think it they’re genuine about opening up and involving and giving ownership, you’ve got to make it accessible.  And that’s why my argument is don’t just open up the National Conference, open up the State Conferences, open up the policy forums. That’s why this is such a massive change because this is really giving opportunity to every Party member to participate in the policy development. And that’s what I want.

ends

