Philip Ruddock MP  MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AND INDIGENOUS  AFFAIRS

Launch of Managing Migration Kit

Parliament House, 12 November 2002

Mr Ruddock launched the Managing Migration Kit at a function at Parliament House. He was introduced by Senator Scullion.

Senator Scullion: Good afternoon and welcome ladies and gentlemen. I'm Senator Scullion. I'm Senator for the Northern  Territory. My role here today is to actually introduce the Minister for Immigration Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs,  Philip Ruddock.

Before I do I just thought I'd like to touch on some points that he'll no doubt talk to you in his launch of the Migration  Speakers' Kit.

I come from the Northern Territory and when I first went to the Northern Territory people told me that the capital is actually  referred to the 'multicultural capital of Australia' and they said it's also referred to as the 'potpourri or melting pot of  nationalities and characterised by the wonderful cultural significance'. In the Territory we just call it Darwin. It's a little less  wordy and we're very much used to that sort of a lifestyle.

And when we're talking about issues of multicultural issues and we're talking about migration issues, because of Darwin's  position and location, and of course by the very cultural nature that we have in Darwin, it's very much a focus of our way of  life and every now and again we have very special weekends, whether it's shovelling octopus into cement mixers and  throwing plates on the ground and celebrating galenti [phonetic], or whether it's actually slipping down to the Mindle Beach  markets on a Thursday night and it's actually quite incredible to try to describe it.

If some of you have been there you'd certainly know the sense of almost confusion to have such a cacophony of smells and  culture and colour where food that almost every nation of the world are prepared and it seems like almost everybody from  every nation is there. There's certainly not much room to spare on Mindle Beach.

But it certainly brings to us, when you live in Darwin, we're very proud of that multicultural heritage and really what it does to  us as a community, we're a very, very strong community, we pull very well together.

We've certainly been at the front line of a whole range of issues and we sort of continue to see ourselves at the front line,  whether it was the bombing of Darwin, whether it was being the focus point of the evacuation of East Timor, or whether it  was in fact just recently being the position in which we first evacuated the people that had to be assisted out of the tragic Bali  bombings.

Because we often look out in the harbour over the last few years we've seen many times - we look across our harbour and our  vista and there are these odd looking boats out there - they're often Immigration vessels that are being used in the purpose of  immigration, so it's certainly brought home to us very much the impact that border control measures have, and certainly as a  back bencher in Darwin, I'm sure I share this issue with many other back benchers and minsiters on both sides of the House  that the issues about migration, the multitude of visas, the nature of travel, the issues associated with border control and

protection are issues that are many fold and I think that obviously the migration speakers kit is something that really very  much assists people like me in this regard. And so on that note it's my very great pleasure to introduce the Minister for  Immigration Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs, the Honourable Philip Ruddock.

[Applause]

Philip Ruddock: Well thank you very much Nigel and if I can thank my many parliamentary colleagues who have come here  today for this launch and I thank Your Excellencies for being here and members of the media and other community  representatives.

First, can I just acknowledge that here even in Parliament House I'm standing on the traditional lands of the Ngunnawal  people and they have a rich heritage which is part of our heritage - while I never claim that indigenous Australians, our first  Australians, are part of a multicultural society, their heritage is part of our heritage and of course it represents the rich  diversity that we know and understand to be Australia today.

I'm going to talk to you today about the success and the achievements and the way in which Australia manages an  immigration program and I'm going to launch a kit that will help people to understand why we select people as we do what  characteristics we look for and why we look for them and why in order to do that we need to also focus very much upon  border integrity.

And I want to take this opportunity to do it with so many members of the diplomatic corps here because what I found as I  travel extensively around the world is that there is an enormous interest in the immigration programs of Australia, and  enormous interest in how we do select and whether or not those programs are beneficial.

And there is also a great deal of interest in the border protection issues - whether countries are transit countries, whether they  receive people who are travelling without lawful authority or whether they're countries that sometimes see some of their  nationals looking to settle abroad.

And I wanted to take the opportunity to set the scene first because Australia has had something of the order of six million  migrants settle here since the Second World War.

If you look at Australia at the end of the war we had something like seven million people. We're now nineteen and a half  million and six million of those people who have come are settlers and today one our of every four Australians are overseas  born.

And while you may not see that here in Canberra it is certainly the face you see of Sydney and Melbourne, and that means we  have people from something like 200 different countries, something like 200 different languages are spoken here and there are  something of the order of 70 different religions practised in Australia.

I often try to give Australians an understanding of the nature of that diversity because most don't recognise that we are  probably the country in the world that has been most affected by lawful migration.

If you look at the United States of America, you look at Canada, you look at most European countries, I think all of them  except Luxembourg have a population well below the 25 per cent of Australians who are overseas born.

I think Israel is the only other country that immediately comes to mind which has been significantly impacted by migration,  and that's posed a very unique challenge because you all know that managing diversity brings with it very considerable  challenge, and in some places it's done well, in others it presents governments with a whole range of issues that they need to  address, and I don't intend to go into those.

All of you know the nature of the different situations around the world about which I could be commenting, yet here in  Australia, regardless of where people have come from there is a commitment first and foremost to this nation, that people  when they come and settle are able to proudly see themselves as Australians and our multicultural society with its underlying  values of parliamentary democracy and respect for the rule of law, our respect for people's basic human rights and equality of  opportunity based upon the sexes and different backgrounds that people have come from are part and parcel of the regime, if I  could put it that way, the multicultural regime, that we run here in Australia.

But whatever people's background, whatever religious path they follow, whatever their race, whatever their country of origin,  they do have a common bond and I think you see that in the commitment that people make to Australia.

And so I think if you look at some of the documents that are produced on multicultural Australia you'll see very considerable  value in the material that is included.

But the migration program is also a program about which I am often asked to comment because increasingly a range of  countries are seeing that their birth rates are declining, in other words their reproductive rates are falling, and many developed  countries have the same experience that we have where we do not through natural birth replace our population that die each  year, and here it is 1.75 per fertile couple, and we only continue to grow because we have lawful migration.

And we have some views about who is likely to be able to settle in Australia and settle successfully, and who are going to add  to our economic potential and who are going to have perhaps a range of other criteria that they might satisfy that will lead to  successful settlement.

And the migration program that we have today is the largest and most highly skilled that Australia has had for over a decade.

We have a planning level set in the range of between 100 and 110,000 places. It's a program that will continue to be a central  contributor to the economic and social development of Australia, helping to ensure that skill shortages do not hold back the  growth of our economy, to ensure that we're able to boost Commonwealth revenues through taxation paid by those who do  come here, get into jobs and succeed.

I recently spoke at the World Economic Conference in Malaysia - one of the regional meetings that that organisation holds -  and I emphasised there what I think is often not understood by Australians, is that a well constructed, well implemented  migration program can be a significant factor in improving the GDP per capita. In other words, raising the standard of living  of the domestic population, as well as meeting budgetary needs.

And over the next 20 years or so, immigration programs of the sort that we conduct now continued into the future will  improve Australian budgets by something of the order of $125 billion - over the next 20 years - $125 billion, and that is a very  significant contribution.

So managing a migration program, an emphasis upon family reunion, recognising that you can't take everybody who seeks  family reunion, an immigration program that fulfils you international responsibilities to assist in relation to refugees who have  a need for resettlement, coupled with skilled migration - both permanent and temporary - can be enormously beneficial.

And this kit enables those people who want to speak domestically about those issues here in Australia, to understand the  rationale for the policies, how beneficial they are, and to be able to promote those to the Australian community as a whole.

But can I say to those of you who are representative of governments that in my discussions with Ministers I think there is a  great deal of interest in these matters and I am sure your home government would be interested in the rationale behind our  immigration program, the benefits that flow from it, and the way in which it's constructed, and how we manage the process.

Because the next point that I make when I speak to audiences in Australia is that you can have the best immigration program  in the world, and you can set about to implement it, but if you cannot manage your borders, the program is of no value at all.

If you simply allow people to come, without ensuring that they meet the criteria that you have established for selection, then  people will take the view that it's only a matter of circumventing those requirements, why shouldn't we do it?

And so one of the strong points that I make is that border control is very important for being able to manage a migration  program in the national interest.

It's also important for being able to maintain a cohesive society and public support for migration. One of the factors you see in  many countries is that the public support that you might hope will be there, languishes because people believe that there, the  migration programs themselves, don't deliver the migration outcome. It's the way in which sometimes the people smugglers  can deliver outcomes rather than governments.

And it's one of the reasons that we have spent a lot of time and members of the diplomatic corps will know, it's one of the  reasons that we have offered to many countries a willingness to assist in advising on how you can implement effective border  control arrangements. How you can check for fraudulent documentation, how you can essentially ensure that the arrangements  that you have in place are working.

And so, we have here, I think - and most of you will have had the opportunity of witnessing it at various times - a highly  sophisticated border arrangements, largely because most of the people who come lawfully come by air.

We monitor all people in, we monitor all people out. It's highly automated, but it also enables us to manage issues where  potential concern may, might arise. Whether it's a security concern, a character concern, whether it's, or people who may have  previously been known to us because of attempts to circumvent our migration requirements. All of these issues are able to be  addressed, simply because we push our borders further away from our own airports.

And one of the aspects of border control that we've been seeking to encourage is for countries around the world to have a, a  very clear focus on how they can also benefit from arrangements whereby these issues are effectively addressed.

But it's in that context I wish to also point out that there have been some other policies in Australia, which have complemented  the border control arrangements.

We have been able - and I leave people to, I'll excuse any Senators who have to go - but I'll people to speak or to look at their  own national situation. But I was looking at some figures the other day in relation to unlawful movements. I've seen figures  that suggest that in some countries in Europe 90% of rejected asylum seekers can't be found.

Here in Australia, if you look at those same figures, we find and locate something of the order of 70%. In other words, if I had  to identify those who have essentially gone underground or tried to avoid being located, here in Australia it's a much smaller  percentage than you see in most other parts of the world.

Now a whole lot of reasons for that. I won't go into it, but more importantly the system of mandatory detention that we operate  for people who arrive in Australia without lawful authority, is a system that has been very important for ensuring that people  know that if they do come that way, they're going to be held for processing, and ultimately will be available for removal if  they have no proper basis for being in Australia.

And we've looked at systems around the world - other systems - and I have to say as difficult as the public policy is, it's one  that I think complements border protection in a very effective way.

And is it important to implement measures that do enable you to manage the borders? I think it is. We've had some dreadful  tragedies - similar to those that we've seen in other parts of the world, where people have lost their lives by trying to travel  without lawful authority, by trying to circumvent border requirements, getting into vessels that were never equipped to carry  people the sorts of distance that has, that are involved. And this is not just something we've seen in [indistinct] it's something  that is known in other parts of the world. So I think effective border protection has been an important factor in ensuring that  we minimise the potential loss of life through people who try to circumvent our requirements.

We've also had a Pacific strategy where some governments have worked very closely with us in ways to ensure the people  who are looking to come here without lawful authority didn't achieve that objective and so far as the Australian situation is  concerned is not an accident, it is because of the implementation of the sorts of policies which have been widely publicised  here and I believe have become better known even abroad that we've had no unauthorised boat arrivals on the Australian  mainland for something like more than twelve months and by the end of December I'll be able to say more than twelve months  we've had not even attempts to reach Australia without lawful authority, and we've been very gratified, I might say, by the  high level of regional cooperation that we have received in relation to these matters and I think the importance that we have  attached to these questions has been reinforced by some of the other tragic events that we've seen recently.

In other words, it is crucial that in managing the movement of people that you know who is travelling, whether they're doing  so in a bona fide way whether they're doing so on proper documents, know whether or not people might be of concern to you,  and managing borders ensures that you at least have the opportunity to ask those questions in a timely way.

Now, as I said initially when I spoke to you today, Managing Migration Speaker's kit is intended to be a tool which will help  those who wish to use it to speak to people in an informed way about these issues.

In other words, I hope in an Australian context it will be helpful in putting truth into much of the immigration debate and I  think it will show how migration benefits Australians and what work the Government is doing to ensure the integrity of our  borders and the programs.

The kit contains a video documentary in four parts, a power point presentation and a number of other publications which does  give a very complete picture of the migration and border management issues.

And ladies and gentlemen research has shown that our policies and programs have enriched Australia both socially and  economically, and my hope is that the messages contained in the kit will demonstrate to all, whether here or abroad, that our  approach is efficacious and that there is a linkage between migration programs and their success and sound border  management strategies.

Can I thank you very much for your very courteous hearing and thank you very much for coming today, and if you haven't  collected a kit already they're by the door and you're most welcome to stay and join us for a bite to eat, a light lunch, as it will  be in the foyer of this room.

12 November, 2002

