Page 1

National Press Club Tuesday, 12 February 2002

Panel discussion: The role of humanitarian intervention in international relations

Panelists: Sir Ninian Stephen, Mr Alexander Downer, Mr Kevin Rudd and Mr Peter van Walsum

The following is a transcript of the question and answer session which followed the formal presentations by the four panellists.

COMPERE:  Today  at  the  National  Press  Club—a  panel  discussion  on  the  world’s response  to  humanitarian  crises.  The  panel  will  examine  what  the  11  September attacks on the US will mean for international aid to those who suffer human rights abuses. Former Governor-General, Sir Ninian Stephen, Foreign Minister, Alexander Downer, Labor’s Kevin Rudd and former Dutch diplomat, Peter van Walsum, form today’s National Press Club panel.

[….]

COMPERE:  Thank  you  very  much  to  our  panellists  for  those  opening  statements. We will move now to our usual period of questions, and the first one today is from Megan Saunders. If you would like to address your question to the panel in general that’s  fine.  If  you  would  like  to  ask  somebody  specifically,  I  am  sure  they  will respond and others will comment on that.

MEGAN  SAUNDERS:  I  wanted  to  address  my  question  to  Sir  Ninian.  Central  to Australia’s  response  to  asylum  seekers  has  been  the  Pacific  solution  policy  of sending them to PNG and Nauru for processing. I am wondering, given the focus on the  need  for  an  international  response  and  an  international  cooperative  effort,  do you think this policy is appropriate, or do you agree with Kevin Rudd when he says that Australia is regarded as a problem state rather than a contributor?

SIR  NINIAN:  I  can’t  imagine  why  you  addressed  that  question  to  me,  but  I  am perfectly clear on my response, which is that I’ve got nothing to say. Thank you.

As to what Kevin Rudd thinks of the situation, I had the great pleasure of listening to him last week speak very wise words. I am sure that those are the sorts of words that  come  from  most  politicians  and  I  listened  with  interest  and  always  will,  but  I certainly won’t engage in discussion of the subject myself. Thank you.

Page 2

COMPERE: The next question is from Mark Metherill.

MARK  METHERILL:  Mark  Metherill  from  the  Sydney  Morning  Herald.  If  I  can address my question to the minister. It is still on problem states, Mr Downer. What do you say to the suggestion by Mr Rudd that Australia is seen as a problem state? Is this not  borne  out  at  least  by  the  Australian government’s dithering  on whether  or not to accede to Mary Robinson’s suggestion that somebody she recommends comes and  looks  at  the  asylum  seekers’  accommodation  and  approach  here?  Also,  on  a parallel  issue,  somebody  mentioned—among  the  speakers—about  the  fear  that  we are seeing an emergence of a unilateral—that is, US-led approach to the whole issue of international governance. Is Australia not, in our rather muted reply on this axis of evil comment by the US President and our general approach, not falling into that unilateral, US-driven approach?

ALEXANDER DOWNER: The answer to the first question is no. And the answer to your question is it wouldn’t be a unilateral approach if other countries fell into line with it as you put it, so your question is a tad contradictory there. Our position on the  President’s  speech—it’s  the  axis  of  evil,  is  the  expression—our  response  to  that has been that this was a State of the Union Address by the President. He obviously uses the language that he thinks is appropriate to his own domestic constituency, but the  point  of  policy  is  that  the  United  States  has  deep  concerns  about  weapons  of mass  destruction  programs  in  the  three  countries  that  he  identified.  That  isn’t something that’s new. The United States, the international community more broadly, the NATO countries, Australia, Japan, South Korea—we’ve had those concerns for a very long time, and all the President was doing was alluding to those concerns and the expectation that it will be possible to resolve those problems, and that really is it. I think there has been an enormous amount of over-interpretation of the President’s words. Do we fall into line with that? We fall into line with the proposition that the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction is one of the most significant issues, if not  the  most  significant  issue,  that  the  world  faces,  and  if  the  international community  can  do  something  to  stop  that  proliferation  of  weapons  of  mass destruction,  then  obviously  we  would  contribute  to  that  and  very  much  welcome that, but we’ll have to wait and see how these issues pan out in detail. But I would caution people not to over-interpret the President’s speech.

KEVIN RUDD: Just on the problem state question. I was in Geneva recently, a little before Alex, and both he and I are former serving officers of the department so we know  a  few  folk—we’ve  been  kicking  around  the  traps  for  a  while.  It  causes  me great pain when you actually run into people who work for UN agencies, who have historically  been  friends  of  Australia,  who  actually  explain  the  problem  state language to you, and it is not confined to one international agency or another. I think that’s the reality. I raised this question in an opinion piece I wrote in the Australian

recently as to whether, in fact, that reality is being accurately communicated back to the  government  from  its  diplomatic  representatives  abroad  and  whether  there  is some self-censorship involved in that.

Page 3

ALEXANDER DOWNER: That is a bit tough on the department.

KEVIN RUDD: I think it is a very accurate reflection of what is going on because if you talk to diplomats in the field there is a fear that if you actually cable wrong in terms of the orthodoxy in Canberra, that the age of frank and fearless advice—which you were inculcated into and which I was inculcated into half a lifetime ago in the department—no  longer  pertains.  On  the  axis  of  evil—well,  it  doesn’t  pertain  as much.

ALEXANDER DOWNER: Because you are in opposition, right?

KEVIN RUDD: No, no.

ALEXANDER DOWNER: It’s the old conspiracy theory—

KEVIN RUDD: No. It is actually a serious and considered reflection based on a lot of folk out there. On the axis of evil, I am rather taken by the British Foreign Office commentary  which  referred  to  it  instead  as  the  axis  of  extreme  unpleasantness, which  I  think  shows  all  the  moderation  with  which  we  normally  associate  the British. Part of the problem with the language is it camouflages, of course, a whole range  of  complexities  and  you  are  familiar  with  them.  Iran  is  much  more  of  a complex  proposition  because  of  its  divided  polity.  Iraq  is  a  separate  case  again. North Korea, which Alex and I have both visited and escaped to tell the story, is a genuinely  strange  place,  but  whether  it  is  productive  to  engage  that  sort  of declaratory  language  when  you  are  trying  to  resuscitate  what’s  left  of  the  South Korean sunshine policy is a separate question.

But the final think I’d say in relation to the United States is this. Campaign against terror is a serious business. The United States at present, uniquely across the world, possesses  the  military  horsepower  to  discharge  it.  When  it  comes  to  the  related question  of  weapons  of  mass  destruction,  I  think  this  is  a  serious  exercise  as  well. The  question  for  policy  makers  is  whether  that  is  best  prosecuted—that  is  the elimination,  thereof,  unilaterally  or  in  concert  with  appropriate  multilateral mechanisms as well.

COMPERE: Thank you, both. The next question is from Belinda Goldsmith.

BELINDA  GOLDSMITH:  Belinda  Goldsmith  from  Reuters.  I  wanted  to  return  to international law and rights, particularly in the wake of the debate about the status and  the  rights,  both  human  rights  and  legal  rights,  of  the  Taliban  and  Al  Qaeda fighters  being  held  in  Cuba;  and  I  wanted  to  ask  the  Minister  if  there  is  any  more information about how the Australian, David Hicks, is going to be treated now that Washington has said that the Taliban will be handled under the Geneva Convention and  whether  that  is  a  matter  now  being  pursued  with  US  authorities.  And  I  then wanted to ask Ambassador Peter van Walsum, in light of your comments on the US

Page 4

and adhering to international law, how you believe these people should have been treated.

ALEXANDER DOWNER: I don’t have anything new for you today on that issue.

KEVIN RUDD: I’ll say something while the Ambassador warms up. The question to you  was  how  should  the  United  States  have  treated  those  who  have  been incarcerated  at  Guantanamo  Bay?  My  first  comment  on  that,  just  before  the Ambassador responds, is simply this: the United States is in some danger globally— and I say this with great respect to my friends from America—of diminishing itself by not both being seen to be and in fact doing, executing complete compliance with the  four  relevant  Geneva  conventions.  In  the  case  of  these  individuals  for  whom  I have  most  sympathy  in  terms  of  what  is  alleged  against  them,  the  fundamental problem  is  the  proof  test,  and  that  is  how  do  you  separate  one  category  from  the other?  The  Third  Geneva  Convention,  I  think  article  5,  is  actually  eloquent  on  this subject.  It  says  that  if  there  is  an  uncertainty  about  the  status  of  a  combatant, whether that person is to be treated as a prisoner of war or as another form of combatant, a properly constituted independent tribunal is to be convened in order to determine that fact. Now unless my American friends can advise me to the contrary, I  don’t  think  that’s  occurred,  and  I  think  that’s  a  problem.  I  say  that  with  some respect.  I  understand  the  other  constraints  under  which  the  United  States  is operating  in  these  circumstances  but  I  think  it  would  be  wise  to  head  down  that course of action. That is the view which I have expressed on behalf of the opposition to the US.

PETER  VAN  WALSUM:  I  apologise  for  missing  that  question.  I  was  trying  to  put my signature in a book. I agree with everything Kevin Rudd has said. I can only say that my personal knowledge of that is limited to what I saw on television and that was  not  very  reassuring.  I  remember  seeing  an  American  soldier  or  non-commissioned officer saying that he had heard that they had to make that distinction but he couldn’t tell them apart; at least they are all against us, or something like that; or none of them is for us, the two categories. I think that is not the way this should be handled. The Geneva conventions give indications as to how this separation has to be made and I agree with everything that Mr Rudd has said.

COMPERE: The next question is from Rob Taylor.

ROB TAYLOR: Rob Taylor from Australian Associated Press. My question is to Mr Downer. There was a report in the Sydney Morning Herald today from Paul Keating— I know you have views on those columns—but he seemed to be insinuating that the government’s view of the relationship with Indonesia now being based upon realism was a sort of code for inaction or the status quo. At the same time with the bringing back  of  the  40th  Parliament  today,  there  has  been  pressure  on  the  government  to outline a vision for its next three years. I am just wondering whether you would care to  annunciate  your  vision  or  what  you  would  like  to  achieve  over  the  next  three years would be.

Page 5

ALEXANDER DOWNER: It does the media no credit to use a Paul Keating article as a point of reference. It takes a lot of time if you are going to read those articles.

It is clearly one of our most important of all relationships and I think all I can say to you  is  that  we’re  happy  with  the  outcome  of  the  Prime  Minister’s  visit.  I’ve  been extremely impressed with the level of cooperation there’s been from the Indonesians in  recent  months.  Hasan  Wirajuda,  the  Foreign  Minister,  visited  here  at  the  end  of the  year,  just  after  the  election.  He  had  a  most  successful  visit.  The  whole  range  of different  issues  that  there  are  between  us  as  neighbours  were  discussed  and programs put in place for dealing with them, including the people smuggling issue. Later  this  month,  we  are  doing  two  things  actually,  not  just  one  thing.  We  are holding the Inaugural Tripartite Ministerial Meeting between Indonesia, East Timor and  Australia  this  time  in  the  lead-up  to  East  Timor’s  independence  on  20  May; having the people smuggling conference—a large number of ministers from around the  region  and  a  bit  beyond  and  some  observers  are  going  to  attend  that.  You  are familiar with that.

Also importantly, I would mention this. I’ve been very impressed with the degree of cooperation  between  Australia  and  Indonesia  in  building  up  this  idea  of  a  South-West Pacific forum and we’ll be moving towards initially an officials level meeting from the countries that will be participating in the South-West Pacific forum and that will be, in turn, followed by a ministerial meeting.

On  a  number  of  other  fronts,  I  think  frankly,  it  is  quite  impressive  how  the relationship  has  been  working.  We  have  18,000  Indonesian  students  here  in Australia.  I  am  always  keen  to  get  more  but  18,000  is  an  enormous  number  of Indonesians  studying  in  Australia.  Despite  the  economic  travails  of  the  Indonesian economy,  I  think  I  am  right  in  saying  our  trade  has  never  been  greater  with Indonesia  than  it  is  now.  Our  aid  program  has  been  substantially  increased  in  the wake of the economic crisis in Indonesia, and in order to help them with a number of very specific issues we have Australian advisers there helping them with governance questions,  particularly  economic  governance.  We  have  humanitarian  programs  on the ground in Indonesia as well.

I  have  to  say  to  you  I  think  some  of  the—without  singling  out  Paul  Keating  who hasn’t got over the 1996 election; I can understand people not getting over the 2001 election because it was only three months ago, but the 1996 election? Come on! That was  six  years  ago.  Surely  the  guy  can  move  on  a  bit.  Some  commentators  love  to hark  on  any  negative  that  occurs  in  the  Australia-Indonesia  relationship  and  then say  that  this  is  all  the  fault  of  Australia.  I  think  that  is  an  extraordinarily  negative way  to  look  at  your  own  country  in  the  first  place,  and  I  think  it  is  an  extremely unproductive way of looking at the overall nature of the relationship. Some play was made of Amien Rais having accepted an invitation to meet with the Prime Minister, at the very last minute pulling out of that meeting, and made a number of comments about the reasons for why he didn’t want to go ahead with that meeting. I think it

Page 6

was a big mistake on his part to have done that. I don’t think it was a big mistake of Mr Howard to have done it because he didn’t do it. And to allege, for example, that Australia  is  intervening  in  what  is  now  called  Papua—it  used  to  be  called  Irian Jaya—in  support  of  some  independence  movement  there—how  can  you  keep proving  your  innocence?  We  have  never  done  it  and  we  won’t.  And  we  are  often criticised  for  that,  that  we  should  be  intervening  in  Papua  in  support  of  the independence movement. People on the left of the Labor Party and Bob Brown and so on, the Democrats, are always saying this, but we don’t, and we won’t.

I  am  not  saying  everybody  in  the  whole  of  Indonesia  is  permanently  happy  with Australia—there  are  mixed  views—but  I  think  we  are  a  strong  enough  and  a  self-confident  enough  country  to  be  able  to  roll  with  those  punches,  and  I  think  the relationship  at  the  government  to  government  level  and  at  many  other  levels  is working very well. So I think we have a good prospect of having an excellent year. I don’t know whether it will be three years but certainly I hope it will be and, beyond that an excellent period in terms of building a relationship with Jakarta.

This  transcript  was  prepared  by  the  Commonwealth  Parliamentary  Library.   It  was  taken from  a  tape  recording,  and  freedom  from  errors,  omissions  or  misunderstandings  cannot  be guaranteed.

