Intersections between race and religious discrimination Keysar Trad

In the name of Allah the Source of All Mercy the All Merciful. [1]

I acknowledge and pay my respect to the Gadigal people and the Eora Nation. I also acknowledge HREOC's effort to include the Arabic and Muslim community.

This is really a talk in point form so that I can fit it into 12 minutes, there is much to explain with respect to all the following points.

From Islamic religious perspective, we acknowledge that people are given negative traits and positive traits and these different traits have important roles to play, for example; even hatred has its place just as much as love has its place, for if we did not know how to hate acts of evil we would end up being indifferent to them and then we would turn into a totally unjust society. Similarly, the negative trait of egocentricity must be acknowledged as having a role in everyday life that is not always negative. This trait saves lives when a person's esteem is low, it can also create competition and it also motivates people to seek justice. If there was not a certain feeling of egocentricity, one may always forgive every form of injustice again leaving us with a negatively competitive world. Further, good qualities are more appreciated and more valued when one knows, understands and experiences the opposite of these qualities.

Every person has the potential to fall on any one of the myriad of negative or positive traits. They can also harness these traits and develop them to either regress into a monster or to ascend into a very beautiful human being.

These traits do not work on their own; they also feed off impulses to activate them - hence a person who is accustomed to acts of evil may not engage in these acts if they do not receive the required stimuli followed by the impulse.

Again, these impulses are necessary for the preservation of our existence as people. For example; an impulse of impending danger allows a person to make preparations for that danger.

What is important is how we as a society recognise these traits and these impulses and train our young to deal with them and also either reward or reform the rest of our population when they react on the basis of these impulses. These traits, attributes and impulses are not going to go away, every person has them and every person has to learn to deal with them and control them so that they do not breach their limit, if they are not

HREOC Website: Racial Discrimination - Beyond Tolerance

http://www.humanrights.gov.au/racial_discrimination/beyond_tolerance/speeches/trad.html (1 of 3) [21/05/2002 1:41:47]

trained to deal with them adequately then society in its entirety stands to suffer and suffer dramatically.

These traits, characteristics and impulses have the potential to cause stress and depression to both victim and perpetrator and this emotional injury will grow to impact on the whole community.

Every time a person causes an injustice through an act of racism, this injustice leaves its impact on the perpetrator, with the first act, they have to deal with the pangs of their conscience, with the second act, they start to become desensitised and hardened until eventually, if they keep at it, the evil that they started eats away their humanity and they become totally destructive to society around them. The price then is paid by friend and foe and deservedly so because society did not have the safety checks to reform this person early on in their evil spree.

As for the victim, the emotional traumas, the reduced esteem, the disenchantment with this world, perhaps also in many cases the domino effects of the racial act as they try to take it out on those weaker than they are, all serve to create a very destructive counterproductive imbalance in society as a whole.

We do not choose those with whom we share this world - we only have control over how we behave towards them. The demography of our society is something that none of us can really escape - as such, it is imperative to work together inclusively with every member of the broader community otherwise society will suffer, it may become diseased, it may decay and it may die. There is a delicate balance in this world and every aspect of society is there for a purpose, any form of exclusion on the basis of race can lead to social ills like crime, illness and injustice thus leading to the failure of society. My religion advises me to consult with every member in the community who is likely to be affected, it promotes inclusion of all who share society with us.

I am a Muslim, it is my faith that gives me this understanding, however, I do not wish to stir stereotypes that may distract some listeners from my message, I am going to keep resisting the temptation of linking my words with religion, though when I speak I speak on the basis of religious guidance. I will not use spirituality in this talk, though spiritually is crucial, I will talk in material terms as much as possible, because generally, those who employ policies of discrimination or exclusion understand material arguments better than spiritual arguments.

Society has human resources as well as material resources, with material resources every astute person, especially an egocentric person will use all their material assets and resources, they will not refuse to use a dollar because it fell on the ground and has some dust on it, nor because it has some rust. Similarly, they will not throw away a bank note if it was creased, ripped, dirty, old or fresh off the press. They will also not refuse to eat from a tree because it grows in a sheltered position or because it has some branches missing. Similarly, a plum is not a pear, but being a plum lover does not lead one to hate pears nor to destroy them. Further, when these resources are yours, you neither waste and squander, nor exploit and abuse. When they belong to you, you become ever so careful in including everything and in protecting and preserving everything.

With material resources, we do not see this discrimination and exclusion, we only see people displaying it with others, with those who are more like them - this is very sad, its repercussions are just as damaging to the racist or exclusionist as they are to society as a whole as they are to the victim.

Those who have a child with a disability can identify with the qualities that their child has, they can also see how the negative discrimination impacts on their child and effects the child's development. Yet, parental love would in most cases stop this parent from also discriminating against their child and from excluding this child.

I remember a colleague who used to work with me once said to me: "God is so cruel". Why so Mr. Colleague? He was referring to when he first saw a certain woman at his place of work. He stared at her beautiful face and he was captivated, immediately fell in lust and lived through several fantasies in his mind. Then she stood up and walked, and he found that she had a noticeable handicap, okay, some adjustments need to be made to all these fantasies. Then he discovered that she was a Muslim (she did not have her hair covered). All his plans were shattered at that moment, Of course he did not blame himself for being racist; he blamed God for both the handicap and the religion. To him, how could God give this beauty to someone who was Muslim and handicapped? It was just not fair. Who missed out in the end - it was my colleague. The lady went on with her life, probably much better off that she was protected, by her handicap and her religion, from the fantasies of this racially motivated person. This person never shared these feelings with the lady herself. Her condition and choice of religion spared her the risk of being sexually harassed by this person.

What happened to this lady is nowhere near as harmful as the cigarette burns that were inflicted on a Muslim girl repeatedly, just because she is Muslim, now, decades after the event, she tells me that the experience made her stronger, but how long did she suffer, how often did she question the reasons that she was targeted and her inability to defend herself or to find someone to help her? What about those who forcibly remove headscarves from Muslim women? This also is not as permanent as when a Caucasian adult struck a young Muslim boy in the head, merely because the boy's name was Mohammad, the blow was so hard that the boy died within half an hour.

Spiritually, we grow when are fair to others, especially those who are different, materially, we cannot afford to exclude members of our community. We need the skill and intelligence of every member of society, we also need

HREOC Website: Racial Discrimination - Beyond Tolerance

http://www.humanrights.gov.au/racial_discrimination/beyond_tolerance/speeches/trad.html (2 of 3) [21/05/2002 1:41:47]

to experience the joy of including others and the bliss of helping others retain and maintain their dignity by according to them the respect that inclusion, fairness and equity bring to them. It would really make a great deal of sense to introduce programs to promote social harmony and cohesion to all members of our society. We have to work with the youth and we have to also work with our politicians. Lately, some politicians have become the biggest promoters of racial hatred and exclusion in our Australian society, we usually see this hatred and fear mongering and exclusion promoted around election time, the damaging repercussions on society are just too great.

Every person in society has their qualities, qualifications, experiences and humanity to share, it is only by unbiased inclusion of every member of society that we can all reap the reward. My religion states that all races are related and all have the same origin. It also says that differences in language, colour or ethnicity among people are signs of the greatness of the Creator. My religion states that differences were allowed to develop amongst us, despite our single origin, so that we can get to learn from one another. These differences serve to enhance culture and civilisation, they are amongst our greatest blessings (and assets). Harnessing these differences peacefully and justly without exploitation is among the greatest challenges facing humanity today.

We saw the disastrous effects of exclusion in South Africa, eventually, after much death and much pain Apartheid had to go. We also saw the terrible result of the Holocaust, attempting to eradicate an entire race, it totally failed, it in fact had the opposite effect, it, like the Balkan genocides against Muslims, had the effect of bringing people together and it gave these people strength from their new united purpose.

However, does the world community learn from the past?

The continuing marginalisation of the Aboriginal community shows that many politicians do not learn, this marginalisation will also fail just like Apartheid failed.

The present trend in Australia with respect to asylum seekers is also creating concentration camps and engendering racism. I pray that these trends do not also tarnish us as individuals - that we do not get dragged down with those who promote this race-based hatred.

Attempts to wipe out peoples with the present Bush War Juggernaut and accompanying Rhetoric will inevitably fail just as miserably as the failure of Nazism. The exclusions and massacres against the Palestinian people, the Kashmiris and the Chechens will also fail just like Apartheid, Nazism and the "Ethnic Cleansing" in the Balkans failed.

Similarly, denial is not going to make the truth go away.

My message is, a politician who plays the race card whether demonising asylum seekers or members of his constituency is really a traitor to his society, his acts of exclusion impair the progress of his nation in its entirety. Our laws do not really reach that far, to target a politician one must also target all those who will defend them on talkback radio, on television, in the print media, and all those lowest common denominators who take the word of these politicians as gospel. We have an exclusionist, isolationist, one-eyed racist federal government and we can see that our present laws are too impotent to do anything about this. We have to develop our laws to cater for these problems, we must also work on our youth to instil in them the benefits of inclusion and the benefits of understanding and acceptance of others irrespective of their "imperfections", the responsibility for this role must be shared by the school, the media and the government. There is no one who is perfect except God. Let us teach each other to work together for the sake of this world that we, like it or not, share together.

Note

1. Please note: I did not say the following at the conference. Though they are very important, I did not say them because they are strictly religious teachings. They explain in better detail the nature of the negative impulses that I discuss throughout the paper. God tells us in the Qur`an that He created the soul and perfected it and then inspired it with knowledge of the evil that it is capable of (so that it can know that this is evil and can strive to avoid it) and knowledge of the goodness that it is capable of (so that it can do this good work). The prophet Muhammad (peace and blessings upon him) explained further by saying that every person has two receptors, one for angelic impulses and one for demonic or satanic impulses, the good acts are usually promoted by the angelic impulses and the evil conduct is always promoted by the impulses from the evil spirits like Satan. Hence feelings of racism or discrimination or exclusion are impulses sent by Satan to pretty much all people, it is up to the person to learn to control these feelings. A person may spiritually mature to completely block out these feelings, to such an extent that the evil spirits or Satan give up and no longer attempt to send these impulses. I will be happy to elaborate further if desired.



© Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission. Last updated 15 March 2002. Your comments and feedback are welcome. Email us at: webfeedback@humanrights.gov.au

HREOC Website: Racial Discrimination - Beyond Tolerance

http://www.humanrights.gov.au/racial_discrimination/beyond_tolerance/speeches/trad.html (3 of 3) [21/05/2002 1:41:47]

