Speeches The Hon Danna Vale MP   Minister for Veterans' Affairs Minister Assisting the Minister for Defence Federal Member for Hughes

The Hon Danna Vale MP

Minister for Veterans’ Affairs Minister Assisting the Minister for Defence

at the 23rd Annual Congress of the Vietnam Veterans' Association of Australia Lake Hume Resort, Albury

Friday, 24 May 2002

Mr Brian McKenzie - National President of the VVAA

Mr Geoff Trevor-Hunt - National Secretary Brig Pat Gowans - Vietnam War Veterans Trust Brig Bill Rolfe - Principal Member - Veterans Review Board Dr Neil Johnston - President Repatriation Commission Department Representatives Mr Ian Campbell - Deputy President Major General Paul Stevens - Repatriation Commissioner Distinguished Veterans and their Wives

Ladies and Gentlemen I am pleased to be here today and to have the opportunity to address the 23rd Annual Congress of the Vietnam Veterans' Association of Australia.

Let me begin by expressing my appreciation to you for allowing me to rearrange my visit to the Congress at late notice.

Your thoughtful cooperation enabled me to attend this morning's state funeral in Hobart and pay my respects as a Minister to for our last Original Anzac, Mr Alec Campbell.

Mr Campbell's death has been marked by Australia as the end of an era - a turning of a page in our history and the passing of our last living link with the Anzacs and the historic event of Gallipoli 87 years go.

Today's state funeral was a final mark of respect from a grateful nation and I was honoured to be there as a representative of the Government and stand alongside the many members of the ex-service community who gathered to honour Mr Alec Campbell's service to Australia.

The last Anzac is gone, but the spirit of Anzac will continue to burn brightly in the hearts and minds of those who value courage, tenacity, resourcefulness, compassion, mateship, a fair go, and yes, that unique Aussie larrikin sense of humour.

In an uncertain world, the values of the Anzacs are very real. Their service and the dedication of those who have followed in their footsteps have helped define the Australian soldier and by your own example, the character, values and tradition that every Australian would claim as a birthright.

Perhaps at no time before has there been a greater appreciation of Australia's wartime service, from the legends the Australians created at Gallipoli and the Western Front in WW1; at Tobruk, El Alamein and Kokoda in World War II; at kapiong and Maryansang in Korea; and at Long Tan in Vietnam, where 'the Australians" - you Aussie boys - carved a legend of your very own out of terror and personal sacrifice.

Today, we have Australians again serving magnificently in the International coalition against terrorism in Afghanistan, Kyrgystan, the Gulf and in Diego Garcia, carrying on the tradition and doing Australia proud.

I see it as the duty of Government, ex-service organisations and the whole community to make sure that those who have served and those currently serving, continue to be recognised, remembered and honoured as living bearers of the Anzac legend.

The legend of Anzac is about the values of nationhood, values which have been our foundation for almost 100 years, and which provide us with a blueprint for our next 100 years.

This is the real gift of Mr Alec Campbell and his mates and we will never forget.

Federal Budget I would like to take the opportunity this evening to discuss a range of issues. However, with the Federal Budget only handed down last week, I think I should begin with some of the important measures included in the Government's plan for the coming years.

Defence measures As you know, the 2002-2003 Federal Budget has a strong focus on Australia's defence, security and border protection.

The Budget maintains the Government's Defence 2000 White Paper commitment of an average annual real growth of 3 per cent for the Defence Budget over the next 10 years.

This funding will

Â· continue Australia's commitment to the international coalition against terrorism; Â· allow the Australian Defence Force to continue operations to deter unauthorised boat arrivals; and Â· strengthen Australia's domestic security by effectively doubling our defence tactical assault capability, including the establishment of a second Tactical Assault Group on the east coast.

Through this Budget, the Government will continue to implement White Paper recommendations providing long-term direction and support to the Australian Defence Force, with spending of about $350 million on new major capital equipment projects.

Defence is a major priority for the Coalition Government. We live in uncertain times that require us to plan for the worst, so that we can be ready to protect our community, our nation and our Ausralian way of life.

This Budget will work to ensure that the Australian Defence Force remains combat-focussed, well-equipped and ready to serve.

Veterans' Affairs measures

However, the Government recognises that it is not enough to equip our troops and send them out in the service of the nation.

We have an obligation to make sure their needs are met if they are injured, or to care for their widows or children if they pay the ultimate price for that service.

The two key initiatives funded in the Veterans' Affairs Budget represent important advances against those aims.

The extension of the Gold Card from the 1st of July means that access to comprehensive health care will now be available for all Australian veterans who are resident in Australia, at or over the age of 70 and have qualifying

service.

Initially, that takes in older veterans of Korea, Malaya, Borneo and, to a lesser extent, Vietnam.

But the long-term impact of this initiative - and the reason why it has been welcomed across the veteran community - is that in years to come it ultimately will provide the Gold Card to all veterans of Vietnam,; and eventually all of those who served in the Gulf War and to our veterans of East Timor, and those now serving in the war against terrorism.

The removal of the freeze on the war widow's income support supplement is another initiative that delivers improved benefits.

The income support supplement helps war widows facing financial hardship to make ends meet. But because the top rate of the supplement has been capped, the benefit of this payment has been eroded by inflation.

We will legislate to remove that freeze and from September, when the next round of pension indexation takes effect, the ceiling rate of the income support supplement will be increased by the same percentage as increases in the service pension.

This initiative has been a high priority for the War Widow's Guild and ex-service organisations, and will benefit some 81,000 war widows.

Pharmaceutical benefits In the area of Health, the Budget includes a series of measures by the Department of Health and Ageing to further reduce the unnecessary use of subsidised medication and to restore the balance between Government and patient contributions to the cost of prescriptions.

As you would be aware, there has been growing concern about the increasing cost of providing subsidised medicines through the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme and its Veterans' Affairs counterpart, the Repatriation Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme.

These schemes are vital elements in meeting the health care needs of Australians. However, in recent years many new, expensive drugs have been listed for the benefit of a range of patients.

The nation cannot afford to allow the cost of subsidised medicines to continue increasing at the current rate, or these schemes will no longer be viable for anyone.

As a result the concessional co-payment for PBS and RPBS prescriptions will increase by one dollar to $4.60 per prescription from the 1st of August 2002.

However, the Government continues to recognise the needs of veteran patients with chronic conditions.

The veterans' pharmaceutical allowance continues at the rate of $2.90 per week.

Veterans also continue to benefit from the safety net which cuts in after the first 52 prescriptions in a calendar year.

Thus, in any one year, the maximum cost facing a veteran using generic medicines is $88.40 over and above Pharmaceutical Allowance, before the safety net comes into effect.

Other measures are aimed at further reducing the unnecessary use of subsidised medicines.

Importantly, there will also be moves to extend the current brand pricing arrangements to reduce the price of generic drugs.

Disability Support pensions The other high-profile issue of the Budget has been the introduction of measures affecting disability support pensions.

These measures follow the recommendations of the McClure Report on Welfare Reform.

It should be stressed that no payments made by DVA are affected by these measures, which relate to disability support pensions in the social security system.

However, there are some veterans who will be affected.

One of the changes is that recipients of the Centrelink disability support pension must be unable to undertake more than 15 hours of employment per week. This is a reduction from the current 30 hours per week. Blind pensioners will be exempted from the new work test arrangements.

There are some DVA disability pensioners, including veterans receiving pension at the TPI rate, who receive the disability support pension from Centrelink.

The Department of Family and Community Services has indicated that TPI pensioners and Intermediate Rate Pensioners, who have undergone a work test at DVA will be exempt from the work test reassessment for the disability support pension.

TPI pensioners are already subject to a work test that they are unable to work more than eight hours per week.

FaCS has, however, confirmed that DVA general rate disability pensioners who receive the Centrelink disability support pension will be subject to the 15 hour work test.

This will affect approximately 1,000 general rate disability pensioners.

Family and Community Services has so far not committed to exempting these recipients from the work test and this is currently being discussed between the two Departments, and I will take a personal interest in these discussions.

Compensation There are other issues in the veteran community still under consideration.

Some of these are the subject of the independent review of veterans' entitlements, which I will discuss further shortly.

But I think it is important to address the debate that has taken place recently about military compensation, and particularly the level of compensation paid to the widow of the SAS Sergeant killed in Afghanistan.

That concern has focused particularly on comparisons between the amount of compensation that is available to the widow of an ADF member killed on operational service, and the big damages payouts that are being awarded by the courts in some civilian cases.

These are the same payouts that are causing so much concern in the wake of issues such as the cost of public liability insurance for organisations such as the VVAA.

But when making comparisons, it is important to look at the value of the benefits provided.

Civilian damages payouts are a one-off lump sum. This payment is immediately eroded by lawyer's fees, often up to 50 per cent. It has to cover all of the plaintiff's past medical bills. And all of this is before the plaintiff can even think about using the money to pay for ongoing medical treatment or to create the source of income that has to support them for the rest of their lives.

The repatriation system cares for war widows for the rest of their lives. We have a life-long commitment to our defence families

The war widow's pension is not taxed, it is not means tested, continues for life regardless of any change in the widow's income or marital status, and is indexed twice yearly to maintain its value.

In addition she receives the Gold Card, which entitles her and any dependent children to full and comprehensive hospital and medical treatment for all illnesses and conditions at the Government's expense.

Dependent children are provided for with the Orphan's pension up to the age of 16, or education support for as long as they are undertaking full-time study.

As well as repatriation benefits, the widow of any ADF member killed on operational service has access to military compensation and superannuation.

This includes a lump-sum, tax-free death benefit and super entitlements including an optional tax-free lump-sum, a productivity lump sum, also not taxable, and a pension.

The total value of all of these benefits varies for each individual and it would be inappropriate to comment on any individual case. But generally speaking, if an Australian Army sergeant should be killed on operational service, his widow and family would have access to an estimated income stream in the order of $45,000 a year.

To compare this with a civilian payout, that income at today's interest rates would require a lump sum investment of $1.2 million.

Our repatriation system has never been about delivering big lump sums. It is there to ensure lifelong financial security and lifelong health security for the families of Australians who lose their lives in the service of their country.

The same applies to the military compensation system. The Government is committed to developing a new, stand-alone military specific compensation scheme.

However, the aim of these reforms is not to pursue the illusory value of an enormous compensation lump sum.

Our objective will be to deliver a scheme based on modern compensation principles, one that recognises the distinctive nature of military service and provides an appropriate balance of compensation and rehabilitation to meet the needs of any Australian Defence Force member who is injured in the course of their service.

The Opposition and ex-service organisations have been provided with briefings on the new scheme proposals and have indicated their in-principle support.

Discussions with the key stakeholders have already commenced.

The new scheme represents a significant restructure of compensation arrangements for the Australian Defence Force and will require new legislation.

The Government wants to ensure that this important initiative gets full consideration. An exposure draft of the new legislation will be made available later this year for formal consultation before the Bill is taken to Parliament.

Independent Review As mentioned, a range of veterans' issues is currently under consideration by the independent committee set up to review access to veterans' entitlements and levels of benefits for recipients of veteran disability pension.

The review has been strongly supported by the veteran community, with more than 2200 submissions lodged by ex-service organisations and individuals.

This week, the committee has begun its community consultation phase, with public meetings held yesterday in Perth and today in Sydney.

In coming weeks, public meetings will be held in every capital city and in Lismore and Townsville, which are regional centres in areas with a high concentration of veterans.

Such is the level of interest in the review that submissions are still being received, and the committee now intends to accept written submissions until it begins finalising its report.

That report is due to be handed to me by mid-November, so that its recommendations can be considered ahead of the May 2003 Federal Budget.

Vietnam Veterans' Mortality Study Now, I would like to turn to some of the developments and issues of particular interest to the Vietnam veteran community.

In line with its commitment last year, the Government is laying the groundwork for a repeat mortality study of Vietnam veterans.

The Department of Veterans' Affairs has written to the Vietnam Veterans' Association and other key ex-service organisations, asking them to nominate representatives for the study's consultative forum.

The 1997 study recommended the Government continue to monitor mortality rates and suggested a repeat study be conducted after the year 2000.

The repeat study is expected to begin next month.

It will draw on the lessons learned from the original project and from the Vietnam Veterans' Health Study, to ensure that this study is of the highest quality, providing valuable information to plan for the needs of Vietnam veterans.

Vietnam Veterans' Health Study It is now two years since the Government announced its response to the findings of the Vietnam Veterans' Health Study.

In that time, the Government has successfully introduced a range of measures to strengthen and broaden support for Vietnam veterans and their families.

One of the most important initiatives has been the Sons and Daughters Project, which aims to support the children of Vietnam veterans in a positive way that promotes self-help.

The project gives the children of Vietnam veterans a voice in the planning and delivery of counselling and support services as well as a range of innovative mental health activities.

These young people are making clear statements that they do not want to be seen as just 'problems'. They want their strengths, abilities and potential contributions to be acknowledged and promoted - a reasonable request for any person.

While the Government, through DVA, provides a range of services to care for veterans, war widows and their families, sometimes the most important thing is for people to know that they are not alone - that they are part of a community and that their community values them and their contribution.

That need is being met through activities like the Sons and Daughter's Family Day held in Tasmania, a great success with more than 130 people attending.

These activities are providing opportunities for veterans and their families to build social networks that help them to maintain a healthier lifestyle and enjoy life to the full.

Long Tan Bursary Extension The findings of the Vietnam Veterans' Health Study also highlighted the importance of educational assistance in providing mental health support to the sons and daughters of Vietnam veterans.

In the past two years, the Government has provided the Long Tan Bursary to help Vietnam veterans' children make the move to university, TAFE or other tertiary studies and enhance their opportunities to pursue the career

of their choice.

As I announced recently, the scheme is now being expanded to ensure that Vietnam veterans' children have access to the educational support they need.

In 2003, 30 Long Tan Bursaries will be on offer, including five each in Queensland and New South Wales, the States with the largest Vietnam veteran populations. Four bursaries will be offered in each of the remaining States and two each in the Northern Territory and ACT.

This expansion will help address potential shortfalls in tertiary education support resulting from the winding up of the Vietnam Veterans' Trust Education Assistance Scheme.

With funding for the scheme due run out at the end of this year, the Government has received a number of representations to maintain tertiary education support for the children of Vietnam veterans. The expansion of the Long Tan Bursary will help meet that need.

Project ASIST Ex-service organisations have also been doing their utmost to address the issue of suicide prevention with the launch of Project ASIST.

Since November there have been approximately eighty members of the veteran community who have attended this "first aid" training to assist people at risk of suicide.

It is gratifying to know there is so much commitment within Australia's ex-service organisations to addressing the issue of suicide prevention.

The Government looks forward to the continued support of ex-service organisations and health professionals in meeting the needs of Vietnam veterans' families and all members of the veteran community.

Evolving role of VVAA Since the Vietnam Veterans' Association of Australia was formed it has worked hard to address issues of concern to Vietnam veterans.

Today the VVAA is represented on a large number of Government committees and is a major contributor to debate, legislation and administration involving veterans from more recent conflicts, as well as Vietnam veterans.

You bring a special perspective - taking in veterans, health professionals and academics - that assists the Government in continuing to meet the changing needs of the veteran community.

And, perhaps now more than ever, the VVAA is fundamental to many programs being undertaken for the benefit of veterans and their families.

While originally established in response to the needs of Vietnam veterans and their families, it is indeed appropriate that the long-term role of VVAA be considered with regard to the needs of other veteran and future veteran populations, without diminishing its value to its original client group.

Because of your demonstrated commitment, I know that VVAA will continue and grow in its valuable role of not only providing strength and support to it's members, but also in addressing the issues of concern directly with me in my capacity as minister for Veterans' Affairs.

Closing comments Ladies and gentlemen, I would like to thank you for your courtesy and attention and for the opportunity to speak with you about matters that concern deeply. I wish you well in your deliberations.

But wait, there is more….It gives me great pleasure indeed to read out part of my media release:

The Australian Vietnam Forces National Memorial will be rededicated on the 10th anniversary of its unveiling

this October, thanks to a $50,000 Federal Government grant to the Vietnam Veterans Association of Australia (VVAA).

Minister for Veterans' Affairs, Danna Vale, announced the grant at the VVAA National Congress in Albury, New South Wales, today.

Minister Vale said the grant was provided through the Federal Government's Commemorations program, administered by the Department of Veterans' Affairs.

"The Vietnam Memorial acknowledges the service and sacrifice of the almost 50,000 Australian sons and daughters who served in Vietnam, including 520 who made the ultimate sacrifice," she said.

"Like their grandfathers and fathers before them, they answered the call of the Commonwealth.

"In the finest traditions of Gallipoli and the Western Front in World War I; of Tobruk, El Alamein and Kokoda in World War II; of Kapyong and Maryang San in Korea, they raised the standard for bravery and valour and created a legend of their own at Long Tan.

"The rededication of the Vietnam Memorial will provide an opportunity for Australians to again publicly show our pride and acknowledge their excellent lineage as worthy bearers of the Anzac tradition."

Minister Vale said the funding would help the VVAA host a weekend of activities in Canberra on 5-6 October, to mark the rededication.

The weekend will include a dawn service, gunfire breakfast, march of honour, rededication ceremony, reception and church service.

"These events are a fitting tribute to those who served in Vietnam and the rededication appropriately acknowledges the decade of commemoration that has taken place at this important memorial," she said.

"The weekend will be a chance for Vietnam veterans from around the country to gather with their mates and pay tribute to those who did not come home.

"It will also be a time for all Australians to show their gratitude and support for the service personnel who served in Vietnam," the Minister said.

These events will be the third major recognition of Vietnam veterans, after the Welcome Home parade in 1987 and the dedication of the Vietnam Memorial in 1992.

Support for the rededication has been widespread among the veteran community and various government bodies.

"I am pleased that so many organisations are involved in this project. Such cooperation will help ensure that the weekend is a success for everyone."



[Return to DVA Minister Speeches index]

