THE HON TONY ABBOTT MP

MINISTER FOR EMPLOYMENT AND WORKPLACE RELATIONS



Speech

Feeling better about Australia Young Liberal Federal Convention

The Victoria Hotel, Melbourne

I suspect that for some influential Australians, the worst thing about 2001 was not the horrific events of September 11 but their fellow citizens’ continuing failure to conform to their ideas about what constitutes a progressive society. We remained a constitutional monarchy. There was no additional apology for indigenous leaders. Not everyone who asked for it was granted permanent residency. Worst of all, in what some commentators branded an act of shame, the Howard Government was re-elected with an increased majority and stronger political mandate. This provoked shades of Bertolt Brecht: the people have forfeited our confidence so let’s dissolve the people and elect another.

There is limited point arguing with those who inhabit the 'republic of bile', as Paul Sheehan cleverly describes it, or trying to convert those who think that Australia is the arse end of the earth. But there are many who want us to be our best selves and they deserve reassurance that today’s Australia is generally better than they are encouraged to think.

By almost any standards, ours is one of the free-est, fairest and most prosperous nations on earth. By the economists’ yardstick of GDP per head, we rank about 10th but, as every returning traveller or visitor knows, an Australian dollar in Sydney buys as much as a US dollar in New York or a pound in London. In any event, our real strengths are the things money can’t buy: like safe streets, a clean environment, communities where people make an effort to know each other’s names and the volunteer spirit which means that 5000 bush fire fighters can be deployed, at virtually no notice, even on a Sydney Christmas Day.

Things are not bad and getting worse but, in many important respects, good and getting better. Over the past five years, the rich have become richer at about the same rate as the poor have become richer. Notwithstanding some worrying regional variations, in general, we have more jobs, higher wages, lower taxes and fewer strikes. Suicide among young males is down 28 per cent in the past three years. There are even signs that we are winning the war on drugs with heroin related deaths, according to Herald-Sun figures, down 80 per cent in the past year.

Contrary to doomsayers’ predictions, the economy has not stalled, unemployment has not soared, riots did not mar the centenary of federation, our part in the war against terrorism has not become a quagmire and we did not become an international pariah over the Tampa incident. It’s a pity that Senator Aden Ridgeway is currently the only indigenous member of the national parliament but his place as deputy leader of a mainstream political party shows our commitment to judge people 'on the content of their character not the colour of their skin'. It’s disappointing that Senator Bin Tchen is still the only Asian-born member of the national parliament but the experience of other ethnic minorities suggests that we will soon be no more self-conscious about the contribution of Asian-Australians than about that of the Irish, Italians, Greeks and Lebanese who have settled here.

The vigour and confidence of contemporary Australia and our evolving sense of who we are and where we stand is epitomised by our role in East Timor. For a quarter century, Australians were impotent spectators to an unfolding tragedy.

Part of the problem was the foreign affairs establishment’s tendency to attribute right or might to anyone but us. Bucking conventional wisdom, this Government decided that the maintenance of good relations with Jakarta was not the only important priority in Australian foreign policy.

In historical terms, the liberation of East Timor hardly ranks with Australia’s role on the western front in 1918. In military terms, it was small compared to our commitment to Korea let alone the two world wars. Yet it was all our own doing. We didn’t play second fiddle (or 'deputy sheriff') to anyone. The East Timor expedition was the first significant military operation to be instigated, arranged and led by Australia. It was no Gallipoli but, in its own way, it was also a coming of age because it was the first time Australia had asserted itself internationally without waiting for someone else to take the lead.

The domestic criticism at the time - that Australia should have known the independence ballot would lead to bloodshed and that we should not have risked our relations with Indonesia by pressing for self-determination - assumed that East Timor had no right to be free. At heart, the critics’ problem was Australia’s implicit assertion that freedom and self-determination are universal human values to which people aspire as much in Asia as in Europe. How dare we back our own values and strength, they seemed to be saying, and assert that the people of East Timor were entitled to their freedom rather than what others judged to be in their best interest.

None of this is to claim a right of interference in the affairs of other countries or to endorse other liberation movements. Only where the likely benefits of involvement outweigh the costs, where there is a legal justification to act, where intervention is logistically feasible and where universal principles of human rights are at stake, can armed involvement in another country be justified. But in such unusual circumstances, grown-up nations need not wring their hands and look the other way any more than a police force should stop for soul-searching before doing what’s necessary to help people in trouble.

The East Timor expedition caused great anxiety among local commentators who subsequently had far less trouble accepting the right of America to intervene in Afghanistan. In part, this was a realistic apprehension of the potential human cost, uncertain ultimate outcome and moral ambiguity of any conflict. In part, it was surprise at the 'mouse that roared'. But mostly, it was doubt about our moral standing to intervene - a species of the 'legitimacy anxiety' and chronic defeatism which taints debate on many of the big public policy questions we face.

Judging by Keating speech-writer Don Watson’s latest essay - Rabbitt Syndrome - the old cultural cringe is as strong as ever. We’re not even in awe of different sets of foreigners. Watson’s extraordinary remedy for the despair he feels about contemporary Australia is to petition for admission as the 51st state of the USA. In so far as he’s making a serious point rather than striking a pose, he seems to be saying that Australia’s long-term challenge is whether we even deserve to survive.

The likes of Watson seem incapable of acknowledging Australia’s basic achievements such as providing a high standard of living to 20 million people here and helping tens of millions more to prosper in other countries through our trade policy. Every year, on a per capita basis, we admit more refugees than any country in the world save Canada. Along with the other liberal democracies, we are generally among the first to help in international crises and disasters. There is no systemic oppression nor legal discrimination against anyone. Yet instead of counting our blessings and singing our praises, there is this tendency to magnify our frailties and take our strengths for granted. Insecurity tends to coalesce around three issues -the head of state, reconciliation with indigenous Australians, and immigration. As Watson puts it, 'refugees frighten us, reconciliation with Aborigines, native title, a republic, these things consistently prove too much for us'. In fact, Australia’s response to these complex questions can be justified and sometimes even celebrated.

To Watson’s continuing disgust, the republican issue has been decided by vote of the Australian people, if not for all time at least for these times. The worst feature of the constitutional debate was some republicans’ insistence that the monarchy demeaned our country and devalued its achievements. Regardless of people’s views about the long-term sustainability of the Crown in Australia, the monarchy here is quite different from the monarchy in Britain and our constitutional evolution from part of the British Empire to an independent country with the Governor-General as effective head of state demonstrates the subtlety and sophistication of local statecraft.

The ferocity of the republican campaign against an innocuous and largely Australianised institution suggests that the real target lay elsewhere and was, perhaps, the kind of country which was so relaxed for so long about a symbol we didn’t wholly own. One of the reasons why prominent republicans were so insistent that the Queen (and not the

Governor-General) must be head of state was fear of losing their chief emotional argument against the existing constitution and therefore needing to find a new issue on which to whip up dissatisfaction with the way things are.

Likewise, reconciliation has become a weapon to wield against the traditional conception of Australia. To many of its proselytes, it is only superficially a means to advance Aboriginal self respect and more an argument for the essentially corrupt and illegitimate nature of the polity itself. Reconciliation is only desirable while it cannot be achieved. Once achieved, it loses its usefulness because it is no longer another point of criticism of society at large. In fact, meaningful reconciliation will only be achieved when Australians are no longer prey to the national insecurity which some reconciliation zealots seem determined to engender.

Reconciliation will turn out to be one of the by-products of a society which has finally become relaxed and comfortable with itself. In the meantime, stressing the need for reconciliation can actually be counter-productive. As Neville Wran once told a Labor Party conference: 'let us have no more calls for unity'. The past must be acknowledged. Mistakes must be admitted. Because there is nothing we can do to alter the historical circumstances of Aboriginal dispossession, the task now is to encourage indigenous people to participate fully in the opportunities Australian society provides.

As Noel Pearson has so courageously stated, the challenge is less to 'do things for Aborigines' and more to encourage Aborigines to take back responsibility for their own lives, families and futures. However it’s couched, an apology will never be enough for some and always be too much for others. The campaign for something which is only going to add to a sense of grievance on one side and guilt on the other - witting or not - looks more like a distraction than a solution.

Immigration has become another battle over Australia’s moral standing and legitimacy. Typically, we have not paraded our virtues. We have no self-congratulating equivalents of the Statue of Liberty proclaiming our willingness to take 'your poor, your huddled masses yearning to be free' yet that is what we have done (especially after Harold Holt abolished the White Australia policy). Our readiness to welcome into Australia people from all over the world with only the willingness to have a go and the desire to see their children excel has added a heroic dimension to the way we live.

In Australia, immigrants are not expected to surrender their old ways of life, cultures, affinities and affections but they are expected to obey the law. People who first fly from the Middle East and Central Asia to Malaysia and Indonesia and who then pay people smugglers to land in Australia or its territories are not asylum seekers however much they may fear returning empty-handed to their families or running the gauntlet of thuggish officialdom back home. People who destroy their identity documents to confuse Australian officials are undoubtedly desperate to stay but what kind of citizens are they likely to make? Australia can’t and shouldn’t build walls against the world’s people but has a sovereign right to control who settles here.

Critics of the Government’s policy need to spell out an alternative. If they believe that our conduct is unbecoming, can they please provide more polite ways of saying 'no'? If they believe that an influx of 5000 boat people a year is not enough to justify exclusion, can they explain how permitting smaller numbers will not encourage larger numbers? If they think that Australia has no right to exclude anyone, can they explain how 20 million people might act as the third world’s lifeboat without committing a form of slow suicide as a nation?

As UK Labour Home Affairs Minister David Blunkett put it when justifying Britain’s detention and repatriation policies, 'I have no intention of creating a fortress…but we have every right to defend our boundaries (and) to defend the coherence of our nationality'. In 1994, the Clinton administration began to forcibly intercept boats and intern their passengers offshore at Guantanamo Bay when an exodus from Cuba became more like an unarmed invasion than people seeking asylum from persecution.

It is in Australia’s interests to run a large, non-discriminatory immigration programme based on merit and humanitarian principles. Whether policy has been dubbed assimilation, integration or multiculturalism, under the gravitational pull of our way of life, millions of migrants have become Australians and, in the process, changed us for the better. Because of the welcome we have extended, migrants have quickly become as much at home here as in their old countries and readily come to have as much in common with us as with their former countrymen.

Both those who supported large-scale immigration to break the hold of 'British Philistinism' and those who feared it because it would destroy the Australia they knew have been proved wrong. Immigration has changed Australia but it has not altered our fundamental strengths nor weakened the sense of solidarity Australians feel for each other. Argument over immigration has generally pitted those who hope immigration will expunge our past against those who are fearful of losing

our heritage. The Australian identity and culture has proved stronger than imagined by the immigration programme’s most evangelical supporters and opponents alike. Australians, old and new, are on a path of cultural convergence. We have not become a nation of tribes so much as a large and interesting extended family.

None of this matters much for the likes of Don Watson who owns up to regarding Australia as 'fairly loathsome'. America, he says, is the 'best society yet achieved in an imperfect world'. Would that 'just five or ten per cent of their immigrants had chosen Australia instead' so that 'lurking behind our self confidence' might be something other than 'anxiety and shame'. Watson’s resort to Oxford Street imagery - the British connection as a 'prophylactic' against American contamination as we 'bent over the barrel and were willing to bend further as the occasion demanded' - is much more eloquent as a statement of contempt for his own country than as an analysis of politics or foreign policy.

Why do so many members of the intelligentsia have so little respect for the culture that shaped them? Why have they so little affection for the society which pays their wages, appoints them to prestigious positions and often gives them a more respectful hearing than they deserve? Having abandoned the 'god that failed', perhaps they are no longer capable of faith in anything. Perhaps they suffer from the Groucho Marx instinct that any club which would admit him wasn’t worth joining. Their distinguishing characteristic is this tendency to look down on people prepared to give Australia the benefit of the doubt. For our 'cultural dieticians' (as John Howard once dubbed them), the scepticism which keeps complacency at bay has degenerated into a poisonous contempt for most of their fellow-countrymen.

The difference between the Howard Government and most of its critics is that it doesn’t think Australia and Australians need to be re-engineered. Over nearly six years, the Government has demonstrated that it’s possible to make improvements to the Australian economy and society and still keep faith with people. The Government has changed the tax system without destroying the morale of small business; introduced Work for the Dole without destroying the welfare system; and dealt with boat people without offending basic decencies. Australia’s record over the past six years shows that it’s possible to be a successful nation without sacrificing our values or re-inventing ourselves. The Government has measured up well against the yardstick of political leadership: managing to do what was regarded as right but unrealistic. Now that government no longer pretends to be the fount of wisdom and the source of all improvement, it’s just possible that laconic grit and stoicism and old-fashioned personal virtues such as honour, duty and service might once more be unselfconsciously celebrated in this country.

Some commentators have accused the Government of being rhetorically-challenged when it’s more a case of preferring action to introspection. Unlike its predecessor, this Government has not masked self-doubt by talking too much or seeing value only in change. Howard’s values only seem out of date to people who think that nothing really lasts. On the evidence so far, the Australian people would prefer to build on our strengths rather than attempting to start again as if the past didn’t matter or could be airbrushed away.



For further information contact:

Simone Holzapfel 0417 656 668

4/01/2002

