Philip Ruddock MP MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AND INDIGENOUS AFFAIRS

Population Change

Border Protection

Migration Program

Humanitarian Program

Multicultural Affairs

Indigenous Affairs

Home Minister's Profile Frequently Asked Questions Contact the Minister Media Centre

MEDIA CENTRE

Transcripts

Media conference with Mr Ruddock

Parliament House, 13 November.

Question: Are there al-Qaeda links among boat arrivals?

Minister: Well I don't know, but what I do know is that we suspect that amongst the 3,500 people who claim to be Afghan, that some 700 may be possibly Pakistani. That is not new information, that's been out for some time. The people we have actually been able to get precise documentation on number 40, and a number of visas have now been cancelled and there are ongoing investigations in relation to all of the states. I suspect that if people who have disguised their identity, that having told us that they were from Afghanistan and had a particular identity, have now been identified as being somebody else from somewhere else that would have implications for character checking that we have undertaken and I assume without any knowledge that that will be of interest to the appropriate authorities but I can't offer any more advice.

Question: Have any of those cases been referred to ASIO at all?

Minister: Well I think I have made the point that if people who are known by one identity and are now showing to be somebody else, I would have thought that would be of interest to appropriate authorities but I have no knowledge of those things.

Question: There has been claims that some of those who are claiming to be Afghani come from an area in Pakistan where al Qaeda is prominent or there is extremist groups, do you know anything about that?

Minister: Well, yes, I mean it's a fact that a lot of the work that has been done has identified people coming from a region of Baluchistan - the city of Quetta and many of the documents that we have found that identified people as being Pakistani came from that region.

Question: Can you confirm that (indistinct)

Minister: No, I don't do that, I have no knowledge of it and if I did, it would be inappropriate for me to talk about it in any event. But I'll just make the point… when we undertake character checks, they are to identify whether people are of security concern and agencies need to know who people are and if identities are changed, it wouldn't be surprising if that information was of interest to those authorities who make those enquiries.

Question: Do you have concerns then that people who are coming to Australia to seek asylum are coming maybe for more sinister moves.. ie maybe to set up cells or the like in Australia?

Minister: Well, the reason we carry out character checks is always the reason we have carried out character checks, is to satisfy us all as to whether people pose risks. The fact is that there have been a number of people excluded on character grounds not necessarily security grounds, but excluded on character grounds… from Australia. There are numbers of people we hold in detention at the moment where we are unwilling to make decisions in relation to their claims because of outstanding character issues. These are issues where if we have information that gives us concern we will protect the Australian interest and we undertake the enquiries that we do to ensure that the Australian interest is protected and there are numbers of people who are still being held because character issues have not been satisfactorily addressed.

Question: Minister, what knowledge if any, do you have about this alleged Al Jazeera broadcast?

Minister: Well, I have no knowledge of it other than the reports I have seen from the BBC and of course we don't know whether or not it is by Bin Laden. There has been no confirmation that I have seen to say that it is, but certainly whoever said it, was doing so in knowledge that tragedy had occurred in Bali and also the events in the Soviet Union and the only point I would make is that is appears to be designed to undermine people's morale. What they are saying is that if you fight terrorism, you are likely to be affected by terrorist activities and linking particular events to how we may or

may not have responded. All I would say is that we have seen the events occur which were totally unjustified, which involved the murder of innocent people and those who are responsible have to be traced. Those who are responsible need to be punished and you can't stand aside in dealing in relation to those issues simply because threats are made of that character.

Question: (Indistinct) …travel warning

Minister: Look, the only point I would make is that travel warnings are appropriate if there is thought to be a risk. Their nationals are entitled to be aware of it. We take that view in relation to Australians. I don't know the nature of other people's travel warnings but I'd simply say, if they believe there is a risk to their nationals then they should act responsibly.

Question: Will the Government take steps to ensure that the funding (indistinct) directive to counselling services?

Minister: Well, I've said here today that the reason we have commissioned a review, is to ensure that that is the case and I've taken on board the comments that have been made here at the conference organised by the National Sorry Day Committee and the Journey of Healing and I would be disappointed if services were not well targeted but we will follow through the specific issues and we will address that in the review that we are undertaking.

Question: You didn't respond to the repeated request for a national apology. Have you still not responded?

Minister: No, I didn't.

Question: Do you think people should move on?

Minister: Look, I simply make the point that we recognise that the people have suffered and we have responded to that and many of us have apologised, including the Prime Minister but there are other implications in relation to asking a generation of Australians today to apologise for acts of their forebears and that point's been made over time and I don't think it's helpful to continue emphasising it.

See: Index of Transcripts

| Home | Search | Links | Privacy | Disclaimer | Copyright | Site Map |

URL: http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/transcripts/transcripts02/parlhouse_1311.htm Last update: 15 November 2002 at 07:25 AEST



