Senator Natasha Stott Despoja  Leader of the Australian Democrats 14 May 2002                          MEDIA RELEASE                                  02/230

http://www.democrats.org.au/

Treasurer cuts compassion to fund fear The Leader of the Australian Democrats, Senator Natasha Stott Despoja, said the 2002/2003 Budget picks on the most vulnerable in the community - the sick, the poor, the disabled and the unemployed.

“This is a Bully Budget. The Government is squeezing the poor to pay for war,” said Senator Stott Despoja.

“At a time when the Government boasts of the economy going gangbusters, this Budget is a lost opportunity to invest in our future.

“The Treasurer has cut compassion to fund fear. Australia could have kept its borders safe without hurting the poor and needy.

“The surplus has been blown on ill targeted and irresponsible election pork barrelling.

“The ill planned baby bonus (up to $510 million in 2005) will benefit wealthier Australians while paying less to those on lower incomes. This is at a time when up to 75% of Australians support a national paid maternity leave scheme.”

Senator Stott Despoja expressed disappointment with the Treasurer’s much vaunted Intergenerational Report.

“In his short-sighted Intergenerational Report, the Treasurer paid little attention to the environment or education. Despite a purported emphasis on intergenerational issues, there is no recognition of the need for sustainable development nor job creation,” said Senator Stott Despoja.

The Pharmaceutical Benefits System

“The cuts to the PBS are mean and nasty. The Government will claw $1.1 billion over the next four years from the poorest and sickest people in our community.

“The Democrats will fight these proposed changes. Pensioners and people with disabilities can not afford the increase in the co-payment for their medication.

“We can help the Government find money for the health budget.

“Tonight the Government could have committed to tightening the Fringe Benefit Tax on company cars, means testing the 30% private health rebate and reinstating fuel indexation to find revenue.

Senator Natasha Stott Despoja  Leader of the Australian Democrats 14 May 2002                          MEDIA RELEASE                                  02/230

http://www.democrats.org.au/

Disability Support Pension

“The Government’s changes to eligibility criteria are going to remove 180,000 people from the Disability Support Pension over the next four years.

“These people will lose at least $52 a fortnight and other concessions while the Government tries to push them into the workforce and they will have to pay more for their medication.

“In contrast, the Government has only offered 73,000 assistance places in rehabilitation training to help people with disabilities find work.

“This is targetting the poor and disadvantaged for Government spending.

Asylum seekers

“This Government is spending in the order of four times the cost of the deployment of troops to Afghanistan on keeping asylum seekers from Australian shores.

“That includes $219 million to build the detention facility at Christmas Island and $455 million over the next four years for receiving and processing asylum seekers at Christmas Island and Cocos Island.

Defence spending

“The Government is hiding behind the war to conceal what it has blown on pre election promises. And it is punishing the poor to pay for this war.

Job Network

“The Productivity Commission has already found that the Job Network does not work, removing $44 million out of the Network is not going to help its chances of success.

“The cuts have everything to do with furthering the Government’s agenda and nothing to do with getting people into jobs at a time when Australia’s long term unemployment remains stubbornly high.

“Currently, there are eight people for every job vacancy. The Government has not made any attempt to create jobs - its only answer to unemployment is breaching and preaching.

Aged care

“The Democrats welcome more additional capital funding and extra funding for wage parity in Aged care.

Senator Natasha Stott Despoja  Leader of the Australian Democrats 14 May 2002                          MEDIA RELEASE                                  02/230

http://www.democrats.org.au/

“However, this funding only provides respite for dementia and no purpose built facilities. Not good enough. More importantly there is no funding for young people in nursing homes.

Superannuation

“This is a Government that halved capital gains tax, it will not tax trusts fairly and now it wants to cut the superannuation surcharge for high income earners.

“In a budget where we are cutting payments to disabled people this is outrageous.

Environment

“The allocation of $9.9m to radio active waste disposal flies in the face of the Government’s so called environmental commitment.

“The people of New South Wales and South Australia will not be impressed by the Federal Government turning their states into nuclear waste dumps.

“The $5.7m cut to the Australian Greenhouse Office shows the Government has a negligible commitment to meeting the Kyoto Protocol targets now or in the future. That the Treasurer made no reference to the environment in his Budget speech shows how low a priority the environment is to this Government.

Education

“This Budget offers nothing for education. At a time when our OECD counterparts are investing heavily in education and R&D Australia continues to lag behind. Where is the investment in our future when the Government will not invest in education?,” concluded Senator Stott Despoja.

For further information contact Alison Rogers on 0419 867 649

