Speech

The Asia-Pacific and the World: Australia's Foreign Policy Context

Speech by The Minister for Foreign Affairs, The Hon Alexander Downer MP at the opening of the Sidney Myer Asia Centre, Melbourne, 22 July 2002

Introduction

Thank you Professor Merle Ricklefs, Director of the Melbourne Institute of Asian Languages and Societies, and Ms Jenny McGregor, Director of the Asialink Centre; distinguished guests including Professor Alan Gilbert, Vice Chancellor of the University of Melbourne; Ms Carlier Makigawa, Project Manager of the 'Spirit Wall'; Mr Charles Goode, Chairman of the ANZ Banking Group, and Mr Carrillo Gantner, Chairman of the Asialink Centre ladies and gentlemen.

I'm delighted to be here and to have this opportunity to address you. I'm particularly pleased to share with Mr Charles Goode the honour of initiating The Melbourne Asia Lecture series. Today's formal opening of the Sidney Myer Asia Centre here at the University of Melbourne offers us a special opportunity to reflect on important aspects of Australia's interaction with the Asia-Pacific region and the world. I propose to address some of these in my lecture today.

Sidney Myer

But I will begin by paying tribute to the man after whom this building is named.

As is well known, Sidney Myer arrived in Australia from Russia as a penniless migrant in 1899. A century ago, Australia was a land of opportunity for those with the wit and will to work hard and effectively, as it is today. And Sidney Myer worked hard and effectively. He achieved great business success in building up one of the largest retail businesses in Australia, which of course is still known by his family name.

But Sidney Myer did more than that. He became a leading philanthropist. Many in the Australian community benefited from his patronage and support. Sidney Myer's legacy has been honoured and enhanced by members of his family, who have continued their tradition of making outstanding contributions to our national life.

I salute all those who, in the spirit of Sidney Myer's legacy, have worked to create this impressive new building. By making possible the co-location of the Melbourne Institute of Asian Languages and Societies and the Asialink Centre, the Sidney Myer Asia Centre provides a new and improved focus for the University of Melbourne's contribution to Asian studies in this country, which adds such an important dimension to Australia's ongoing interaction with our Asian neighbours. I am, of course, proud to be a member of the Asialink Council myself.

The global context

Sidney Myer's achievements as a migrant to our shores reminds us that modern Australia has been created out of a centuries-long process of what, fashionably today is called, globalisation.

Permanent European settlement from 1788 broke this continent out of its geographic isolation once and for all. Ever since, our national life has involved a developing and deepening interaction between Australia, the region and the world, which of course has quickened since Federation and even more so since the Second World War.

It is fair to say that we have developed a sophisticated approach to our region and the world that reflects our special distinctiveness as a nation - in particular, the balance and interplay between Australia's engagement with Asia, and our Western make-up and broader international relationships and interests.

The Federal Government continues to believe, as we stated in the first ever foreign and trade policy White Paper in 1997 (which is to be superceded later this year), that 'Australia has global interests which require a foreign and trade policy of broad scope'. While the focus of our policy will always be on the Asia-Pacific region in which we are located, this does not diminish the important interests we must pursue elsewhere - in the Americas and Europe, for example.

There is no doubt, to use a clichÈ, that we currently live in challenging and changing times. Looking back, it must be said that the 1990s were a remarkable decade. The end of the Cold War opened up the international system from what had previously been largely a bipolar world order. We had unprecedented economic growth and prosperity, fuelled by further international integration of production and distribution, and a wave of technological innovation symbolised by the spread of the Internet. We even had intellectuals like Francis Fukuyama claiming that the 'end of history' had arrived with the triumph of liberal democratic capitalism.

The horrible events of September 11, 2001 delivered a terrifying reality fix, reminding us all that the world remains essentially an unstable place. As a result, the fundamental role and place of the sovereign state in international affairs has been reasserted, as the world deals with what is in fact a transnational issue, namely the threat of terrorism. And that has brought forcefully home to us in Australia, once again, the importance of the pursuit of the national interest through our foreign policy.

The process of globalisation is, however, not going to stop. Continuing change has to be accepted and understood as a constant challenge impacting on Australia's foreign policy and most other aspects of national policy.

In shaping our future together in a world of change, Australians need to retain a clear sense of the national interest that lies at the heart of our foreign and trade policy. The Government broadly defines this as the security and prosperity of Australia and Australians. I can assure you that the new foreign and trade policy White Paper which I mentioned earlier, entitled 'Advancing the national interest', will stick to this theme.

The regional context

There has, of course, been enormous change in the Asia-Pacific region in recent years. Events like the East Asian financial crisis, the aftermath of continued economic and political uncertainty, the historic transition to democracy and decentralised rule in Indonesia, East Timor's independence and challenging governance issues in the South Pacific have all reshaped our immediate political and economic environment.

Australia's response to these changes has demonstrated how well prepared we are for dealing with a world in which change is a constant - and I can say after more than six years as Foreign Minister, it is so often unpredictable Our civil institutions are sound, our economy is strong, our military and foreign and aid services are effective, and our assistance to neighbours in need - for example, through IMF programs in regional countries or in the crisis in East Timor - has been both valuable and valued. Indeed, Australia's engagement with Asia has been growing substantially, and this can be measured in many ways - through our trade and investment performance, for example, (we have never had more trade with Asia than we do now) or by the substantial numbers of students from South East Asia at educational institutions in our country (and again we have never had as many Asian students studying in Australia as we do now).

Looking further afield, conflict in the Middle East continues to have an impact beyond its borders. And while there are encouraging signs that sustained diplomatic activity has helped reduce tensions between India and Pakistan, the stand-off between them in South Asia has posed the distinct threat of nuclear exchange, with horrifying and devastating consequences. Developments in those parts of the world will have a profound impact upon regional and global security.

None of us, in the region and beyond, can ignore the fact that we are still in the early stages of a revolution across the spectrum of science and technology - in military affairs, in information technology, in biotechnology, material science and nano-technology.

Overall, there is no doubt that power relativities in the region have changed, and there are new challenges to sovereign states. Among these are trans-boundary issues affecting basic good governance - movements of people including, of course, asylum seekers; the environment; and public health issues such as HIV/AIDS.

We see the extent of deeper change by looking briefly at just a few countries in the region.

Japan remains a regional and global economic powerhouse. But a recession lasting for ten years now has made a great impact, and we cannot ignore the major long-term challenges posed for Japan by demographic and other issues.

China continues its emergence as a regional and global power in a process featuring rapid and fundamental social and economic change. As a new WTO member, and as host of the 2008 Olympics, China is clearly increasing its international engagement.

On the Korean peninsula, a long, demanding process of reconciliation and perhaps, one day, reunification has commenced - despite the setbacks that occur from time to time.

A number of South East Asian countries continue to suffer the residual effects of the financial crisis. There has been a crisis of self-confidence. Political upheaval and the need for continued structural reform has put great pressure on governments.

Burma

I would like to use this occasion today to say something about a South East Asian nation that is often in the news - Burma, or Mynanmar as it calls itself. Burma represents an example of Australia's distinctive foreign policy.

The Australian government's long-term interest is in a democratic, prosperous, peaceful and stable Burma, which can play a full and constructive role in regional political and economic affairs. The recent release of the General Secretary of the National League for Democracy, Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, has been a most welcome step in this direction. However, the task is far from complete and will require further efforts from all concerned within Burma and in the international community, including Australia. With no one country's approach to Burma having succeeded so far, we have adopted some creative strategies to encourage positive change.

Our assessment is that some form of engagement, rather than isolation, is the right strategy to encourage change in Burma. One example is our effort to contribute to an improved human rights situation in Burma through our human rights workshops. We expect that any advances on human rights will be modest, but they will be worthwhile. Given Burma's poor humanitarian situation, Australia is also investigating ways to alleviate the child nutrition problem there.

Alongside a disturbing humanitarian situation is a worrying economic picture. We do not have in place economic sanctions with Burma, as some do, because our view is that isolation is likely to be ineffective. Australia's economic links with Burma are limited and until there is real political and economic reform in Burma, we expect them to remain so. The Australian government provides assistance to Australian firms with an interest in Burma - commensurate with our limited trade interests - but we also give companies advice on Burma's poor economic governance, forced labour and consumer boycotts.

Our approach enables the Australian Government to engage with the Burmese Government on human rights, the humanitarian situation and economic governance issues. This provides an opportunity not only to raise concerns, but to encourage positive change.

Our approach to Burma is different to many western countries. It highlights our distinctive approach to our relationships with our ASEAN neighbours - our near neighbours.

Challenges and opportunities

In the light of what I've already said, I'd like to reiterate some of the broader foreign policy challenges which Australia must face as it forges its future in the region.

Australian interests lie in a prosperous and stable region - one that is more open to our goods, services and people, and with reduced regional uncertainties and tensions. But the Asia-Pacific region is heavily militarised. It has the world's six largest armies - in China, the United States, Russia, India, and the two Koreas. And it has three flashpoints of global significance in Taiwan, Korea and Kashmir.

Australia will need to use its influence, as part of broader international efforts, to help ease tensions in these places, as we do. Our alliance with the United States - together with the web of

US alliances in the region - is an important strand in underpinning regional prosperity and security. Australia has also established formal political-military dialogues with Japan, Korea, China and India, and we are forging a new trilateral security dialogue with Japan and the United States.

We must continue to develop further our relations in Asia, at the bilateral level, and in regional and multilateral institutions. Trade and investment, amongst the countries of the region and with the rest of the world, will help to ensure prosperity and underpin regional stability and peace. But other links are also important, notably those that develop people to people contacts through education, tourism and cultural relations.

The war against terrorism is of both regional and global significance. Australia is committed to using all the resources at our disposal - military, intelligence, law enforcement, and customs - to counter this dangerous threat to our security.

We must guard against allowing this war to be characterised as something that it clearly is not - a confrontation between Christianity and Islam, a clash of civilisations. I am aware of the particular interest that this University has in building up its program of Arab and Islamic Studies, and its overall commitment to positive dialogue between cultures. I want to encourage you in this work, which will assist us all in meeting this challenge.

This is not an exclusive list. There are many other challenges and opportunities I could mention, but these are some of the key ones. They will be addressed in greater detail in the forthcoming White Paper.

Conclusion

In conclusion, I want to emphasise that we must continue to find the right balance and interplay between Australia's engagement with Asia and our broader international relations. Our approach to the region will continue to be pragmatic, flexible and realistic - responding to the challenges of change while remaining focused on our national interest.

By meeting the challenges and opportunities I have identified, Australia will continue to make a positive contribution to the region and the world - one of which we can be proud, and which will leave a legacy to inspire our children and grandchildren in the years ahead.

