http://www.democrats.org.au

Senator Andrew Bartlett Australian Democrats Immigration Spokesperson

26 March 2002  MEDIA RELEASE                           02/145

Government continues to muddy the waters at ‘children overboard’ inquiry Australian Democrats' Immigration spokesperson, Senator Andrew Bartlett, has expressed disgust at the latest round of vilifying of asylum seekers by the Government as part of the Senate Inquiry into the Children Overboard incident.

Senator Bartlett said new allegations were read out during Committee hearings in an attempt to smear the reputation and character of thousands of asylum seekers, even though the allegations relate to the actions of just a small number of people.

“Once again there is no recognition or acknowledgement of the despair of these people and the immense stress placed upon them as a consequence of the Government’s policy towards asylum seekers,” said Senator Bartlett.

“In fact, evidence provided to the Committee has shown that the Government’s policy not only increases the risks of self-harm amongst desperate people, it increases the pressure on our Navy to uphold Government policy to the extent that peoples lives are put at unnecessary risk.

“Commander Banks gave testimony that he could not tow an obviously unsafe vessel until he was given direction to do so by the Prime Minister.

“There is no doubt that the restrictions placed on Commander Banks resulted in the rescue taking place at the very last moment possible.

“With the knowledge that very small children including a three week old baby were on board, the Commander could not order a rescue. His primary mission was to prevent the boat entering Australian waters, and for it to be sent back on its treacherous journey to Indonesia.

“The Government attempts to justify this immoral policy by, once again, painting all asylum seekers as child abusers.  If the Howard Government's supposed concern for children had any substance, they would not insist on a policy of leaving children, including babies, to the dangers of the open sea in a boat which is taking on water, is obviously overcrowded, barely seaworthy, lacking lifeboats and mechanically unsound.

“It is clear that the Government’s tactic with the Senate Inquiry is to draw attention away from their own deceptions regarding the false allegations of children being thrown overboard by continuing to smear asylum seekers who have no ability to respond.

“The issue is not the alleged actions of a very small number of asylum seekers, the issue is what we, as Australians, do when faced with the prospect of a human tragedy we can prevent,” concluded Senator Bartlett. ENDS

For interview: Senator Bartlett on 0418 743 789 or (02) 6277 3406

