

"A Charter of Citizen's Rights - Will this benefit  Multiculturalism in Australia?"

Keynote presentation given by Dr Sev Ozdowski OAM, Human Rights  Commissioner at the 2002 FECCA National Conference on "Setting the Agenda  for a Multicultural Australia", 5-7 December 2002, Canberra

It is a pleasure to be able to address you today and I would first like to acknowledge the Ngunawal  people, the traditional custodians of the land on which we stand and a reminder that Australia's  cultural traditions began at least 40,000 years ago.

Before commencing I would like to take a minute to reflect on what the recent tragedy in Bali meant to  the victims and especially their families.

Next let me assure you that today I am not here to speak about my Children in Immigration Detention  Inquiry, although I have just come from a very interesting four public hearing involving DIMIA and  ACM on this subject, but rather to talk to you about the subject of an Australian Charter of Citizen's  Rights and multicultural Australia.

And on that topic I would like to acknowledge the pioneering work performed by the ACT in the  general area of a Bill of Rights.

The connection between an Australian charter of rights and multicultural Australia can best be  summed up as follows: minority groups arguably have a harder time enacting change thru Parliament,  because their numbers, of necessity, don't translate into a majority of votes. Therefore they will more  commonly look to the legal system for protection and the legal system needs a "menu" so that it  explicitly knows which rights are capable of legal protection.

The Federal Government's recently legislated package of "Anti-Terror Bills" and especially the  foreshadowed "ASIO Bill" has also focussed the need for close attention on these issues as never  before. Prior to September 11, the issue, for me, fell into the category of useful but not essential. With  the Australian Government getting even more serious about "the war against terrorism", as evidenced  by this legislation, I feel that it now falls into the category of absolutely vital.

For many years I was of the view that Australia with its parliamentary democracy, its independent  judiciary and a free press, provided most of us with an adequate level of human rights protection; a  model for others to follow. Like many of you here today, I was active on arrival in this country, in  remitting information back to Poland about Australia's democratic traditions and institutions. A practice  which undoubtedly benefited our various mother countries as they slowly emerged from undemocratic  systems of government and took their first hesitant steps down the democratic road.

But in recent times I have changed my position. I now think that Australia's democratic safeguards  need, shall I say, "freshening up" if we are to retain a position as one of the freer countries of the  developed world.

Over the last few weeks we have read accounts of ASIO inspired raids on the homes of people who  fall into the category of a minority group within Australian society. There have also been calls for the  banning of a style of dress which also falls into the definition I have just used. If nothing else, these  events highlight the importance that attaches to the rights of minority groups being well documented  and clearly understood, especially by the majority group. This is an important issue for multicultural  Australia.

Let me first paint you a general picture about "rights" in Australia.

What do most Australians think about their current human rights? The answer to that question is  simply: not very much!! When I address different community meetings across Australia I am often  being asked basic questions about our human rights. Some people do not even know that we have a  Constitution or that it includes a few basic "human rights", namely: s.80 which provides for a jury trial  in the State where the alleged Federal offence took place; s.116 denies federal legislative power with

HREOC Website: Speeches

respect to religion; s.117 protects residents of one State from discrimination based upon residence, in  other States; s.41 which seems to imply the right to vote, but still awaits final High Court confirmation.

Then there are the two "economic" rights, s.92 freedom of interstate trade and s.51 on payment on  just terms for Commonwealth acquisitions of property. Hardly an inspiring list!!!

No mention for instance of basic freedoms such as freedom from arbitrary arrest or detention, right to  a fair trial or due process, freedom of association or equality of all persons before the law.

On occasions when I move around our community I am told that human rights are un-democratic and  even un-Australian, because they are imposed on us - in violation of Australian sovereignty - by the  United Nations, which in turn is portrayed as an unaccountable world government.

Very few Australians know that our country is usually involved in drafting any UN human rights  instrument; that each convention needs to be signed and ratified; and that, even then, it has no  domestic legal status unless conferred by specific domestic legislation.

However despite the lack of detailed knowledge of their human rights, Australians have a very strong  sense of social justice. We have a "fair go" culture. Australians know what is "fair" and how the  national cake should be divided.

And those aspirations have been confirmed by legislation since Federation.

In fact, Australia's particular achievement has been the development of a comprehensive system of  protection of economic and social rights. Its foundations were put in place well before the Bolshevik  revolution and long before we ratified the UN Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights in  1975.

Economic rights for adult European males (subsequently partially extended to women but excluding  indigenous Australians for many years) were strongly supported with the introduction of the  conciliation and arbitration system in 1904 and sealed by the "Harvester Decision" of 1907,  guaranteeing a basic wage.

These examples provide evidence of Australia's historical capacity to box above its weight, especially  in the development of international rights and modelling of world's best practice.

Since the 1970s, incorporation of international human rights into domestic legislation has focussed on  measures to ensure greater opportunity for social equality. By now we have federal statutes  prohibiting racial, sex and disability discrimination and recently the Government has proposed to  develop age discrimination legislation.

Australians however do not have a similar focus on civil and political liberties.

As a result, previous attempts to introduce a Bill of Rights to protect these values have failed  completely. A recent NSW parliamentary committee inquiry into the issue went even one step further,  by saying that a Bill of Rights would positively harm public good!!

And there are good historical reasons for such a culture. The Australian Federation was not forged in  a war of independence or revolution and white Australians have no history of struggle against massive  human rights abuses.

Unlike the French and US constitutions which were formed by their citizenry with an eye to restricting  the power of government, so as to give the maximum amount of freedom to the people, Australian  states were bought into existence, literally, by Government action.

Nations established in violence or ones who've experienced long periods of oppression have been  much more likely to entrench those hard won liberties in their legal system. Many of you here today  have either had first hand experience of this or have learnt about it from family stories.

But that is not the experience of white Australia. Gossip from the background to the wheeling and  dealing, that led up to the creation of the Federal Constitution, even has it that some of our 'founding  fathers' were opposed to a statement of individual rights, because of the potential for racial equality  consequences!!

The Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission Act itself distinguishes between civil/political

HREOC Website: Speeches

rights and equality rights. There is a stark contrast between remedies available in race, sex and  disability discrimination versus remedies in civil and political rights. The courts can adjudicate on  equality complaints when the Commission's conciliation fails. But no court can award a remedy to civil  and political rights violations under the Human Rights Act.

To sum up, the Australian contemporary human rights culture is strong in terms of protection of  equality rights but weak on civil liberties. In fact, our relative neglect of civil and political liberties puts  us at odds with other first world countries with which we traditionally compare ourselves.

For example, the legal protection of individual liberties in the USA is considered superior because of  its constitutional Bill of Rights. It has been the subject of many books and films. Similarly the  European Union- it is a world leader in protection of human rights.

And there is a clear trend toward better protection of civil liberties in other first world countries.  Canada adopted its Charter of Rights and Freedoms in 1982 and New Zealand its Bill of Rights in  1990.

Even Britain adopted a Human Rights Act in 1998, despite the previously held view that the common  law adequately safeguarded human rights.

Having said that, I am also very aware that many undemocratic countries have Constitutions which  boast, on paper, their strong adherence to civil rights principles. The former Soviet Union was one  such. The reality is that "civil rights" enforcement via the KGB is not quite the same as enforcement by  the US Supreme Court!!!

The lack of adequate legislative protection of civil liberties in this country is now bringing a range of  negative consequences to Australia. To start with it may result in the erosion of existing civil liberties.  Lack of a statutory statement means there is no yardstick for measurement. It makes both  enforcement through the courts and civic education difficult. It allows executive power to grow.

The effect of this was particularly evident in the recent examination by the Senate's Legal and  Constitutional Legislation Committee of the six "anti-terrorism bills. Imagine how much easier it would  have been to gauge the likely effect of those Bills had there existed a legislative benchmark of "civil  liberties" against which measurement could be made.

Another example: the rule of law is an important foundation of our society. It means that disputes are  determined under the law by independent judges. It provides for the supremacy of law over  administrative actions. But the legislation passed by the Parliament in the context of the Tampa crisis  abolished judicial review of many DIMIA decisions under the Migration Act. So some asylum-seekers  are not permitted their day in court.

My recent inspections of Australia's remote location immigration detention centres at Port Hedland,  Curtin and Woomera tells me that elimination of regular judicial oversight of administrative detention,  especially where it is long-term, is dangerous. In the year since my last visit to these centres, the  mental deterioration of those people is marked and the atmosphere is more like that of a mental  hospital than an immigration detention centre. The quicker they are shut down the better.

The lack of legislation defining our civil liberties means our courts are left with developing common  law in this area. For example, the Australian High Court in 1995 in the Teoh case said that public  officials must take Australian ratified rights under the United Nations Conventions, which are the  closest thing we have in this country to a checklist of civil liberties, into account, where the convention  right is not clearly excluded by domestic law.

And certainly it is fair to say that the "common law" has in recent times evidenced capacity to change  as the nature and values of society change. Precedents which conflict with contemporary social  values have been more readily overruled.

But the courts should not have a determining role in public policy beyond their responsibility to  interpret the laws as laid down by Parliament. Therefore, it would be more satisfactory if this process  was developed by Australian-own legislation, drawn from an appropriate mix of UN Conventions and  reflecting the Australian experience.

In time this would produce a body of Australian human rights jurisprudence which would influence  international thinking on these subjects. Another the key issue for Australia, however, is whether our  lack of focus on individual freedoms suppresses Australia's competitiveness in a globalised economy?  There is an enormous body of evidence that the importance of the individual in any State must never

HREOC Website: Speeches

be underestimated, especially in economic terms.

A current example is the most successful contemporary world economy, the US. It is characterised by  a minimum of State interference. Individual freedoms are encouraged, giving rise to "can do" capacity,  innovation and collective reward. Protections are provided by the US Constitution with its Bill of Rights  which allows individuals aggressive pursuit of their rights through legal action a la Erin Brockovich.  However as the Enron and WorldCom debacles illustrate, a very strong regulatory oversight regime is  also essential.

In the case of my personal experience, the total inability of the communist state to utilise individual  enterprise, innovation and aspirations was undoubtedly one of the more significant causes of its  failure. In other words, individual enterprise and innovation are one of the key factors in the history of  economic development. To put it simply, they tend to flourish in a culture where the rights of the  individual are respected and capable of self initiated enforcement. When focussing on Australia, one  could say, that by and large up until the late 1960's, the "Government as big provider" system referred  to earlier in my speech (as compared to individual rights) worked reasonably well for most white  Australians.

But the last 30 years have produced massive structural changes, in the search for greater economic  efficiency, in the way business, both domestic and international, operates. Australians find themselves  confronting situations where individuality has assumed far greater importance. Just think about labour  market changes alone. When I joined the public service in 1980 I joined it for life. Wage centralisation  was paramount. Today nobody works in the public service for life any more and most are on individual  performance based contracts.

At the same time, traditional protections have weakened; trade union membership is declining.  Governments of all persuasions are vacating the traditional "big brother" roles and pulling back to  basic service provision of health, education and law and order.

Also some of the other key stakeholders are now performing their roles in a different manner.

The dominance of the major political parties and the rigidity of their discipline undermine the prospects  of individual protection at the parliamentary level.

The judiciary is effective BUT limited as Justice Brennan said in Mabo: "in discharging its duty to  declare the common law of Australia, this court is not free to adopt rules that accord with  contemporary notions of justice and human rights if their adoption would fracture the skeleton of  principle which gives the body of our law its shape and internal consistency."

The media, using a "squeaky wheel" approach is still capable of championing individual causes. This  is because they have the ability to mould public opinion and impact on decision makers. But change  via media is necessarily a haphazard approach to public policy and to the protection of human rights.

This loss of traditional protection from government is not well understood by many Australians and yet  they feel threatened by the changing trends. To them economic rationalism means loss of control over  individual destiny. This partly explained the attraction of Pauline Hanson - who seemed to articulate  the fears of many ordinary Australians, but failed to provide answers.

So I put it to you that there is a "civil liberties black hole" at the heart of this issue.

All systems need harmony to produce optimal outcomes and harmony requires checks and balances.  It is evident that in contemporary Australia, the capacity for individuals to protect their own rights has,  in time, become severely depleted. This fact is not widely understood, but we all feel instinctively less  secure. The result is that we become change and risk averse as we try to stop things spinning more  and more out of our personal control.

The nub of the argument is that governments have been so busy dismantling the old ways in their  drive for efficiency, that they have neglected to erect appropriate new safeguards for us as individuals.

And yet there is data to hand that suggests that Australians are growing more comfortable with the  notion of civil rights and freedoms. In opinion surveys over the last decade or so, we have  overwhelmingly agreed on various rights as fundamental. Some of them received 100% endorsement  including freedom of political speech and freedom from arbitrary arrest.

Further, more than half of those surveyed believed that their rights are NOT well protected against  unfair government action.

HREOC Website: Speeches

It is also encouraging to read data that public opinion favours better protection for individual rights. In  1991, 72% of ordinary citizens surveyed wanted a bill of rights setting out basic rights and freedoms  for individuals. It is possible that individual Australians are now worrying more, that majority generated  laws, even in a democracy, are not always necessarily "JUST". Minority groups and individuals can be  unfairly oppressed.

So, where do we go from here? One possible safeguard would be to legislate for our own Australian  Citizens' Charter, in the same way most Australian corporations, even banks, have done with  "Customers Rights". It simply makes good business sense.

There is a real political opportunity here for Australians to be re-empowered by these rights. As a  result people will have less to fear from the increasingly interventionist executive arm of Government,  whatever its political colour. I am suggesting that these rights would provide an opportunity for  Government to re-engage with the Australian people in a tangible way.

So to sum up, I believe an Australian Citizens' Charter would assist people by replacing some of the  government protections that previously existed, but have now disappeared. This may then encourage  us to react more pro-actively to the global economic changes that are engulfing us all. This could have  profoundly positive economic implications for individual Australians.

Of course issues such as the Tampa asylum-seekers incident, September 11, Afghanistan and now  Bali have added complexity to this issue. Australians who believe in basic human rights are also  naturally concerned about their security.

The proposed curtailing of personal freedoms explicit in the Government's "war on terrorism", which  broadly I think, we accept the need for, makes a "citizens' charter even more essential. In the absence  of a legislated list of existing rights, it is difficult to measure what we are being asked to give up when  the Government proposes such security measures. We have no easy way to assess the  "proportionality" of their proposals.

But I must sound one final cautionary note. Recent overseas experience, such as the US and  England, in their anti-terrorist laws post September 11, are more destructive of individual rights than in  Australia. This is despite those countries having a Bill of Rights. So I am not suggesting that we here  present today could totally relax, if only Australia had a charter of rights.

But multicultural Australia has much to offer on this issue. Many of you have first hand experience of  regimes which engaged in systematic abuse of the human rights of minority groups, often using the  excuse that it was necessary in order to protect the majority. We should be prepared to speak about  those experiences so that our fellow Australians, who mercifully, have been largely spared this kind of  behaviour can make a more informed judgement, on the important issue of a Charter of Citizens'  Rights.

