ADMINISTRATIVE LAW -THE ESSENTIALS 19

Trends  Consiste  Law Reform  HON DUNCAN QRR MI?*

In my recent book, Elect the Ambassador! Building Democracy in a  GlobaZised World,l I detail and analyse some of the dramatic social  and economic changes experienced in Australia during my time as  a member of the Federal Parliament, which began in the mid-

1980s. These changes have altered our society and its democratic  processes irrevocably.  During that same period, and of course stretching back some-  what longer, there has been no less significant change to Australia’s

democratic processes, effected by changes to the structure and  content of the system of administrative law review in Australia, at  both Commonwealth and State/Tkrritory level. We have come a long  way since the groundbreaking impacts of the Kerr, Eland and Ellicott

Committees.2 Major highlights have included the enactment of the Administrative Decisions (Judicia2 Review) Act 1977 (Cth), the enact-  ment of freedom of information legislation in all jurisdictions  except the Northern Tkrritory, and the establishment and evolution

*

1

2

Shadow Minister for Justice and Customs; Member for Denison.  D Kerr, Elect the Ambassador! Building Democracy in a Globalised World (Pluto  Press, 2001).  Commonwealth Administvative Review Committee Report, Parl Paper No 144 of 1971

(Kerr Committee Report); Committee on Administrative Discretions Final Repovt,  Parl Paper No 316 of 1973 (Bland Committee Final Report); Committee of Review  of Prerogative Writ Procedure, Prerogative Writ Procedures: Report of Committee of  Review, Parl Paper No 56 of 1973 (Ellicott Committee Report). The reports are  reprinted in R Creyke & J McMillan (eds), The Making of Commonwealth  Administrative Law (CIPL, ANU, 1996).

of tribunals with general merit review jurisdiction akin to the  commonwealth Administrative Appeals Tribunal. The important  investigatory roles in the administrative law system that are playe  in each Australian jurisdiction by agencies such as the offices of  the Qmbudsman, and by human rights and anti-corruption agencies,  have also evolved greatly since the mid-1980s.

The net result of these changes is that Australia has developed  a system of administrative law that is widely acknowledged as a  world leader. Indeed, it is understood that the soon to be released  U M  Leggatt Report on Tribunals3 draws heavily on the Australian

experience, as too did South Africa in the far-reaching reforms it  introduced to its own administrative justice system.  There is, of course, always room for improvement in any  system. And even the most talented and successful wunderkind  needs guidance. That is why the last Labor government in Australia  gave serious attention to reviewing our maturing administrative  law system to improve its performance. In my then capacity

as

Minister for Justice, I asked the Administrative Review Council  to undertake an inquiry into the effectiveness of Commonwealth  review tribunals. The result was the Better Decisions report of 1995,4

a work whose recommendations still have not been implemented,  but which stands as an important resource for law reform in this  important area.  I will not dwell on too many historical details in this paper.

Rather, the topic I have been asked to address is should the future  design of the Australian administrative law system be a local  jurisdictional matter, with each parliament and government free  to adopt its own model? Or should there be national minimum

standards?

REAT

My view can be shortly stated. Subject to constitutional limitations,  there should be greater commonality on administrative law prin-  ciples across the country. This is not to say, of course, that there  should be complete uniformity. We are all familiar with the

importance in the Australian federal system of allowing reasonable  and appropriate differences to exist between Commonwealth, State  and Wrritory legal schemes, and of the benefits of constructive and  spirited negotiations between the senior law officers of various  jurisdictions in relation to those differences.

3 Review of Tribunals, Dibunals for Usevs-One System, One Service (Sir Andrew  Leggatt, Chairman, Lord Chancellor’s Department, 2001).  Editors’ Note: this report recommended, among other things, a statutory right to  reasons, and the creation of a generalist administrative tribunal.  Administrative Review Council, Bettev Decisions: Review of CommonweaZth Merits  Review %bunds, Report No 39 (AGPS, 1995).  4

ADMINISTRATIVE LAW -THE ESSENTIALS

With that important caveat, it is nonetheless clear that the  administrative law system would benefit from greater convergence -  both in principle and in practice-across jurisdictions. This is not  least because of the significant growth in recent years in national

scheme laws across the broadest range of subject matter, from road  transport, to agricultural marketing, welfare, labelling, gene tech-  nology and so on. These laws increasingly affect the lives of the  widest range of Australians, in a wide variety of ways. It is clearly

desirable that there be maximum consistency across the nation in  terms of legal redress associated with government decision-making  in implementing this large, and growing, web of laws.  The central impediment to national consistency in Australian

administrative law systems has been constitutional. Constitutional  arrangements at State, Territory and Commonwealth level have had  a particularly pronounced differential effect on the workings of  administrative law tribunals. Two key points of difference are: differ-  ences in jurisdiction; and differences in judicial leader~hip.~

Jurisdictional differences between the ~ommonwealth, States  and Brritories  The first constitutionally-based point of jurisdictional difference  results from the absence of a formal limitation of separation of  powers at State and Territory level. As Robin Creyke has noted, this-

... has freed State and Tkrritories to grant jurisdiction to tribunals in a  manner which is not possible in the Commonwealth. The result has  been the creation of tribunals with a truly polyglot jurisdiction.6

The growth of this polyglot-or, as Creyke terms it, “‘Christmas  pudding”-jurisdiction has meant that we now see executive,  legislative and judicial powers being exercised by the generalist  administrative tribunals at State and Territory level. This has been  particularly the case in New South Wales and Victoria and, to a some-  what lesser extent, in the Australian Capital Wrritory. Creyke

identifies a growing cultural shift in consequence in the manner of  operation of State and lkrritory tribunals, as cross-membership of  panels is encouraged, especially across the administrative/  civil divide. She argues that this will lead increasingly to “cross-  fertilisation of practices which will inevitably tend towards the

quasi-judicial mode of procedure”.  This is  in distinct contrast to both the Commonwealth model  that served as the foundational blueprint for these State and  Brritory bodies (that is, the AAT) and, to a more dramatic extent, its  proposed replacement (the Administrative Review Tribunal) -which  the Coalition intends to place firmly at the administrative, rather

5

6 Ibid.

For a more detailed exposition of these points of difference, see R Creyke,  “Tribunals: Divergence and Loss” (2001) 29 Fed L Rev 403.

than judicial, extreme of potential models for administrative  review b ~ d i e s . ~

Leadership differences between the C  Wrritorie s  The second relevant point of jurisdictional difference is not discon-  nected from the first. It relates to the judicial leadership of tribunals.  At State level-following on from the ground-breaking example set at

Commonwealth level in relation to the AAT-there has been a strong  preference for judicial appointments to the senior positions in  administrative tribunals, including to their presidency. Again, this  has been the case most especially in New South Wales and 'Victoria,  where there has been a close, mutually beneficial and-again-

cross-fertilising professional relationship between the courts and the  administrative tribunals. This has had a valuable practical effect on  the quality of tribunal decision-making, on the public reputation of  the tribunals, and on the internal culture of the tribunals.

Yet at Commonwealth level the Coalition Government now  proposes to reject these potential benefits, as the President of its  proposed ART will not be a judicial appointment. Incredibly, the  Coalition Government has not even proposed that the President be a  legal practitioner of any standing or have any experience in the

area of administrative review.8 This proposal runs counter to both  the letter and spirit of the recommendation in the Better Decisions  report that the head of such a body-  ... have high legal skills, high level experience in decision-making and

dispute resolution, and a n  ability to determine authoritatively any  decision from the diverse range of matters that would come before the  tribunal [qualities that] would ordinarily (but not necessarily) be found  in a person who is a judge, or who has legal skills broadly equivalent to

a judge.g

Of course, since the trilogy of High Court Decisions - G T - ~ Z Z ~ ~ ~ ,   Kable'' and - there must be doubts as to the constitutionality  of appointing a judge as head of any Commonwealth tribunal,  including the proposed ART, especially if they are more closely

allied to the executive and are subject to ministerial directions, even  if only relating to pr0~edure.l~ These doubts should not be over-

7

8

9

10  11  12

13

Editors' Note: The Administrative Review Tribunal Bill 2000 (Cth) and the  Administrative Review Tribunal (Consequential Amendments) Bill 2000 (Cth)  were referred to the Senate Standing Committee on Legal and Constitutional  Affairs, which reported on 14 February 2001, with a dissenting report by the  Australian Labor Party and the Australian Democrats. The Bills were rejected by  the Senate on 26 February 2001.

Administrative Review Tribunal Bill 2000 (Cth) s 12.  Better Decisions report, above n 4 at [8.32].  Grollo v Palmer (1995) 184 CLR 348.  Kable v Director of Public Prosecutions (NSW) (1996)189 CLR 51.

WiZson v Minister for Aboriginal and ?brres Strait Islander Affairs (the Hindmarsh  Island case) (1996) 189 CLR 1.  These cases introduced the notion of functions which were incompatible with  judicial functions for Chapter I11 judges, that is, judges exercising federal judicial

power, whether at the Commonwealth or the State level.

ADMINISTRATIVE LAW -THE ESSENTIALS 2 3

stated, however, as this potential impediment to judicial appoint-  ment in the ART context is clearly not absolute. The Coalition’s  position on this issue arguably is yet another example of its  unwillingness to approach law reform with a more open and creative  mind, in order to develop the best possible legal structures and

institutions that deliver the highest quality justice to Australians.  This criticism is not opportunistic political point-scoring on my  part. The Shadow Attorney-General and the Opposition have consist-  ently challenged the Coalition’s ART proposal. This is not because  we are opposed in principle to reforming the Commonwealth  tribunal system by bringing the specialist tribunals under “one  umbrella”. Rather, it is because the Coalition’s specific reform  proposal does not appropriately implement the important recom-

mendations of the Administrative Review Council  as stated in the

Better Decisions report. As a consequence, the Coalition’s proposal  poses a serious threat both to the quality and independence of  the administrative decision-making process.

ITIES BETWEEN E C Q ~ ~ O N W E A L T ~ ,

I have outlined some impediments to greater uniformity between  administrative law systems in Australia. These are substantial  impediments deriving from important constitutional checks and  balances that are integral to Australian democracy. Like many

such impediments, however, these impediments are neither absolute  nor entirely immutable. They present some opportunities for  constructive law reform.  These impediments aside, it must not be forgotten that there  has nonetheless been

a very successful marriage of commonwealth,  State and Brritory minds in the area of direction-setting in adminis-  trative law.

Tribunals with broad jurisdiction  As one important example, the States have tended- albeit belatedly,  and then with regional variations that do deserve some mention-  to adopt the Commonwealth’s generalist administrative tribunal

model. That model was picked up first in Victoria with its AAT, then  in the ACT and in South Australia. In South Australia the regional  variation was to make the administrative appeals body  a division

of a court-the District Court in that State-partly as a cost-saving  measure and partly so that it was not such a threat to the judiciary  and judicial culture. Subsequently, NSW and Victoria, set up res-  pectively their Administrative Decisions Tribunal and the Victorian

Civil and Administrative Tribunal, with a combination of civil  and administrative jurisdiction as the maj or departure from the  Commonwealth model. In Tasmania at present there is a proposal  to commit the merit review jurisdiction to the Tasmanian

Magistrates Court. I understand that Western Australia is also

looking at this issue14 following on from the proposal by the Western  Australian Law Reform Commission for a Western Australian Civil  and Administrative Tribunal (WACAT), which would be similar in  structure and functions to the AIYT a

Significantly, the following ess ents of Common-

wealth administrative review tribunals are also core elements of  merit review tribunals at State level. In summary:  they conduct de novo merits review (according to the same  meaning of that concept as developed by the Commonwealth

AAT);

they are not intended to be court-substitute bodies (at least in their administrative jurisdictions), and hence are not  bound by rules of evidence, and they operate informally and  to an extent in an inquisitorial fashion; and  0 they are relatively cheap and accessible for applicants for

review.

0 they have wide jurisdiction;

e

mbudsmen  A further important example of Commonwealth/State convergence  on administrative law matters is that the States have all now  adopted the institution of Ombudsman - again, with variations that

deserve mention. Both Queensland and Western Australia have  Parliamentary Commissioners rather than Ombudsman as their  officials, and the greater closeness of the officials in those States to  the Parliament changes the nature of the body to an extent. Once

again, however, there are core notions in the legislation setting up all  the offices. Hence the Ombudsman’s principal function is investiga-  tion and recommendation-it is not adjudicative. The core prin-  ciples against which the efficacy of administrative action is tested  by the Ombudsman are common to all jurisdictions; although the  breadth of the Ombudsman’s powers is somewhat different. Again,

these differences lie at the margins. For example, some Ombudsmen  lack the power to consider policing matters; some cannot investigate  FOI matters; and some cannot investigate decisions by Ministers.  The fact that every jurisdiction has adopted the office is  indicative both of the success of this mode of administrative  redress and of its importance

in contributing to greater national

consistency in administrative law procedure.  It should be noted, however, that a divergence may be devel-  oping at present between Commonwealth and State approaches, as  the office of the Commonwealth Ombudsman displays an increased  focus on “own motion” and systemic reviews-as being of greater

14 Editors’ Note: The report by Michael Barker QC, Western Australian Civil and  Administrative Review ?i.ibunaZ, was published on 5 July 2002.  15 For a fuller account, see J McMillan, “Merit Review and the AAT-a Concept  Develops’’ in J McMillan (ed), The AAT-TLueniy Years Forward (AIAL, 1998) 32.

ADMINISTRATIVE LAW -THE ESSENTIALS LQ

overall benefit for the limited resources available to that office, than  investigations of individual complaints. This potential divergence  may of course in time lead to a reconvergence, as the trend could  be picked up and run with at State level.

Another area in which trends of Commonwealth/State diverg-  ence and reconvergence might develop in the future relates to the  extent to which Ombudsmen will scrutinise actions taken by private  sector bodies performing government functions under contracted-  out arrangements (as does, for example, the Parliamentary Commis-  sioner in the United Kingdom).

A second untested area and zone of possible Commonwealth/  State divergence and reconvergence relates to the extent to which  Ombudsmen may begin to take explicit account of rights juris-  prudence drawn from domestic and international law sources. l6  Arguably we are beginning to see this latter development in an

implicit sense- two important recent examples being the Common-  wealth Ombudsman’s March 2001 reports of own motion investiga-  tions into the supervision by the Department of Immigration and  Multicultural Affairs of Immigration Centres and Immigration

Detainees held in State Correctional Fa~i1ities.l~ Both reports raise  some important concerns about the human rights dimensions of  the Howard Government’s management of the mandatory detention  regime, highlighting problematic aspects of detaining asylum

seekers in prisons or prison-like conditions.

In this paper I have provided a broad-brush overview  in an attempt

to highlight two opposing trends in the development of adminis-  trative law. One is the “trend of resistance” which operates against  national uniformity, resistance occasioned largely by constitutional  (but also political) impediments to harmonisation of approaches

at Commonwealth, State and Wrritory levels. The other is the “trend  of consistency” which has seen successful initiatives such as the  Ombudsman model, many key aspects of the generalist tribunal  model and FOI legislation, copied at State and Wrritory level.

These opposing trends are  in constant tension. They play

themselves out in more complex ways in application to different  aspects of administrative law that I have not discussed in this  paper - for example, in relation to administrative law remedies, and  in relation to standing.

16

17

See finrther, eg, R Snell, ‘%wards an Understanding o f  a Constitutional Misfit:  Four Snapshots of the Ombudsman Enigma” in C Finn (ed), Sunrise or Sunset?  Administvative Law in the New Millennium (AIAL, 2000) 188.  Commonwealth Ombudsman, Report of an Own Motion Investigation into

Immigration Detainees held in State Correctional Facilities (AGPS, 2001), and  Commonwealth Ombudsman, Report of an Own Motion Investigation into the  Department of Immigration and Multicultural Affairs’ Immigration Detention  Centres (AGPS, 2001).

I have already indicated my general preference, subject to  constitutional limitations, for outcomes in administrative law  reform inclining towards the victory of consistency over divergence.  I have not attempted, however, to be too prescriptive about the

content of those outcomes. Good law reform-and, indeed, res-  ponsible political representation - depends upon effective consulta-  tion as much as upon the imposition of pre-existing ideological  preference. It also depends upon an ability and willingness to see the  big picture: to understand where we might be heading as a society,

to discuss and determine where we should be heading, to discern  what is the best way to get there, and to negotiate compromises and  difficulties along the way. This is how we bring about law reform  that enhances rather than undermines Australian democracy.

