1

Young women in the contemporary Australian women’s movement:

collective identity, discursive politics and “postsocialist” dilemmas





In the mid to late 1990s the Australian women’s movement was consumed by suggestions

of inter-generational warfare that distracted movement actors from some important tasks.

Questions  were  raised  about  the  presence  and  visibility  of  young  women  in  the

movement.  Assertions  that  some  forms  of  feminist  praxis  were  ‘good’,  and  some  were

not, undervalued the value of the important work being done in this ‘between the waves’

moment. In this paper I contend that young women are playing a key role in maintaining

the political space available for Australian feminist activism in a “postsocialist”1 context.

I argue against the generational paradigm as a model for understanding changes that occur

within social movements over time. Further I argue that, despite both media rhetoric and

the  claims  of  some  young  feminists,  there  is  little  to  suggest  that  the  activism  of

contemporary  young  feminists  constitutes  a  ‘third  wave’  of  the  women’s  movement.  I

offer  an  understanding  of  this  “cross-generational  moment”  (Zita  1997:1)  that  draws  a

more  productive and  inclusive  picture  of  the  role  of  young women  in  the contemporary

Australian women’s movement.



An exploration of contemporary young feminists’ processes of collective identity provides

a  useful  and  timely  alternative  to  the  intrinsic  limitations  of  feminist  generationalism.

Alberto Melucci’s (1985, 1989, 1995, 1996) conception of collective identity as a process

directs  us  towards  an  examination  of  young  feminists’  shared  cognitive  definitions

concerning the ends, means, and field of action; their networks of active relationships; and

their  emotional  investment  in  their  activism  (1995:44-5).  This  constructivist  approach

avoids the reductive noose of generationalism by understanding that the apparent unity of

collective  action  is  in  fact  discursively  constructed  through  movement  participants’



1  Nancy Fraser (1997) defines “postsocialism” as the absence of a credible, progressive alternative to the  current order, marked by a false antithesis between claims for recognition and the need for redistribution.  Fraser always places the term “postsocialist” in quotation marks ‘to signal the effort to maintain a critical  posture’ in relation to the “general horizon within which political thought necessarily moves today”  (1997:1). I concur with this critical stance and therefore continue Fraser’s use of punctuation.

2

continuous  processes  of  reflexive  discussion  and  contestation  over  key  concepts.  For

young Australian feminists two of these key concepts have been their role in the broader

women’s  movement  and  their  relationship  to  older  feminists.  It  is  these  issues  that  this

paper explores.



With the notable exception of scholars such as Chilla Bulbeck (1997, 1999, 2000, 2001)

and  Anita  Harris  (1998,  1999a,  1999b,  2001),  the  issue  of  generationalism  in  the

Australian women’s movement has been largely abandoned as an area of scholarship and

media  interest.  Certainly  in  Australia  there  has  been  little  questioning  of  the

appropriateness  of  the  generational  metaphor  or  the  alleged  age-based  split  in  the

women’s  movement.  In  the  United  States  scholars  have  suggested  that  age  is  not

particularly  relevant  in  considering  changes  that  have  occurred  in  the  women’s

movement  over  time.  For  example,  Nancy  Whittier  (1995)  argues  that  age  is  less

important  than  the  point  in  time  at  which  movement  participants  are  politicised  in

determining  what  constitutes  a  “political  generation”.  While  this  is  undoubtedly  true  it

does not follow that age is not a useful  and important  avenue of enquiry in developing

new  understandings  of  the  contemporary  women’s  movement.  The  very  fact  that  the

debates that occurred within the media, and within the women’s movement, in Australia

in the 1990s were based on questions of generational cohort make it essential to explore

age  as  an  axis  of  difference  with  the  movement.  Further,  I  would  argue  that  while  the

concept  of  generationalism  does  not  hold  much  explanatory  power  in  itself,  there  are

important differences in the ways the young women are performing feminist praxis, and

these  differences  need  to  be  understood,  and  hopefully  embraced,  by  the  wider

movement.



It  has  been  suggested  by  several  scholars  that  the  women  who  became  a  part  of  the

women’s movement in the early 1970s were largely ignorant of women’s history in this

country  (Lake  1999,  Sawer  and  Simms  1993,  Curthoys  1992).  To  some  extent  this

allowed  second  wave  feminists  to  break  with  tradition  and  engage  in  processes  of

collective  identity  that  were  fresh  and  innovative.  For  contemporary  young  Australian

feminists,  however,  almost  the  reverse  is  the  case.  Contemporary  feminists  are  all  too

3

aware  of  the history of  second  wave  activism  in  this  country and,  in  order  to  assert  the

unique  qualities  of  their  own  feminism(s),  are  forced  to  define  themselves  against  the

previous ‘wave’ or ‘generation’.  This has resulted in an apparent rejection of much of the

second wave that has taken place in a very public manner, with certain key texts attaining

a high degree of popularity and media coverage2.



Changing contexts



Following  the  dismissal  of  the  Whitlam  Labor  government  in  1975,  the  conservative

government  of  Malcolm  Fraser  attempted  to  wind  back  the  feminist  machinery  of

government  that  had  been  established  in  the  early  1970s  (Dowse  1982)  and  to  “cut

funding and limit federal responsibilities for women’s issues wherever possible” (Kaplan

1996:37). At the same time, the movement itself was becoming more diffuse, in part due

to  a  recognition  of  the  impossibility  of  sisterhood,  but  also  due  to  the  development  of

expertise  on  particular  issues  by  different  groups  within  the  movement.  Reade  (1994)

argues that “the movement splintered into a collection of specific interest groups which

began to speak for and act upon issues reflecting their particular experiences” (1994:212).

The  idea  of  “splintering”,  however,  fails  to  capture  the  strength  of  the  submerged

networks  that  continued  to  operate  within  and  between  groups.  Certainly  to  the  public

eye, and even to some women in the movement, there appeared to be a lack of impetus or

momentum.  I  would  argue,  however,  that  these  structural  and  organisational  changes

merely  reflected  the  movement’s  necessary  transformation  to  accommodate  a  different

political opportunity structure.



In her study of the contemporary radical women’s movement in the United States, Nancy

Whittier  (1995)  argues  that  longtime  feminists  found  it  difficult  to  remain  politically

active during the 1980s due to the destabilisation of the women’s movement that resulted

from “the constriction of both political opportunities and economic resources” (1995:14).

Longtime feminist activists also found some of the changes in the movement itself to be

at  odds  with  their  original  aims  and  ideologies.  While  these  “veterans”  have  remained

2  Both Trioli’s (1996) Generation f and Bail’s (1996) DIY feminism were ranked in the top ten bestsellers in  October 1996 (Bulbeck 1997:3).

4

consistent  in  their  politics  and  their  focus  “the  women’s  movement  as  a  whole  has

changed sharply around them” (1995:19). This has also been the case in Australia where

the  focus  for  many  feminists  became  the  necessary  fight  to  preserve  (and  extend)  the

funding  for  a  wide  range  of  services  that  the  movement  had  secured  during the  1970s.

However this focus on state funding led to the further institutionalisation of feminism at

the expense of the movement’s more radical goals. For some this has meant a new form

of coalition politics such as Whittier found in the United States, where “other movements

absorbed  feminist  activists  and  helped  to  preserve  and  disseminate  feminist  ideology,

culture and innovations in strategy, tactic and organisational structure”(1995:189). While

these new coalitions have been important for contemporary young feminists, for longtime

feminists these changes were disturbing and contributed to the view  that  the movement

was  failing  to  thrive.  In  terms  of  instrumental  policy  goals,  the  level  of  continued

pressure  from  the  women’s  movement  that  was  necessary  to  maintain  the  pace  of

institutional change was lacking (Lake 1999:260), however the need for the movement to

evolve and take other forms during this period was unavoidable.



Transformations  in  organisational  form  and  the  antifeminist  agenda  of  the  Fraser

government  were  by  no  means  the  only  political  changes  that  the  Australian  women’s

movement had to contend with in this period. The introduction of economic rationalism

(and  its  attendant  neo  liberalism)  under  the  Hawke  and  Keating  governments  “hurled

Australian society into a headlong clash between the necessity to compete internationally

for export markets and an ever-eroding social justice agenda” (Kaplan 1996:155). While

the rhetoric of the Hawke and Keating governments was more favourable to the women’s

movement than the Fraser government had been, the reality of global economics and the

rise of the New Right meant that the social, cultural and institutional spaces available for

social  movements  was  rapidly  decreasing.  Traditional  forms  of  movement  activism  in

this climate became untenable, as Mark Davis (1997) argues:

Geopolitical  balances  have…shifted  with  the  end  of  the  cold  war;  the  global

political is operating in new ways, and the sorts of struggles that take place within

it have changed. The idea of public culture has dwindled, with public institutions

being privatised or corporatised and media ownership being concentrated in fewer

5

and  fewer  hands.  Economies  have  become  globalised,  markets  rationalised  and

corporations  downsized,  making this  a  different  world  from  that  of  even  twenty

years ago (1997:17).

For young women growing up in this “postsocialist” era the possibilities of politics and

activism  appeared  markedly  different  from  the  possibilities  that  feminists  in  the  1970s

encountered.



The other notable occurrence of the 1980s and 1990s to have a profound  impact on the

young  women  growing  up  in  this  period  was  the  political  and  social  backlash  against

feminism  and  the  women’s  movement.  The  backlash  included  conservative  attacks  on

feminism and the women’s movement for their alleged destruction of the family and the

damage that they had done to men’s lives (Faludi 1991). The extensive media coverage

that this publication garnered resulted in the term “backlash” entering popular discourse

and becoming a part of the feminist idiom in ways that could not “fail to have an effect

on most young feminists” (Bailey 1997:24). In  fact for most young women growing up

and coming to feminism (or not) during the 1990s, who had missed out on the euphoria

of 1970s feminism, the discourse of backlash was far more prominent in discussions of

feminism than other perhaps more celebratory tales of feminist history. In Australia this

anxiety about feminism came to a head with the generational debates of the mid 1990s,

which in turn overlapped with another “very significant shift to neoconservatism and the

New  Right  that  coincided  with  the  end  of  thirteen  years  of  Labor  government  and  the

election  of  the  Liberal-national  Party  coalition”  (Mead  1997:9)  under  Prime  Minister

John Howard.



The strength of the conservative backlash against feminism during the 1980s and 1990s

added  further  pressure  to  what  were  increasing  internal  divisions  within  the  women’s

movement (Sommerville 2001). These divisions came about as many feminists attempted

to correct some of the perceived ‘errors’ of  the 1970s to do with exclusion and racism.

Others, however, blamed the postmodern turn in feminist theory for the destruction of the

political category “women” and expressed  their fears  that this attention to diversity and

difference would leave the women’s movement unable to successfully articulate political

6

demands  (see  for  example  Kaplan  1996,  MacDonald  1996).  These  social,  cultural,

political, economic and even theoretical trends combined during the early 1990s to create

the myth of “postfeminism”. Deborah Siegel (1997a) argues that the popular media uses

this term to describe

…a  moment  when  women’s  movements  are,  for  whatever  reasons,  no  longer

moving,  no  longer  vital,  no  longer  relevant;  the  term  suggests  that  the  gains

forged by previous generations of women have so completely pervaded all tiers of

our  social  existence  that  those  still  “harping”  about  women’s  victim  status  are

embarrassingly out of touch (1997a:75).

While  this  postfeminist  condition  has  never  in  fact  existed,  the  continuing,  neoliberal,

assertions  that  it  was  a  reality  significantly  undermined  the  women’s  movement’s

standing  as  a  creditable  political  player.  So,  under  attack  from  the  New  Right,  in  a

changing  political  and  economic  climate  and  paying  necessary  attention  to  their  own

processes of collective identity, feminists and the women’s movement seemed, at least to

those  not  a  part  of  it,  to  all  but  disappear  from  public  consciousness.  It  was  in  this

confused climate that the ‘generation wars’ exploded in the Australian media.



Is this the Third Wave?



As  in  the  United  States  and  Britain,  Australian  feminists  engaged  in  a  high-profile

‘generational debate’, which as Jane Long (2001) recalls was “hard to avoid” during the

1990s due to the “steady stream of writing which debated the extent to which feminism

was allegedly unravelling along the seams of youth and age” (2001:8). The debates that

occurred  during  the  1990s  have  been  highly  influential,  particularly  in  manipulating

public  perceptions  regarding  the  ‘health’  or  otherwise  of  the  Australian  women’s

movement.  Anxiety  from  older  feminists  (Summers  2002  [1993],  Greer  1999,  Kaplan

1996) about the whereabouts and style of younger feminists framed a set of “competing

discourses  about  young  feminists”  (Harris  2001:1)  that  have  continued  to  influence

contemporary young Australian feminists’ processes of collective identity.



7

Since the mid-1990s younger and older feminists, both in Australia and elsewhere, have

been seeking to name and describe the changes that they see in the women’s movement.

One  of  the  most  common  descriptors  has  been  the  idea  that  contemporary  young

feminists  have  formed  the  ‘third  wave’  of  the  movement  in  the  tradition  of  the  two

previous,  high  profile  waves.  Many  young  feminists  in  the  United  States  identify

themselves as belonging to the ‘Third Wave’. Some, such as Amy Richards, (co-author

with Jennifer Baumgardner (2000) of ManifestA: young women, feminism and the future)

have been involved in organising specifically third wave activism. Richards co-founded

the  Third  Wave  Foundation,  a  national  organisation  of  young  feminists  in  the  United

States that claims 5,000 members and manages to raise US$300,000 in funds each year.

In  Australia,  however,  there  is  nothing  on  such  a  large  scale  as  the  Third  Wave

Foundation,  and  the  groups  of  young  feminists  that  exist  here  more  closely  resemble

submerged  networks  than  high  profile  organisations.  Therefore  the  question  must  be

asked: Is this the third wave?  At the present time there is little evidence to suggest that

we are in another wave of feminist activism that in any way resembles the previous two

waves.  We  cannot  simply  import  a  term  that  may (or  may  not)  accurately describe  the

situation  in  the  United  States.  Further,  to  discuss  the  work  of  contemporary  young

Australian feminists as if it were already a wave is to miss the significance of what they

are  actually  doing.  Between  the  waves  feminism  has  historically  been  ignored  or

forgotten,  and  mislabelling  contemporary  feminist  activism  ‘the  third  wave’  merely

repeats this error.



This rejection of the term ‘third wave’ as a descriptor for contemporary young feminist

activism is not to suggest that the concept of waves of activism is not a useful one. Waves

are a powerful metaphor, calling up images of “beauty and power” (Bailey 1997:17) and

suggesting  a  ferocious  energy,  surging  forward  in  a  motion  that  cannot  be  stopped.

Jacqulyn Zita (1997) suggests that the idea of a wave “allows us to shape a space that has

both  continuity  and  discontinuity  with  the  past”  (1997:6).  This  idea  allows  for  the

possibility  of  understanding  both  the  high  profile  peaks  of  activism  and  the  times  of

abeyance such as we are in at the present. Cathryn Bailey (1997), however, cautions that,

given the impossibility of drawing any clear  line  between  the end of  one  wave  and the

8

beginning  of  another  the  “political  motivations”  for  claiming  one  group  of  feminists  is

chronologically or sequentially different from another must be questioned. Bailey argues

that  waves  can  only  be  properly  defined  in  their  historical  context  where  differences

between them can be clearly understood. Anita Harris (2001) suggests a similar degree of

caution in not allowing the term ‘third wave’ to “homogenise young feminism” (2001:1)

and thus obscure the cultural context in which this feminism is arising.



One reason that some young feminists have claimed the title ‘third wave’ is to highlight

what they see as the important differences between their lives and activism and the lives

and  activism  of  feminists  in  the  second  wave.  Asserting  these  differences  through

ongoing  processes  of  collective  identity  is  an  important  task  as  it  allows  the  women’s

movement  to  renew  and  remake  itself  rather  than  stagnating  and  becoming  outdated.

Chilla  Bulbeck  (1999)  suggests  that  for  contemporary  young  women  the  insights  of

1970s feminists are no longer new and that, “early feminists must sometimes seem to be

fumbling idiots” (1999:15). Kathy Bail (1996) argues that young women’s rejection of a

feminist identity indicates that “many of them have already trashed this loaded term, or,

at the very least, they want to bend it and make it their own” (1996:5). Bail goes on to

suggest that what she calls “a reaction against constricting dogma” is in fact a “means of

keeping  feminism  active  and  alive”  (1996:5).  While  I  would  suggest  that  an

understanding of feminism as “a constricting dogma” is primarily due to backlash media

coverage rather than reality, the argument that ‘between the waves’ conflict is important

for the movement as a whole is an important one. The risk in this approach, however,  is

that by making the “reinvention process” fundamental to young feminist praxis, “new and

improved”  becomes  more  attractive  and  even  more  valid  than  “historically  informed”

(Orr 1997:32-3).



The realisation of this risk has led Leslie Heywood and Jennifer  Drake (1997) to argue

that  a  rejection  of  everything  that  the  second  wave  has  done,  merely  to  make  young

feminists  seem  “fully differentiated”  (1997:53),  is  unconsidered  and  unnecessary.  They

claim that the struggles of  second wave feminists “are still  our struggles,  if in different

forms”  (1997:54).  Heywood  and  Drake  see  that  the  second  and  third  waves  of  the

9

women’s movement are neither “incompatible nor opposed” (1997:3) even though they

may  be  different  in  their  goals,  strategies  and  orientations.  As  Catherine  Orr  (1997)

argues:

…third  wavers  are  not  the  first  to  struggle  with  the  complexities  and

contradictions  of  applying  feminist  principles  to  their  everyday  lives.

Acknowledging this might lead to some well-worn second wave paths that prove

invaluable. The wheel does not have to be reinvented (1997:32).

I would argue that an important part of young feminists’ processes of collective identity

is  to  determine  their  similarities  and  their  differences  to  second  wave  feminists,  while

seeing neither group as homogenous. In this way they may be able to see themselves as

part of a ‘between the waves’ moment that is doing important work in furthering feminist

understanding and negotiating ongoing conflicts.



Writing  of  Australian  feminists  in  the  between  the  waves  period  of  1919  to  1969  Zora

Simic argues that

…activists  in  this  period  established  the  space,  framework,  networks,  tools  and

discourses for campaigns such as equal pay that came to fruition in the women’s

liberation period (1999:2).

Simic goes on to argue that what separated activists between the waves and in the second

wave were “definitions and meanings for feminism and feminist activity and the cultural,

social  and  political  space  available  for  such  feminist  activity”  (1999:2).  Given  the

undervalued  nature  of  between  the  waves  activism,  however,  it  is  understandable  that

contemporary young feminists should seek to create for themselves an identifiable “we”

that  as  Deborah  Siegel  (1997b)  suggests  becomes  “a  public  performance,  an  outward

show  of  solidarity”  (1997b:59)  in  which  young  feminists  take  a  “stance  of  political

resistance  to  popular  pronouncements  of  a  moratorium  on  feminism  and  feminists”

(1997b:52).









10

From sisters to mothers and daughters



In Australia the debates between younger and older feminists have primarily been framed

within a paradigm of ‘generations’ rather than metaphorical waves. This rhetorical move

suggests that the women’s movement has progressed from the now disparaged notion of

sisterhood to another feminine “familial metaphor” (D’Arcens 1998:105); that of mothers

and daughters. Whereas in the 1970s and 1980s these conflicts were primarily over the

grounds  of  ‘race’,  class  and  sexuality,  in  recent  years  these  conflicts  have  shifted  to

incorporate  the  terrain  of  age.  This  shift  has  involved  what  Virginia  Trioli  (1996)

describes as a “significant and painful realigning of the feminist debate as it moved from

one  generation  to  another”  (Trioli  1996:8).  The  concept  of  generation  itself  is  limited,

tending  towards  the  creation  of  caricatures  and  stereotypes  of  groups  of  feminists.

However, as Devoney Looser (1997) argues “Not to examine ‘feminist generation’ out of

a concern for its theoretical instability and violence as a category does little to address the

effects of the category” (1997:33).



Trioli  (1996)  argues  that  invoking  the  concept  of  a  generational  divide,  with  all  its

“rhetorical  riches,”  is  “the  easy  way  out”  of  the  struggle  to  understand  differences

between  feminists  in  the  1970s  and  1990s.  The  image  of  the  “knowing,  mature,

libertarian feminists on one side; [and] the cringing, punishing young things on the other”

(1996:9) does little to advance our understanding of either the complexity and diversity

of young feminists’ activism or the important place that these young women should hold

in the contemporary women’s movement. Associated with this problem is an embedded

attachment to a “discourse of linear progress” that suggests a “too-stable feminism” in the

past,  against  which  contemporary  feminism  is  measured  and  usually  found  wanting

(Long  2001:5-7).  Both  Jane  Long  (2001)  and  Louise  D’Arcens  (1998)  argue  that

“herding  older  and  younger  women  into  opposing  camps”  (D’Arcens  1998:111)  works

only to “severely obscure the diversity of feminisms and their historical fluidity” (Long

2001:3). While this supposedly “blanket generational experience” (Long 2001:3) allows

young  women  to  claim  a  specificity  and  unity  that  ‘belongs’  to  their  generation,  the

privileging  of  age  over  other  aspects  of  identity  is  at  odds  with  the  diversity  that  is

11

apparent  among  young  feminists.  According  to  Bulbeck  (1999),  young  feminists  are

“torn between a desire to deconstruct an essentialist feminist ‘we’, and the political need

to  confirm  common  bonds”  (1999:14).  In  other  words,  the  generational  paradigm  does

little  more  than  complicate  existing  feminist  dilemmas  about  difference  and  strategic

universalism.



Differential  relations  of  power  and  authority  are  also  constitutive  components  of  the

generational paradigm. As Louise D’Arcens (1998) argues:

Because  this  model  is  based  on  an  unequal,  hierarchical  relationship  between

successful  middle-ages  mothers  and  less  established  feminists  daughters  …This

raises  the  question  of  whether,  within  this  model,  it  is  possible  for  young

feminists  to  respond  to  their  elders  without  in  some  way  reinforcing  the

predetermined image of insolent daughters (1998:109-10).

According to Mark Davis (1997), this model of what he calls the “new generationalism”

amounts to little more than a form of “cultural gatekeeping” which is used to “single out

social  groups,  apportioning  tastes  and  ideologies  according  to  age,  to  set  up  young

people, even demonise them, as ‘outsiders’” (1997:16). While the concept of generation

may  indeed  function  as  a  “regulatory  category”  as  Davis  suggests  (1997:15),  his

argument  that  the  “taunt  of  generationalism…usually  comes  from  above,”  (1997:15)

denies the agency of young people, and in this case young feminists, in apportioning the

category to themselves. Contemporary young feminists have been just as active as older

feminists  in  constructing  debates  within  feminism  along  the  axis  of  age.  While

acknowledging  the  power  relations  that  age  often  creates,  which  in  many  cases  may

account  for  the  anger,  hurt  and  hostility  that  characterised  the  Australian  feminist

generation debates, it is unhelpful to lay the blame for the creation of the category at the

feet of one or other group.



These intrinsic difficulties in the concept of feminist generationalism again highlight the

reasons that an  understanding of contemporary young feminists’ processes of collective

identity is important at this point in time. An examination of young feminists’ cognitive

definitions  concerning  the  ends,  means,  and  field  of  action;  the  networks  of  active

12

relationships  among  young  feminists;  and  their  emotional  investment  in  their  activism

(Melucci  1995:  44-45)  makes  it  possible  to  trace  specific  trajectories  and  capture  the

diversity of activism being practiced by contemporary young feminists without resorting

to  generalisations  based  on  monolithic,  universalised  generations.  This  approach  also

allows for an exploration of Australian debates between different groups of feminists that

does  not  get  “beached  on  the  need  to  find  fault”  (Trioli  1996:51)  as  the  debates  in  the

1990s  did.  The  concept  of  generations  may  still  be  usefully  deployed,  however,  in

developing a model of what D’Arcens calls “intergenerational reciprocity” (1998:113) to

replace the concept of conflict between generations. While the differences between (and

among)  contemporary  generations  of  Australian  feminists  may  be  significant,

understanding the processes of collective identity for both diverse groups may allow for a

model of “conflictual sisterhood” that D’Arcens (1998:114-5) proposes as a replacement

for the generational model. This suggestion recognises the necessity for conflict to occur

between  feminists  in  the  women’s  movement  as  a  part  of  their  ongoing  processes  of

collective  identity,  by  acknowledging  that  “conflict  is  as  much  a  part  of  sisterhood  as

harmony or shared interests” (1998:114).



The Australian generation debates



The  generational  debates  within  the  Australian  women’s  movement  were  sparked  by

published criticism of young women by two well-known second wave feminists; namely

Anne  Summers  and  Helen  Garner.  These  publications  provoked  outrage  from  young

women  who  responded  in  the  media  and  in  publications  of  their  own.  This  rapidly

developing body of literature was quickly labelled ‘the generation debate’, in which, as in

the Unites States, two homogenous, anonymous and universalised masses of women were

divided into camps determined primarily by age, thus erasing other differences between

women based on location, class or ethnicity. In the media beat-up that accompanied these

publications  the  essayists’  work  was  reduced  to  “trashing,  countertrashing  and

metatrashing”  (Bulbeck  2000:7)  and  the  real  significance  of  inter-generational  feminist

discourse  was  lost.  Also  lost  was  the  actual  work  that  young  women  are  doing  in

maintaining the Australian women’s movement and creating its future.

13



Anne Summers’ Letter to the next generation3  (2002 [1993]) was addressed “especially

to  women  who  were  born  after  1968,”  who,  in  an  early  indication  of  the  burst  of

generational  rhetoric  to  come,  she  named  the  “daughters  of  the  feminist  revolution”

(2002:521).  In  the  Letter  Summers  wondered  what  young  women  think  and  feel  about

feminists from the 1970s. She could not:

…imagine any young woman who wanted to do something with her life not being

able to make the connection between the great array of choices now available to

her and the battles we had fought. Wouldn’t she acknowledge this? Wouldn’t she

feel  something  -  gratitude?  a  debt?  a  responsibility  to  keep  widening  those

choices for herself and her generation? To me, it seemed inconceivable that young

women  in  their  early  twenties  would  not  feel  as  drawn  to  the  movement  to

increase women’s opportunities as I had been when I was their age (2002:519).

Summers expressed her concern about the possibility of a “generation gap” emerging in

the feminist agenda, as second wave feminists began to focus on issues more relevant to

older  women,  and  urged  young  women  to  “remain  vigilant”  (2002:537).  While  the

critical tone of the letter provoked outrage from many young feminists who felt that their

activism  was  being  ignored4  Summers  also  clearly  expressed  her  belief  that  young

feminists  are  active  in  ways  that  she  did  not  understand.  These  young  women,  she

suggested “will do it in your own time and in your own way” (2002:523). The Letter had

its desired, provocative effect as young women rushed to respond to what they saw as a

challenge  from  Summers,  even  as  they criticised  her  for  being  a  “gatekeeper  of  public

debate” (Else-Mitchell and Flutter 1998:xi). However, the Letter also planted one of the

most obvious ‘red herrings’ that was to emerge in the debates of the 1990s. In drawing

attention to the “I’m not a feminist, but…” phenomenon, and questioning the visibility of



3  This text first appeared in Refracting Voices: feminist perspectives from Refractory Girl (1993), and was  subsequently reprinted  in  the  second  and  third  editions  of  Anne  Summers  (1994,  2002  [1974])  Damned  whores and god’s police. Its widespread notoriety, however, results from its inclusion in the (then) annual  women’s  issue  (to  coincide  with  International  Women’s  Day)  of  the  Sydney  Morning  Herald  Good   Weekend Magazine in March 1995, at which time Summers was editor of this publication.  4

In May 1995 The Sydney Morning Herald’s Good Weekend Magazine carried a five-page spread in which  young women challenged Anne Summers’ article. The magazine reported that “ articles on sexual  harassment and feminism’s generation gap in our recent issues generated the greatest volume of mail in the  magazine’s 10-year history” (The Sydney Morning Herald cited in Mead 1997:23).

14

the ‘next  generation’ of feminists, Summers created the myth  that there were no  young

feminists at all. This resulted in feminism and the women’s movement having to “defend

its relevance by a random census of the number of people prepared to wear its tag” (Trioli

1996:52). This diverted attention from the more interesting, and important, questions of

how feminism and feminist activism is different for young women.



In  contrast  to the critical  but  hopeful  tone of Summers’ Letter, Garner’s  The first stone

(1995) functioned “to exhale a very large and very disappointed generational sigh about

the  ways  in  which  the  promise  of  liberation  in  the  1970s  had  paled  into  priggishness”

(Long 2001:2). Garner brought the notions of ‘victim feminism’ that were a part of the

generational concerns in the United States into play in the Australian context, without, as

Jenna Mead5 (1997) points out, “much thought for the differences between Australia and

the US” (1997:9). Garner also made interpersonal relationships the focus of her analysis

and criticisms of contemporary feminism, rather than examining questions of institutional

power and structural disadvantage that young women continue to experience. Mark Davis

(1997),  one  of  Garner’s  most  rigorous  critics  outside  the  women’s  movement,

summarised Garner’s assessment of Australian feminism in The first stone as containing

a “common refrain”:

…there’s  a  new  type  of  feminism  abroad  -  a  negative,  doctrinaire,  punitive

feminism that can focus on only one thing at the expense of all else: the idea that

women are victims…this  is a feminism that allows no possibility for fun, sex or

female  power,  and  it  has  reached  plague  proportions  among  young  women

(1997:76).

These  allegations  of  “contemporary  feminism’s  supposed  corruption  and  decline”

(1997:82)  acted  to  widen  the  generational  divide  in  Australian  feminism  by  allowing

some,  high  profile  older  feminists  to  “dichotomise  between  their  feminisms  and  what

follows by casting themselves as the movement’s mothers” (1997:83).





5  Dr Jenna Mead emerged as a key figure in what became known as the ‘Ormond affair’. At the time of the  incidents of alleged sexual harassment Mead was the equal opportunity officer at Ormond College and  counselled the women complainants throughout the case. In The First Stone, Mead was split into six or  seven different characters, allowing Garner to imply that a feminist conspiracy obstructed her research for  the book.

15

From  1995  to  1999  the  Australian  print  media  maintained  a  sporadic  focus  on  the

feminist ‘generation wars’, however very few of the column inches devoted to this topic

did much to further anyone’s understanding of the changes that were occurring within the

women’s  movement.  Criticisms  continued  to  flow  from  older  feminists  such  as  WEL

founder  Beatrice  Faust  (1997)  who  argued  that  “Older  feminists  cannot  hold  the  line

without support from the under-30s - yet many young women are so naÃÂ¯ve that if you spit

in  their  face  they’ll  say  it’s  raining”(1997:23).  These  were  met  with  responses  from

young women such as Kathy Bail who suggested that “rather than try to connect with the

activities of younger women, many feminists are quick to dismiss them” (1997:46). Other

younger feminists attempted to present their own ideas of what the debates were about.

For example Fiona Stewart (1999) argued that:

Contrary to popular belief and some media, the feminist movement is not about to

self-destruct…So, the debate we’re having is not  really about feminism. It’s not

even about whether it has succeeded or not or to what degree. It is more about a

society that has failed to live up to women’s raised expectations of life in general.

(Stewart 1999:15).

Journalist  Virginia  Trioli  (1999),  attempted  to  put  the  debates  into  some  sort  of

perspective:

Much  is  made  of  arguments  between  feminists,  with  a  rancour  attributed  to  the

disputes  that  is  never  applied  to,  say,  arguments  between  economists,  military

strategists or quantum physicists. The rancour is, in reality, rarely there: but what

often attends differences of feminist opinion is a thin-skinned defensiveness that

is not only disappointing but self-defeating (Trioli 1999:45).

The  end  result  was,  as  Jane  Long  (2001)  proposes,  a  “confusing  and,  indeed,

contradictory  series  of  claims  about  feminism  and  its  directions”  (2001:2)  that  have

inevitably had an impact  on the young women who were reaching maturity in the mid-1990s.



Some young women took the opportunity to use their publishing connections to make a

more extensive response to the criticisms from Summers and Garner. Journalists Virginia

Trioli and Kathy Bail both produced texts during 1996 in order to put forward their view

16

of  the  ways  in  which  young  women  were  engaging  with  feminism  and  the  women’s

movement. In a direct response to some of the criticisms raised in The first stone Trioli

describes  the  “highly  practical  breed  of  feminism  that  is  the  practice  of  many  young

women’s lives”(1996:11) in the areas of the workplace, the media and laws surrounding

questions  of  sexual  harassment.  While  initially  critical  of  the  generational  paradigm

(1996:9)  Trioli  ultimately  finds  it  hard  to  avoid  because,  as  Louise  D’Arcens  (1998)

observes, there is a central conflict in the Generation f project that “results from [Trioli’s]

desire  to  defend  her  generation  while  at  the  same  time  casting  doubt  upon  the  very

concept  of  feminist  generations”  (1998:110).  Nevertheless  Trioli’s  contribution  to  new

discussions  of  the  role  of  young  women  in  the  Australian  women’s  movement  was

strategic and effective as it delivered a fairly straightforward presentation of the work that

young feminists were doing. Her analysis covered areas that were generally understood to

be  feminist  terrain  and  she  placed  the  need  for  more  traditional  collective  action  at  the

centre  of  her  assessment  of  the  instrumental,  political  goals  that  young  women  were

pursuing.



A  far  more  controversial  response  to  criticisms  levelled  at  younger  women  from  older

feminists came from Kathy Bail and her edited collection DIY feminism.  The concept of

DIY or do-it-yourself feminism is intended to describe young women’s rejection of what

Bail saw as “institutionalised” feminism that “suggests a rigidity of style and behaviour

and  is  still  generally  associated  with  a  culture  of  complaint”  (1996:5).  Dismissing

organised  feminism  as  “old-fashioned”,  Bail  exalts  a  feminism  that  is  “largely  about

individual  practice  and  taking  on  personal  challenges  rather  than  group  identification”

(1996:16). While this perspective has some degree of resonance with the types of cultural

practices  and  discursive  politics  that  are  a  feature  of  contemporary  young  feminist

activism, Bail’s approach almost entirely de-politicises the actions of the young women

who  contributed  to  her  book.  In  reducing  young  feminists  to  a  desire  to  be  “identified

through their interests and passions - such as music, publications or business- before their

gender” (1996:4) Bail ignores the deep significance that these sites of cultural production

- as acts of resistance - have for many young feminists. Central to Bail’s perspective is

the  idea  that  feminism  as  a  social  movement  is  no  longer  appropriate  or  relevant  to

17

contemporary young feminists. This rejection of the need for collective action is seen by

Anita Harris (1999) as evidence that Bail’s representation of DIY is:

…fundamentally  consistent  with  liberal  individualism  [where]  freedom  to  do  as

one  pleases,  resistance  to  categories,  and  personal  achievements  (preferably

accomplished through sassy behaviour) are held up as evidence of social change

(1999:283).

In  other  words,  Bail  avoids  any  analysis  of  structural  disadvantages  that  affect  young

women’s  lives  in  different  ways,  depending  on  the  opportunities  available  to  them  by

virtue of their ‘race’ or class. As some other young feminists ask “What if we can’t do-it-ourselves?” (Else-Mitchell and Flutter 1998:xvi).



Some  young  Australian  feminists  criticised  Bail  for  the  ways  in  which  she  caricatured

and stereotyped young feminist activists. For example, Foong Ling Kong (1997) suggests

that DIY feminism provides a list of  “do’s and don’ts” for young women who want to be

identified  as  belonging  to  the  “marketable  category”  of   “The  Young  Feminist”

(1997:69). Rosamund Else-Mitchell and Naomi Flutter (1998) echo this criticism in their

introduction to the collection Talking Up when they argue that DIY:

…sounds very edgy. Let’s face it, marketing feminism with groovy fonts, a funky

layout  and  some  pictures  makes  it  palatable  and  digestible  to  a  populist  post-modern world. But it doesn’t necessarily equate with social transformation and it

isn’t a call to action (1998:xv).

One contributor to  Talking Up, Krysti  Guest (1998), also expresses her frustration with

Bail for representing young feminists as “only worded up on groove culture, cyberpunk

and lipstick” when she sees the real work of feminism as dealing with things that can be

“pretty damn joyless…complex to understand and which oppress women” (1998:160-1).



These criticisms suggest that Bail has not accurately captured the work that many young

feminists are doing. Anita Harris (1999) argues that the cultural products being generated

by young feminists with an authentic, punk DIY ethic, such as the production of zines6,



6  The word ‘zines’ is short for fanzines, which Anita Harris (1999) describes as “independently produced  informal newsletters…[which] are produced on little or no budget, provide social commentary of a critical

18

goes  far  beyond  Bail’s  neo-liberal  individualism.  Harris  sees  clear  links  between  the

politics  of  grrrl7  power  and  grrrl  culture  and  the  continuing  collective  politics  of  the

women’s movement. She points out that:

Producers  of  grrrl  zines  see  themselves  actively  shaping  and  building  feminist

politics, and bringing feminism to  a wider and younger audience. Their ways of

doing feminism are not presented as being at odds with older or more mainstream

ways, but work together with these to build a strong movement of a diversity of

women (1999:286).

This analysis suggests that the ‘generational wars’ in the Australian women’s movement

have been decidedly miscast. Young women may indeed be involved in new processes of

collective  identity  and  new  forms  of  activism  that  may  be  hard  for  older  women  to

recognise. But setting up one group as radically and dichotomously opposed to the other

does little more than generate a load of media rhetoric. The fact that younger and older

women  are  engaged  in  a  wide  variety  of  activism  is  sign  of  the  women’s  movement’s

health. Understanding their processes of collective identity as providing space in which to

discuss  these  differences  does  not  mean  that  the  movement  is  on  the  verge  of  self-destruction. Looking for these differences, and embracing them when we find them, will

ensure that young women’s engagement with the broader women’s movements is valued

rather than overlooked.



Contemporary diversity



In  all  the  texts  written  by  young  women  about  their  relationship  to  feminism,  both  in

Australia  and  in  the  United  States,  one  clear  message  comes  through;  young  feminists

want  their  diversity  acknowledged  as  a  positive  contribution  to  the  contemporary



nature, and usually include reviews, information sharing, editorials and creative writing around issues  relevant to young people” (1999:284). I would suggest that they are another interesting echo of the  discursive strategies of 1970s feminism which relied on the distribution of hand typed and roneoed  newsletters and information sheets such as Anne Koedt’s (1969) The myth of the vaginal orgasm which  was widely distributed on university campuses and Women’s Liberation meetings.  7

Anita Harris (1999) argues that the “re-writing of the word ‘girl’ into ‘grrrl’ was intended to communicate  anger (the ‘grrr’ stood for growling) and rejection of patronising attitudes towards young women”  (1999:284-5). It is primarily associated with groups such as Riot Grrrl and producers of zines such as Grot  Grrrl, who  “used music and writing to develop a political platform for younger women” (1999:285).

19

women’s movement.  They reject the somewhat  absurd stereotype that  Louise D’Arcens

(1998) draws from some of the discourse of the Australian generational debate; the image

of  “the generic young feminist…a curious hybrid figure who sits provocatively-dressed

at her computer emailing her solicitor”  (1998:111). As Virginia Trioli argues:

There is no young feminist anymore … There are young women in Australia who

call themselves feminists but  who have almost nothing in common - politically,

ideologically - with each other … feminism now incorporates so wide a spectrum

of  thinking  and  action  that  some  older  feminists  clearly  cannot  get  a  grip  on  it

(1996:9).

Blaming older feminists for ‘not getting it’, however, merely obscures one source of the

problem,  that  is,  the  packaging  of  ‘young  feminism’  in  the  media  and  by  publishing

houses. On  the covers of ‘new feminist’ books both in Australia and the United  States,

parts  of  women’s  bodies,  particularly  crotches  and  mouths,  were  used  to  signify  that

‘young feminist’ voices were speaking (Bulbeck 2000). As Anita Harris (2001) suggests,

the  so-called  ‘generation  debate’  itself  can,  at  least  in  part,  be  seen  as  resulting  from  a

combination  of  “well-intentioned  young  women  themselves,  good  marketing  by

publishing  companies,  and  international  corporations  piggy-backing  on  new  images  of

girlhood to gain access to potential consumers” (2001:2).



The  feminism  that  is  practiced  by  young  women  in  the  contemporary  women’s

movement is nothing if not diverse. Yet in the “race to colonise” and name what young

feminism is  and  means,  the  diversity of  young  women’s  activism is in  danger  of  being

lost (Harris 2001:8). Anita Harris (2001) suggests that there are three distinctive features

of “new feminist praxis”, namely its diversity; its ability to use contemporary resources

such  as  technology  and  popular  culture;  and  its  dispersed,  often  leaderless  structures

(2001:5)  However  even  naming  these  characteristics  runs  the  risk  of  inadvertently

stereotyping young women’s activism. After all, not all young feminists have access to,

or are interested in, new technologies, and some young women prefer to be involved in

traditional,  hierarchical  organizations  with  clear  leaders.  Similarly,  some  of  these  traits

can also be said to have applied to feminists in the 1970s, as exemplified in the Women’s

Liberation  groups’  determination  to  have  leaderless  collectives.  Nevertheless  the  point

20

that  young  feminists  want  to  make  is  quite  clear.  They see  that  they have  created  their

“own  tactics,  style  and  generational  imprint”  that  benefit  the  women’s  movement  as  a

whole (Baumgardner and Richards 2000:289).



One way in which young feminists see themselves as different from their predecessors is

on their emphasis on ‘lived feminism’ or feminism that is practiced in their daily lives. In

reality,  however,  this  notion,  and  the  suggestion  that  feminism  begins  in  women’s

personal lives (Else-Mitchell and Flutter 1998) is a clear but unacknowledged echo of the

second wave concept of the personal as political. What is different is the context in which

young feminists’ daily lives are lived.  As Anita Harris (2001) points out  “the feminism

lived  by  many  young  women  is  constituted  in  diverse,  networked,  global,  and

interconnected praxis” (2001:1). In other ways, too, there is more to connect younger and

older feminists than a superficial analysis might reveal. The unresolved dilemmas about

difference in feminism that have gone on since the 1970s, for example, have had a lasting

effect on the young women who have grown up within these debates. As Heywood and

Drake (1997) suggest, young feminists are “products of all the contradictory definitions

of and differences within feminism”(1997:3).



The  spate  of  publishing  in  the  1990s  that  attempted  to  articulate  and  define  what

feminism  means  to  contemporary  young  women  can  be  seen  as  an  example  of  what

Stacey Young (1997) calls the “feminist strategy of discursive struggle.” These authors

“[p]ublish their work in an effort to bring their insights to bear on other women’s lives,

and on the women’s movement’s analyses and agendas” (1997:13). Discursive struggle is

as important to feminist activism as policy oriented or electoral politics in the struggle to

transform power relations and social structures. As Young argues:

…discursive production is central to women’s movement activity; furthermore it

is  an  especially  important  site  in  struggles  to  expand  our  understanding  of

differences  among  women,  their  relationship  to  the  construction  of  women’s

subjectivity and identity, and their relationship to feminist resistance (1997:23).

The  texts  of  the  feminist  ‘generation  wars’  deal  explicitly  with  issues  of  differences

between  women,  both  in  terms  of  ‘generational’  or  age  related  differences,  and  other

21

differences  based  on  location,  class  or  ethnicity.  This  emphasis  on  “how  to  practice

feminism  differently”  means  that  the  work  of  contemporary  young  feminists  “places

differences among women at the centre of the project” (Siegel 1997b:69) and can thus be

seen  to  stand  in  contrast  to  second  wave  emphasis  on  unity  and  sisterhood.  Cathryn

Bailey  (1997)  argues  that  this  attention  to  difference  may  be  the  most  important

contribution  that  younger  feminists  make  to  the  women’s  movement,  as  “despite  the

efforts of older feminists, racism within feminism is alive and well” (1997:26). However,

for  Krysti  Guest  (1998),  this  suggests  the  need  for  more  contemporary  feminist  theory

from  young  women  as  she  fears  that  the  emphasis  on  individual  approaches  that  has

characterised  young  feminist  discourse  to  date  will  end  up  “smothering…systemic

questions  of  difference…allowing  some  pretty  nasty  systems  of  oppression  to  remain

invisible” (1998:165).



This dilemma clearly articulates the “postsocialist” context in which contemporary young

feminists are working. In their desire to express their individualism, their difference from

previous  forms  of  feminist  activism  and  their  attention  to  difference  and  multiplicity,

young  feminists  risk  obscuring  their  fundamental  commitment  to  achieving  social,

cultural  and  political  change.  They  are  grappling  with  the  “postsocialist”  struggle  to

avoid  an  either/or  choice  between  a  social  politics  of  class  or  equality  and  a  cultural

politics of identity or difference and are working to understand how culture and economy

work  together  to  produce  injustices  (Fraser  1997).  Therefore  any  analysis  of

contemporary  young  feminist  activism  must  not  focus  on  discursive  struggles  and

articulations of difference alone, but must also acknowledge that contemporary feminism

has orientations that are materialist (Walter 1999) and strategic (Schubert 1998).



One  reason  these orientations  are  so often  overlooked  is  due to many young feminists’

engagement with popular culture as a site of resistance. However, young feminists defend

these strategies, while acknowledging that, as Heywood and Drake (1997) argue:

Our hybrid engagement with culture and/as politics sometimes looks problematic

to  second  wave  activists,  who  might  accuse  us  of  exchanging  engagement  with

institutional  and  economic  inequities  for  a  self-referential  politics  that

22

overestimates  the  power  of  critiquing,  re-working,  and  producing  pop-  and

subcultural  images  and  narratives.  But  as  third  wave  activists,  we  contest  a

politics  of  purity that  would  separate  political  activism  from  cultural  production

(1997:51).

Nancy  Whittier  (1995)  also  rejects  the  downplaying  of  cultural  critique  as  a  feminist

strategy and points out that “cultural hegemony triumphs by making nondominant points

of  view  invisible  or  unthinkable”  (1995:53).  Young  women  know  and  understand  this,

and,  in  the  absence  of  a  more  favourable  political  opportunity  structure,  engage  with

popular culture as a site  of genuine and  necessary resistance. As Jennifer  Baumgardner

and  Amy  Richards  (2000)  argue,  this  is  a  significant  difference  between  contemporary

young feminists and feminists of the 1970s:

For the generation that reared the Third Wave, not only was feminism apparent in

the  politics  of  the  time  but  politics  was  truly  the  culture  of  the  time…For  the

Third  Wave,  politics  was  superseded  by  culture  -  punk  rock,  hip-hop,  zines,

products, consumerism and the Internet (2000:130).

It  may,  indeed,  be  difficult  for  older  feminists  to  understand  contemporary  forms  of

feminist  activism  as  Chilla  Bulbeck  (2000)  suggests,  due  to  their  “fear  [of]  the  loss  of

politics, as we have come to know it” (2000:19). However, giving contemporary young

feminists  a  measure  of  respect  and  credit  for  devising  and  engaging  in  strategies  and

tactics that are appropriate and necessary to their time is somewhat overdue. This ability

to  adapt  should  also  be  seen  as  a  sign  of  the  flexibility  and  strength  that  allows  the

women’s movement to survive the constant changes that are occurring both in the social

and political context in which it operates and within the movement itself.



Rejecting  the  generational  script  with  its  attendant,  emotionally  laden  discourse  of

mother-daughter relationships (Siegel 1997a) is another essential task if the movement is

to survive as a mainstream political player. There is more important work to be done in

understanding this “cross-generational moment” (Zita 1997:1) and documenting the sites

and  forms  of  contemporary  feminist  activism  that  young  women  are  engaged  in.  This

type of documentation should aim to provide a more productive and inclusive view of the

role  of  young  women  in  the  contemporary  Australian  women’s  movement.  This  work

23

belongs in this between the waves, “exploratory period” that, as Zora Simic (1999) points

out, is essential “in order for major cultural changes to occur” (1999:6) in the future.



Young women in the Australian women’s movement are involved in coalition work with

other  social  movement  actors  that  again  points  to  their  engagement  with  issues  of

differences  between  women.  Anita  Harris  (2001)  argues  that  this  reflects  previous

examples of between the waves feminism:

In Australia at least, we are perhaps seeing some kind of hearkening back to the

forgotten feminism between the wars that was heavily concentrated on Aboriginal

rights, ideas of nation,  citizenship and equality, union issues and migrant labour

debates…it  is  possible  to  document  a  kind  of  resurgence  of  these  sorts  of

concerns today (2001:8).

Add  to  this  list  the  young  women  who  are  working  in  coalition  with  the  anti-capital

movement  and  the  refugee  movement  in  Australia  and  it  becomes  clear  that  the

“identification  of  a  single,  young  Australian  feminist  voice  is  impossible”  (Mitchell

1998:185-6).  Nor  is  such  identification  desirable.  The  model  of  conflictual  and

multivocal  sisterhood  that  is  indicated  in  the  processes  of  collective  identity  of

contemporary  young  Australian  feminists  is  a  clear  sign  of  the  women’s  movement’s

continued relevance and vitality.





Sarah Maddison

Doctoral candidate

Discipline of Government and International Relations

University of Sydney

smad2640@mail.usyd.edu.au





Paper  presented  in  the  Political  Science  Program,  Research  School  of  Social  Sciences,

ANU, Seminar Series, 27 November 2002.



24

References

Bail, K.(1996), D.I.Y.  Feminism, Allen and Unwin, Sydney.

Bail. K. (1997), “Cable gals,” The Australian Magazine, May 31-June 1, p 46.

Bailey, C. (1997), “Making waves and drawing lines: the politics of defining the

vicissitudes of feminism”, Hypatia, Vol. 12, No. 3, Special issue on third wave

feminisms.

Baumgardner , J. and Richards, A. (2000), ManifestA: young women, feminism and

the future, Farrar, Strauss and Giroux, New York.

Bulbeck, C. (1997), Living Feminism: The Impact of  the Women’s Movement on  Three

Generations of Australian Women,  Cambridge University Press, UK.

Bulbeck, C. (1999), “Simone de Beauvoir and generations of feminists.” Hecate, Vol. 25,

No.  2,  pp5-21.

Bulbeck, C. (2000), “Failing feminism? What the generation debate does and doesn’t tell

us about the future of feminism,” Inaugural University of Tasmania Women’s

Studies Series Seminar, University of Tasmania, 27 April.

Bulbeck, C. (2001), “Feminism by any other name? skirting the generation debate,”

outskirts, 8, http://www.chloe.uwa.edu.au/outskirts/article3.html

Curthoys, A, (1992), “Doing it for themselves: the women’s movement since 1970” in

Saunders, K. and Evans, R. (eds), Gender relations in Australia: domination and

negotiation, Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, Australia.

D’Arcens, L. (1998), “Mothers, daughters, sisters,” in Else-Mitchell, R. & Flutter, N.

(eds), Talking up: young women’s take on feminism, Spinifex, Victoria.

Davis, M. (1997), Gangland: cultural elites and the new generationalism, Allen and

Unwin, St Leonards.

Dowse, S. (1982), “The women's movement's fandango with the state: some thoughts on

the movement's role in public policy since 1972”, The Australian Quarterly,

Summer.

Else-Mitchell, R & Flutter, N (1998) Talking Up: Young women’s take on  feminism,

Spinifex, Victoria.

Faludi, S. (1991), Backlash: the undeclared war against women, Crown, New York.

Faust, B. (1997), “Daughters in the dark”, The Weekend Australian, 15-16 March, p. 23.

25

Fraser, N. (1997), Justice interruptus: critical reflections on the “postsocialist”

condition, Routledge, New York.

Garner, H. (1995), The first stone: some questions about sex and power, Picador, Sydney.

Greer, G. (1999), The whole woman, Transworld Publishers, London.

Guest, K. (1998), “Scattered speculations on being a white feminist,” in Else-Mitchell, R.

& Flutter, N. (1998) Talking Up: Young women’s take on  feminism, Spinifex,

Victoria.

Harris, A. (1998), “Generation (Se)X,” in Else-Mitchell, R. and Flutter, N. (eds), Talking

up: young women’s take on feminism, Spinifex, Melbourne.

Harris, A. (1999a), “Defining and contesting DIY: The politics of grrrlpower,” Refereed

Conference  Proceedings,  Australasian  Political  Studies  Association

Conference, University of Sydney, Sydney.

Harris, A. (1999b), “Is DIY DOA? zines and the revolution, grrrl-style,” in White, R.

(ed), Australian youth subcultures: on the margins and in the mainstream

Australian Clearinghouse for Youth Studies, Hobart.

Harris, A. (2001), “Not waving or drowning: young women, feminism and the limits of

the next wave debate,” Outskirts, 8,

http://www.chloe.uwa.edu.au/outskirts/article4.html

Heywood, L. and Drake, J. (1997) (eds), Third wave agenda: being feminist, doing

feminism, University of Minnesota Press, Minneapolis.

Kaplan,  G.  (1996),  The  Meagre  Harvest:  The  Australian  Women’s  Movement   1950s  -

1990s,  Allen and Unwin, St Leonards.

Kong, F.L. (1997), “Outlaws in a jam” in Mead, J. (ed) Bodyjamming: sexual

harassment, feminism and public life, Random House, Milsons Point.

Lake, M. (1999), Getting Equal: The history of Australian feminism, Allen and Unwin, St

Leonards.

Long, J. (2001), ““A certain kind of modern feminism”: memory, feminist futures and

‘generational cleavage’ in historical perspective,” Outskirts, 8,

http://www.chloe.uwa.edu.au/outskirts/article2.html

Looser, D. (1997), “Gen X feminists? Youthism, careerism and the Third Wave” in

Looser, D. & Kaplan, E.A. (eds), Generations: academic feminists in dialogue,

26

University of Minneapolis Press, Minneapolis.

MacDonald, L. (1996), “Dismantling the movement: feminism, postmodernism and

political action”, Refractory Girl, No. 50, Autumn, pp 58-51.

Mead, J. (1997) (ed) Bodyjamming: sexual harassment, feminism and public life,

Random House, Milsons Point.

Melucci, A. (1985), “The Symbolic  Challenge  of  Contemporary  Movements”,  Social

Research,  vol. 52, No. 4,  Winter,  pp.789-815.

Melucci, A. (1989), Nomads of the Present: Social Movements and Individual Needs in

Contemporary Society, Temple University Press, Philadelphia.

Melucci, A. (1995),  “The Process of  Collective  Identity”  in  Johnston, H.  &

Klandermans, B.  (eds),  Social  Movements  and  Culture,  UCL  Press,  USA.

Melucci, A.  (1996), Challenging  codes:  Collective  action  in  the Information  age,

Cambridge University Press, UK.

Mitchell, Suzette, (1998), “Lines of demarcation: Beijing 1995,” in Else-Mitchell, R.

& Flutter, N. (1998) Talking up: young women’s take on feminism, Spinifex,

Victoria.

Orr, C. (1997), “Charting the currents of the third wave,” Hypatia, Vol. 12, No. 3, Special

issue on third wave feminisms.

Reade, K. (1994), “Struggling to be heard: Tensions between different voices in the

Australian women’s liberation movement in the 1970s and 1980s” in Hughes,

K.P.  (ed),  Contemporary Australian Feminism, Longman, Australia.

Sawer, M and Simms, M (1993), (eds), A woman’s place: Women and politics in

Australia, Allen and Unwin, Sydney.

Schubert, M. (1998), “The strategic politics of organisation” in Else-Mitchell, R. &

Flutter, N. (eds), Talking up: young women’s take on feminism, Spinifex,

Victoria.

Siegel, D. (1997a), “Reading between the waves: feminist historiography in a

‘postfeminist’ moment”, in Heywood, L. and Drake, J. (eds), Third wave

agenda: being  feminist, doing  feminism, University of Minnesota Press,

Minneapolis.

Siegel, D. (1997b), “The legacy of the personal: generating theory in feminism’s third

27

wave,”  Hypatia, vol. 12, no. 3.

Simic, Z. (1999), “Notes in search of a location for between the waves of feminism”

Outskirts vol. 5,

http://www.chloe.uwa.edu.au/outskirts/archive/VOL5/article6.html

Sommerville, J. (2001) “Germaine Greer versus the New Feminism: gender politics in the

United Kingdom and the United States, Social Politics, Fall.

Stewart, F. (1999), “Generation X feminists are not whingers: the big con is not

feminism, but the idea that you can have it all”, The Age, 12 July, p. 15.

Summers, A. (2002 [1993]), Damned whores and god’s police, Fourth edition, Penguin,

Victoria.

Trioli,  V.   (1996),  Generation   f:   sex,   power   and   the  young   feminist,   Minerva,

Melbourne.

Trioli, V. (1999), “Feminist divide a test of faith”, The Bulletin, 20 July, p. 45

Walter, N. (1999), The new feminism, Virago, London.

Whittier, N. (1995), Feminist Generations: The persistence of the radical women’s

movement, Temple University Press, Philadelphia.

Young, S. (1997), Changing the Wor(l)d: Discourse, Politics and the Feminist

Movement, Routledge, New York.

Zita, J. (1997) Introduction to Hypatia, Vol. 12, No. 3, Special  issue on third wave

feminisms.





















28























































