Philip Ruddock MP MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AND INDIGENOUS AFFAIRS

Population Change

Border Protection

Migration Program

Humanitarian Program

Multicultural Affairs

Indigenous Affairs

Home Minister's Profile Frequently Asked Questions Contact the Minister Media Centre

MEDIA CENTRE

Mr Ruddock launches Family Visitor Network Introduction

Each year nearly three and a half million visitors come to Australia to spend time with family and friends. The Family Visitor Network is an initiative designed to make visiting Australia eaiser for these people. The Network provides a system which is open, transparent, understandable and accessible, giving visitors the correct information for their trip.

The Minister for Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs, Philip Ruddock, launched the Family Visitor Network on 28 August 2002. He was introduced by the Deputy Secretary of the Department Ed Killesteyn.

Launch Speech: Philip Ruddock

Well, thank you very much, Ed. And I acknowledge my many parliamentary colleagues, Minister Gary Hardgrave; Julia Gillard the Shadow Minister; Laurie Ferguson also Shadow Minister. And can I say I'm delighted to see so many parliamentary colleagues. If I mention them all today I am going to be stuck because I will no doubt miss some people out, but I do want to say particularly to the Members of Parliament and Senators that are here, how much I appreciate that.

I think in part it's probably because these issues are very close to us all in our responsibility as Members of Parliament. And I think that's one of the reasons today that this launch, unlike many, has such a distinguished group of Members of Parliament. And I just say that I'm starting quickly and going quickly because Julia said to me a moment ago, in the spirit that we have around this parliament, 'You better get moving. We've got warning there's 10 minutes before a division.'

So let me just acknowledge first the Ngunnawal people. I just left a function a moment ago at which Matilda House, who is well known as a Ngunnawal elder, extended a welcome. She is at the conference across the way, and others are engaged today. But I always have an affinity with the Ngunnawal. As I said this morning, having been born in Canberra on the site of what is now the National Museum, I think that I can almost claim Ngunnawal linkages myself.

But today we're here to talk about the Family Visitor Network. And this has been established in response to concern of clients, but I might say concern also expressed by their representatives. The department doesn't always understand their needs and I think the department is of the view that many people don't understand our requirements either. And there are often linkages, particularly to our overseas posts, that are difficult. It's often hard to make inquiries. And what we sought to do is to try and find a way through those particular difficulties which we've all experienced over time.

What I am seeking at Minister, of course, is an element of cooperation in not only understanding why we have to visa people and what that involves. And the decision making processes, which are really about determining that visit arrangements are bona fide. In other words, people don't seek to come here with one purpose: ie, to visit, and then to suddenly find their real objective is a migration purpose.

And of course one of the points that I've been trying to make as I've spoken to communities - and I might say as I've worked well with a number of communities - is to impress upon them that they can play a role in encouraging people, when they are thinking of coming to Australia, to recognise that you do need to work with us. If you have in mind the permanent migration arrangement you should tell us that's what you have in mind and explore that first. And that if you have in mind a visit arrangement and it is bona fide and you observe the visitor conditions then it ultimately enhances the system and you can in fact mean that we're able to deal with issues differently.

And I want to just give you some news on visitor visas for people who have come from higher immigration risk areas and some of our emerging tourism markets, because the news is exceptionally good.

The approval rates for visas have in fact gone up, not only in absolute numbers but also in percentage terms, globally 97.94 - almost 98% of visa applications are granted.

Now, visa grant numbers, from markets such as China and India, are continuing to grow very strongly. Non return rates are now at all time lows. We have a non-return rate of 1.85%, which is below 2% for the first time. And the rates in absolute numbers of visitors applying, particularly in many cases abusively for refugee status, are down. It's now .15%. So there's been a very very important success story there in terms of what we have been able to achieve through working with communities, getting a better understanding of what the visa process is about. We've been able to

approve more people to visit and we're getting better compliance.

And it's because of a range of measures that we think have been working, and it is important that these positive trends continue, and the Family Visitor Network is another step in the on-going process of trying to reform those arrangements. So I now want to tell you a little, if I can, about the network itself and how it will operate and the benefits that we hope will come from it.

First it will involve the provision of information and advice. Much of it will come from the Department's telephone inquiry line, which will allow members of the public direct access to a dedicated Family Visitor Network officer over the phone. So, instead of getting into somebody who might be dealing with permanent migration applications, might be dealing with business issues, you'll be dealing with somebody who knows and understands the needs and the requirements for a visitor visa.

And there will be of course, further, a Family Visitor Network information kit. And this is a tool that the department has developed to help people understand the process at overseas posts. And it includes not only forms, which you can see in the promotional folder that's been distributed today, it has the other information about the Family Visitor Network: the health requirements for temporary entry; and visiting Australia general requirements.

Now, the Family Visitor Network form outlines the visitor visa policies. It explains the procedures and the decision-making processes. And it explains what a genuine visit is and the criteria that people need to satisfy to substantiate that it's a genuine visit that is intended.

The form also includes frequently asked questions and highlights some of the conditions which are at times attached to particular visitor visas and to which applicants need to pay attention. Like I'm sure you've all heard of the 8503 - gee, I don't know why we make it so complicated. 8503. But it's a condition that goes on visas where we're giving somebody the chance but we think they might want to make further applications, and it's a bar to further applications. And it's to try and explain those sorts of conditions that are attached.

Of course Australia enjoys some of the best health standards in the world. The health requirements that we have in place are there to ensure the safety of the Australian community against particular diseases. And it's important that we ensure that those health standards are maintained. I mean we have, along with Norway, the lowest incidence of tuberculosis in the world. And that is not something that we want to compromise.

Now the Visiting Australia General Requirements Form also provides details of the various visa classes. Two applicants to help them decide which may be most appropriate because sometimes if you are looking for work you might think about whether it should be a working holiday maker visa rather than a visitor visa. You're not going to be able to get the other if you come here. And so it's to encourage people to think about what form of visa is going to be most appropriate for them.

Information specific to the immigration office overseas where the relative or client intends to apply for a visa will also be included in the information kit. So they can get information about a particular problem that might arise if you're dealing with our office in Beirut or if you're dealing with our office in Manila, or if you're dealing with our arrangements in London or Hong Kong or wherever it is.

Now, by providing the information kit, it's certainly my hope that clients will better understand how visitor visas are processed. For people here in Australia, how they can help their relatives prepare applications thoroughly. How important it is for the applicant to submit all the information necessary so that when an application is considered we're not having to ask for further information or rejecting an application because the information isn't there. And of course, most importantly, to demonstrate that they intend a genuine visit to Australia.

As it is now, Members of Parliament, community and religious leaders can and no doubt will continue to make representations on behalf of people that they know. Particularly where there are constituents involved in sponsoring a family member. Now, the Family Visitor Network will not change this arrangement. But rather it will help formalise the process. And once you have made a decision to make a representation on behalf of a member of your community, or the Members of Parliament, your constituency, of course you can contact the DIMIA Community Liaison Officer of the Family Network Visitor arrangements in the particular capital city to seek assistance.

Now the network will not be involved in the decision-making process. But rather it will help to provide information as a source for both the post and themselves. And I want to emphasise the importance of this. I've said to Members, and I've said to people from time to time, when you're making representation - community - when you're making representations and you are going so far as to vouch for somebody's credibility, and we're going to take that into account, we attach a great deal of importance to that. And if you've attached your credibility to it and you know we've relied upon it, you ought not to be surprised, if something goes awry, that we will be asking more questions about your statements in the future.

In other words, it's desirable to build up a profile of reliability in relation to those assurances that you give us if we're going to be able to weigh them and take them into account and give people the credit for those representations that are being made. Now of course the network will not mean that all applicants who apply to visit families in Australia will be granted a visa. Applicants who can't demonstrate an intention to undertake a genuine visit, or who don't meet health or character criteria, will continue to be refused. The success of the network will be gauged by improved awareness in the community of decision-making overseas. And my department will work closely, and I have to say - as some of us have to slip away as we no doubt will in the next moment or so - my department today will be spending time, particularly with community representatives, in briefing you on the arrangements.

Let me conclude by officially declaring the Family Visitor Network arrangements open and launched and encourage you to come back, particularly for the launch that will be made by my colleague Gary Hardgrave shortly, in relation to some special new announcements we're making in relation to migration agents.

Thank you very much. The Family Visitor Network is officially launched.

28 August 2002

URL: http://www.minister.immi.gov.au /media/speeches/20020828_famvisit.htm Last update: 02 September 2002 at 14:58 AEST



