Philip Ruddock MP MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AND INDIGENOUS AFFAIRS

Population Change

Border Protection

Migration Program

Humanitarian Program

Multicultural Affairs

Indigenous Affairs

Home Minister's Profile Frequently Asked Questions Contact the Minister Media Centre

MEDIA CENTRE

Transcript

Media conference with Minister Ruddock, London, August 15, 2002 [Introduction] [Agreements between South Africa and Australia] [Working Holiday Maker agreements between Greece and Australia] [Resettlement of Tanzanian refugees] [Understandings with other countries] [Bakhtiari family] [Court decisions]

MINISTER: Look what I thought I might do is just give you the first opportunity to talk to me about some of the issues that I have been dealing with in the last fortnight. My arrangements in the last fortnight have involved me visiting South Africa, Tanzania, Greece, Serbia, the Czech Republic, Slovakia, Austria, Pristina, Kosovo, and now London.

In each location my primary purpose has been to deal with refugee and asylum issues in a broad context, particularly in the context of the approach that is being developed within the UNHCR, the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, to examine the need for reform. This is something that they have been doing in the context of global consultations and while the consultations have involved their secondary constituencies of NGO's and academics, they also involve their primary constituency, namely governments, and I've certainly been involved in discussions about the importance of that reform process and a focus on particularly two elements that are important for a viable refugee system to survive and that is the issue of primary and secondary movement, the need to differentiate between those movements which are designed to obtain protection and those movements that are designed to obtain a migration outcome and it is fairly obvious that a refugee convention is about protection, it's not about migration.

Secondly, for those people who are not refugees, but whose mere presence in the asylum system jeopardises its on-going viability as a system that can provide effective protection, returns of non-refugees is also an important issue and in that context my discussions on this occasion have had these outcomes.

Agreements between South Africa and Australia

First, in relation to South Africa, Australia and South Africa have signed an agreement to ensure that if people reach Australia and have had the opportunity by being present in South Africa to pursue asylum claims, we can return them.

We have had discussions with other countries in a preliminary way, to pursue that further objective. In Serbia we have signed, on this visit, an agreement for ongoing cooperation in relation to unlawful movements and agreed to continue in dialogue about reform of the refugee system. In the Czech Republic and in Austria and in Slovakia, I have agreed with ministers that we will be exchanging letters about the reform process outlining the suggestions that Australia is making and countries there are minded to look at those issues in a constructive way. Similarly here in the United Kingdom, I have just had discussions with Lord Filkin and again that is a matter of mutual interest.

Working Holiday Maker agreements between Greece and Australia

In relation to Greece and Austria, we have now reached a point after discussions where we can enter into more detailed negotiations with a view to developing Working Holiday Maker agreements and in the context of both Austria and Greece, our desire for agreements to be genuinely reciprocal and to provide opportunities for young Australians in the same way that we would provide opportunities to young Austrians and young

Greeks is well understood and I think we managed to overcome some of the perhaps misunderstandings about the nature of what we had in mind with each country. When you are seeking to develop arrangements which reflect the generality of our Working Holiday Maker arrangements and fit them into other people's legislative regimes, there are complexities but the dialogue has been, on this occasion, very constructive.

Resettlement of Tanzanian refugees

Two final matters that I would mention, I have always said that the importance of protecting the international refugee system centres upon a willingness to engage in resettlement of people who are refugees, who have no prospect of returning home and who are unsafe where they are. In Tanzania, I visited a refugee camp on the border of Burundi. The Tanzanians at the moment are involved in pursuit of return of the bulk of long-standing refugees and they seek to do so with the cooperation of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. That cooperation is forthcoming in relation to areas of Burundi that are seen to be safe and secure and as many as 400,000 - 500,000 people could be returned from Tanzania in the near to medium future. Those arrangements are taking place now with something of the order of 1,000 people a week being invited to come forward and, having expressed interest in return, make the immediate arrangements.

Not everybody when assessed on a case by case basis can safely return and the more obvious cases involve those people of mixed marriages, of which there are some but also people with particular identities that may be of a high profile and UNHCR has identified around about 1,000 people that they think fit that profile amongst the half a million people that are likely to return and I have certainly indicated that within the context of our resettlement program, we along with the United States of America and Canada, should be able to assist the UNHCR in relation to that resettlement request.

Finally, tomorrow I'll be participating in a dialogue here organised by Professor Salt of the London University. Professor Salt has brought together a very wide range of interlocutors some of whom are senior government officials and we will be involved in a comprehensive discussion about immigration issues. Professor Salt, as you may know, has commented internationally over a period of time that Australia's system is a model that others could usefully look at and I think the breadth of people that he is bringing together will enable a discussion to occur which reflects that degree of international interest about the beneficial nature of well constructed indeficatious migration programs.

Understandings with other countries

REPORTER: Can you explain, in layperson's terms, what it means to have an agreement of cooperation with Serbia and the agreements with the Czech Republic, Austria and Slovakia, in terms of that issue of returns and hence the difference between movement, movement for protection and movement for migration? I mean where are we up to with those countries? Is there progress being made? Are we going to get an agreement like we have with South Africa? How far down the track are we?

MINISTER: The way in which we deal with these matters is first to engage in relation to those areas where we have something to offer and where we are seeking to ascertain the extent to which, if there is cooperation, we are able to each benefit. The primary benefit that comes from the discussions and agreements; with Serbia we have an agreement for information exchange and for cooperation, and essentially that agreement enables us to be able to provide to them information about the sorts of people who are involved in people smuggling operations. I often liken people smugglers to travel agents. Some people can specialise, but most agents, if they are going to be able to satisfy the needs of their clients, have to recognise that some clients will come with particular aspirations and if you're a people smuggler to Australia it may be in your interest to have some way of being able to facilitate somebody's travel elsewhere if that's where they want to go.

So, for us information exchange with countries about what they know of the routes and people who are involved and what they are doing can be very helpful as can the information that we receive be helpful to them.

Secondly, we are dealing with countries who generally speaking do not have the same degree of sophistication that we have in relation to identifying people who are travelling on forged documents, that may be improperly documented and cooperation that helps build their capacities to be able to deal with these issues is also important.

The third leg is, and why I am particularly pleased that the indications from each of these countries that they are prepared to look at readmission, is not because I expect that it is particularly useful for Australia to have readmission agreements with the Czech Republic, Slovakia and Austria, The fact that we have agreements on those issues which will inevitably come, and their willingness was very positive on those issues, is a reflection of what is an emerging international standard and the more arrangements that you have put in place that would enable returns to occur, if it was necessary, the more you are able to say to others where it may be more beneficial, that this is good international practice. So, what is emerging with countries like Canada, the United States, New Zealand and Australia, is that we are all involved in an on-going dialogue with other countries about return agreements to build up the sort of arrangements that in a European context, and I am sure you'll understand this, are covered more broadly under what they call the Dublin Convention.

For us, there is no Dublin Convention but there is the opportunity to put together beneficial arrangements. Look, I must say I hadn't immediately focussed upon what might have been the reasons for the South African desire to have a contract with us. When I tell you the reason, it will become fairly obvious but it hadn't immediately struck me. South Africa is beset at the moment by very large numbers of people from within the African continent seeking immigration outcomes by accessing South Africa and that's the major issue that they are having to deal with. They have not been beset with significant movements of people from elsewhere but they are aware that there can be movements from other parts of the world including Asia. If they are going to get any movement into South Africa from Asia, their concern is that it may come via Australia. I don't think that would happen, but I think that is their concern and so the return agreement provides that if people access South Africa, through Australia, where they could have put asylum claims in Australia, they can be returned. Equally, for us, it means that if people have been in South Africa where they could have put in protection applications before they sought to access Australia, they can be returned to South Africa. Now, we have had about 20 cases of people who, over the course of the last couple of years, who under informal arrangements before the signing of this agreement, we've been able to get back to South Africa.

REPORTER:

They've accessed Australia via South Africa?

MINISTER: So, we are not talking big numbers but we are talking about essentially putting in place arrangements so that if somebody is in the business of putting together a new smuggling operation, they will know that it's not really going to be terribly productive and that their clients are going to be on their way back. That's essentially what it means. In the European context, there are occasionally some people from France and Germany that, for various reasons, ended up in Australia who have either had successful claims before or assumed claims in Europe and return agreements may have some implication in a small number of cases but, again, I think the broader issue is if we can get those sorts of arrangements in place as good international practice it is going to make it much easier to go to other countries where they may be more useful.

REPORTER: But does the UNHCR accept that as part of its reform? I mean where the UNHCR reform up to?

MINISTER: Well the UNHCR process has been one in which they have been involved in what they call global consultations and they have had a series of meetings in which they have developed a range of something of the order of 200 or so different recommendations. In terms of those recommendations becoming in any way defined as a policy or having any degree of acceptance by nation states, they require endorsement by the Executive Committee. The Executive Committee of the UNHCR meets I think around about September/October each year and so at the moment while there will be some preliminary meetings at which these matters will be discussed with governments and out of that might flow an indication that there are some issues that can be pursued, others that might not, that process hasn't yet been finished.

Bakhtiari family

REPORTER: A domestic issue. Mike Rann has called for the release of the Afghan family, the Bakhtiaris?

MINISTER: First point is that we don't know whether or not they are an Afghan family. We know that there are determinations that they are not refugees, but the complicating factor is that there was a finding in relation to the father of the children, or the claimed father of the children, that he had obtained a temporary protection visa at an earlier point in time and because he was on a temporary protection visa some argue that should be enough for this family to be reunited.

The problem is that the father was already the subject of investigations that have been on-going in relation to a number of Afghans where we believe that we may have been seriously mislead. In relation to the claims that they have made and in relation to Mr Bakhtiari, we have put him on notice that we are looking at the cancellation of his visa on the basis that it was inappropriately obtained. He has sought to restrain us from acting in relation to that cancellation and that matter, along with some other matters, are now before the court. Independently of that some of your colleagues have been undertaking some enquiries of their own. I think the Sun Herald in Sydney sent a journalist to Quetta with a copy of the man's photograph and said to people do they know him and somebody said yes he was our plumber and since then the Australian newspaper has sent the journalist to the village that he claimed that he came from in Afghanistan and he's interviewed 40 people in a village of 100 and found nobody who knew him. So, I mean this is an issue in which we are dealing with but clearly a family, whether they had refugee entitlements, it would be now harder to believe that they have a continuing need for protection. In other words, they have made no claims against Pakistan which may be their country of either permanent or temporary residence and it is now highly unlikely viz a viz Afghanistan that they have claims either. In that sense, this is an issue about which the family should go home.

REPORTER: That's the legal argument but Mr Rann's calling for their release on humanitarian grounds.

MINISTER: Well let me just say this. Release of people who have no lawful entitlement to be in Australia gives rise to an expectation that you can achieve migration outcomes simply by being in Australia. Mr Rann has no responsibility for protecting our borders, I do. Mr Rann has no responsibility for protecting our migration program, I do. Mr Rann makes comments about humane treatment, I am concerned that people should be treated humanely. That is why we are looking at on-going detention in the most humane way that we can assure it but we will not be seeking to send a signal or to undermine the integrity of our borders by simply accepting that behavioural difficulties can achieve migration that would not otherwise be achievable. One of the reasons I take a strong view on that is that there is some evidence to believe that many of the behavioural concerns that we see in detention arise from a mistaken belief that if you put us under duress you will get a different outcome. So, one of the reasons that I do not like to compromise in relation to matters of this sort is that it leads other detainees to believe that self-harm, for instance, might be helpful. I don't know whether you saw the report about me from one of the people who returned to Afghanistan fairly recently voluntarily, but he made it very clear that the reason he was going home was because, as he said himself, "we stitched our lips and we rioted and Mr Ruddock was unmoved." Now, I am moved when I witness events of that sort, I am concerned when it happens but I also have to think rationally and have regards to the broader implications of every decision that I take and I am afraid Mr Rann is not looking at those issues in that context.

Now, we may well be minded to make alternative arrangements but within a detention context. For instance, I noticed Mr Rann says look this family should be taken to Villawood in Sydney. I would have no problem if Mr Rann was prepared to accommodate Mr Bakhtiari in South Australia where he would be closer to his family. He might well be able to provide accommodation in Port Augusta for Mr Bakhtiari so that he could visit his family in the new centre of Baxter if we move the children there. I mean it seems to me that if you are going to look at these issues laterally and you have the interest of the family at heart, moving people to Villawood where the accommodation is in short supply, simply on the basis that they would be nearer to their father, you know their father is unemployed, he is on benefits, he is only in Australia while he has a temporary protection visa, he could be nearer his family if he were prepared to re-accommodate himself in South Australia and there doesn't seem to be any reason why he shouldn't and the South Australian government, if it's so interested in these matters might be able to facilitate that.

The interesting thing is, as far as Mr Bakhtiari is concerned and his advisers, is that they prefer to deal with these matters at arms length. There has been no attempt to discuss with me what are the most appropriate arrangements and what alternative models could be pursued. I mean I would be interested in people who were prepared to come forward and say look rather than trying to take a battering ram to the legal system, we'll try and

work out sensible solutions, but I suspect that this family, in part, is being used by people who are intent on changing the system rather than pursuing what is in their best interests, I suspect. Now, having given you your headlines for the day, I wanted to just make one other observation. It may be cultural but what I find fascinating is the preoccupation with only two of the five family members who are, in fact, detained, by the family's advisers, presumably on instructions, or perhaps without instructions, but I find it interesting that when there is a family of five, the proceedings and the attention only seems to focus on two.

REPORTER: What's your point there?

MINISTER: Well I don't know except that if detention is inappropriate for children, one would have thought that the interests of the children collectively would have been pursued by the advocates and not just some of the children.

REPORTER: So, the other three as well?

MINISTER: Well I am saying there are three other children and you don't hear any mention of them, that's all. It may be cultural. I mean the other three are daughters, but I don't know.

Court decisions

REPORTER: I have a question about the Federal Court decision….

MINISTER: Which one?

REPORTER: Well, there was one today ….

MINISTER: There were two today.

REPORTER: The one about the right of appeal in the Tampa case.

MINISTER: I'm not too sure there's a right of appeal on Tampa that I've heard of.

REPORTER: No well whether or not there is, as I understood it they looked at five cases and in four found that there was no...

MINISTER: I am aware of the fact that there has been a full court decision, five judges, involving five separate cases in which, as I understand it, the full court has said that the privative clause that we enacted last October is constitutional.

REPORTER: That's the clause that says there is no right of review?

MINISTER: Well the clause boosts the validity of the decisions taken at first instance so that there are limited opportunities for review. The court has, as I understand it and it is always difficult to paraphrase something in layman's terms for an issue which is quite complex, but the court has said the provision is constitutional, it's not struck down. In relation to three of the cases there is not an issue that has to be reviewed, in other words the decisions have been upheld, but in relation to two of the cases they have said that there are certain matters that even the privative clause can not essentially preclude being reviewed in certain circumstances. The circumstances that the court has tried to construct for issues of a very - there's a form of words and I've forgotten the form of words they used, and nobody's going to be able to help me on this. So the court has said that there are certain matters in which there is an inviolable limitation on being held unreviewable. So, we are now going to go through, I suspect if this decision withstands further scrutiny, I suspect what will happen in relation to those who have been unsuccessful they will probably want to appeal to the higher court and we will obviously then look at what issues we think might be appealable. But introducing a new concept of something being a matter that can be held to be an inviolable ….

REPORTER: This means like being unquestionable right.

MINISTER: It's essentially saying that there are certain matters that even the privative clause does not preclude being reviewed.

REPORTER: And do you accept that, does the government accept that or will you …….

MINISTER: I'm simply saying that I think we have got a long way to go yet in relation to firstly the willingness of advocates and their clients to accept the view of the court that the privative clause is constitutional, first of all, and I suspect that if they challenge that we will find all of these other concepts as

well will be the subject of a reconsideration but it's too early to say what that might be and I will obviously be taking advice on those matters in the course of the next few weeks.

REPORTER: But do you have a preliminary view on that idea that there are some matters that are beyond the scope of the privative clause?

MINISTER: Look, I would like to look at the legislation in detail before I finally come to a view. I mean I am here in London and I have had a summary of the information put to me. The court has issued a summary of its decision. I understand the decision is some 400 pages long and I will want to take advice on all of those issues.

REPORTER: And what about the other case which seemed to be saying that you have to let people out of detention if no-one will take them back, I mean if you can't return them.

MINISTER: That's always been the case. I mean there is nothing new about that. The law is clear that we can continue to hold people as long as we are making arrangements for their removal. What Justice Merkel has done is to form a view as to what the standard of proof is in relation to the efforts that we are undertaking in relation to that matter. Now look, we obey the law and Mr Almasri has been released in accordance with the order but again this is a matter about which there are wider implications on which I will be taking advice.

REPORTER: And just on the privative clause thing, the guy whose appeal was upheld is he going to get out?

MINSITER: I think there were two cases in which these matters were dealt with and whether or not they are detained or not I don't know the detail of the circumstances of each of the parties involved and I don't want to get down to managing those matters save to say if people are detained and this goes to the basis upon which they are detained we will do what we are lawfully required to do but my understanding is that the matters here went to visa cancellation and I'll take some further advice on that.

REPORTER: Just to bring it all together, this appeal of the decision today which you think is coming, there is another high court case coming on similar issues.

MINISTER: Is there?

REPORTER: I thought there was another about the validity of the migration legislation and whether the whole issue of appeal. Is this going to come down to a high court showdown about whether you could do what you wanted to do in that legislation in effect.

MINISTER: There may well be. There may well be. I would not use words like high court showdown, let me say that. If you want to use words like that, don't credit me with them please. I mean we believe in the rule of law and at the end of the day parliament can state what it believes the law should be. If decisions of courts don't accord with our view as to what the law should be, we can seek to change the law but in terms of interpreting what the parliament has enacted, that's a proper role for the courts. So let me just make that very clear. What we have here is a situation in which the full court of the federal court has given a decision, some of those issues may be appealable by the applicants and some of those matters may be appealable by us. It is too early to say what the response will be. We will take that with advice. In relation to the high court, I understand later this month the high court may be looking at some of these issues again in other cases. I understand that and we will argue those matters before the court in those cases but our hand may be strengthened by the fact that we already have the advice of the majority of the full court that the privative clause was in fact constitutional.

See: Index of Transcripts

| Home | Search | Links | Privacy | Disclaimer | Copyright | Site Map |

URL: http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/transcripts/transcripts02/london_150802.htm Last update: 20 August 2002 at 09:39 AEST



