http://www.democrats.org.au

Senator Andrew Bartlett Australian Democrats’ Immigration Spokesperson

5 May 2002  MEDIA RELEASE                          02/211

Defending the Indefensible The Australian Democrats believe that the Minister for Immigration, Philip Ruddock, has deliberately misled the Australian public by the comments he made on Channels Nine’s Sunday program.

The program focused on trauma experienced by the children of asylum seekers kept in mandatory detention, often for periods as long as three years.

Australian Democrats Immigration Spokesperson, Senator Andrew Bartlett, said the Minister was defending the indefensible.

“Once again we see the Minister blaming refugees for their problems. He has claimed that parents must remain responsible for their children and what they are exposed to in any situation,” Senator Bartlett said.

“We are talking about people who are already traumatized. These are people who have fled war, terror and persecution under extremely difficult circumstances.

“The detention regime places an extra strain on adults and children who are already vulnerable. It is a process deliberately established to send a harsh message to those fleeing persecution that they will not be welcome in Australia.

“When a State Authority such as the Department of Children’s Services recommends release into the community, the Ministers response is to say he cannot release adults from detention under the Migration Act.

“This is a deliberate attempt to mislead the public. The Minister can and does have the power to issue a bridging visa until the case can be determined. There is only one reason he will not act to help these children, and that is a policy decision.

“He has said on more than one occasion that he would not advocate the release of families because it sends a bad message to asylum seekers who may try to come to Australia.

“The Australian Democrats have called for a Royal Commission into the treatment of detainees, so the realities facing asylum seekers can be exposed,” concluded Senator Bartlett.

For an interview contact: Senator Andrew Bartlett on 0418 743 789

