LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION

TRANSCRIPT 0F INTERVIEW - PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA, 18TH FEBRUARY 2002

E & OE - PROOF ONLY

Subjects:  ‘Kids overboard’ affair, allegations against the Governor-General

CREAN: Defence has now contradicted the Prime Minister and indicated that more than two photos were sent to Minister Reith’s office.  What the Government has to do is to tell us what those photos were - release them - so that people can make up their own minds as to whether what Minister Reith released was selective and had pictures not telling the true story.  There is a further dimension today and that is reports that an adviser in the Prime Minister’s office was asked to check in October and November the truth of the ‘kids overboard’ stories.  If he was asked to check, it beggars belief that with all the information swilling around casting doubt on the veracity of the story that he didn’t form that opinion.  When did he pass that information to the Prime Minister?  That too is a question the Prime Minister has to address.

JOURNALIST: From your knowledge of how DLOs operate within offices is it incomprehensible to you that they would not passed this up the chain within their offices?

CREAN: Absolutely incomprehensible.  The DLOs would have passed the information on particularly in the hothouse that Mr Hampton seemed to be operating in ordering and demanding of Defence all sorts of information.  It’s unbelievable that a DLO would not have passed any information coming to them on to Mr Hampton and in turn to Mr Reith.

JOURNALIST: Are you also saying that Miles Jordana in the PM’s office would have passed that information on to the Prime Minister?

CREAN: If Mr Jordana was asked to get information verifying the truth of the ‘kids overboard’ and if the Prime Minister was seeking advice, as he told us he did, again on the 7th of November it defies belief that he wouldn’t have spoken to Mr Jordana.  Why would he be requested to get information and then not pass it on to the Prime Minister?  I might also point out that this story confirms my other belief as

2

to why the Prime Minister’s language changed between the 8th of October and the 10th of October.  If Mr Jordana sought information as early as the 7th of October on the veracity that explains more clearly in my mind why the Prime Minister started to tone down his language on the 10th.  The Prime Minister started to have doubts - the trouble is he never told the Australian public.  He was prepared to have the story continue to run and he wants you to believe that he was never told.  Well, I don’t believe him and I think it’s important that the inquiries get to the bottom of it.

JOURNALIST: Do you think the Senate is going to start getting to the heart of some of this today with the bureaucrats?

CREAN: Well it could.  I mean, I think that it’s Senate Estimates and there will be, there may be defences that people put up.  Let’s wait and see.  I hope we can start to get some information out today but if not then there’s the inquiry and if the Government seeks to gag or to restrict people that can come along and give the full explanation then we will have to look at where we go from there.  But there is also the opportunity, of course, in the House of Representatives today.

JOURNALIST: The Prime Minister says a very strong magnifying glass needs to be put over the allegations against the Governor-General.  Do you believe he should be launching some sort of inquiry?

CREAN: Magnifying glass - yes.  But what he’s had is the reverse end of the telescope.  John Howard’s been looking through the long end.  John Howard doesn’t want to face up to the truth.  He’s hidden it from the Australian public and now he’s wanting everyone else to ignore it.  Well we won’t allow it to be ignored.

JOURNALIST: Are you very concerned then about whether the Governor-General, do you have serious doubts about whether he should be continuing in his post?

CREAN: I am sorry was that earlier question about the Governor-General?

JOURNALIST: Yes.

CREAN: Well I am sorry.  That’s taken out of context then and I thought you were still referring to all of this information associated with the boat people.

JOURNALIST: Sorry he said that a magnifying glass should be put over the allegations against the Governor-General.

CREAN: Well, no, I think that it is important that the full detail of those allegations be made available but I think equally important is that the Governor-General give a full explanation.  I don’t think it’s sufficient merely to deny it.  I think that the charges, the claims, the issues need to be met and I think all of us will be interested to see what has to be said tonight but mere denial without evidence I think will not satisfy people.  And I think it’s in everyone’s interests that the

3

Governor-General make a full explanation on the allegations made so that this issue, so that people can make up their minds further.

JOURNALIST: …damaging the Office.  Would you agree with that?

CREAN: I think the longer these issues remain unresolved and unanswered, of course it damages the Office of the Governor-General and that’s not good for the country.

JOURNALIST: But should the Prime Minister intervene?

CREAN: I believe the Governor-General should be given the opportunity to fully respond to the allegations made.  I have had discussions with him previously, not in relation to the latest but previously, in which I came away of the view that he was genuinely trying to address the issues.  I think he should be given that opportunity.  I urge him to do so.

JOURNALIST: Are you satisfied with the way in which he is responding to these allegations appearing on tonight’s Australian Story?  Is that adequate as far as you are concerned?

CREAN: I think we will only be able to make that judgement when we see tonight’s story.  I have only seen reports of the additional material that has now been put together for tonight responding to what came out over the weekend.  I think until we see it or get access to a transcript of it it’s very hard to make that judgement.

Ends.

