

AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY



Mark Latham MP                                              19 December 2003

Federal Labor Leader

Transcript of doorstop at Forum Shopping Centre Forrestfield - Perth

Subjects:  Bulk Billing; Productivity Commission & FHOG; Stamp  Duty; Children in detention.

E & OE

LATHAM:   It’s great to be out here today with John and to wish him all the best.  It’s a mighty crusade to save bulk billing right around the country. And I look forward to  seeing him in Sydney at the end of January and working with him and all the other  Australians worried about the loss of bulk billing in implementing the Labor policy where  unlike the Government - they’ve basically given up on bulk billing - we want to get the  rates back up and ensure that our policy does the right thing to help the doctors do the  bulk billing and ensure that all Australian families don’t need private health insurance, they  don’t need a safety net. Let’s get the bulk billing available to them. And that’s the best  thing we can do for the health system in this country, and it’s the best thing we can do to  save Medicare.

JOURNALIST:  The Productivity Commission has recommended that the first  homebuyers grant be means tested. Do you think that’s a good idea?

LATHAM:   We’ve been talking about targeting of grants for quite some time. We  don’t believe it should be available to millionaire homebuyers. That seems to be a waste of  public money so targeting the grant, getting the money to where it is most needed is a very  important way of dealing with Australia’s housing affordability crisis. There is no overnight  solution, the house prices have gone up so much. But surely making a better targeted use  of federal money is going to be a good thing compared to a system where people buying a  million dollar house can get a public subsidy.

JOURNALIST:  What about stamp duty?

LATHAM:   I want to have a look at the full recommendations of the report but  stamp duty of course is a matter for the states. Primarily though housing affordability is a  federal responsibility and I’ve been advocating six or seven big things, the federal  government could be doing to improve housing affordability in Australia and that’s where  my focus lies. It is mainly a national responsibility but if there are recommendations  relevant to the states and territories it’s for premiers and chief ministers to have a look at  those.

JOURNALIST:  You’ve been talking about shared equity schemes, the Productivity  Commission looked at those but said the first home buyers grant is the way to go, do you  think they still need to be examined?

Contact: David Britton 0411 743 320                                   www.alp.com



LATHAM:   I think we’ve got six or seven important federal responsibilities to deal  with Australia’s housing affordability crisis. There is no overnight solution, but better  targeting of the first homebuyers grant is important and certainly, schemes that help  families save for a house deposit is vital. Families who have got to work hard and save  hard and put money aside for a house deposit - they don’t get any encouragement out of  Canberra at the moment. So, my proposals for matched savings accounts and nest egg  accounts - we’re working hard on those and we’ll have policy announcements in the new  year.

JOURNALIST:  But is means testing the best way of make it a fairer system though, is  that the best way to target?

LATHAM:   Well, it’s been our policy to have the targeting for quite some time. We  don’t believe in giving the grant to people buying a million dollar home. If they can afford a  million dollar home they don’t need a public subsidy. So we’re happy to look at targeting  policies, we’ve had those in the past and I’m very keen to read the full report of the  Productivity Commission and work out the six or seven important ways to ensure that the  great Australian dream of home ownership stays alive. Parents and grandparents around  Australia are petrified that the next generation will be a generation of renters rather than  homeowners. We don’t want that, we want to keep home ownership alive in Australia and  ensure that young people have that great Australian dream within their reach.

JOURNALIST:  The Treasurer said that housing prices go up and down typically and  the Government should stay out of it - we’ve got one of the highest rates of home  ownership around the world. What’s your reaction to that?

LATHAM:   Unfortunately under Mr Costello the participation of first homebuyers  in the housing market is at an all time low. Traditionally in this country the thing that’s kept  the great Australian dream of home ownership alive is the fact that 23% of people in the  housing market are doing it for the first time - they’re buying their first home. Under Mr  Costello that historic average of 23% has fallen to 13% so it’s at an all time low. We’ve got  fewer first homebuyers in the market as a proportion than we’ve ever had in Australia and  that’s a real problem. If we haven’t got first home buyers participating in the market then  common sense will tell you there’s a problem, there’s a housing affordability crisis and for  Costello to take a laissez faire attitude - that he’s got no responsibility for it - I would have  thought just defies reality. We need active Government policies to build up housing  affordability and build up that proportion of first homebuyers in the market.

JOURNALIST:  What about revisiting negative gearing?

LATHAM:   That’s not on our agenda. That’s not something that we’ll be doing at  all in the future.

JOURNALIST:  [inaudible]…Point Nepean. What’s your reaction to the federal  government deciding to leave it in public hands?

LATHAM:   Under pressure from the Mornington Peninsula community and a lot of  concerned people in Victoria, I think it’s a good thing that the Government has backed  away from commercial development. It should never have been on the agenda. This is a  win for the local community and it’s been the Labor Party’s pleasure to support them, to

2

3

argue the case to turn the whole site into a national park. Under pressure the  Government’s moving in that direction. But I note that they say it will take five years to  hand over the site to the Victorian Government as national park. The Labor Party policy  has always been to do that straight away and if they can improve their announcement  today if they will get it to the national park status and the protection of environmental  values of Point Nepean even faster.



INTERVIEWER:  [inaudible] the Government’s handling of this issue?

LATHAM:   They have been all over the shop, they have had so  many different options and it is only due to community pressure from the  people on the Mornington Peninsula community, the people in Victoria with  the support of the Labor Party that has got the Government to see sense. It  has been a real worry we shouldn’t have sites of environmental and public  value treated this way. I suppose it is a case of better late then never, but  again I urge them to get it to national park status as quickly as possible. It  shouldn’t take them 5 years to do the right thing on that site in getting it over  to the Victorian Government as a national site quickly is certainly in the public  interest.



INTERVIEWER:  What do you make about the PM’s call for an  investigation into claims that maybe children were encouraged to be involved  in the actions in Nauru.

LATHAM:   I understand my Shadow Minister for Immigration,  Stephen Smith is getting some detailed information about what happened.  The picture is not clear and certainly our policy is to close down the so called  Pacific Solution which has been a very expensive [inaudible] and I am hoping  to get a report from Stephen Smith about it due course.



INTERVIEWER:  [inaudible]

LATHAM:   They should close down the Pacific Solution and they  should also get children out of detention centres. We have an opportunity  before Christmas to get children out of detention and as a parent and  involved in family love and care, in a civilised society children should not be  behind barbed wire. And I say again to the Prime Minster let’s get the  children out of the detention centres before Christmas, I say that as a parent  and I urge the Prime Minister to do the same thing as a parent and a  Parliamentarian

INTERVIEWER:  [inaudible]

LATHAM:   Stephen Smith is getting a detailed report of the  circumstances and we will be better able to make these judgements once we  know more about the circumstances.



LATHAM:   Thanks very much



ENDS

