Philip Ruddock MP  MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AND INDIGENOUS AFFAIRS

Transcripts

Press Conference - Migration Program 2003-04 (Humanitarian And  Non-Humanitarian), ATSIC

Canberra - 31 March 2003

Migration Program 2003-04 (Humanitarian And Non-Humanitarian)

Philip Ruddock: Ladies and gentlemen we distributed earlier the statements that I intended to make so that you might be  reasonably well informed about the issues before we came together, but I do wish to just formally announce the migration and  humanitarian programs proposed for the year 2003/04 and if I can deal first with the humanitarian program it appears shorter,  but for me it's a very important program and one in which I've always placed a great deal of personal interest.

It has been fixed again at 12,000 places but it will include places rolled over - that is, any places that are not fully utilised  during this financial year will be rolled over to next financial year.

I mean there could be some difficulties in reaching the figures and targets that we had fixed. At the moment some of our  offices in the Middle East that would be involved in processing permanent visa applications have been contracted for reasons  of safety of personnel.

I think those areas in which we have withdrawn staff have been notified but we're still very much involved in Beirut and if we  have to move to Athens we would, but it does mean that there is always a potential for some cases not to be completed within  the year.

The estimated 4,000 places for refugees will be met and within that there will be of course places for women at risk in  particular.

In the SHP program, which is for people in like, refugee-like situations who need a resettlement outcome and have sponsors in  Australia there will be 7,000 places. Our estimate is that we will need something of the order of 700 places for onshore claimants.

I don't recall a figure as low as that, and the reason is that the measures that we have adopted in relation to border protection  have led to a 50% reduction overall in onshore asylum claims.

I looked at the figures fairly recently for Europe and the united Kingdom was 30% up. Some European countries were down  but I think there were only about three or four other countries that have actually been able to achieve a 50% reduction in  onshore claims.

And of course what that has meant is that Australia being one of the nine or so countries with a dedicated and continuous  resettlement program is able to maximise places, and we will have within that program something of the order of the third  largest program for resettlement in the world after thew United States and Canada.

And the reduction in onshore asylum claims needs to be seen in terms of the opportunity to maximise the numbers of people  who come through structured refugee resettlement programs and humanitarian programs and the real challenge for the  Australian community and particularly those people who vocally support refugees in this new environment is to see whether  or not they will come forward and want to help, particularly those communities that are seeking community support for  helping sponsors, particularly recently arrived refugees who may be seeking to use the special humanitarian program.

I won't say much more on that. You see the break-up in the figures which indicate that in the allocations in recent years there  has been a marked shift to Africa and the Middle East. The European allocations are well down. That reflects the change  primarily in the Balkans and I expect that that will be reflected in the figures that we ultimately approve for this year after that  program is implemented.

The second statement I have is in relation to the 2003/04 migration program.

We are building very much on the established program which has enabled us to get a very, very marked shift to skilled  migration in the context of increased world competition for what is in fact a scarce resource we are increasingly faced with  competition and one of the way in which we have been able to leverage Australia as a destination for permanent migration for  people with skills has been the growth in the overseas student market in Australia.

This year the program will again be in the range of 100,000 or 110. We're going to keep it at that level as we announced last  year until 2005/6, subject only to any exceptional circumstances.

There has been a marginal change in that you we put in place certain measures for parents and we received parliamentary  approval for that, but the approval didn't come until fairly late in the year and we won't be able to visa any parents, additional  parents in this year's program, so we are rolling over into next year's program the additional parent places that would have  been available this year. And that means that it will bring to 7,000 the numbers of parents that will be available to be visaed.  That will be 1500 in the normal parent stream and 5,500 in sponsored parent stream.

And I might say I have been very much appraised of very considerable community interest in those sponsored places, across  all communities, and any idea that the amounts that people were going to be asked to contribute might be oppressive I think  flies in the face of the degree of interest that has been expressed to me, but the family stream will be 47,100. It will be the  largest program for family members since 1995/6.

The skill stream will increase from 63,300 to 68,300 and that is the largest skilled migration program ever for Australia.

Now is that a good thing? It clearly is if you look at the research that I have attached to this statement.

The research shows the benefits of highly skilled and targeted migration. It shows we continue to receive a brain gain, not a  brain loss, a net brain gain as a result of targeted migration. It shows that skilled migrants are able to quickly establish  themselves in the labour market and apply their skills and qualifications.

The figures also demonstrate they have remarkable lower levels of unemployment, and more importantly the work that we  have published indicates very clearly that it produces a positive benefit to government budgets and that is not only  commonwealth but also state budgets.

But the most important aspect of these changes relate to an areas of very personal interest and that is getting a better dispersal  originally of the migration program, and you know that I have implemented a number of measures since we came to office.  We've shifted the decisions of something like 22,000 people and in this program year we are announcing a number of further  changes that are designed to obtain a further and better dispersal of the Migration Act.

Now those changes involve leveraging student eligibility for permanent residency so as to give further advantage to those who  have studied in regional centres or in low growth capital cities. And what it means in reality is that if you are an overseas  student and you study in Adelaide or Hobart, in Darwin, or in any of the regional locations outside of Sydney and Melbourne

and I might say Sydney and Melbourne also includes Wollongong, Newcastle and the Central Coast, Perth or the south-east of  Queensland - that's the Gold Coast or Brisbane.

If you study outside of those areas it will be easier to migrate, and the reason for that measure is that in our judgement people  are more likely to stay in those areas where they have a connection.

We know already from the research that's been carried out that if people have family, sponsors, living in a particular area  they're more likely to live nearby. If they have a job available to them in a regional centre they're more likely to live there and  settle there, and gain if they've, in our view, if they've settled, had accommodation, studied, know a regional centre, and that's  the place they've undertaken their studies and where they had their networks and where they're able to find potential  employers they are more likely to stay there as well.

So, you find in this statement today quite a deal of detail about the changes that are designed to enhance our focus on skills  and demand, to target successful labour market performance of migrants with Australian qualifications and particularly  enabling those overseas students who have studied for a minimum of two years, those who have undertaken second class  honours or higher degrees, including masters, and even more points for doctorates to get additional points as well.

So, we think that these measures will enhance Australia's competitiveness in finding skilled migrants in an increasing  competitive world.

I'm happy to take any questions that you have. If I can just say that I'd prefer to take questions on immigration matters first  and if there are any indigenous issues you want to discuss we can leave that until the end.

Question: [Inaudible] How many places are going to be rolled over? You said some would be rolled over from this year.

Philip Ruddock: Look, I mean we think there could be something of the order of 1500 or so, maybe a little more.

Question: So [Indistinct] hundred in total?

Philip Ruddock: Yeah, yeah. I mean if you look at what happened last year, it was about of that order. And we expected to be  able to get them all through this year. But I mean the difficulty we have is primarily with the Middle East, where getting  people's medical clearances, the other checking that needs to be done, some of the interviewing when staff deployments in the  Middle East have been contracted because of the present circumstances, may mean that there are difficulties in getting those  targeted figures for this year.

Question: Has there been any consideration of reserving places within the humanitarian program for people fleeing the war in  Iraq?

Philip Ruddock: Well, I made clear what the government has said before. If you had a situation like we saw in 1991, you  would have no people displaced by war. And to date there has been - I was looking at the figures last week, I haven't checked  them again today - but I think only third country nationals had left Iraq, and very few Iraqis had in fact fled. And people who  were being deployed on the basis that they were going to be people-ing refugee centres in Iran, Turkey, Jordan, Syria, are still  on standby. We expect that exodus has not occurred.

Now, we did get an exodus last time. The exodus came when Saddam Hussein was seen to be still in power and unleashed his  revenge upon populations that he thought weren't loyal to him. And the big outflow occurred months later when it became  obvious that Saddam Hussein was still in power.

Now, we are not ruling out a need to assist in relation to refugees if situations emerge where that is necessary. We've not ruled  it out, but we are certainly not planning on it, on the basis of past experience.

Our hope would still be that many people who have been displaced might, as a result of a successful outcome to this war, be  in a position to go back to secure lives, and to join their relatives free of any form of oppression.

But it is important to recognise, in relation to refugee and humanitarian programs, that they remain flexible. And we have

always been in a position to respond to changed circumstances. And you can see the shift that's occurred, in relation to  humanitarian places in the last two years, with a reduction in the number of people that have had to be resettled out of the  Balkans because of the changed circumstances there. And the ability to be able to assist more people in Africa and more  people in the Middle East.

Question: When you talk about [Indistinct] and the need to respond as things arise, is that strictly within the 12,000 program  limit? Or do you leave open the possibility of going above that if the need arises?

Philip Ruddock: Well, it would be a government decision if that need arose. But there have been circumstances in which we  have.

The Kosovo deployment and the East Timorese deployment were additional deployments beyond the normal refugee and  humanitarian program that the government undertook because there was a need.

So if you're asking me do we remain ready to assist if there is a very significant change in circumstances? Well, experience  suggests that we do, but we are not planning on any such possibilities at the moment because they are not on the horizon and  really are highly unlikely against present parameters.

Question: [Indistinct] program that you might make an announcement on the East Timorese asylum seekers. Are you going to  be doing that? And will this humanitarian intake include numbers - places for East Timorese?

Philip Ruddock: Well, I think I indicated in relation to that that the person who made the observations was quite ill-informed,  and you'll appreciate that as the week goes on.

Question: [Indistinct] seven hundred places for on-shore claimants, you say this is as low as you can ever remember. Does it  follow then that maybe some of our off-shore illegal immigration facilities might be wound back? And what about some of  those islands that were excised? Is there any possibility that that might be revisited?

Philip Ruddock: Well, there's no possibility of revising the excising of islands.

Question: Ever?

Philip Ruddock: No possibility. I mean, why have we done it? We've done it to ensure that if people arrived unlawfully by  boat, a different regime would apply. And when you've had a measure that has achieved remarkable success, why would you  change it? Why would you change a winning formula? One that saves people's lives, stops people getting in boats and enables  you to deliver refugee places to the people who most need it? Why would you change it?

In fact I thought you might have noticed last week that I introduced a Bill to the House of Representatives. It was a Bill that  had been rejected more than six months ago in the Senate in relation to excluding, from the migration zone, islands in the  Coral Sea through the Torres Strait off North-West Western Australia and the Northern Territory.

In other words, our objective is to ensure that we have full coverage in relation to excised places so that if people got past  Christmas Island or Ashmore Reef, that the regime would apply.

Now, are we closing facilities? Yes, we are. I mean we have essentially mothballed Cocos Island. We've mothballed  Christmas Island. We've mothballed Curtin on-shore, and we are proposing to close or mothball Woomera by Easter.

So there has been very significant change, and we will respond to changed circumstances. At the moment I think we have  around about 455 people I think on Nauru. People have continued to leave as we get documents for them. And we are at the  point where, in relation to Mannus Island, I think we have actually three off-shore persons that remain there.

And so, yes, there have been very significant changes in the deployment of resources as a result of the fact that we have gone  now for 15 months without any substantial unauthorised boat arrival attempts.

Question: In the short term, just taking on board what you said about so far there haven't been [Indistinct] from Iraq. Does the

government have contingency plans, over the next couple of months, to provide short-term safe haven to refugees?

Philip Ruddock: Well, the simple answer is no. If you look back at what happened in relation to Kosovo, and if you look at  what happened in relation to East Timor, they were particular situations whereby there was (1) an international response; (2)  an international request; and (3) where the time that had elapsed suggested that this was not a short exodus which would  follow with a fairly quick return of people to their homes.

In Kosovo it came almost 12 months after the initial deployment of many people into Macedonia. And, as I recall, I mean the  situation there was that people had to be offered a safe sanctuary or a temporary protection regime as Australia put in place, to  encourage Macedonia to continue to receive an outflow of people from Kosovo.

And it was only the UNHCR, I have to tell you, was very much opposed to the implementation of such arrangements, and  only came to the view, as I said, 12 months after the initiation of the crisis that that was an appropriate response.

So it's far too early to talk about responses of that sort.

The East Timorese situation occurred where there were a number of people who needed to be evacuated from the UN  compound in Dili, and where the safe haven arrangements in Australia proved necessary because we were essentially close by  and able to receive them. And were, as countries are in the Middle East now, a neighbour in a special relationship and in a  special and unique position to be able to accommodate those people. And that was the circumstances in which it occurred.

Question: [Inaudible]

Philip Ruddock: I'd rather stay with migration until we come to any indigenous. I'll come back to you.

Question: [Inaudible] identify what particular area, what skills in particular this year we'll be focusing on?

Philip Ruddock: Well, I hoped that somebody might ask me that question. I brought along a sheet, which we can give you,  which is that [Indistinct] migration occupations and demand list. I mean essentially skilled workers add to economic capacity  and provide significant benefits, regardless of whether or not they're on an occupation and demand list.

The occupation and demand list is a priority area. And what you've got is a range of computer professionals, it's narrowed a  little because we took some out fairly recently. A range of nursing professionals, a range of other medical or quasi-medical  professionals - I think I put it that way. Hospital pharmacists, retail pharmacists, occupational therapists, physiotherapists,  radiographers. A range of chefs, refrigeration and air conditioning mechanics, and hairdressers.

Question: [Inaudible]

Philip Ruddock: Apparently, m'mm. But I'd have to say one of the areas in which I would expect considerable emphasis on  training should occur is in areas like that. But because we do link to a lot of migration nominations employers having to meet  certain training commitments.

But, look, that is a very good news story. And the benefits that are being obtained are very, very large. And they are not just  benefits for today, they are benefits for future generations.

Question: [Inaudible] suggestion, Minister, that those that are now no longer arriving by boat, but might have had the money  for example to pay for people smugglers in Indonesia or elsewhere are now choosing to come through other routes that could  end up in the skilled migrant program?

Philip Ruddock: Well, I'd have no problem if they wanted to come through a skilled migration program.

Question: [Inaudible]

Philip Ruddock: I've got no evidence - I've got no evidence that somebody who thought of being smuggled has now sought  to apply in any of the occupation areas. But what I would say is that if people had appropriate qualifications, it is always better

to apply and come lawfully than to use a people smuggler. I would certainly say that.

I thought your question may have been asking me about whether there is any evidence that they are looking at other places to  go or other ways of travelling. And, yes, there is some evidence to suggest that, amongst smugglers, that they have been  talking about trying to get to people unlawfully by air into Australia or other countries. But there is no evidence, in terms of  the unauthorised air arrivals, that we see that that has been successful.

There may be people who were looking to be smuggled here that are now saying, 'Well, if we're going to put our hands -  ourselves in the hands of smugglers we'd rather go somewhere else.' The numbers that go to Europe are so large, the numbers  that we are receiving they probably wouldn't influence greatly.

But certainly the UK figures, as I said, were 30% up. In other parts of Europe they were marginally down. The overall  European numbers are about the same.

Question: [Indistinct] didn't have the skills, not [Inaudible] didn't have the money, is it, in a lot of cases. A lot of them have  vast amounts, tens of thousands of dollars.

Philip Ruddock: It is the case that people came with money. It may not have been enough for a business migration program  place. You can't buy your way in. A business migration place requires business skills as well as capital.

Now, in relation to skills, the question you'd have to ask yourself is were those people coming through the refugee and  humanitarian program people who would've been able to access Australia's skilled migration programs, I suspect not.

The first requirement in most occupations is that you have to have a capacity to communicate effectively. The majority didn't  have English - some did - but the majority didn't. There are, certainly amongst the people who've been released on Temporary  Protection Visas, the evidence is that more than 50%, even now, are still on benefits. That suggests they haven't obtained  employment even though they're able to do it. So that's a much higher figure than I would've thought was likely.

And even those people who have obtained work tended to do it in areas where essentially they are competing with unskilled  labour. You know, if you go and get a job in the abattoirs at Young, or if you're doing fruit picking around areas, around  Shepparton and Cobram, or in the Riverland in South Australia where a lot of the employment has been found.

I have only seen or heard of one or two people who have obtained occupations which might be described as skilled and, even  there, they've done so simply because they're here and not necessarily because they would've achieved a skilled migration  entry if they'd applied offshore.

Question: Mr Ruddock, just one point of clarification, the Press Release says a total of 7,000 in the contingency parent  reserve but the attached table shows 6,500. Do you know which is the correct figure?

Philip Ruddock: Well, the figure is 7,000 but it includes the 500 places that were there before. So the total is 1,500 in the  parent program and 5,500 in the sponsored parent program, which is a total of 7,000. But that includes the 500 that were  always there. So what you're looking at is 6,500 additional places, that is the new places both in the old format - that is the  normal parent stream - and 5,500 in the sponsored parent, which was new. Does that clarify it?

Question: [Inaudible] saying that people smugglers, there was talk that they may try to bring people unlawfully in through  aircraft rather than boats. Can you give us any more information about that? Has there been an attempt, you're saying there  was nothing that you were aware of, had people …

Philip Ruddock: Look, most of that has come from what we call 'information' that we receive from third party sources about  what smugglers might be talking about to their potential clients. And all I can say is when you look at that information that  we've received and compare it to the reality, there may have been a lot of talk but it hasn't manifest itself in outcomes.

Question: Where are the smugglers being coordinated?

Philip Ruddock: Well, I don't know they're being coordinated, I mean, what you have is information that we receive from

time to time about the sorts of things that smugglers are saying to the people that we know are in Indonesia, and in Malaysia.  But mainly in Indonesia. I mean there is a population of somewhere between a thousand and two thousand people who've  either been found to be refugees or being supported by the International Organisation for Migration in Indonesia. And they are  no longer seeking to get into boats, but they would still like to move, and we know that's been the sort of talk - talk of the  town, as it were.

Question: Are you going to take any action, as a result of this information, to tighten security in these [Indistinct]?

Philip Ruddock: Any information we receive which can be used to improve our systems, you can rest assured is.

Question: Security at airports?

Philip Ruddock: No, we consciously look at these issues and I don't actually have the figures with me today but if you look  at the unauthorised air arrivals the numbers have come down very significantly, at the same time that the boat arrival numbers  were going up. And that trend has continued, that trend has continued.

Now, Steve can get you the precise figures, but the air arrivals have not suggested that smugglers have been able to  successfully move people to that form of entry.

Alright, well if we've finished with the immigration issues, you had an Indigenous question.

ATSIC

Question: There's been a call down by some ATSIC Commissioners and Indigenous leaders to remove Geoff Clark. Were  you considering doing that, or even suspending him until the outcome of his appeal?

Philip Ruddock: Well, my situation hasn't changed since Friday, and I said I regard the fact that he was convicted as a very  serious matter. And, in relation to any action to suspend, that is a matter that is for him. I don't think I have any power other  than the powers of dismissal, and I indicated in my statement on Friday that the importance ATSIC ought to be bearing very  much on his mind, as it is on the minds of a number of the commissioners who are speaking out on this matter. And he should  take that into account in any decision that he sees fit to make.

Now, in relation to the question of dismissal, I have to act lawfully. Decisions I take are reviewable - not only judicially but  also, as I understand it, at the time when I might table any instrument in the parliament. I think people would expect that I  would have regard to what the law says. And any decision I might be contemplating would require that I engage in what is  known as a 'natural justice loop,' I would have to put any matters that I might be considering to him and allow him to  comment on those matters.

And I think it needs to be very clear in the way in which I comment on these matters that I am not in any way pre-judging  these issues.

Question: Just to clarify, you have the power of dismissal but not to suspend?

Philip Ruddock: That's as I understand it.

Question: [Inaudible] having Mr Clark there, though, don't you. I mean, it's Mr Robinson you, ultimately, who's got a more  …

Philip Ruddock: I don't have likes and dislikes. I don't have likes and dislikes, and I made it clear to Mr Robinson who has  put about the view that I have a problem with him that I deal with these issues as the cards fall. And in the case of the  Biggera[*] Group there was a report of the Office of Evaluation and Audit which drew to my attention certain matters related  to the legal service.

There is a body - Biggera Motors - that was wound up with considerable debt to ATSIC. And there are a number of companies  within the Biggera Group, and Mr Robinson has agreed with me that there should be a proper audit of all of those matters to

put beyond doubt any concerns that might exist as to whether or not funds had been misused.

Mr Robinson is also the subject of - as I understand it - certain charges in Queensland, brought by the Queensland Police.

Now, I have nothing to do with any of those matters. I haven't initiated them, but when they are there I may well have to come  to a view in relation to them, and I will deal with it, as I say, as the cards fall.

In relation to Mr Clark, I have had a very good working relationship with Geoff Clark. But if, by his own behaviour, he has  brought himself within the reach of certain provisions, then I have certain responsibilities and I will exercise those  responsibilities properly, without pre-judging him, but I will do my duty, if I have to. And, I mean, that's the situation we're in.  But I do not want anything that is said by me - or any interpretation that is put on what I say - to suggest that I come with likes  or dislikes, or in any way pre-judging the issues that I have to deal with.

Question: Minister, on the separation of powers, how inevitable is that? You've said that you're interested in looking at that,  and also are you interested in broadening the Board's powers so that it has the ability to sack its Chairman should it wish to,  something it can't do at the moment?

Philip Ruddock: Well, look, we have a review of ATSIC and to the greatest extent possible I prefer to allow decisions that  need to be taken by the Government to arise from the review.

The review has a potential to deliver and outcome which will afford acceptance, particularly given the nature of the  consultation that it is undertaking and the broadly based nature of its membership. So I am not in the business of trying to pre-empt too much of what the review is seeking to look at. But there are a number of matters that have come into the public arena  which suggest that a form of separation of powers would have given us a far more transparent and accountable organisation in  ATSIC.

The issues which arose in relation to the Chairman's legal costs; the issues that have arisen in relation to travel. There are a  range of matters where people have gone back and looked at those matters again because I think people were not necessarily  thinking about the broader perception of the decisions they were taking and if you have a clear separation of powers where a  body makes policy decisions then the implementation of those decisions is taken by a separate and accountable bureaucracy  the possibility of decisions which will be subject to criticism arising will diminish.

Now, I mean, that's the background to it.

Now in talking to ATSIC, and you know I have talked to ATSIC. I talked to the Commissioners last week. I explained to them  that I am at the moment the subject of litigation - I don't want to talk about the litigation but in relation to the decision I took  to introduce certain powers dealing with conflict of interest, legal services have launched a challenge to the decision I took,  the determination I made that funding would not be paid or provided to organisations where a commissioner or a regional  chair played a substantial management role.

Now it may well be we'll get a decision in the next week from Justice Healy. It may well be that my decision will be found to  have been lawful, but it may not.

I think that ATSIC needs to be thinking proactively - (1), about its own reputation, (2), what happens if the conflict of interest  measure is struck down, (3), was the conflict of interest measure so broad in its operations that those issues might be more  successfully addressed by a separation of powers, and if they are of the view that a separation of powers approach could  achieve the ends I have sought in a more effective way, perhaps it is in their interest to request the Government to implement  an effective separation of powers, and if they were to do that I think it ought to reflect a degree of maturity in their own  deliberations and I might say I'm greatly encouraged by the role of the new commissioners in a very significant change in a  number of policy areas, particularly I think the domestic violence initiative that they took last week which I endorsed, and you  will recall I endorsed.

So, I think, any approach taken by ATSIC to invite an effective separation of powers would not only be well received by the  Government but might well also obtain opposition support.

Question: [Inaudible]

Philip Ruddock: I'm sorry, could you speak up a little, I missed it.

Question: Is the fact that the Board can't sack its Chairman, but it's basically easier to roll the Prime Minister than it is to get  rid of the ATSIC Chairman, should the Board have that ability?

Philip Ruddock: Well, look, I said right at the beginning that's not an issue that's going to be addressed quickly and easily  and without I think consideration, a broader consideration of a whole host of powers, and I think the ATSIC review is the  appropriate place for those matters to be put and addressed.

Question: You do have the powers to sack him, and there's plenty of precedent in Australian history of people in public life  who run foul of the law being stripped of their powers or been sacked. I mean really you've got plenty of power and the  evidence is there for you if you felt it necessary.

Philip Ruddock: Well I don't know how many people have been dismissed by governments for convictions which they were  able to appeal, and where an appeal may have been successful. But if you'd like to point me in the direction of dismissals on  the basis of convictions where appeals have been launched I'd be interested to see the material - only in an academic way, but  you know, I'd be interested to see what evidence you have. I don't think there is any evidence, but I am of course in terms of  the advice I am seeking, wanting to know, what the precedents are as well as what my legal obligations are.

Question: Do you think Mr Clark has [Indistinct] more proactive in initiating some changes earlier than he has done in terms  of accountability, in terms of some conflict of interest issues, in terms of some issues that are important to ATSIC such as  domestic violence. If he hasn't done those things what makes him an effective chairman?

Philip Ruddock: Well let me just say, there was a very significant change in membership. I don't know what goes on in the  councils of the organisation, but the change of membership has brought about many of these decisions.

Mr Clark may have been of the view that these changes were necessary before and supported them afterwards. I don't know.  But I simply make the point that there is a very encouraging sign in the way in which the ATSIC Board wishes to deal with  these issues, and I am giving them support as they seek to find their own way on those matters. I think they are very important  developments.

Question: [Indistinct] indication of your ability to dismiss Mr Clark, is it only under the misbehaviour direction that you can  do that, because from memory the ATSIC Act only allows you to do that if the sentence is a year or more, is that right?

Philip Ruddock: Look, the ATSIC Act has certain provisions and it's the Act that applies. The misbehaviour direction is a  direction that was given by me to give people some advice as to where it was thought the ambit of power might flow.

In other words, it was to help people to know what might constitute misbehaviour. It was an advisory or declaratory, if I could  put it that way, declaratory statement by me to help people understand how the power might be used, but the power is a power  under the Act, and it's for that reason that in dealing with these issues I am not guided simply by my own determination. It is  one factor that I might look at, but I have to be advised by the advice I receive specifically as to what my powers are, the facts  and anything that the Chairman might want to say about those facts. In other words, the natural justice loop is important; the  fact that I don't prejudge these matters is important. In my own determination if you look at some of the decisions of the  courts I have to regard as being exactly what it is, declaratory but not necessarily binding upon me.

Okay, thanks very much.

