



LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION

TRANSCRIPT OF MEDIA CONFERENCE   SYDNEY, THURSDAY 30 JANUARY 2003

E & OE - PROOF ONLY

Subjects: Troop Deployment; North Korea; Asylum-seekers; Mr Hanna

CREAN: The Australian public is entitled to the truth about what  commitment the Australian Government has made to George Bush in terms of  our troops, and they’re not getting the truth from the Prime Minister.

I’m sick of the deceit of the Prime Minister.  He’s treating the public like mugs.   He says he wants peace, but he’s already committed our troops to war.  He says  that he’s made no commitment to the United States about the involvement of  our troops, but I don’t believe him.  This is the same person who told the  Australian public there’d never, ever be a GST.  This was the same person who  lied about the kids overboard. This is the Prime Minister that now wants the  Australian public to believe that he’s made no personal commitment to George  Bush in terms of committing our troops unilaterally to US action.

I want to know from the Prime Minister what he actually has committed to  George Bush.  I want to know, for example, did he say to George Bush  specifically that our troops wouldn’t be involved in the event of nuclear weapons  being used.  I want to know what agreement has been made to the command  structure under which our troops operate.  And I want to know, in terms of that  commitment to support the US, how our troops can be extricated if nuclear  weapons are used.  These are all essential questions for the Prime Minister to  answer, and he won’t.  And he is not telling the truth when he says that he’s  made no commitment about troops.

Now there’s a simple course of action here for the Prime Minister, who today  was on every radio program in the country saying he wanted peace.  How do  you secure peace by committing our troops?  The way to securing peace is to  say to the US - and take the hard decision in relation to us as an alliance partner  - we will not support any action unless it’s authorised by the United Nations.   The issue is very simple.  How to disarm Saddam Hussein?  The answer is also  simple.  It can only be done under the authority of the United Nations, because  that’s the resolution that Saddam Hussein is required to respond to.

1

If the Prime Minister wants peace, the only way to secure the peaceful outcome,  the peaceful disarmament, is through the United Nations.  And if, indeed,  Saddam Hussein doesn’t respond, any action to enforce the decision can only be  taken by the United Nations.

There is only one answer in terms of Australia’s national interests, and the Prime  Minister is not being honest with the Australian people when he talks about the  commitment that he’s made.

JOURNALIST: What [inaudible] in the light of Colin Powell debriefing to the  Security Council.  What further evidence would [inaudible] to convince you that  Saddam Hussein is [inaudible]?

CREAN: There is no question is that Saddam Hussein has to be  disarmed.  The question is how you do it. It can only be done through the United  Nations.  So if Colin Powell has additional information, I welcome the fact that he  will be presenting it to the Security Council.  What I can’t understand is why it  hasn’t been presented to them beforehand.

JOURNALIST: Have you, in any of the security briefings that you’ve been a  part of, heard of any connection of al Qaeda to Iraq?

CREAN: None.  In all of the information that I’ve had, the connection  between al Qaeda and Saddam Hussein has not been made.  And I have been  clear on the record in the past, when with the connection between Saddam  Hussein and terrorism is made, we would support action consistent with our  commitment to fight the War on Terror.  No such connection has been made,  and there is still no evidence out there making it.  There are assertions out  there.

And, again, going to the honesty of the Prime Minister - he often makes the  connection between the War on Terror and Saddam Hussein.  He never  produces the evidence.  If he’s got evidence, he should produce it.  But, in the  absence of it, he shouldn’t be deceitfully promoting that as the justification for  his commitment to George Bush.  I want a Prime Minister that makes the  commitment in Australia’s interests, not in George Bush’s interests.

JOURNALIST: But if that evidence is compelling enough for you, but the UN is  still stalling, would you [inaudible].

CREAN: The matter has to go through the United Nations… I am  convinced, and more and more as this debate goes on, I am convinced that the  United Nations can deal with this matter.  The fact that there was a unanimous  resolution of the United Nations back in October, the fact that the weapons  inspectors have produced a tough report, the fact that the United Nations is  prepared to consider the additional information of Colin Powell, the fact that  there is a realisation that Saddam Hussein can’t snub the United Nations - all of  that points in the direction of the United Nations being able to get a resolution  up that matters.

2

And this is what I have been consistently been calling for - since April of last  year - there’s only one course of action, and that’s to go through the United  Nations.  Let the United Nations determine the appropriate course of action.   When that happens, we will be vindicated in terms of the policy stance that I  have announced and continued to advocate.

John Howard runs hot and cold in terms of the UN involvement.  He’s made a  commitment to George Bush, but he won’t tell the Australian people.  And he’s  ambivalent on his commitment to the United Nations.  His whole track record  demonstrates that ambivalence.  Labor, on the other hand, has been totally  committed to the course of action having to be pursued through the United  Nations.  That’s where it should be determined, and that’s where the weight of  world opinion is now headed.

JOURNALIST:  [inaudible]

CREAN: I said this yesterday.  I mean, I think all of the information has  to be made available through the UN.  It’s not for their eyes only.  Now, I accept  the fact that some of this can be, you know, classified intelligence.  But in the  end, if it’s compelling evidence, one has to make the decision.  If it helps tip the  balance in terms of giving world opinion, that should be made available.  And  I’ve always called for all relevant information.

I’m under no doubt that Saddam Hussein has these weapons, and I am  absolutely committed to ensuring he is disarmed of them.  The difference  between me and the Prime Minister - I say that he can only be disarmed  through the authority of the United Nations.  And if we go down the path of  unilateralism and not the United Nations, that’s the open invitation for other  countries to take steps unilaterally, to move out of the international framework  for conflict resolution, to move out of the United Nations’ framework for trying to  deal with these global issues.

And where does that leave Australia, given the trouble spots in our region, given  the fact that we are a small power, given the circumstances that we found  ourselves in in the case of East Timor?  We need the United Nations.  It’s  therefore in our national interests to be insisting that it be the United Nations’  authority that determines the next step.  Where there have been significant  developments in the last few days is a demonstration to me that the United  Nations is capable of reaching a conclusion as to what the next steps are.  John  Howard should be insisting upon that being the only basis upon which we  commit our forces.

JOURNALIST:  [inaudible]

CREAN: The Howard Government has always, when it’s suited their  agenda, bagged the United Nations.  It’s that sort of catch cry that the Prime  Minister uses when it suits his political agenda, of saying, ‘We’re not going to be  told by some other body what to do.’

3

It’s a complete misleading and misrepresentation of what the United Nations is  and what it stands for.  Now he’s been out on every radio program today saying  he wants peace and he wants the matter settled through the United Nations.   Why hasn’t he been arguing that to George Bush up until now?  This is a Prime  Minister that wants to be believed for promoting a peaceful outcome, publicly,  when he’s privately committed to backing the US unilaterally.  And I want the  Prime Minister to come clean on what his commitment is, but I don’t believe him.   I don’t believe he’s telling the truth when he says he’s made no commitment to  the United States in the event of unilateral action.

JOURNALIST:  [inaudible]  Saddam  Hussein had the US and countries like  Australia not committed military pressure on Saddam Hussein?  Indeed, what  could the UN have done?

CREAN: The UN decision was a unanimous one in October.  Obviously,  the fact of the United States in there supporting it, that was terribly significant.   But bear in mind that before Tony Blair started to argue internationally the case  for the UN to get involved and for the case to be made, it was George Bush and  John Howard, quite frankly, that were talking the war option back in the middle  of last year.

I think it is significant, terribly significant, that the United States took the view  that the UN had to be part of the resolution that put the weapons inspectors  back in.  But that only confirms my point -  that if the US exerts its energy now  to getting a resolution of the UN, that’s the best outcome for everyone, because  that is consistent with a resolution previously carried putting the weapons  inspectors back in.  It doesn’t signal unilateral action and the breakdown of the  collective responsibility to ensure disarmament.  It’s a much better order for  securing global peace and regional security, and that’s in Australia’s national  interests.

JOURNALIST: Mr Howard is already talking about North Korea.  Is that  premature, do you think?

CREAN: No, he should have been talking about North Korea, and they  should be acting very strongly to try and get North Korea back in into the  International Atomic Energy Agency and to recommit to its previous  undertakings to not develop nuclear weapons and not proliferate.

But how do you send a signal to North Korea that they have to be part of the  international framework, and not go unilaterally, when the Prime Minister has  privately committed to a unilateral support for the US in the case of Iraq?  The  Prime Minister is being hypocritical.  And the international bodies and the  countries will see through that hypocrisy.  What you need is consistency, and  also you need truth and honesty with the Australian public.  We’ve not got  honesty with the Australian public by the Prime Minister and we’ve got hypocrisy  and inconsistency in the case of the involvement of the UN.

JOURNALIST: Mr Crean, what about your reaction to a second Labor  backbencher taking a stance today [inaudible] asylum-seekers, Mr Hanna?

4



CREAN: This was Mr Hanna in South Australia.  Well, I’ve just received  information to that effect.  I would simply say this, that Mr Hanna was elected to  the South Australian Parliament on Labor Party policy.  If he disagrees with that  policy, he has only one course of action to take which is principled, and that is to  resign his seat and contest it again on the new policies.  The Australian public is  sick of being treated by people who stand under one banner and switch to  another.  And, again, it goes to the question of honesty and trust with the  Australian people, and it’s important that politicians are to ensure that trust, that  they take the honourable steps.  And the steps appropriate here would be for  him to resign from Parliament.

JOURNALIST: [inaudible] would be a by-election?

JOURNALIST:  [inaudible]  representation of that.  And we’re talking about  Carmen Lawrence as well? [inaudible]

CREAN: Look, this might concern you, but it doesn’t concern them and  it doesn’t concern the Australian people.  What concerns the Australian people is  John Howard’s leadership and his truthfulness - John Howard not being truthful  with the Australian public about why he has committed our troops to unilateral  action if the US so chooses.  And why he hasn’t told the Australian public about  it.

JOURNALIST:  [inaudible]

CREAN: I think that next week in the Parliament you will see a lot of  dissension in Liberal ranks about the stance that the Prime Minister has taken in  relation to Iraq.  The deployment of the troops has already seen backbenchers in  revolt in his own camp.  The Prime Minister is not only out of touch with the  Australian public sentiment, he hasn’t consulted properly his own party.  The  Prime Minister hasn’t been open with the Australian public, and he hasn’t been  open with his own party.

JOURNALIST: Mr Hanna says that under your leadership the Labor Party has  lost its heart and soul.  What do you say to that?

CREAN: The Labor Party is the heart and soul of this nation.  The Labor  Party is the only party committed to issues on the domestic front that matter to  Australian families.  The Labor Party is the only party that believes in the  fundamental importance of the family to this nation, and will develop policies  that support families.  The Labor Party is the only party that will deliver on real  environmental reform and change in this country.  And the Labor Party is the  only party prepared to strengthen our nation by developing the economy to its  fullest.  That’s the heart and soul of what the Australian people are about, and  that’s what Mr Hanna was elected on in South Australia last time.  Let him see  how he goes as an independent, standing again on his policies versus those of  the Labor Party.

5

6

JOURNALIST: [inaudible] North Korea, I just wanted to confirm that you are  in agreeance with the way Mr Howard is handling the North Korea problem, and  you believe it is appropriate for [inaudible] Iraq.  Should they be talking about it  already, the day after the State of the Union address?



CREAN: I’m sorry, in terms of, what’s he saying in terms of North  Korea?

JOURNALIST:  [inaudible]

CREAN: You mean in terms of disarmament?

JOURNALIST:  Yes.

CREAN: Well, again, I’ve got no difficulty with the Prime Minister being  concerned about North Korea and its departure from the International Atomic  Energy Agency and it tearing up its commitments in terms of nuclear  disarmament.  My point, though, to the Prime Minister is the way to address that  problem is to get them back into the international cart.  And you can’t argue  consistently that they be in the international cart if he himself is prepared to get  out of it.  What I want is the Prime Minister to be consistent and I want him to

be truthful.  And if he’s neither of those, we’ll have a foreign policy that is all  over the shop.

JOURNALIST: [inaudible] five or six years ago [inaudible] military and  geopolitical issues [inaudible]

CREAN: Well, yes.  The asylum-seekers issue is one of those matters  that has to be addressed properly through an internationally consistent regime of  operation.  The best way to stop the country-hopping of asylum-seekers, quite  frankly, is to ensure that the same definition of asylum-seeker applies in  whichever the country this is.  You can’t do that unless through an international  framework.  And the difficulty for the Prime Minister, he seems to think that we  can operate in isolation, that we can develop policies that might suit the  domestic agenda for him, the political agenda, but they don’t solve the issue.   And what he should be doing is recognising the fundamental importance and  significance of the international bodies to achieve lasting results to these key  complex questions.

JOURNALIST:  [inaudible]

CREAN: No, I didn’t even know he was intending to run.  It’s the first  I’ve heard of it before today.  He’s in a completely different jurisdiction, of  course, than I’m involved in.  It would have been an issue for the South  Australian Premier.

(ends)

