Gary Hardgrave MP

Minister for Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs



Media Release H124/2003 - 4 September 2003



Guide To Help Migrants Understand Australian Law

A new initiative to help migrants understand Australian law and the role of police was announced today by  the Minister for Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs, Gary Hardgrave.

Mr Hardgrave and Mr Gerard Daniells, Executive Director, Australasian Police Multicultural Advisory  Bureau and Mr Bill Kelly, Deputy Commissioner Operations, of the Victoria Police, launched A Guide to  the Role of Police in Australia in Melbourne today.

The Guide is designed to help newly arrived migrants understand their rights and responsibilities under  Australian law.

'It is vital that new migrants and refugees are provided with information on Australia's policing processes  and fundamental legal concepts, as they often arrive from countries with vastly different legal systems  and standards,' Mr Hardgrave said.

'This is a practical, informative guide that outlines the criminal justice system in Australia, provides a list of  emergency service contact numbers, and highlights avenues of action for victims of crime,' he said.

'Many recently arrived migrants may not be reporting crime because of a variety of cultural reasons.'

A Guide to the Role of Police in Australia was developed by the Australasian Police Multicultural Advisory  Bureau, with funding assistance from the Australian Government's Living in Harmony initiative and further  funding from VITS LanguageLink and the Australian Multicultural Foundation.

Produced in English, Arabic, Afghani (Dari), Bosnian, Chinese (Mandarin), Persian (Farsi), Somali and  Vietnamese the guide is now available in PDF form from the Australasian Police Multicultural Advisory  Bureau web site in all eight languages at www.apmab.gov.au/pubs/PoliceGuide.html.

Mr Bill Kelly said it was another step in making Victoria Police and other police and legal services more  accessible to all members of the community.

Mr Hardgrave said the guide was an excellent example of the commitment of Australia's State and  Territory police forces to the delivery of culturally appropriate, customer oriented services to all  Australians.

'Strengthening relations between police, and culturally and linguistically diverse communities is an  important step towards ensuring that the needs of multicultural Australia are met, and that community  harmony continues to be achieved,' Mr Hardgrave said.

Media contact: Amanda Lynch 0419 123 862

