



LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION



STATEMENT BY THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  THE HON SIMON CREAN MP

Shadow Ministry

I am today announcing significant changes to Labor’s Shadow Ministry to put  in place the best team possible to take Labor into Government at the next  election.

The reshuffle makes the best use of the rich talent and experience available  to me as Leader, recognising the strengths of each member of Labor’s  frontbench.

I have promoted Mark Latham to the crucial position of Shadow Treasurer,  giving him overall responsibility for Labor’s economic policies.

This promotion recognises the work Mark has done in developing policies to  give all Australians the opportunity to get ahead, own their own home, and  achieve financial security.

Bob McMullan will continue to play a crucial role in ensuring Labor’s economic  policies maintain low interest rates and strong growth through the key finance  portfolio.

Bob will also play a critical role in coordinating Labor’s policy agenda, taking  on the new portfolio of Cabinet.

Bob will also be responsible for Indigenous Affairs and Reconciliation, an area  vital to securing a fairer future for all Australians.

My Deputy, Jenny Macklin, will remain in the crucial portfolio of Employment,  Education and Training, continuing the great work she has done developing  Labor’s Higher Education Policy, which is due to be released shortly.

Julia Gillard will be Labor’s new Shadow Minister for Health.  Julia has done a  superb job as Labor’s Immigration spokeswoman and will now have the job of  promoting Labor’s plan to save Medicare and restore bulk billing.

2.



Julia will be replaced as Labor’s Population and Immigration spokeswoman by  Nicola Roxon. The excellent job Nicola has done developing Labor’s policies to  protect children have proved she is more than able to tackle this challenging  portfolio.

Nicola in turn will be replaced by the newest addition to Labor’s front bench,  Senator Jacinta Collins, as Shadow Minister for Children and Youth, building  on the great work she has done in the Senate promoting the interest of  families.



Senator Stephen Conroy will take responsibility for Labor’s policies to promote  trade, and our response to the proposed Free Trade Agreement with the  United States.  His new portfolio also highlights his ongoing responsibility for  Labor’s campaign to ensure companies act responsibly.

Craig Emerson becomes the new Shadow Minister for Workplace Relations, a  crucial area for fairness in the workplace and for helping families better  balance their work and family responsibilities.  I have asked Craig to give  special focus to the quality of work and new work opportunities for Australia’s  future.

Robert McClelland adds Justice and Community Security to his Attorney-General portfolio.  Martin Ferguson adds Urban Development to his existing  responsibilities.



Kim Carr adds Industry and Innovation to his responsibilities, enabling him to  focus on the vital industries, jobs, research and development necessary for  Australia’s prosperous future.



I have also asked Daryl Melham to take on the important new portfolio of  Heritage and Territories.

Joel Fitzgibbon adds Tourism to his portfolio, Mark Bishop adds Customs, and  Kate Lundy adds the Arts.  Annette Ellis now has complete responsibility for  Labor’s disability policy, and Gavan O’Connor takes on Housing.



Warren Snowdon will also assist on Reconciliation in his capacity as a  Parliamentary Secretary.

All Shadow Ministers will now have complete responsibility for their portfolios  as I have decided to replace the existing front bench structure by including all  Shadow Ministers in Shadow Cabinet.



MELBOURNE  2 JULY 2003

SHADOW MINISTRY  2 July 2003



PORTFOLIO SHADOW MINISTER OTHER CHAMBER

Leader The Hon. Simon Crean MP Senator the Hon. John Faulkner



Deputy Leader.  Employment, Education and Training

Jenny Macklin MP



Senator Kim Carr

Leader of the Opposition in the Senate. Special Minister of  State;  Home Affairs

Senator the Hon. John Faulkner

Daryl Melham MP  Robert McClelland MP

Deputy Leader of the Opposition in the Senate. Trade,  Corporate Governance, Financial Services and Small Business  Senator Stephen Conroy Craig Emerson MP  David Cox MP

Employment Services and Training Anthony Albanese MP



Senator Kim Carr

Veterans’ Affairs;  Customs

Senator Mark Bishop  The Hon. Graham Edwards MP  Robert McClelland MP

Industry, Innovation,   Science and Research; Public Service

Senator Kim Carr

Craig Emerson MP  Anthony Albanese MP

Children and Youth

Senator Jacinta Collins Nicola Roxon MP

Assistant Shadow Treasurer  David Cox MP Senator the Hon. Nick Sherry



Ageing and Seniors;   Disabilities

Annette Ellis MP

Senator Michael Forshaw  Senator Jacinta Collins

Workplace Relations

Craig Emerson MP

Senator Jacinta Collins

Defence

Senator Chris Evans

The Hon. Graham Edwards MP

Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs

Laurie Ferguson MP

Senator the Hon. Nick Sherry

Urban and Regional Development;   Transport and Infrastructure

Martin Ferguson MP Senator Jacinta Collins

Senator Kerry O’Brien

Resources; Tourism Joel Fitzgibbon MP Senator Kerry O’Brien



Health  Deputy Manager of Opposition Business

Julia Gillard MP Senator Chris Evans

Consumer Protection and Consumer Health

Alan Griffin MP Senator Michael Forshaw

Treasury  Manager of Opposition Business

Mark Latham MP Senator Stephen Conroy

Information Technology; Sport; The Arts

Senator Kate Lundy Lindsay Tanner MP

Attorney-General; Justice and Community Security

Robert McClelland MP Senator Joseph Ludwig

Cabinet and Finance;   Reconciliation and Indigenous Affairs

Bob McMullan MP Senator Stephen Conroy

Senator Chris Evans

Heritage and Territories

Daryl Melham MP Senator Kate Lundy



Primary Industries

Senator Kerry O’Brien Joel Fitzgibbon MP



Regional Services; Local Government;  Housing

Gavan O’Connor MP Senator Kerry O’Brien

Senator Jacinta Collins

Population and Immigration;   Assisting the Leader on the Status of Women  Nicola Roxon MP Senator the Hon. Nick Sherry

Senator Kate Lundy

Foreign Affairs Kevin Rudd MP Senator the Hon. John Faulkner



Retirement Incomes and Savings Senator the Hon. Nick Sherry David Cox MP



Family and Community Services

Wayne Swan MP Senator Mark Bishop



Communications

Lindsay Tanner MP Senator Mark Bishop



Sustainability and the Environment

Kelvin Thomson MP Senator Kate Lundy





Parliamentary Secretaries

Parliamentary Secretary for Industry, Innovation,   Science and Research

Senator George Campbell

Parliamentary Secretary for Defence

Hon. Graham Edwards MP

Parliamentary Secretary for Family and Community Services

Senator Michael Forshaw

Parliamentary Secretary for Sustainability and the Environment and Heritage

Kirsten Livermore MP

Parliamentary Secretary for Attorney-General and Justice and Community  Security  Senator Joe Ludwig

Parliamentary Secretary to the Leader of the Opposition

John Murphy MP

Parliamentary Secretary for Communications

Michelle O’Byrne MP

Parliamentary Secretary for Primary Industries, Resources and The Arts

Sid Sidebottom MP

Parliamentary Secretary for Northern Australia and Reconciliation

Warren Snowdon MP

Parliamentary Secretary for Urban and Regional Development, Transport  Infrastructure and Tourism  Christian Zahra MP

Chief Opposition Whip

Hon. Janice Crosio MP Senate Whip Senator Sue Mackay

Whip in the House of Representatives

Michael Danby MP Deputy Senate Whip Senator Trish Crossin

Whip in the House of Representatives

Harry Quick MP Deputy Senate Whip Senator Geoff Buckland



