



Shadow Minister For Citizenship and

Multicultural Affairs

MEDIA RELEASE

LAURIE FERGUSON MP

14 May 2003  SLIM PICKINGS IN UPDATED MULTICULTURAL

AGENDA



The Government’s strategic directions statement Multicultural Australia: United in

Diversity, released with yesterday’s Budget, is a major disappointment.

The 8 page glossy statement flows from an unreleased in-house evaluation of the  Coalition’s 1999 New Agenda for Multicultural Australia .  There was next to no  community consultation involved in the preparation of the Government’s plans for  the next 3 years.

The statement rightly notes that citizenship is a strong unifying force in our diverse  multicultural community. Yet it contains only 4 sentences about Australian citizenship  and no new commitments in this important policy area. This is in stark contrast to  the Opposition’s 30-page citizenship policy statement released on Australia Day.

The Government repeats its claimed commitment to access and equity. It appears  to believe, however, that social justice can be achieved simply by more streamlined  reporting and more effective analysis by mainstream Commonwealth agencies. While  saying there is “a strong case for better developing even greater investment in  vulnerable individuals”, particularly refugees fleeing trauma who have had a  disrupted education, the statement lacks any such additional measures. Minister  Hardgrave clearly prefers to spend taxpayers’ money on glossy booklets and videos.

The Opposition welcomes the Government’s acknowledgement that countering  threats to community harmony needs to play a greater role in its multicultural  agenda. International events have clearly strained community relations. While  Australia is a remarkably harmonious and tolerant country, we need to constantly  restate our abhorrence of racism and religious and cultural prejudice and work in  genuine partnership with the States and Territories to promote improved community  relations.

Instead we see the ridiculous spectacle of the Government legislating to abolish the  position of Race Discrimination Commissioner and to curtail the powers and functions  of the Hum an Rights and Equal Opportunities Commission. In seeking to do so, the  Coalition is heading in totally the wrong direction.



For further information:  Laurie Ferguson MP 02 6277 4920  Warren Gardiner 0409 910 004

