









KEVIN RUDD M.P.

MEDIA RELEASE

Shadow Minister for Foreign Affairs

HOWARD ON IRAQI NUCLEAR WEAPONS = CHILDREN OVERBOARD VOLUME II

Three big new problems for John Howard



John Howard’s defence on his claims about Iraq’s nuclear weapons program is in tatters.

The record demonstrates Mr Howard has made three claims about Iraq’s nuclear capability, namely:

1. He claimed in his formal parliamentary statement prior to the Iraq war on 4 February 2003  that: “Iraq continues to work on developing nuclear weapons” and that as evidence of this  “uranium has been sought from Africa”(based on British intelligence);

2. In the same 4 February statement Mr Howard claimed that: “Iraq is reconstituting its nuclear  weapons program” (based on CIA intelligence); and

3. In the face of the comprehensive undermining of the above two claims, John Howard stated,  through his spokesman in today’s newspapers, that the Government’s emphasis on the case  against Iraq was on chemical and biological weapons - thereby implying Iraq’s nuclear  weapons program was somehow marginal to Mr Howard’s case to the Australian people.

The credibility of all three claims by John Howard has now been fundamentally holed.

On the first claim, today we have the stunning report from former US Ambassador Joseph Wilson. In  the New York Times, Ambassador Wilson makes clear that in February 2002, he was dispatched to  Niger to verify earlier claims about the exportation of uranium to Iraq.  Wilson concludes it was  simply too difficult, given the level of oversight of the two uranium mines in Niger for such a sale to  have occurred.

Wilson also states that following his return to Washington in March 2003, four separate documents  would have been prepared by various US officials outlining Wilson’s conclusions on the Iraq/Niger  uranium claim. Yet Mr Howard would have us believe there were no Australian officials apprised  of Wilson’s conclusions during the 11 months which elapsed between his return from Niger in  March 2002 and John Howard’s statement to the Australian Parliament in February 2003 - which  expresses no doubt at all on the question of the Iraq/Niger uranium claim.



Further information: Kevin Rudd, MP 0418 796 931 or Alister Jordan 0417 605 823

Mr Howard’s second claim that “Iraq is reconstituting its nuclear weapons program” now encounters  similar fundamental contradictions coming out of Washington. In an interview overnight with Mr  Greg Theilmann, formerly of the US State Department’s Bureau of Intelligence and Research,  Theilmann is reported as saying “If the Prime Minister was reaching the conclusion that Iraq had  reconstituted its nuclear weapons program, which in our office was one of the biggest issues of all,  well we saw no evidence”. The same report states Mr Theilmann said these dissenting views would  not have been a secret to the Howard Government. Mr Theilmann reportedly worked on these matters  in the Bureau of Intelligence and Research between 2000 and 2002. Yet Mr Howard would have us  believe these conclusions on the part of the US Bureau of Intelligence and Research were somehow  mysteriously unknown to any Australian officials prior to Mr Howard’s statement to the  Parliament on 4 February 2003 - which stated without any equivocation that Iraq was reconstituting  its nuclear weapons program.



On both claims, it is down right unbelievable that, given Howard’s repeated statements about the  closeness of the Australia-US intelligence relationship, nobody from the Australian Government was  in any way aware of Ambassador Wilson and Mr Theilmann’s separate conclusions.

Finally, we have today’s claim that the Howard Government based most of its pre-war case on Iraq’s  biological and chemical weapons capabilities - and that somehow claims about Iraq’s nuclear  capabilities laid very much at the margins of John Howard’s case for going to war. If this was the case,  why did John Howard, in his seminal parliamentary statement on Iraq during the Parliament’s formal  debate on Iraq, outline what he would now have us believe were entirely marginal claims about Iraq’s  nuclear weapons capability?

It flies in the face of the accumulated documentary record of both John Howard and Alexander  Downer from April 2002 to the war, which we have so far extracted some 36 separate references in one  form or another, to the Iraqi nuclear question.



Prior to the last election, John Howard misused Australian intelligence information on the question of  asylum seekers throwing their children overboard. It now appears we have volume two of the  children overboard saga - this time on the misrepresentation of the status of Iraq’s nuclear capability  prior to the Iraq war.

National security policy in Australia is too serious to become the domestic political plaything of Prime  Minister John Howard.

Ends 7 July 2003









