

CASTAN CENTRE FOR HUMAN RIGHTS LAW



Ms Cherie Booth QC

Paper on which the lecture delivered by Ms  Booth QC was based

"The International Criminal Court and Our  Hopes for International Criminal Justice -  Some Thoughts and Reflections"

16 April 2003 Queen's Hall, Parliament House, Melbourne

Introduction

It is both a privilege and an honour to address you today. I am  especially excited to be involved in a discussion about prospects  and issues for the International Criminal Court. This is an  opportune time for such a discussion, given that, as you know, the  Court was inaugurated last month. The Rome Statute of the ICC  has its flaws - the nature of the drafting process and the political  issues at stake ensured that - but we have now reached a stage  where the principle of individual criminal liability is established for  those responsible for the most serious crimes, and where an  institution has been established - on a permanent basis - to ensure  the punishment of such individuals. The Court, no doubt, will serve  as a painful reminder of the atrocities of the past century and the  level to which humanity can stoop. I say nothing new when I tell  you that it appears we are doomed to repeat history. International  criminal law is testimony to that fact. As Judge Richard Goldstone,  former Chief Prosecutor at the Hague Tribunals has wryly  commented, the hope of "never again" so often becomes the  reality of again and again'. (1) But at the same time I am  convinced that the International Criminal Court, with independent  prosecutors putting tyrants and torturers in the dock before

independent judges, reflects a post-war aspiration come true. My  discussion with you today flows from the conviction that the  International Criminal Court is our best response to the atrocities  which bedevil our claims to 'humanity'.

Aspirations to establish a permanent international criminal court  can be traced back to shortly after the Second World War and the  adoption by the newly created United Nations, on 9 December  1948, of a resolution mandating the International Law Commission  to begin work on the draft statute of an international criminal court.  (2) In the climate of the Cold War, little was done to take the  project forward, and the idea of an international criminal court was  revivified only in the 1980's with a proposal by Latin American  States, led by Trinidad and Tobago, who envisaged such a court  as their last resort to prosecute international drug-traffickers. (3)  The International Law Commission was thereafter directed by the  General Assembly of the United Nations to consider the drafting of  a statute of an international criminal court. The early 1990's saw  the Commission prepare a draft statute for such a court and by  1994 a formal Draft Statute for an International Criminal Tribunal  was adopted by the ILC and forwarded to the General Assembly  for consideration. (4) During the time that the Commission was  preparing the Draft Statute, events compelled the creation of a  court on an ad hoc basis to respond to the atrocities that were  being committed in the former Yugoslavia. That tribunal, the  International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, was  established by the Security Council in 1993 and mandated to  prosecute persons responsible for serious violations of  international humanitarian law committed in the territory of the  former Yugoslavia since 1991. (5) Then, in November 1994, and  acting on a request from Rwanda, the Security Council voted to  create a second ad hoc tribunal, charged with the prosecution of  genocide and other serious violations of international humanitarian  law committed in Rwanda and in neighbouring countries during the  year 1994. (6)

The Rwanda and Yugoslav Tribunals therefore fuelled the  widespread belief that a permanent international criminal court  was desirable and practical. The ICTY Statute, for example,  influenced the draft Statute that the ILC was busy drawing up in  the early 1990's. By the time delegates convened in Rome to draft  a statute for a permanent international criminal court, the Tribunals  could provide a reassuring model of what such a court might look  like. These two Tribunals - the first international criminal tribunals  since Nuremberg - are close relatives, sharing virtually identical  statutes, as well as the same Prosecutor and Appeals Chamber.  Most significantly, the tribunals stand together as a working model  of international criminal justice. This model unpacked has certain  defining characteristics which draw their inspiration from the rule of

law: an international criminal forum applying rules of international  law, staffed by independent prosecutors and judges, holding  persons individually responsible for crimes against humanity and  war crimes, after allowing them a fair trial. In addition to the  example which the Tribunals have provided of working criminal  justice, the innovative jurisprudence that they have produced -  such as the progressive view that crimes against humanity could  be committed in peacetime, (7) and the finding that war crimes  could be committed during an internal armed conflict (8) - fed into  the debates at Rome and eventually came to be reflected in the  Rome Statute. (9)

The Statute of the International Criminal Court was adopted on the  17th of July 1998 by an overwhelming majority of the States  attending the Rome Conference. To date, the Rome Statute has  been signed by 139 States and 89 States have ratified it. One  significant absentee as a ratifier is the United States. It is notable  that within just four years the treaty has achieved the 60 required  ratifications, far sooner than was generally expected. The Statute  entered into force last year on 1 July 2002, at which time the  Court's jurisdiction over genocide, war crimes and crimes against  humanity took effect. The judges for the Court were chosen earlier  this year in February, and were sworn in on 11 March 2002 at the  inaugural session of the Court in The Hague. All of the senior  elected officials of the Court should be in place and ready to take  up their tasks by the summer of 2003. I need hardly mention that  the opposition to the Court displayed by the United States -  starting with its decision to oppose the adoption of the Statute at  Rome and now continuing with its campaign to sign 'impunity'  agreements with member states - has dampened the excitement  that goes along with these developments. With or without the  involvement of that country, however, the Court will be up and  running within the next year. .

What are its prospects? The answer to that question might be  found, at least partly, in the experience of the ICTY and the ICTR.  So, by reference to the experience of the ICTY and the ICTR, I  should like to address the prospects of the ICC in relation to three  issues: first, the prospects in relation to the legitimacy and  credibility of the Court; secondly, the prospects insofar as the  Court's functions are concerned, and thirdly, the prospects for the  Court as a truly 'international' institution.

Prospects for credibility and legitimacy: the International  Criminal Court and Women

The prospects for an effective, legitimate and credible international  court depend, to a very great extent, on the composition of its  bench. It is of singular importance that an international court be

composed of judges with the most appropriate qualifications. That  means, amongst other points, that there be representation of the  principal legal systems and appropriate geographical  representation, and that there be an appropriate gender balance.

The recent election of judges to the International Criminal Court  shows that the international status quo is changing. Elections took  place in February 2003 in what turned out to be an unprecedented  event. Apart from the utmost importance of the event for the Court -  for its launching, credibility, and work - in the panoply of  international courts and tribunals, the election was not business as  usual.

ICC member states were faced with a new type of voting  procedure. All international courts and tribunals make  requirements for representation among its judges. For example, to  facilitate the international character of the courts, and their ultimate  legitimacy, all their statutes require that no two judges can be of  the same nationality, and furthermore, they call for equal  geographical representation and/or representation of the principal  legal systems of the world. However, in addition to all these  requirements, the Rome Statute sets out further requirements, not  previously seen. To ensure that the court would not only be  equipped with academics and former diplomats, a common  background of other international judges, the Rome Statute  requires that at least half of the judges come from the courtrooms,  i.e., with experience in criminal law and procedure (Article 36(5)).  Furthermore, the Rome Statute stipulates that in the selection of  judges, states parties shall take into account the need for, within  the membership of the Court, a fair representation of female and  male judges (Article 36(8)(a)(iii)), and to include judges with legal  expertise on specific issues, including violence against women  and children (Article 36(8)(b)).

The nomination period for election of judges to the International  Criminal Court was opened on September 9,2002 and closed on  November 30, 2002. By the closing date, 45 nominations were  received - among them 35 male and 10 female candidates. A  minimum benchmark, which had been set for each group, was  met, including the benchmark of at least 10 female candidates,  and extension of the nomination period was not necessary.

The election of judges took place in New York between February 3-7, 2003. Late in the night of the last day of the session (9:30 PM),  just short of the midnight deadline, following 33 rounds of voting  over four days, the first bench of the International Criminal Court  had been elected. Among the judges, I am extremely happy to  announce, are seven women, a new record among international  courts and tribunals. Furthermore, among the 18 elected judges,

three are from the group of African states, three are from the  group of Asian states, one is from the group of Eastern European  states, four are from the group of Latin American and Caribbean  states, and seven from the group of Western Europe and Other  states. As I mentioned earlier, the judges were sworn in at a  ceremony in The Hague just over a month ago, on March 11,  2003.

Never before has an election to an international court been  followed as closely. Of particular importance, civil society was  extremely active, calling for a transparent process, and a selection  based on the merits of candidates, rather than of political  considerations.

Among the advocacy, the campaign for fair representation of  female and male judges was particularly successful. The inclusion  of the requirement in the Rome Statute, and implementation rules,  provided an incentive for states to propose more women  candidates, as the high number of nominated women - compared  to other elections - demonstrates. Having seven women among  the elected judges at this important time in the Court's life is truly a  great success, an important milestone for its legitimacy and  acceptance.

It is also an important step forward for the international judiciary  more generally. For far too long the composition of international  courts has been overwhelmingly male, suggesting that the  selection process operates within unacceptable limits. A study  prepared in 2001 for the Project on International Courts and  Tribunals shows that of 153 judges attached to the nine principal  international courts, just 18 were women.(10) This is partly  because women are under-represented as judges in most national  legal systems, as well as under-represented at the international  level. However, it is not credible to suggest that under-representation is due to a dearth of suitably qualified candidates.  Other factors include the selection process itself with the lack of  priority that States attach to the issue and persistent ideas about  the nature of suitable candidates. Many States, for instance,  persist in promoting a particular type of candidate - one with a  background in academia, diplomacy and the International Law  Commission - to which women are less likely to conform.

The election of 7 women judges to the International Criminal  Court, under the strictest conditions of openness and  transparency, shows that States are finally taking seriously the  idea of a 'legitimate' international judiciary. It is crucial that  international justice be seen to be fair and representative of  international society as a whole. The Rome Statute has thankfully  set a new standard among international courts, which for too long

have tolerated an under-representation, or all too often - absence,  of female judges, and the success of the ICC in this matter will  hopefully be a model for a new order.

The importance of female appointees to the Court is reinforced by  the attention given by the ICC Statute to women's issues, as  compared with the very limited concern that women's issues have  received in international criminal law in the past.(11) In the field of  armed conflict history is replete with examples of women being  targeted as victims of sexual assault as part of a policy of war.  Rape and other acts of sexual violence have long been utilised as  instruments of warfare, used not only as an attack on the  individual victim but also as a means to 'humiliate, shame,  degrade and terrify the entire ... group'. (12) These victims have  been let down when it has come to the prevention and prosecution  of these offences, largely because sexual violence has been  regarded as an accepted concomitant of war, even if it was not  explicitly condoned. The story is told of the Byzantine emperor  Alexius who, in appealing for recruits during the First Crusade,  extolled the beauty of Greek women as an incentive to go to war,  an idea which later came to be known as that of 'booty and  beauty', and which was associated with success in battle. More  recently, General Patton's writings about the Second World War in  his book entitled War as I Knew It, reflect the 'inevitability' of rape  in times of war. Patton remembers that in spite of his most diligent  efforts, 'there would unquestionably be some raping', and that he  demanded the details as early as possible so that the offenders  could be appropriately dealt with. (13)

And of course, besides the concomitant inevitability of sexual  violence, rape has historically served a tactical function in war as  an expression of the totality of victory - a sort of 'sexual coup de  grâce'. As the events in Rwanda and the former Yugoslavia so  horribly remind us, this function of sexual aggression against  women often serves as a grotesque public display of domination  where the 'rape of the woman's body symbolically represents the  rape of the community itself'. (14)

At the international level it was only in relatively recent times that  sexual violence against women in armed conflict came to be  regarded as an important issue in serious need of redress. Since  1990 international criminal law has made greater progress on  women's issues than during any other time in recorded history.  The Rome Statute both exemplifies the progress thus far and hints  at the future contribution that the Court can make to the attainment  of justice for women. The Statute allows for prosecution of a wide  range of gender-based or sex-based crimes, provides certain  protections to victims of these crimes, and calls for the inclusion of  women in the different Organs of the Court. The inclusion of these

gender provisions in the Rome Statute clearly did not occur in a  vacuum. The fact that the Statute is progressive with regard to  women's issues is in no small measure due to the struggle of civil  society and the women's human rights movement, including in the  Rome negotiations. Furthermore, by the time the delegates  convened in Rome to draft the Statute, they had the benefit of  drawing on the jurisprudence that the ICTY and the ICTR had  developed as regards the substantive elements of gender and sex  crimes, as well as the Tribunals' experience in the investigation,  prosecution, and adjudication of such crimes.

As we reflect on the momentous appointment of seven female  judges to the ICC, one of the most important lessons we can draw  from the ICTY and ICTR is that there are advantages that these  women judges will bring to the International Criminal Court when it  comes to the prosecution of gender-based and sex-based crimes.  The UN Secretary General's Report that accompanied the Statute  of the ICTY already recognised as much when it provided that,  given the nature of the crimes committed and the sensitivities of  victims of rape and sexual assault, due consideration needed to  be given to the employment of qualified women to that Tribunals'  staff. (15) And as an example of the contribution that women  judges have made in cases involving sexual violence, I should like  now to consider the decision of the Rwanda Tribunal in the  Akayesu case. (16)

Akayesu was the first case heard before the Rwanda Tribunal, and  is heralded today as possibly 'the most important decision  rendered thus far in the history of women's jurisprudence'. (17) Not  only was it the first international war crimes trial in history to try  and convict a defendant for genocide, it was also the first  judgment in which an accused has been found guilty of genocide  for crimes which expressly included sexualised violence, and the  first time that an accused has been found guilty of rape as a crime  against humanity. But the obvious contribution this judgment  makes to the advancement of gender issues might not have come  about were it not for the intervention of Judge Pillay, a South  African Indian, and the only female judge on the Rwandan tribunal  at the time.

It was February 1997 and the trial had just begun. Jean-Paul  Akayesu was in the dock. He had been charged with giving orders  for, and participating in, crimes against humanity committed at the  Taba Commune. Surprisingly, given what we now know of the  Rwandan situation, no charges or evidence of rape were initially  brought at the trial, with the prosecutor claiming that it was  impossible to document rape because women would not talk about  it.(18) However, Judge Pillay delicately pursued a line of inquiry  with two women - called by the prosecutor to testify to other crimes

- as to whether rape had occurred in the Commune. The first  witness explained how she had fled her village before the  slaughter began and had managed to hide in a tree where she  stayed for several days. After deciding it was safe, she climbed  down to discover that only her 6-year-old daughter had survived a  massacre in which the rest of her family was killed. Together they  tried to escape the area but were caught by Hutus and her  daughter gang-raped. Her sworn statement taken before the trial  mirrored this evidence given in court about the murders, but was  silent about the details of her daughter's rape, apparently because  the investigators had not asked her about rape. After further  careful examination by Judge Pillay, the witness also testified that  she had heard that young girls were raped at the Taba Commune  where Akayesu was in charge. The second witness confirmed this.  She testified that she had been taken into custody and held at the  Bureau where Akayesu had stood and watched as girls were  dragged into the compound and repeatedly raped by armed militia.  Commenting on this situation, Judge Pillay said:

'We have to try a case before us where this person  [Akayesu] has not been specifically charged with rape.  We're hearing the evidence, but the defence counsel  has not cross-examined the witnesses who gave  testimony of sexual violence, because it is not in the  indictment. I'm extremely dismayed that we're hearing  evidence of rape and sexual violence against women  and children, yet it is not in the indictments because  the witnesses were never asked about it.' (19)

The consequence was that in June 1997 the indictment was  amended by the Prosecutor to add charges of sexual violence. But  many agree that such additional charges would not have come  about had it not been for the instrumental role Judge Pillay played  in questioning witnesses and evoking testimony of gross sexual  violence. (20) When the trial resumed, extensive testimony  concerning rape and other forms of sexual violence was admitted  into evidence - evidence that was used to establish that sexual  violence was an integral part of the genocide committed during the  Rwandan conflict. (21) The Akayesu matter stands out, therefore,  as a reminder that when it comes to the issue of composition of  international criminal courts, the ultimate beneficiaries of a 'fair  representation of female judges' on the bench are the victims of  sexual violence themselves.

In relation then to the specific nature of sex-based and gender-based offences in the Rome Statute, the 'fair representation' of  female judges goes beyond the issue of gender equality. The

lessons from the Rwanda and Yugoslavia Tribunals make it clear  that the presence of female judges, as well as of women in senior  positions in the Prosecutor's office, contributes significantly to the  effective prosecution of sexual violence against women. As Judge  Pillay has recently stressed, in this new field of international  criminal justice, '[w]ho interprets the law is at least as important as  who makes the law, if not more so.' (22) The member states that  were deciding on the appointment of judges to the ICC have, I am  happy to say, taken Judge Pillay seriously. As many of you will  know, Judge Pillay is one of the seven women who were sworn in  last month as judges of the International Criminal Court.

Prospects for criminal justice - what role for the International  Criminal Court?

Naturally, the question of justice for women in the international  criminal law field is only a small part of a much larger question,  namely, what do we understand by the phrase 'international  criminal justice' itself? In relation to the ICC, allow me now to turn  away from the specific focus of justice for women, and to consider  some of the functions we expect the Court to perform, as well as  to assess its prospects in relation to those functions.

The experience of The Hague Tribunals, and Nuremberg before  that, shows that the ICC will have an effect beyond the trials  themselves, and significance beyond traditional conceptions of  justice. While one leading commentator in the field rightly reminds  us that 'it is important to be modest about the potential of war  crimes trials and international criminal law generally', (23) modesty  or realism when it comes to the International Criminal Court need  not be cynicism

The International Criminal Court as public demonstration of  justice

The International Criminal Court is a call to responsibility for  persons guilty of 'the most serious crimes of concern to the  international community as a whole'. (24) In this respect it takes  seriously the words of Justice Robert Jackson, Chief Prosecutor at  Nuremberg, who famously said that letting major war criminals live  undisturbed to write their 'memoirs' in peace 'would mock the dead  and make cynics of the living'. (25) Perhaps the function of a trial  in the International Criminal Court is thus first and foremost a  proclamation that certain conduct is unacceptable to the world  community. That may sound like an obvious statement, but it is not  one which international law has always embraced. While war  crimes are committed every day and whole races have been  defined by their experience of genocide or crimes against  humanity, international laws designed to punish these acts have

only been invoked when there has existed 'an unusually propitious  constellation of political factors'. (26) In the 20th century such a  constellation of factors led only to trials at Nuremberg and Tokyo  after WWII, and in the 1990's, to the creation of The Hague  Tribunals - a selective outpouring of indignation at best, and an  insidious message at the international level that to a large degree  war crimes and crimes against humanity are followed by impunity.

The International Criminal Court presents itself as the mechanism  to cure this defect in the international legal system by providing a  public demonstration of justice. The act of punishing particular  individuals - whether the leaders, or star generals, or foot soldiers -  becomes an instrument through which individual accountability for  massive human rights violations is increasingly internalised as part  of the fabric of our international society. At the same time, it is a  method by which we put a stop to the culture of impunity that has  taken hold at the international level. Former Secretary of State  Warren Christopher suggested in the context of the Balkan crisis  that '[b]old tyrants and fearful minorities are watching to see  whether ethnic cleansing is a policy the world will tolerate.' To him,  '[i]f we hope to promote the spread of freedom, or we hope to  encourage the emergence of peaceful, multi-ethnic democracies,  our answers must be a resounding "no".(27) The ICC, building on  the work done by The Hague Tribunals, is the means by which a  resounding 'no' is now possible in respect of every crime set out in  the Rome Statute. In that regard, it is of singular importance to  note that no one - not even a serving head of state - will be able to  claim immunity from the jurisdiction of the Court.

Upholding the rule of law - the creation of order

Besides the moral condemnation of these crimes at the  international level, the ICC will serve a second, and vital, purpose,  namely, upholding the rule of law. To respond to mass atrocity  with legal prosecution is to exact retribution by embracing legal  order. The retributive theme was evident most clearly in the Allies'  prosecution of Nazis at Nuremberg after affirming, earlier in the  war, their commitment to prosecute the war 'criminals' for their  'acts of savagery'. (28) In the closing days of WWII it was far from  clear that the Allies would carry through with this legal  commitment; the British Prime Minister, for example, is widely  reported as having favoured the summary execution of a dozen or  so leading members of the Nazi hierarchy. However, in the end,  Nuremberg's legacy is that of legal retribution - of staying the hand  of vengeance and of ceding 'Power ... to Reason'. (29)

Is retribution in the classic sense what the International Criminal  Court is meant to achieve? In part, the answer is 'yes', as  evidenced by the Preamble to the Rome Statute which proclaims

that 'the most serious crimes of concern to the international  community as a whole must not go unpunished and that their  effective prosecution must be ensured'. Of course, retribution as a  motivating force comes with its own problems. One of these  problems is that a war crimes trial is an exercise in partial justice  to the extent that it reminds us that the majority of war crimes go  unpunished. (30) This, many of you will recall, was a criticism in  particular of the Yugoslavia Tribunal's decision to prosecute Dusko  Tadic - a mere foot soldier in the events of the Balkan crisis -  simply because it did not have custody of a higher ranking, more  significant figure. It was argued that there were hundreds more like  Tadic, and that there was little point in convicting one among them  in what seemed to have been a mere lottery. We can expect that  the International Criminal Court will face similar challenges if  'situations', involving mass atrocities, are referred to it for  prosecution. However, given the nature of mass atrocities such as  those committed in Rwanda and Yugoslavia, it will be nearly  impossible for the Prosecutor to avoid making broader strategic  choices when it comes to deciding whom to prosecute. We should  draw some solace, I would suggest, from the fact that in a world in  which a multitude of people may have become embroiled in war  crimes, the punishment of each and every offender is not  necessary to achieve respect for the rule of law, or to declare our  disgust at the acts committed.

Moreover, it is important to remember that the role of the ICC will  be complementary to national courts. Under the Rome Statute's  'complementarity principle' national judicial systems of states  parties will have the first bite at the cherry in respect of any  investigation which affects their territory or their nationals. The  principle of complementarity ensures that the ICC operates as a  system of international criminal justice which buttresses the  national justice systems of states parties. (31) Indeed, the principle  proceeds from the belief that national courts should be the first to  act. It was written in relation to the experience at Nuremberg that,  '[t]he purpose was not to punish all cases of criminal guilt ... . The  exemplary punishments served the purpose of restoring the legal  order, that is of reassuring the whole community that what they  had witnessed for so many years was criminal behaviour'. (32)  Because of the ICC's system of complementarity we can therefore  expect national criminal justice to play an important role in  assisting the ICC to provide 'exemplary punishments' which will  serve to restore the international legal order.

Memory against forgetting (33) - The ICC as truth-teller

The third function of an ICC trial - and closely aligned with the  value of upholding the rule of law - is the opportunity it creates for  truth telling. Truth, after all, is the cornerstone of the rule of law.

Two important points, I think, need to be kept in mind. The first is  that international criminal trials have a commemorative potential;  they can build an objective and impartial record of events. (34)  This was true of Nuremberg, and it is true also in respect of the  current trials in The Hague. Naturally, we should recognise the  tension between the production of history and the task of  conducting a criminal trial. A criminal trial with its elaborate rules  regarding relevance and inadmissibility of evidence as well as its  focus on the accused in court means that it can never provide a  definitive and comprehensive record of history. The ICC is able to  provide a coherent and judicially manageable account of tragic  events, a 'judicial truth', if you will. But the painting of the fuller  picture of history, through local initiatives such as truth  commissions based on popular participation, must be left to those  affected by the crimes. (35) That having been said, we can rest  assured that the materials collected by the ICC which have passed  its strict rules of admissibility of evidence can contribute to the  creation of objective accounts of events which will play an  important role in fighting forgetting.

The second important point is this: proceedings before the ICC  have the potential of countering the attribution of collective  responsibility for acts committed by individuals. Richard Goldstone  put it well when commenting on the emotive photographs - one of  which is printed on the flyer for these lectures - of the accused in  the dock at Nuremberg. He said that 'one sees a group of  criminals. One does not see a group of representatives of the  German people - the people who produced Goethe or Heine or  Beethoven'; as he put it: '[t]he Nuremberg Trials were a  meaningful instrument for avoiding the guilt of the Nazis being  ascribed to the whole German people'. (36) That this is an  important function for the ICC can be seen from the experience of  the ethnic violence in Rwanda and Yugoslavia. The truth telling of  The Hague Tribunals has been essential in the promotion of  reconciliation by individualising the guilt of hateful leaders and  disabusing people of the myth that adversary ethnic groups bear  collective responsibility for crimes.

The International International Criminal Court

Thus far I have considered some of the functions of the ICC in its  pursuit of 'international criminal justice'. I would like to conclude  this lecture by focusing on the international aspirations of the ICC  when it comes to criminal justice.

The idea of an international criminal law - built as it is on an  underlying system of shared social ethics - can be considered  strangely inappropriate, given that the international regime has no  central sovereign and is morally pluralistic. (37)

This conceptual difficulty associated with international criminality  has been overcome, however, by endorsing the idea that there is  an international social system which is realised in a number of  ways, including the very notion of an International Criminal Court.  The second half of the twentieth century has seen the  strengthening of human rights and the humanitarian law of war  and the growing sense that because individuals live under the  international legal system, they must necessarily have rights and  obligations flowing from it. The fact that delegates at Rome were  able to come together and finalise the ICC Statute is evidence of  the existence of a social system built on universal respect for the  idea of human rights - a system which denounces the most  serious war crimes and crimes against humanity because of a  recognition that tolerating such atrocities diminishes and threatens  everyone.

The prospects for the ICC as a protectorate of the ideals of the  international community as a whole become difficult to imagine,  however, when some States elect to exclude themselves from that  vision. This is particularly true when those States are powerful,  and strikingly so when such powerful States, like the United  States, are traditionally associated with the very values the ICC  seeks to endorse.

From its earliest beginnings, an important element of the US  conception of its own national interest has been the development  and maintenance of an international rule of law. The importance  the Framers gave to international law is reflected in the  Constitution itself, whereby Congress is given power to 'define and  punish Piracies and Felonies committed on the high seas, and  Offences against the Law of Nations. (38) In the last century the  US was a leading force in the establishment of the Permanent  Court of Arbitration; a chief architect of the United Nations, the IMF  and the World Bank; a leading sponsor of the ad hoc tribunals on  Rwanda and the former Yugoslavia; and a vocal endorser of the  idea of an international criminal court. Indeed, President Clinton  called for a permanent war crimes tribunal shortly before the  Rome Conference when addressing genocide survivors in  Rwanda. (39) The impact of the US failure to support the ICC may  be symbolically important - a high-profile rejection of a major  initiative for the rule of law in international affairs. But it will also be  a lost opportunity if a state with a long-standing commitment to  human rights does not take a lead in shaping the work of the  world's first international criminal court. Indeed, the ICC Statute  has principles central to American conceptions of justice all over it,  reflecting ideas such as due process, command responsibility, and  superior orders, to name but a few. (40) Participation in the ICC  would mean that the US would have a major role in shaping the

evolution of the Court in ways that further this vision of the future  of the international legal system

At the Rome Conference in 1998, the US worked closely with the  UK throughout long and difficult negotiations to ensure that the  Statute of the ICC contains adequate safeguards against politically  motivated prosecutions of our citizens. It is plain that the UK was  and remains satisfied that this was achieved.

Now, as then, the UK remains convinced that US and UK national  interests in taking forward the Court coincide; and that the  overriding concern of the international community to bring an end  to impunity for war crimes and crimes against humanity will be  advanced significantly by the emergence of the ICC, with  American participation.

The US claims that the Rome Statute is flawed. Certainly it is not  perfect. While the Statute is a reflection of wide agreement which  inevitably involved some compromises, none of those  compromises undermines the basic fact that the Court will act only  where national jurisdictions cannot. The principal and fundamental  safeguard within the Statute is the 'complementarity principle' I  mentioned earlier, whereby national judicial systems of States  Parties will have the first bite at the cherry in respect of any  investigation which affects their territory or their nationals. UK  courts retain the right and responsibility to investigate offences  committed in the UK, or where British Citizens stand accused of  committing ICC crimes anywhere else in the world. The same is  true in respect of the national courts of all parties, including the US  if it chooses to join. The ICC will therefore be able to step in only  where a national judicial system is unwilling or unable genuinely to  investigate. In relation to the UK, no circumstances are foreseen  under which that would apply to the British judicial system. In any  case, the Prosecutor of the ICC must notify all States Parties and  States with jurisdiction over the case before beginning an ICC  investigation, and cannot on her or his own initiative begin an  investigation without first receiving the approval of a Chamber of  three judges. At this stage, it would be open to States to make it  clear that they will investigate allegations against their own  nationals themselves. In such a situation the ICC must then  suspend its investigation. The Court will only take over if the  national system is unable to investigate, for example, because of a  breakdown in its judicial systems; or because it had refused to  investigate without appropriate justification. If it had investigated  and subsequently refused to prosecute, the International Court  could only proceed if it concluded that that decision was motivated  purely by a desire to shield the individual concerned. This, it will be  clear, is an unlikely prospect in the UK if an accusation appeared  to have any basis in fact. And the same would undoubtedly be true

in respect of the US were an accusation to appear well founded  against one of its citizens.

Australia made its position clear when it entered the following  declaration when it ratified the Rome Statute.

"The Government of Australia, having considered the  Statute, now hereby ratifies the same, for and on  behalf of Australia, with the following declaration, the  terms of which have full effect in Australian law, and  which is not a reservation: Australia notes that a case will be inadmissible before  the International Criminal Court (the Court) where it is  being investigated or prosecuted by a State. Australia  reaffirms the primacy of its criminal jurisdiction in  relation to crimes within the jurisdiction of the Court.  To enable Australia to exercise its jurisdiction  effectively, and fully adhering to its obligations under  the Statute of the Court, no person will be surrendered  to the Court by Australia until it has had the full  opportunity to investigate or prosecute any alleged  crimes. For this purpose, the procedure under  Australian law implementing the Statute of the Court  provides that no person can be surrendered to the  Court unless the Australian Attorney-General issues a  certificate allowing surrender. Australian law also  provides that no person can be arrested pursuant to  an arrest warrant issued by the Court without a  certificate from the Attorney-General. Australia further declares its understanding that the  offences in Article 6, 7 and 8 will be interpreted and  applied in a way that accords with the way they are  implemented in Australian domestic law."

The International Criminal Court has been heralded as perhaps  the most significant international organization to be created since  the United Nations. (41) If that is true, then it is of some  significance that the world's most powerful nation has not only  opted out of the Court, but has taken strident measures to oppose  it. The United Kingdom and many other states which are close  allies of the USA have ratified the Statute, and enacted domestic  legislation to promote the working of the International Criminal  Court. In 1998 the UK concluded, and after the most careful  consideration, that the liberty and well-being of its citizens:  whether service personnel, officials, politicians or civilians, will not  be threatened by malicious or politically motivated arrest and  indictment in a foreign land by virtue of its commitment to the  Court. The UK has long acknowledged that the US has a lead role

in defending our common values, maintaining peace and security  and defending democracy and human rights throughout the world.  The UK has closely aligned itself with that role and has deployed  troops in different parts of the world in pursuit of those values.

While the USA has been a leader in the development of public  international law, it is unfortunate, in my opinion, that (allegedly  along with China, Iraq and Libya), it is one of only 7 governments  which voted against the adoption of the Statute of the International  Criminal Court in July 1998. And now of course it is apparent, that  for the present time at least, the United States will not become a  party to the Statute. I consider that to be highly regrettable. The  ICC has come into force despite the efforts of the United States,  and it will operate - successfully I am sure - without the United  States, as do many other international tribunals (such as the  International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea, in Hamburg). But the  ICC would surely be an even greater success if the United States  was to participate, assisting in the development of the procedural  and substantive rules, the activities of the Prosecutor and, if there  were an American judge, the development of the Court's  jurisprudence. The absence of the United States means that we all  stand to lose from the full benefit of the experience of a country  with the strongest commitment to the rule of law generally and  expertise in criminal and international law in particular. I hope, in  these circumstances, that the United States will leave the door  open to future participation and, in the meantime, provide  constructive support from the sidelines.

Conclusion

It has come time now for me to conclude. Under the rubric of  'international criminal justice' I have had the opportunity of  speaking with you about the prospects that the ICC holds for the  idea of women's justice, as well as the contribution it will make to  criminal justice more generally. There is every reason to believe  that the Court, now staffed by adequately qualified women and  men, will provide international justice across the broad spectrum of  matters it will come to face.

The ICC is part of a continuum, a process that was catalysed in  Nuremburg. As regards the international aspirations of the Court,  my hope is that in years to come there will be a broad and  universal acceptance of the International Criminal Court by all  nations. The beginnings are positive, let us hope for a Court which  is, in time, worthy of its name and our continued strong support.

1 'Were They Just Obeying Orders?', The Guardian, May 7, 1996,  at 10, quoted in Simon Chesterman 'Never Again ... and Again:  Law, Order, and the Gender of War Crimes in Bosnia and

Beyond', (1997) 22 Yale J. of Int. Law, 299 at 316. 2 See William Schabas An Introduction to the International  Criminal Court 2001 vii. 3 See Kriangsak Kittichaisaree International Criminal Law 2001  27. 4 See James Crawford 'The ILC's Draft Statute for an International  Criminal Tribunal' (1994) 88 American Journal of International Law  140; James Crawford 'The ILC Adopts a Statute for an  International Criminal Court' (1995) 89 American Journal of  International Law 404. 5 See UN Security Council Resolution 808 of 22 February 1993  and Resolution 827 of 25 May 1993. For detailed accounts of the  creation of the ICTY see M.C. Bassiouni and P. Manikas The Law  of the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia  1996 Chapters I-III. See too Virginia Morris and Michael Scharf An  Insider's Guide to the International Criminal Tribunal for the  Former Yugoslavia: A Documentary History and Analysis 1995. 6 See UN Security Council Resolution 955 of 8 November 1994.  For detail see C. Scheltema and W. van der Wolf (eds.) The  International Tribunal for Rwanda: Facts, Cases, Documents,  1999. 7 At Nuremberg 'crimes against humanity' were prosecuted as  crimes associated with one of the other crimes within the  Nuremberg Tribunal's jurisdiction, namely, war crimes and crimes  against peace. Since Nuremberg several variants of crimes  against humanity developed, not all with a nexus with armed  conflict (the most prominent example is genocide - the most  egregious form of crime against humanity - which the Genocide  Convention of 1948 defines as an offence which can be committed  in times of peace and war). The requirement of a nexus with  armed conflict was firmly done away with by the Yugoslavia  Tribunal in its celebrated decision in Prosecutor v Tadic (Case No.  IT-94-1-AR72), 2 October, 1995, (1997) 35 ILM 32. Article 7 of the  Rome Statute codifies this evolution of crimes against humanity as  being crimes committed either in times of peace or war.  8 The Tadic case once again; see Tadic note 10 above.  Interesting developments have also come out of the Rwanda  Tribunal's decisions. For instance, in the Akayesu matter  (Judgment, ICTR Trial Chamber (2 September 1998), Case No.  ICTR-96-4-T), the Rwanda Tribunal, largely through the efforts of  the South African judge, Navi Pillay, came to the enlightened  conclusion that rape could constitute an act of genocide. See  further the discussion below.  9 See William Schabas op cit 12. 10 See Cherie Booth and Philippe Sands, 'Keep Politics out of the  global courts', The Guardian, Friday July 13, 2001. 11 See generally Rhonda Copelon 'Gender Crimes as War  Crimes: Integrating Crimes against Women into International  Criminal Law', (2000) 46 McGill Law Journal, 217, 220-228.

12 See Theodore Meron, 'Rape as a Crime under International  Humanitarian Law', (1993) 87, AJIL, 424, at 425, citing Tadeusz  Mazowiecki, Special Rapporteur, Report on the situation of human  rights in the territory of the former Yugoslavia, A/48/92 - S/25341,  Annex, at 20, 57 (1993). 13 George S. Patton JR, War As I Knew It, (1947) 23, quoted in  Susan Brownmiller, Against Our Will: Men, Women and Rape  (1975) 23 and cited in Chesterman, op cit, at 324. 14 Chesterman, op cit, 328. 15 See Report of the Secretary General, 3 May 1993 (S/25704),  cited in Cate Steains 'Gender Issues', in Roy Lee (ed.), The  International Criminal Court: The Making of the Rome Statute -  Issues, Negotiations, Results (1999), at 376. 16 Judgment, ICTR Trial Chamber (2 September 1998), Case No.  ICTR-96-4-T, available at http://www.ictr.org.  17 See Kelly Askin, 'Women's Issues in International Criminal  Law: Recent Developments and the Potential Contribution of the  ICC', in Dinah Shelton (ed.), International Crimes, Peace, and  Human Rights: The Role of the International Criminal Court,  (2000) at 52. 18 See Rhonda Copelon, 'Gender Crimes as War Crimes:  Integrating Crimes against Women into International Criminal  Law', (2000) 46 McGill Law Journal, 217 at 224-225. Copelon  points out that rape formed no part of the first series of the ICTR  indictments, even though it was included as a crime against  humanity in the ICTR Statute and mentioned therein as an  example of the war crime of humiliating and degrading treatment.  This was notwithstanding the fact that a Human Rights  Watch/Federation Internationale des Ligues des Droits de  L'Homme report focused on rape and sexual assault in the Taba  Commune, over which Jean Paul Akayesu had control. The same  report documented the failure of the prosecutorial staff to take  rape seriously as well as the inappropriateness and lack of training  of the investigative staff to undertake rape enquiries. 19 Jan Goodwin, 'Rwanda: Justice Denied', On the Issues, Fall,  97, vol. 6, no.4, at 2, available at http://www.echonyc.com/-onissues/f97rwanda.html. 20 See Cate Steains, op cit, in Lee, op cit, at 378, as well as  Copelon, op cit, at 224-226). See also Kelly Askin who writes that  'it is highly unlikely that the Akayesu decision ... which exemplifies  a heightened awareness of crimes committed against women,  would have demonstrated such gender sensitivity without South  African Judge Navanethem Pillay's participation in both the trial  and the judgment' (Askin, 'Sexual Violence in Decisions and  Indictments of the Yugoslav and Rwandan Tribunals: Current  Status', (1999) 93, AJIL, 97 at 98, fn. 8); see too Barbara Bedont  and Katherine Martinez, 'Ending Impunity for Gender Crimes  under the International Criminal Court', (1999) vol. vi, The Brown  Journal of World Affairs, 65-85, available at

http://www.crlp.org/pub_art_icc.html. 21 See Askin, 'Sexual Violence in Decisions and Indictments of  the Yugoslav and Rwandan Tribunals: Current Status' (1999),  AJIL, vol. 93, 97 at 105-106. 22 United Nations, Division for the Advancement of Women and  Centre for Refugee Studies, York University, Canada, Gender-Based Prosecution: Report of the Expert Group Meeting,  EGM/GBP/1997/Report, (Toronto, 9-12 November, 1997) at 33,  cited in Bedont and Martinez op cit. 23 See Gerry Simpson, 'War Crimes: A Critical Introduction', in  Timothy McCormack and Gerry Simpson (eds.), The Law of War  Crimes: National and International Approaches (1997) at 29. 24 See the Preamble to the Statute of the International Criminal  Court. 25 Robert H. Jackson, The Nurnberg Case, as Presented by  Robert H. Jackson, (1947), at 8. 26 Simpson, op cit, 28. 27 Provisional Verbatim Record of the Three Thousand One  Hundred and Seventy-Fifth Meeting, UN SCOR, 3175th mtg., at  12-13, UN. Doc. S/PV.3175 (22 Feb., 1993), quoted in Payam  Akhavan 'Justice in The Hague, Peace in the Former Yugoslavia?  A Commentary on the United Nations War Crimes Tribunal',  (1998), 20, HRQ, 737 at 750. 28 See Chesterman op cit 312. 29 See Jackson, op cit, 94. 30 Simpson, op cit, 8. 31 So William Schabas writes that the term 'complementarity' may  be somewhat of a misnomer, 'because what is established is a  relationship between international justice and national justice that  is far from "complementary". Rather, the two systems function in  opposition and to some extent hostility with respect to each other.  The concept is very much the contrary of the scheme established  for the ad hoc tribunals [for Yugoslavia and Rwanda], whereby the  international court can assume jurisdiction as a right, without  having to demonstrate the failure or inadequacy of the domestic  system' (Schabas op cit 67).  Schabas is referring here to the fact that the International Criminal  Tribunals for the Former Yugoslavia and Rwanda, both of which  are set up by the UN Security Council exercising its enforcement  power under Chapter VII of the UN Charter to maintain  international peace and security, exercise primacy jurisdiction over  the national courts in those two countries.  32 Bert Roling, 'Aspects of Criminal Responsibility for Violations of  Laws of War', in Antonio Cassesse (ed), The New Humanitarian  Law of Armed Conflict, (1979), at 206. 33 The renowned Czech author, Milan Kundera, reminds us that  'the struggle of man over power is the struggle of memory over  forgetting'. 34 Antonio Cassesse, 'On the Current Trends towards Criminal

Prosecution and Punishment of Breaches of International  Humanitarian Law', (1998) vol. 9, no.1, EJIL, 2 at14, available at  http://www.ejil.org/journal/vol9/no1,art1-01.html. 35 See Payam Akhavan, 'Justice in The Hague, Peace in the  Former Yugoslavia? A Commentary on the United Nations War  Crimes Tribunal', (1998), 20, HRQ, 737 at 784. 36 Richard Goldstone, 'Fifty Years After Nuremberg: A New  International Criminal Tribunal for Human Rights Criminals', in  Albert Jongman (ed.), Contemporary Genocides: Causes, Cases,  Consequences, (1996) at 215, cited in Akhavan, op cit, at 766. 37 See generally Simpson, op cit, 16-17. 38 Constitution of the United States, Article I, Section 8. 39 During March 1998, at Kigali. See Lawrence Weschler,  'Exceptional Cases in Rome: The United States and the Struggle  for an ICC', in Sarah Sewall and Carl Kaysen (eds.), The United  States and the International Criminal Court, (2000), at 91. 40 See the comments of Theodore Meron, recorded in Lawrence  Weschler, op cit, in Sewall and Kaysen (eds.), op cit, at 109. 41 See William Schabas op cit 20.



