



LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION

TRANSCRIPT OF DOORSTOP - WITH JASON McCARTNEY, BALI  SURVIVOR AND AUTHOR OF `BEYOND BALI’  CANBERRA PUBLIC HOSPITAL, SUNDAY 23 NOVEMBER 2003

E & OE - PROOF ONLY

Subjects: `Beyond Bali’, Health & MedicareMinus, Sun Herald  story; Rugby World Cup final; Turkey terrorist  bombing; Border protection

McCARTNEY:  Well, being here in Canberra this weekend, for me it’s part  of my book tour, `After Bali’. I suppose the book came about, it started off as  a personal journal for me. Because when you go through something like Bali,  as traumatic as that, the physical scars, sometimes the mental scars actually  cut deeper. So, it started out that way. What transpired when I did come  back and play footy nearly transcended all the issues. I thought the sensitivity  about writing a book about Bali and I focused a lot on that, unfortunately I do  have to tell the story, but it focussed a lot on my recovery and also the  account of people close to me, being my wife, family, team mates. And also  the medical staff which are so important.

And that’s why it is great to be here today at the hospital too because I  realised first hand that if it wasn’t for the fantastic medical facilities we have  in Australia it is fair to say that a lot of other wouldn’t have pulled through.  So, part of the proceeds of my fundraising appeal while we are on tour with  the book - Coles Myer were fantastic in donating $5 every copy sold last  week and a minimum of $30,000. Mazda is sponsoring the tour with $3 a  kilometre, which will be around about another $90,000. And that is going to  be split through seven hospitals around Australia. Obviously the two adult  hospitals I was in, being Darwin and the Alfred hospital in Melbourne, and the  other five are focusing on the children with burns.

For Simon to be here today its great for me because obviously the Kangaroos’  affiliation with Simon and also the fact that I - along with a lot of other  people have had great support, I suppose, in political terms from both parties  - but for me personally, Simon was there at the beginning, he visited me in  intensive care at the Alfred hospital and he’s been there right through. And I  speak for many when I talk about survivors and family members have been

1

thankful for, I suppose what you would call cross-Party consideration  throughout what has been a pretty traumatic twelve months.

JOURNALIST:  So you’ve met some of the victims of the Canberra  bushfires here this morning, you must have a lot of empathy for people who  are still in hospital after that event.

McCARTNEY:  You do, and we were talking about it before, it’s something  you realise pretty quickly that no matter how bad it gets you always know  there are people worse off. And it certainly was bad for me and a lot of others  but you only have to meet people on the way and you realise it puts it all in  perspective. So, I was up here last year with the Kangaroos on a camp here  and it was just after the bushfires. And just to see that devastation and it is  really hard.

JOURNALIST:  Is it emotionally draining for you, Jason, to keep on doing  what you are doing?

McCARTNEY:  Look, it’s a strange thing because people will say to me,  `you’re still talking about it, you’ve written a book, have you moved on?’ and  I think I’ve just moved on so far. And look, the way I dealt with things was to  be able to talk about it. And that’s helped me no end. I feel like now I have a  bit of control, because I’ll be the first to admit when I first saw images of Bali  and the perpetrators it was very disturbing and upsetting. And still deep down  it boils away, but I can see that now and I can’t, I don’t want that to restrain  me. So by talking about it I definitely feel like I’ve moved on a long way.

CREAN:  Well, it’s a pleasure to be with Jason again. One of the  great defining moments of sport this year was Jason’s come back game. And  I was just reflecting in the car coming down today how the last kick of the  game got the Kangaroos over the line. In contrast to last night where the last  kick of the day got the Wallabies beaten. But, I think what everyone saw in  Jason on that day was his courage, his determination, his commitment to  never letting the bastards beat him. What they’d done had occasioned  dreadful burns to him, it cut short a great career in football. But he was  determined to make the most of it, to take adversity and turn it to advantage.  The book is a great read. I think that it really tears at you, at many stages in  the game - the fight for life. I know when I went to see him in the Alfred  hospital all he wanted to talk about was getting back to play football, getting  married to Nerissa and then getting back up fishing, Barramundi fishing in  Arnhem Land. Now, he’s done the first two, you still haven’t made Arnhem  Land though?

McCARTNEY:  No, no.

CREAN:  So, no doubt when this tour is over you’ll get the  opportunity to do it. But the other occasion, the other opportunity I had when  I was down at the Alfred Hospital was to speak to the wonderful people in the

2

Burns Unit. The people who actually repaired the damage, repaired the body,  enabled people to get back and lead normal lives. Jason has today been  speaking to people here in the Burns Unit, people in the hospital here who  are getting their dressings changed. They were victims in the Canberra  bushfires. But I think the fact that Jason knows it is about giving back, it’s  that great community spirit. It is a Kangaroos’ spirit. Kangaroos in terms of  the Aussie Rules Club in particular where they understand the importance of  putting back into the community. But the proceeds from this book going to  support burns units around country.

One final point that I would make, Jason has touched upon it, is the fact that  we’re here in one of the great public hospitals of the country. I mean, when  people need attention whatever the circumstances it’s the public hospitals to  which they turn. Of course private hospitals can perform a function, but  without commitment and investment in our public hospitals the sort of  medical care and attention that Jason has been talking about just wouldn’t be  there.

Now, that’s why Labor is committed to ensuring that our public hospitals have  the pressure taken off them. Bulk billing, the lack of it, is forcing people who  can’t find a doctor who bulk bills to come to the emergency wards in the local  hospitals. It puts additional pressure on. The Federal Government refused to  negotiate properly with the states to adequately fund the hospitals. We’ve got  to keep our investment in our public hospitals and we’ve got to advance it.  what it needs is greater cooperation between federal and state governments  to support these vital organisations in our country.

JOURNALIST:  The Greens are going to move a disallowance motion  against the regulation enabling the $5 incentive. Is that something that Labor  would support?

CREAN:  We hope that what the Greens and the Democrats do is to  support amendments that Labor will move to extend the $5 to everyone. I  mean, if the argument is right that $5 should be paid for concession card  holders and parents with children under 16 to lift bulk billing rates for them  why isn’t it true for everyone? And so rather than simply move disallowance I  don’t want to stop something if it can be built upon. And what I would prefer  to do is to say that the $5 should be paid for every patient rebate that is bulk  billed.

JOURNALIST:  But isn’t it a disallowable instrument? So, it’s either in for  those people or out completely?

CREAN:  Well, that’s why, I think that what we’ve got to look at is  the other forms and procedures in the parliament by which we can get  improvements to the Government’s package to save bulk billing. That’s what  it comes down to. Now the Government knows it is in trouble otherwise it  wouldn’t have spent this money. But what we’ve demonstrated is that you

3

actually spend the money better and lift bulk billing for everyone. You can get  bulk billing back to over 80% as distinct from 60%. Now if that can be done  that’s the sort of package that parliament should actively consider and  support.

JOURNALIST:  Do you think there is any chance of that happening in the  next two weeks?

CREAN:  Well, let’s wait and see. I was interested to read the other  day that Lyn Allison who, people were saying had accepted the package, said  that she was surprised at the many calls that were coming in criticising the  Government’s package for not having gone far enough. So if there is the  capacity to embrace Labor’s package in the deliberations of the parliament  that is going to improve the lot of everyone. What it’s going to do is to lift  bulk billing for everyone and it’s going to take pressure off the public  hospitals. Only Labor has got the package that will save bulk billing and that’s  why it is the package that should be supported.

JOURNALIST:  Do you oppose the safety net when that goes through the  Senate?

CREAN:  Well, why do you need a safety net unless people are  going to miss out? That’s the simple question that is involved here. If bulk  billing is available for everyone you do not need a safety net. The second  point I would make is, what sort of a safety net is it when you’ve got to pay  $1000 to get into it. That just puts more pressure on Australian families. And  what I’m about doing is to say you don’t need a safety net if you’ve got  access to bulk billing and therefore let’s restore bulk billing and let’s support  Labor’s package that does just that. We’re not charging people $1000 to get  into any safety net. Bulk billing is the safety net. It’s there for everyone. It’s  being paid for, contributed to by people paying the levy. The Government  should honour its promise to offer bulk billing as an option for everyone and  free care in public hospitals.

JOURNALIST:  So what will your recommendation be to Caucus re the  safety net?

CREAN:  Well, let’s wait and see actually what the Government puts  forward by way of legislative change and what they are proposing by way of  regulation. We still have not got that information. Julia Gillard has finally got a  briefing from the Minister tomorrow. Can you believe it? I mean, this is a  package that has been announced last Tuesday. And yet the Opposition  hasn’t been briefed and won’t be briefed until tomorrow. So, let’s see what  technically they put up. But my point is that we have an opportunity here  now. The Government knows it has got to improve its package. What I’m  hopeful of doing is forcing the issues so that they improve on it even further.

4

JOURNALIST:  Re the Sun Herald story, any substance to the claim that  your support in Caucus is slipping?

CREAN:  Look, the story is unsourced, unattributed and untrue. I  read the story and I thought to myself, well they’ve sold him the Sydney  Harbour Bridge.

JOURNALIST:  But who? Who has done this?

CREAN:  They’ve sold him the Sydney Harbour Bridge and I’m  surprised that there wasn’t also a story with his by-line saying the Wallabies  won last night. If he believes that he’ll believe anything.

JOURNALIST:  Mr Crean, you’ve had six months of healing since that last  challenge. Have you achieved 100% support in the Caucus, what’s your  gauge on that?

CREAN:  I tell you what we have achieved. We’ve achieved the  recognition that our health system is in crisis and it needs repair. We’ve  focused attention on one of the great issues in this country. We’ve also  succeeded in doing it in relation to education. Now I don’t need polls to tell  me that those issues are important. And quite frankly, what people are  interested in is policies, not polls. And I’m about producing and driving the  agenda to see the policy change that saved Medicare, restores bulk billing  and takes the pressure off our public hospital system.

JOURNALIST:  Can I ask you about your support in the Caucus though?

CREAN:  Support in the Caucus is fine.



JOURNALIST:  Has the Prime Minister completely usurped the role of the  Governor-General last night at the Rugby?

CREAN:  Well, I must say he didn’t look too happy presenting those  medals last night, the Prime Minister. It didn’t look like he wanted to…

JOURNALIST:  Would you have been?

CREAN:  Look, I think it was a fantastic game. Disappointing result  but you couldn’t be disappointed with the way in which they played the game.  It was a fantastic game and they were really, apart from the first try they  were behind all night. But those pressure goals of Flatley, to get you back into  the game on two occasions and to just lose it in the last minute. A hundred  minutes of football and you lose in the last minute. I think that’s what they  call percentage football. And Australia just missed out on the margin. But is  was a fantastic game, you couldn’t have gone away disappointed. And I  would have been proud to be out there, quite frankly, putting medals on both

5

6

teams. Because it was a great tribute to the game of Rugby and Australia did  us proud. Unfortunately we ain’t go the cup.

JOURNALIST:  Just back to the Sun Herald story, the fact that this story  was flogged to the journalist, doesn’t that indicate that there is destabilising?

CREAN:  I think it says more about, why would run the story?  Unsourced, unattributed, untrue. No names mentioned. Why would you give  it prominence? And it doesn’t deserve it. All I’m saying is that I expected to  see a story - once I’d read it I thought I’d turn the next page or turn back to  the front page and see the Wallabies have won.

JOURNALIST:  …Australian citizen killed in the Turkey blast?

CREAN:  No, I hadn’t heard that. That’s the first I’d heard of it. I’d  need to get some information about that. But if that’s the case that’s tragic.  And is it the result of terrorism?

JOURNALIST:  It was from the…?

CREAN:  From the? Was it. From Australia? I hadn’t heard that. But  if it is the case obviously my condolences to his family and friends.

JOURNALIST:  Mr Crean, can I just ask you, Kim Beazley entered the  border protection debate last night, do you welcome that kind of contribution  from a backbencher?

CREAN:  What I want is effective border protection in this country.  We haven’t got it from this Government. They’ve scaled back on the defence  arrangements and so that’s how the recent boat got in. how did a boat get if

we’re supposed to have good border protection? I understand this morning  from Senator Vanstone that whilst the refugees will return to Indonesia she  doesn’t know where people smugglers or the boat is. What sort of border  protection is it when you send people back and let the people smugglers and  the boat free to do it again? And I think the other point about this  Government that needs to be seriously asked of them is how did they let Mr  Brigette into this country? How did they issue what is increasingly looking like  a known terrorist to get back into this country? What we haven’t got in this  country is effective border protection from this Government. They talk up the  fear but they fail to act. What I’m interested in doing is putting in place  policies that do give proper border protection. We are the only Party  advocating a Coast Guard. And if we had a cop on the beat we would have  been able to stop that boat.

(ENDS)

