Gary Hardgrave MP

Minister for Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs



Media Release H47/2003 - 14 April 2003

New Contracts for Migrant English Language Tuition

The Minister for Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs, Gary Hardgrave, today announced  the awarding of Adult Migrant English Program (AMEP) contracts that will provide  English language tuition to over 9,000 migrants and refugees each year.

The contracts, between the Department of Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous  Affairs and the NSW Education and Training AMEP consortium, are worth more than  $100 million over five years, beginning 1 July 2003.

Speaking at the contract signing ceremony, Mr Hardgrave said that the new contracts will  help thousands of migrants and refugees on their journey to successful settlement in  Australia.

'The contracts will also help maintain the AMEP's vital 'nation building' role as a  facilitator of community harmony and cohesion,' Mr Hardgrave said.

'They represent a significant investment by the Commonwealth in ensuring that new  arrivals have every opportunity to take up their entitlement to learn our national language  and so take the first and most important step towards full participation in Australian  society.

Mr Hardgrave congratulated the NSW Education and Training AMEP consortium on the  high quality of its tender, which will see it become the AMEP's largest service provider  in Australia.

'The NSW Education and Training AMEP consortium was awarded the contracts after an  extensive evaluation process which combined technical worth and financial analyses to  arrive at an overall assessment of best value for money,' Mr Hardgrave said.

'Through these contracts we will ensure that the AMEP operates as an integrated  community service of considerable flexibility and responsiveness.

The contracts have been awarded in three regions of New South Wales: the Inner City  and Eastern Sydney region, the Southern Sydney and Illawarra region, and the Burwood,  Hornsby, Newcastle and rural NSW regions.

A list of the consortium members is below.

• NSW AMES   • Northern Sydney Institute of TAFE   • Sydney Institute of TAFE   • Southern Sydney Institute of TAFE   • Illawarra Institute of TAFE   • Hunter Institute of TAFE   • New England Institute of TAFE   • North Coast Institute of TAFE   • Riverina Institute of TAFE   • Western Institute of TAFE   • Open Training and Education Network   • University of NSW Institute of Languages   • The Smith Family   • Lady Gowrie Child Centre   • St George and Sutherland Community College.

A number of other agencies are sub-contracted to provide tuition.

Media contact: Allan Pidgeon 0409 606 614



