

Senator Andrew Bartlett   Leader of the Australian Democrats     September 11, 2003                   MEDIA RELEASE                          03/657



Government and Labor Again Fail Refugees

The Australian Democrats today slammed Labor’s refusal to support Democrat amendments, which  would have stopped the Government’s bid to further impose grossly unfair treatment on refugees  who arrive legally in Australia.

Democrats’ Leader, Senator Andrew Bartlett, said that Labor’s rush to play politics on the issue of  refugees, meant they were sacrificing more than 2,400 legitimate refugees currently on temporary  protection visas.

“Instead of working with the Democrats to prevent Government moves to change Australia’s  protection regime - making us the only country in the world that imposes temporary protection on  all asylum seekers no matter how they arrive in Australia - the Labor Party has taken a stand which  runs the risk of effectively sacrifice the immediate futures of 2400 refugees.” Senator Bartlett said.

The government has introduced a package of regulations, some of which include components that  would have allowed 2,400 refugees currently on a treadmill of temporary protection to apply for  permanent protection. The other component introduced temporary protection in the first instance for  all asylum seekers including those who arrive legally on a valid visa.

The government had deliberately packaged these regulations in such a way that the only method of  amending them was through an amendment to legislation, rather the normal approach of  disallowing the unacceptable part of the regulation.

“By refusing to support our amendment Labor risks throwing out the good out with the bad,  sacrificing the immediate future of 2400 people who have already endured tremendous suffering.

“Had they worked with the Democrats, Labor could have constructively removed the most cruel  and heartless elements of the Government’s plan, while saving the improvements.

“Labor have failed refugees and they have failed basic politics, having fallen totally into the  Government’s trap.” Senator Bartlett said



For interview with Senator Bartlett contact Katrina Beikoff on 0419 867 649



http://www.democrats.org.au/

