





LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION



STATEMENT BY THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  THE HON SIMON CREAN MP



Shadow Ministry



A Crean Labor Government will make protecting consumers a major priority  through the creation of a new portfolio of Consumer Protection and Consumer  Health.

I am delighted to announce the appointment of the newest member of  Labor’s front bench team, Alan Griffin, to this crucial portfolio.

The appointment capitalises on the great work Alan has been doing over the  past 15 months as Labor’s Parliamentary Secretary for Consumer Affairs and  Banking Services, and prior to the last election as Parliamentary Secretary to  the Shadow Minister for Health.

Over the past year the Howard Government has shown its complete disregard  for consumers through its failure to act on issues such as credit card and  consumer debt, bank fees, its refusal to protect motorists by labelling and  restricting ethanol levels in fuel and its obsession with self-regulation and  deregulation.

Labor rejects this approach, and the creation of this new portfolio highlights  the increased focus that a Crean Labor Government will place on protecting  consumers.

To further highlight our priorities, I have included in Senator John Faulkner’s  existing role a new responsibility for strengthening the Parliamentary Party’s  links with the party organisation.

Senator Faulkner becomes Shadow Special Minister of State and Shadow  Minister for Home Affairs.

Senator Kim Carr will now take on the additional responsibility as Shadow  Minister for the Public Service.









- 2 -



I am also delighted to announce the appointment of Julia Gillard as Shadow  Minister for Reconciliation and Indigenous Affairs.

Julia’s new portfolio is in addition to her existing responsibility as Shadow  Minister for Population and Immigration and is a recognition of the superb  work she has done in this area, most notably with the release late last year of  Labor’s widely acclaimed asylum seeker policy.

I have also taken direct responsibility in Shadow Cabinet for the Status of  Women and added this responsibility to Nicola Roxon’s portfolio.  As Labor’s  Shadow Minister for Children and Youth, Nicola has been successful in holding  the Government to account in the vital areas of child care and child abuse,  and is leading the debate on the need to invest in the early years.

This addition to her role highlights the priority Labor will place in office on  policies that are not only good for children, but will also assist parents,  particularly mothers, to juggle the responsibilities of both work and family.

I have also confirmed the appointment of Labor’s Treasury spokesman Bob  McMullan as Shadow Minister for the Arts.

Bob is a former Minister for the Arts who has a great passion for Australian  culture and a superb understanding of the Australian Arts community.  I am  sure this appointment will be applauded by all in the Arts community.



I have appointed Michelle O’Byrne, Member for Bass, to replace Alan Griffin as  Labor’s new Parliamentary Secretary.

Michelle will be Parliamentary Secretary for Communications under Lindsay  Tanner, with specific responsibility for the regional implications of broadband  technology and Australia Post.

Access to broadband and the continued ability of Australia Post to provide a  decent basic postal service to all Australians, particular those in regional  areas, will become a major issue in coming months.



I have also appointed the Member for Lowe, John Murphy, as my  Parliamentary Secretary. John is a superb and extremely hard-working local  member and I am delighted he will now be working as my Parliamentary  Secretary.

The changes I have announced today further highlight Labor’s priorities and  reflect my determination to develop policies that meet the needs of all  Australians.



MELBOURNE  18 FEBRUARY 2003

SHADOW MINISTRY  as at 18 February 2003



PORTFOLIO  SHADOW  MINISTER1  OTHER  CHAMBER

Leader          Status of Women

- Parliamentary Secretary

The Hon. Simon Crean MP  Nicola Roxon MP  John Murphy MP

Senator the Hon. John Faulkner  Senator Kate Lundy

Deputy Leader.  Employment, Education, Training and Science       Science and Research;  - The Public Service  - Employment Services and Training



Jenny Macklin MP  Senator Kim Carr  Senator Kim Carr  Anthony Albanese MP

Senator Kim Carr  Anthony Albanese MP  Anthony Albanese MP  Senator Kim Carr

Senate Leader.  Special Minister of State and Home Affairs  - Justice and Customs

Senator the Hon. John Faulkner  Daryl Melham MP  Daryl Melham MP  Senator Joseph Ludwig

Treasury          The Arts

-  Parliamentary Secretary (Arts)  Deputy Senate Leader.  Finance, Small Business and Financial Services  - Assistant Treasurer  - Retirement Incomes and Savings

- Consumer Protection

The Hon. Bob McMullan MP  The Hon. Bob McMullan MP  Sid Sidebottom MP  Senator Stephen Conroy  David Cox MP  Senator the Hon. Nick Sherry  Alan Griffin MP

Senator Stephen Conroy  Senator Kate Lundy

David Cox MP  Senator Stephen Conroy  David Cox MP  Senator the Hon. Nick Sherry

Innovation, Industry and Trade  - Information Technology and Sport  - Parliamentary Secretary (Manufacturing Industry)  -

Craig Emerson MP  Senator Kate Lundy  Senator George Campbell

Senator Kate Lundy  Craig Emerson MP



Defence  - Veterans’ Affairs  - Parliamentary Secretary

Senator Chris Evans  Senator Mark Bishop  The Hon. Graham Edwards MP

The Hon. Graham Edwards MP  The Hon. Graham Edwards MP

Regional Development, Transport, Infrastructure and Tourism  - Regional Services, Territories, Local Government and Tourism  - Parliamentary Secretary (Northern Australia and the Territories)  - Parliamentary Secretary

Martin Ferguson MP  Gavan O’Connor MP  The Hon. Warren Snowdon MP  Christian Zahra MP

Senator Kerry O’Brien  Senator Kerry O’Brien



Population and Immigration;          Reconciliation and Indigenous Affairs  - Citizenship & Multicultural Affairs

Julia Gillard MP  Julia Gillard MP  Laurie Ferguson MP

Senator the Hon. Nick Sherry  Senator Joseph Ludwig  Senator the Hon. Nick Sherry

Economic Ownership;          Community Security

Mark Latham MP  Mark Latham MP

Senator Stephen Conroy  Senator the Hon. John Faulkner  Senator Campbell (Urban Development  and Housing)

Attorney-General;          Workplace Relations  - Manager of Opposition Business in the Senate and Parliamentary  Secretary (Attorney-General)



Robert McClelland MP  Robert McClelland MP  Senator Joseph Ludwig

Senator Joseph Ludwig  Senator the Hon. Nick Sherry

Primary Industries and Resources  - Resources

- Parliamentary Secretary

Senator Kerry O’Brien  Joel Fitzgibbon MP  Sid Sidebottom MP

Joel Fitzgibbon MP  Senator Kerry O’Brien

Foreign Affairs

Kevin Rudd MP

Senator the Hon. John Faulkner

Health and Ageing  - Ageing and Seniors  - Consumer Health

Stephen Smith MP  Annette Ellis MP  Alan Griffin MP

Senator Chris Evans  Senator Michael Forshaw  Senator Nick Sherry

Family and Community Services  Manager of Opposition Business in the House  - Children and Youth  - Minister Assisting on Disabilities

- Parliamentary Secretary

Wayne Swan MP

Nicola Roxon MP  Annette Ellis MP  Senator Michael Forshaw

Senator Mark Bishop

Senator Mark Bishop  Senator Michael Forshaw

Communications  - Parliamentary Secretary

Lindsay Tanner MP  Michelle O’Byrne MP

Senator Stephen Conroy

Sustainability and the Environment  Parliamentary Secretary

Kelvin Thomson MP  Kirsten Livermore MP

Senator Kim Carr

Chief Opposition Whip

Janice Crosio MP Senate Whip Senator Sue Mackay

Whip in the House of Representatives

Michael Danby MP Deputy Senate Whip Senator Trish Crossin

Whip in the House of Representatives

Harry Quick Deputy Senate Whip Senator Geoff Buckland

1 Members of the Shadow Cabinet are shown in bold-type.  Parliamentary Secretaries are shown in italics.





