Gary Hardgrave MP   Minister for Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs

Media Release H109/2003 - 15 August 2003



Minister Launches Guide to Help Young Migrants and Refugees

The Minister for Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs, Gary Hardgrave, today launched an  educational guide to help newly arrived young migrants and refugees settle into Victoria.

The Guide for Newly Arrived Young People is a 30-page publication aimed at 15 to 24-year-olds and outlines in clear language information about the Victorian education system.

'This project was initiated as a response to the disrupted history of schooling commonly  experienced by the children of migrants and refugees,' Mr Hardgrave said.

'There are about 16,000 young refugees living in Victoria and this guide will help them  achieve their educational potential through clear and appropriate advice and information.'

Mr Hardgrave said the recent Review of Settlement Services for Migrants and Humanitarian  Entrants drew attention to the challenges young refugees faced in making successful  transitions through the stages of education, training and employment.

'The Review emphasises the responsibility of all departments and service providers to plan  for the delivery of appropriate services for young migrants and refugees,' Mr Hardgrave said.

'This review has been invaluable in providing a clearer picture of what needs to be done to  better meet the needs of our new arrivals.'

Mr Hardgrave said the guide also complemented the Refugee Resettlement Advisory  Council's 'Strategy for Refugee Young People', which highlighted the complex needs of  young refugees such as dealing with a new culture, coming to terms with their past and the  transition to adulthood.

The guide was developed by the Australian Government's National Integrated Settlement  Strategy through the Victorian Settlement Planning Committee's Refugee Youth and  Transitions working group, which focuses on assisting the settlement of youth into Victoria.

It was funded from a Community Settlement Services Scheme (CSSS) grant awarded by Mr  Hardgrave last year.

It has been translated into 11 languages and will be distributed through schools, Migrant  Resource Centres, TAFEs and Universities. It will also be available online at the Department  of Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs website, www.immi.gov.au.

Media contact: Amanda Lynch 0419 123 862

