



LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION

TRANSCRIPT OF INTERVIEW - JOHN MILLER & ROSS DAVIE, 4BC  BRISBANE, TUESDAY 29 APRIL 2003

E & OE - PROOF ONLY

Subjects: Medicare; Pharmaceutical recall; Reconstruction of  Iraq; Asylum seekers; Sex trade; leadership

PRESENTER:  Good morning, Simon, have you had the phone call?

PRESENTER:   Well that’s a very valid question. Has the phone not gone?

CREAN:  No, but look, we’ve moved on from that. Kim knows what  he’s got to do, but I know what I’ve got to do and that’s to keep punching  through the message.

Particularly in terms of Medicare at the moment because what people are now  facing, if this legislation goes through, they’re going to have to pay more for  their health care, more to see a doctor. This is the end of bulk billing.

And look, this isn’t just a fight between me and John Howard, this is a fight to  retain Medicare - a health system that is well recognised as being the best  system you can have. And yet this Government wants to destroy it. Why  would you do that? Why would you take a system that’s functioning properly,  run it down and then give it a further knife in the back?

PRESENTER:  Look, obviously you don’t want to talk about the leadership  thing and we can understand that because I really don’t think that it matters  a hell of a lot to most Australians anyway. What is important, though, is this  issue of Medicare. Now, the Government would have us believe that this will  provide more incentives for doctors to bulk bill and certainly pensioners and  concession holders. It will get extra doctors and nurses for rural and remote  areas. Yet medical people I’ve spoken to are saying it will have precisely the  opposite effect.

CREAN:  It will have the opposite effect. And just think about it. The  only people it gives incentives to bulk bill to are concession card holders. That

1

means, John, that any family above $32,300 will now be faced with a co-payment because there is no incentive to bulk bill them.

Now, if the Government acknowledges that you’ve got to give additional  incentives for bulk billed concession card holders and pensioners, why won’t it  acknowledge that it has to give additional incentive to bulk bill all patients?

Because that’s what Medicare is. That’s what the Medicare contract is. The  1.5 per cent levy on your tax entitles you to a doctor that bulk bills. It also  entitles you to free hospital treatment in a public hospital. But this  government is taking that away. And it means that all families are going to  pay more for their health care.

PRESENTER:  But the Government will say that Medicare was never  intended to be used by all and sundry, it was always for the lower income  earner, the concession card holder and the people, really, that most need it?

CREAN:  Well how is it that under Labor’s stewardship of Medicare,  bulk billing rates went up to over 80%?

PRESENTER:  But can we afford that, Simon?

CREAN:  Yes we could afford it. We could afford it. And don’t tell me  that in a budget of $30 billion a year - and this package which the  Government dropped out yesterday is $900 million - don’t tell me that you  can’t re-establish bulk billing.

Now, if you look at the graph in terms of what happened, in the last seven  years of the Labor Government, bulk billing steadily increased. In every year  since - under the Howard Government - it’s gone down. Why? Because they  don’t believe in it, they’re not committed to it.

And they’re now trying to say, they’re trying to change the definition, they’re  trying to say that only pensioners and concession card holders were those  that could get bulk billed.

But I mentioned before the figure of $32,000. These are not wealthy people,  John. These are families struggling to make ends meet. And if they’ve now,  particularly with all of these concerns around about health, whether it’s the  SARS virus, if these are families that have to go to a doctor and already they  have to put $40 or $50 up front for each of the children - where are they  finding that money? And this is a system which is just a licence to do more of  that, to charge families more money.

Now, what I’m saying is the Australian community deserves better. We can  afford bulk billing, we can afford to restore it. And we will only save Medicare  if we do restore it. The choice is between John Howard who wants to destroy  Medicare and me leading a Labor Government that will save it.

2



PRESENTER:  But at the end of the day, the people who are going to  make a decision on this are the doctors. I mean, they’re the one’s that no  matter what system’s in place if they don’t want to bulk bill they won’t.

CREAN:  Well, that’s true. But, if you look at the system that I talked  about before, when Labor was in power the bulk billing rates went up to over  80 per cent. Under this Government they’ve fallen below 70 per cent.

And yesterday when John Howard and Kay Paterson were asked the question,  `will you guarantee that this will see the end of the decline in bulk billing’, he  couldn’t do it. Well I’m giving the guarantee. I am guaranteeing to restore  bulk billing. Because, we will lift the patient rebate, we will progressively  restore bulk billing in this country.

Now you can’t do it over night. I’m not trying to pretend you can do it  overnight because this Government’s run it down over seven years. But it  needs a down payment, it needs a statement that we are here to secure bulk  billing and save Medicare. Because if we don’t have this argument now, if we  don’t have this fight now, if we don’t block the legislation that’s going to  destroy it you won’t get it back.

This is the beginning of the Americanisation of the Australian health system.  Where your Medicare card doesn’t count and they insist on your credit card. If  you go into a doctor he doesn’t ask for the Medicare card, he asks for your  credit card. That’s not a system that we want and it’s a system that I will fight  to ensure does not come in.

PRESENTER:  The medical profession has reliably informed us that there  are 8 million Australians who have a health care card. That’s far too many  isn’t it? Would you advocate that there should be tighter regulations on the  actual numbers of people who’ve got the card so if that could somehow be  reduced, or more looked after, you know, across the board we might have a  better system?

CREAN:  What I’m advocating is that every Australian is entitled to a  Medicare card and that Medicare card should give access to bulk billing. It  should give access to the contract that was entered with this Government and  previous Governments that if you pay your Medicare levy you get affordable  health care.

That’s not happening at the moment. What John Howard is doing is  introducing a two-tiered system. Only pensioners and concession card  holders, if they’re lucky, can have access to bulk billing. Everyone else has to  pay more. The co-payment is going to be entrenched. They’re even  encouraging private health insurance to cover the gap. For the first time in  this country, you’re having to take out private health insurance to see a  doctor. That’s the Americanised health system.

3



PRESENTER:  That’s not a key issue though.

CREAN:  That is a key issue.



PRESENTER:  Yes, but, when you say to see a doctor. The trouble is that  is it’s getting increasingly harder to get in to see a doctor. Because we’ve got  a vast shortage of GPs in this country, and not just in rural areas. And heaven  help you if you want to see a specialist within about five to six weeks - even  if you’re paying.

CREAN:  Yes, I agree with that. And so two things have to happen.  We have to increase the numbers of doctors and I welcome the initiatives in  this package that do that. We’ve been calling for them for some time and we  won’t be seeking to stop those measures if they really do hit the mark, if they  do achieve the result.

The second thing of course is that the reason it is difficult to get into hospitals  as well is because the emergency wards of hospitals are clogged up with  people who can’t find a doctor that bulk bills so they go to the local hospital.  Now, if what you’re really trying to do is to ease the pressure on the hospitals  as well as give families affordable health care. That’s why bulk billing has to  be restored. It’s a simple proposition.

Now, of course, it involves a commitment of resources but it’s not as if we  don’t have the resources, it’s a question of where they’re prioritised. And this  Government has got its priorities wrong. And if we’re spending…

PRESENTER:  Where would you get the resources from? What would you  run down to fund this?

CREAN:  Well, already in this package there is a base upon which  we can build to restore bulk billing. They’ve acknowledged that you have to  lift the patient rebate if you’re to do something to save bulk billing. In their  case they only want to save it for concession card holders. I’m saying do it for  the lot. Let’s have a look, initially at the existing health budget. Let’s have a  look at where there can be a better prioritisation because I make the point,  with $30 billion of health expenditure annually by the Commonwealth  Government you must be able to secure the base upon which our system  depends. You must be able to save Medicare by restoring bulk billing.

PRESENTER:  Mr Crean, the incentives to doctors in the system, started  at $1 a patient, if you like, the $5.50 or whatever they are, would you suggest  that the incentives to doctors should have been far higher in order to help  them, to entice them to bulk bill?

CREAN:  Yes, well even the Government’s own package  acknowledges that in rural and remote areas. I think they get up to…

4



PRESENTER:  $5.50 in rural areas or something like that.

CREAN:  Somewhere around $6.00. So the point is, there’s  recognition that the incentive under the current system isn’t there to  encourage more doctors to offer bulk billing. So the patient rebate does have  to be addressed. The Government acknowledges it but it doesn’t go far  enough.

PRESENTER:  But wouldn’t you concede that by giving an incentive to  doctors that the Federal Government’s not trying to destroy Medicare they’re  trying to get more doctors to bulk bill?

CREAN:  No, they’re not because they’re only requiring, they’re only  giving the incentive to bulk bill concession card holders. There’s no incentive  for all of the other Australian families, the millions of Australian families, any  family above $32,000. There’s not one extra dollar of incentive to bulk bill  them.

Now if the argument is right, Ross, this is my point, if they acknowledge the  argument that you’ve got to lift the incentives to bulk bill concession card  holders, why not go the next step and provide the incentives to bulk bill all  customers?

PRESENTER:  Because they feel Australians over that $30-35,000  threshold can afford to pay.

CREAN:  Well I think you should go out, and I think John Howard  and Kay Patterson should get real, they should get out into the community  and ask people - on $32,300 a year - whether they consider themselves  wealthy. And whether they feel, when they turn up to a doctor next time,  they’ve got to put a co-payment across the table simply to see the doctor.

That is not a fair system. It is not a just system. And it’s not a system that  Australians deserve. They’re already paying for a system - through their taxes  - that guaranteed them access to a doctor that bulk bills. John Howard’s torn  up that guarantee. What I’m saying is, we’ve got to re-establish it.

This is a fundamental fight that the community has to have. If they don’t  stand and fight on this issue they will not be able to afford health care into  the future. And I tell you what - I’m going to be leading that charge in terms  of that fight.

Because, I do believe that people should have affordable health care. I don’t  think families should have to think twice about going down to a doctor if their  kids are sick. I think they should be entitled to know that they’ve got their  kids best interests at heart. They shouldn’t have to go to a doctor with one  child sick, get a prescription filled out and share the prescription with the

5

other kids in the family. That’s not health care. That causes further problems  down the track.

And what I’m saying is, this is a question of priorities. This is a nation that  committed itself to providing affordable health care but it’s a Government  that’s torn up that contract. I’m going to restore it.

PRESENTER:   Okay, let’s move on, shall we, to a somewhat related  issue I guess in the sense that it involves health and that is the Pan-pharmaceuticals recall and the withdrawal from sale of a wide range of  products. It could go into the thousands. Do you concur with Geraldine  Moses, for example, from the Pharmaceuticals Society who said on this  program this morning that the Government has given these vitamin  manufacturers way way too much rope?

CREAN:  Well I’m very interested in her comments and obviously  they’re facts that need to be further established. But I think the first thing  that needs to be done here, John is that the full information for the public is  made known.

Where, actually, are the risks, what are the products and what are the  manufacturers that this company has produced for? I think the very first step  that has to be taken is for people’s minds to be put at ease. That they know  which of these vitamins, or supplements, these complements, which of these  are putting them at risk.

PRESENTER:   It’s surprising the number, naÃÂ¯ve of me I guess, did it  come as a surprise to you that so much, like 70 per cent of these products  were coming from the one manufacturer, were just badge engineers for it?

CREAN:  Well, I didn’t know that particular percentage. But, I think  that what it does highlight is that when you’ve got that significant a base  providing to a whole range of manufacturers, it’s important to have the  safeguards in place. And I think that’s an issue that has to be further  investigated.

But the initial step, John, has to be - let’s put the public’s minds at rest. I  mean, I heard the Health Minister last night, or the Parliamentary Secretary  and she was hopeless quite frankly, because she couldn’t answer the question  as to what was at risk and what wasn’t.

Now, if this is a Government, and it’s got it’s Therapeutic Goods Authority out  there, knows it’s got a problem, it should have had the information ready to  go, unequivocally, all of the information available so that the public mind  could be put at rest.

The question as to whether or not too much leniency has happened, the  question as to whether or not there’s got to be changes - that’s a matter for

6

resolution further down the track. But the immediate step has to be to ensure  the safety of the public and that can only happen if they’re given full  accurate, unequivocal information.

PRESENTER:    I think there’s a list of products that will surface over the  next few days and other companies and…

CREAN:    Yes but my point, Ross, is it shouldn’t wait a couple of  days. I mean, if this is a problem, if it’s a problem the information has to be  out as soon as possible. Otherwise you’re going to have all of this unease, all  of this uncertainty and you know what people are like, particularly when  they’re on different sorts of medications. But in this case the vitamins, the  complements; they rely on them on a regular basis. They need to know  whether they’re safe. They’re in a routine, they’re given advice to take them,  they’ve got to know that what they’re taking is what’s been prescribed.

PRESENTER:    There is a very large advertisement in today’s Courier Mail  that lists all the registration numbers of the various base products. And you  can find those on the labels if you do want to check for yourself whether  you’re in any doubt.

CREAN:    Well again I just make the point that even this morning  there was a lot of confusion as to which products were safe and which ones  were not. I think that the immediate task is, lets get that information out as  quickly as possible and that’s what I would urge.

PRESENTER:  All right. Let’s move on again to another subject. Earlier  on in the, in our involvement in the conflict in Iraq when I and a number of  other Australians perceived you to be equivocating on whether or not you  actually supported the men and women of the armed forces who had been  committed to the fight by the Government, made me angry, made me, well  use a fairly uncomplimentary remark, Mr Crean, I will hold my hand up and  admit. You’ve since made it very clear that you’ve supported that. On the  subject of our ongoing - well supported the troops, of course. On the subject  of our ongoing relationship with the United States do you think it’s important  for John Howard to visit George Bush at his ranch in Texas?

CREAN:    Well I think it’s important that the relationship between  Australia and the US, particularly through the US Alliance continue to be  strengthened. My disappointment with the way in which things have evolved  over the last six months is that the fundamental strength of that alliance  which says international conflict be resolved through the United Nations  wasn’t pursued to its fullest. And I think if it had been pursued to its fullest  we could have had a result in Iraq without the killings.

I go on to make the point though, that it’s terribly important now in terms of  that relationship that we get the UN into Iraq as the overriding authority for  the reconstruction of Iraq. It’s terribly important in terms of the peace

7

keeping exercise and the humanitarian exercise. I think it’s a very dangerous  circumstance where the peace keeping role is confined to just the allied  forces that are in there - which we’re obliged to do under international  conventions. I want the troops home as quickly as possible. The best way to  get them home as quickly as possible is to get the UN mandate in there  overseeing the reconstruction…

PRESENTER:    Well I think that everyone wants the troops home as  quickly as possible.

PRESENTER:  Yes, well the Government’s saying…

CREAN:    What he should be saying, what John Howard should be  saying to George Bush is, `get the UN mandate in to oversee the  reconstruction of Iraq’.

PRESENTER:    All right. Has this not though, if not immediately, but then  very much appearing to be turning out to be a case of the end justifying the  means?

CREAN:    Well I don’t think that the end ever justifies the means if  innocent civilians are killed in the process. And we still haven’t seen the  outcome, the final outcome, in terms of the figures on that. But the fact is it’s  happened. It’s happened and the war is over. What we’ve got to get on now  with is the task of reconstruction, and we should learn from the mistakes of  the past I suppose. And if in fact the UN - that has experience in this area of  reconstruction and humanitarian relief - get it in there. Spread the activity  and get the reconstruction of Iraq happening as quickly as possible.

PRESENTER:    Ok another issue. We’ve had a couple of boats of boat  people heading our way recently. You’ve been fairly vocal about that in years  gone by. How do you think the Government has handled it in the past and  how do you think it should, would you make any changes to the way it’s  being handled with this current situation?

CREAN:   Yes. I think that, I said that what we really need is the  international agreements - in particular with Indonesia - with our near  neighbours that say that we will not receive people who come down who  have been passed on from those countries. We had those arrangements with  China previously, we still have them in place with Vietnam, from our  Government’s operations.

We also need an international framework in which there’s consistency about  the definition of what constitutes refugees and humanitarian so that the  people smugglers can’t country-hop. That’s what happens at the moment.  They get down to one country, they’re pushed on to another and they think  they can get more favourable treatment. We need an international

8

framework. What Australia hasn’t done well, Ross, is to develop those  agreements in our region.

PRESENTER:    Particularly with Indonesia?

CREAN:    And particularly with Indonesia.

PRESENTER:    With Megawati.

CREAN:    And if that agreement was in place we wouldn’t have had  the potential problem that we faced with these boats of recent weeks.

PRESENTER:   So you would be advocating that we should be looking at  our Indonesia relationship a little more?

CREAN:    Well, I think that we need to look at that on a broader  scale. But, specifically for this, if we had the good relationship with Indonesia,  my view is that we can secure the same sort of understanding with Indonesia  that we had with China.

PRESENTER:    OK time is getting away on us but very quickly, we have a  report from a wire service this morning that Labor, yourself, and your  Opposition Immigration Spokesman, Julia Gillard are calling for a wide  ranging judicial inquiry into women and girls being brought into Australian for  the sex trade.

CREAN:   Well I think this is a terribly important issue and the  Government seems to be acknowledging the problem but not prepared to do  anything about it. Obviously people, and these are again - well you’d call  them people smugglers - but people that play on human misery, play on their  poverty, play on their disadvantage, get them here under false pretences and  then subject them to awful sorts of commitments.

What we have got to do is to have the inquiry that gets at the source of this  problem. That stops it at source. In the same way as we talked about  agreements with these other countries, find out the source, prosecute them  and ensure that we bring an end to this awful, antiquated system and  demeaning system.

PRESENTER:    And finally now, just moving back if we may briefly, to the  leadership issue, what do you make of the commentators who say that what’s  effectively happened here is that Kim Beazley has shut up and taken a step  backwards and that you are being given a second chance through the budget  session of Parliament to see how you perform and that after that it might well  all be on again?

CREAN:    I say that I’m not going to be distracted. I am determined  - and you saw this yesterday and again today - I am determined to take the

9

10

fight up to the Howard Government to save Medicare. Why? Because I believe  that it’s in the interests of all Australian families that they have affordable  health care.

This is something that Labor Parties have fought for under Whitlam and  Hawke and they are going to fight for them again under Crean. And I am  committed, in Government, to restoring bulk billing and saving Medicare. But  today we are launching the campaign to get public mobilisation to insist that  Medicare be saved and bulk billing restored. That’s what I’m focused on  totally.

PRESENTER:    Mr Crean thank you for coming in and talking to us this  morning. And if it’s any consolation we put a call into Kim Beazley’s office as  well and he hasn’t returned ours either so, there you go.



CREAN:   Ok well maybe you can put him through on a party line  today.

PRESENTER:  Okay. He’s got all my numbers. Good luck and thanks  again for your time.

(ENDS)

