Last updated: 10 November 2003

Address at the Conservation for Antarctic Marine Living Resources  meeting

Hobart, Tasmania - 4 November 2003

I wish to recognise Mr Kunio Yonezawa, Chairman of the Commission for the  Conservation for Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR), as well Dr Rennie  Holt, Chair of the Scientific Committee and, of course, the Executive Secretary of  CCAMLR, Denzil Miller - and other distinguished guests, and I think that includes  everyone.

Can I also say how fortunate we are today to be joined by the President of the  Senate of the Parliament of Australia - Senator Paul Calvert. Paul is based here in  this lovely city of Hobart, and it's really a great honour that Paul is able to join us at  this very informal lunch.

Can I also say to you all how very honoured I am to be able to meet with you this  afternoon. And I do want to extend to you, on behalf of the Government of  Australia, another very warm welcome to our country, and to the southern most  State capital of our nation. The Commission, in its wisdom, many, many years ago,  decided to base itself here in Hobart, and I certainly hope that the provisions and  the facilities of this fine city have been to your liking, and have been conducive to  the very important work that you all have to do.

Today, you would have seen many of the better half of the Australian population;  that is, all the lovely women upstairs with their spectacular hats. Now, we don't  normally dress like that, and we are not doing that especially for the CCAMLR  delegation, although we would have done that had we thought about it, but today is  really Australia's national day, quite unofficial of course, but today is Melbourne Cup  Day. It is a horse race in Melbourne, next capital city to the north, and it is the only  time - if you are ever in Australia and wanted to rob a bank, you would do it in  about an hour and ten minutes time because nobody in Australia would be watching,  doesn't matter if you are a policeman, an army colonel, Prime Minister or what ever  you are doing. So, I suspect when the Melbourne Cup is being run, in just over an  hour's time, the only people working in Australia will be you. So a big  congratulations on that!

I must say that Hobart is the home, as well, of the French Antarctic Exploration  Division - and it is of course the home of the Australian Antarctic Division, the  element of the Australian Government that looks after Australia's interests in  Antarctica. It is an organisation of which all Australians are very proud, and it's an  organisation that, we as Australians, do recognise has played a very big role in the  peace and science that is the hallmark of the great southern continent. It does very  important work with the representatives of all your nations who work in Antarctica  on some of the great challenges that face humankind; particularly, as the world  battles some of the major calamities, such as global warming, which I know is of  great concern to all those with an interest in the planet, and certainly with an  interest in Antarctica.

As well as that, the world is also facing other calamities, and that's something that  brings me out of Parliament in Canberra to come to speak to you today in this very  brief and informal way. It is another one of the great challenges that I think  humankind faces, and it is certainly one which the Commission for Conservation of  Antarctic Marine Living Resources really has to address and meet head on. In fact,  the underlying reason for the establishment of the Commission is quite obviously,  and quite clearly, the conservation of marine living resources in the Antarctic, and  that's a major challenge for all of you, and for the organisation itself.

If CCAMLR does not act decisively this week to protect the marine resources, then  the high ideals that were involved in the formation of CCAMLR will be dashed, and I  would think that, unless we get it right this week, CCAMLR will have failed as an  organisation - because there isn't much time left. So many people, and so many  people of good will, and of good faith, and of great ability have put in so much over  the years to CCAMLR and all that it stands for.

And it would be to our ever lasting shame, I would suggest, if all the good work that  has been done by all of those very dedicated and very committed people over so  many years, was overborne and defeated by a group of criminals. A group of people  whose only goal in life is to make themselves very wealthy at the expense of the  world's most precious natural assets. Criminals who have no interest in the future of  the planet, no interest in the way things should operate in the world's oceans;  certainly no interest in the welfare of the seaman and workers onboard some of  these boats, people who are paid absolute pittance to go down and catch fish, like  the Patagonian toothfish. The only purpose in life for those criminals is to make a lot  of money for themselves, illegally.

Ladies and gentlemen, I suggest that a group like CCAMLR should not be beaten by  a bunch of criminals. And while I understand that, we do at times, as  representatives of our countries, have to worry about the detail, we have to worry  about how various decisions, how various approaches at CCAMLR, do impact on our  countries and our national interests, and how they impact upon us in relation to the  rest of the world. We have to look at those things, but we cannot allow our own  national pride, one might say, to allow these petty criminals to destroy one of the  world's last pristine marine ecosystems. That is, we really do have to ensure that we  can transcend all of these particular difficulties we may have as individual nations,  so that we can address, what I believe, are the issues that will demonstrate how we,  as a humans, will look after the planet in the years ahead.

Ladies and gentlemen, we all know about, and all have had experience with, some of  the vessels that fish illegally in the southern oceans, in the oceans right across the  world. Very often we know, as national governments, that we never quite get the  evidence that we need to bring prosecutions. But by and large we all know who are  the people who are raping the marine ecosystems, who are destroying some of the  very special species, and some of the very special natural systems of the world.

We all know that the United Nations Convention on Law of the Sea (UNCLOS), while  it was appropriate 30 years ago, when it was first introduced, when it was first  conceived, isn't, I would suggest, capable of dealing with today's modern situations.  Today we have very advanced technology in communications, and I would suggest  to you that the rules UNCLOS originally adopted aren't quite appropriate now. I  would like to see work done to upgrade UNCLOS into the modern day era. At a  conference I attended organised by the OECD in Paris in early June, there was a  consensus that a group of ministers from a number of countries should get together  to investigate ways to modernise the UNCLOS rules to make it easier for those of us,  and that is all of us, who would want to protect our oceans and our marine  ecosystems from those whose only purpose in life is to plunder it.

We all have our difficulties in our various countries. We all have had great difficulty  in bringing the pirates to account. Many of you, I think all of you, followed as closely  as we in Australia did, the chase of the Viarsa across 3,900 nautical miles, over 21  days. In Australia, I might say, as in all of your countries, everyone is innocent until  proven guilty. So I am not suggesting the Viarsa, and I am not able to suggest the  Viarsa was engaged in illegal activities - that's a matter for the courts to determine.  But it certainly belies belief that if a boat is transferring through Australian waters as  innocently as they've claimed to be - why they would have failed to heed a warning  to stop and be inspected, if they had nothing to hide.

So, that particular chase, and I am sure that you are all aware of it, I think did focus  attention on a problem that we all have to face.

Can I mention to you, and you all have similar experiences, that as we were  bringing the Viarsa into Fremantle, one of our licensed fishing boats from Australia  actually came across another vessel called Alos, clearly fishing without a permit in

Australian Antarctic waters? Because our authorities were otherwise engaged, that  vessel has, for the time being, escaped, but no one can doubt that it was fishing  illegally. And you all have stories like that in your own waters.

We have to work together, and I know that is what you have been doing the last  week and will be doing this week, we have to work together to help each other  overcome the illegal fishing operations. Can I particularly thank all of you for your  assistance at the time of the Viarsa incident? We did let you all know, and we have  had many expressions of support, I think, the unanimous expressions of support  from all of the CCAMLR member nations.

We had offers of tangible support from many of you, and without singling out some,  although that is what I am going to do, we are particularly grateful, the Australian  Government, for the assistance that South Africa, the United Kingdom and Uruguay  gave us in apprehending the Viarsa and bringing it before the Australian courts. I do  want to particularly thank those three nations and, indeed, all of the other member  nations of CCAMLR for the assistance they gave at that time.

Ladies and gentlemen, I hope that at what I believe is a critical time for the  Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources that we can  double our efforts to stamp out illegal fishing wherever it occurs. I know that we  have all put a lot of effort into this goal over the past 12 months, and the previous  12 months, certainly over the past week, and I know that work is continuing. Can I  urge you to keep going on that? I do think we have to look at the future of the  planet - I do think we have to put aside some of the things that might impact upon  us as individual nations and work towards a resolution that will protect and save  forever the Antarctic marine living resources.

Again, ladies and gentlemen, thanks very much for coming along. Congratulations  on the great work you do, as part of the delegations to CCAMLR. I certainly pledge  to you my total support and the total support of the Australian Government in the  very difficult work, and the very difficult challenges you have in front of you. Thanks  again for coming.



http://www.affa.gov.au/ministers/macdonald/speeches/2003/ccamlr.html



