

MEDIA RELEASE MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS ALEXANDER DOWNER FA109            20  July  2004







DIPLOMATIC APPOINTMENT: AMBASSADOR TO TURKEY

I have today announced the appointment of Jean Dunn as Australian Ambassador to Turkey.   Ms Dunn will replace Jon Philp who has been Ambassador since July 2001 and is expected to  take up her appointment in August 2004.

Australia enjoys a close bilateral relationship with Turkey, a country strategically located at  the meeting point of Europe and Asia.  Turkish migrants have contributed significantly to  Australia’s social and economic development over the years and the Australian-Turkish  community now numbers more than 100,000.  Our two countries’ shared experience of the  Gallipoli campaign in 1915 has become a cornerstone of the relationship.  Gallipoli played a  significant role in forging Australia’s national identity and marks an important stage in the  history of modern Turkey.  It has come, over time, to create a unique bond of friendship  between the peoples of the two countries.  Australia warmly appreciates the generosity of  successive Turkish Governments in making possible the annual commemorative events at  Gallipoli attended by so many Australians.

Turkey is an important market for Australian exports and the stabilisation of the Turkish  economy and ongoing economic reforms should facilitate growth in trade and investment.   Turkey has participated alongside Australia in the Peace Keeping Operation of the United  Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor (UNTAET PKO). Turkey also took a  leading role in the International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) in Afghanistan and has  contributed to reconstruction efforts in Iraq.  The importance of the bilateral relationship is  reflected in the large number of high-level visits in recent years.

Ms Dunn is a career officer with the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade and is currently  Deputy Head of Mission in Seoul.  Ms Dunn had responsibility for trade policy issues while  serving in Washington (1991-1994) and Geneva (1984-1987).

Prior to her current appointment, Ms Dunn was a senior negotiator in the Australia/Singapore  Free Trade Agreement negotiations and has held senior positions responsible for WTO  negotiations, trade development and public diplomacy.  Ms Dunn served as the senior trade  consultant to the Minister for Trade from June 1994 to March 1996.

Ms Dunn holds a Bachelor of Arts degree with Honours in Japanese language and politics  from Monash University and undertook postgraduate studies on Japan/Indonesia relations.   She is married with three children.



Media Inquiries:   Chris Kenny (Ministerial) 02-6277 7500/0419 206 890     Julie  McDonald  (Departmental)  02-6261  1555



Media releases and speeches are available from DFAT via the internet.      http://www.dfat.gov.au/

