M E D I A  R E L E A S E



Stephen Smith MP  Shadow Minister for Immigration  Member for Perth



01/04         6  January  2004





Nauru Hunger Strike



The views of the Government of Nauru published in a Letter to the Editor in today’s  Melbourne Age, is a complete condemnation of Immigration Minister Amanda  Vanstone’s handling on the Nauru hunger strike.

A copy of the letter is attached.

Minister Vanstone’s failure to adequately address this issue has been typified by her  on going attempts to avoid responsibility and blame others for the situation.

When the first suggestion was made late last year that medical facilities might be  under pressure, I urged Minister Vanstone publicly and told her office privately that  the highest priority must be to ensure that there was no failure to supply medical  facilities and treatment.  If there was any doubt about the provision of medical  treatment and services, the Government had to err on the side of caution and supply it.

Not even talking to the Nauru government about these matters is not erring on the side  of caution.

As well, Minister Vanstone has had to be dragged to the starting gates at every point.

When I suggested on 15 December last year that she send the Immigration Detention  Advisory Group (IDAG) to Nauru, she responded by saying it was not a  Commonwealth responsibility.  This point is comprehensively debunked by Minister  Clodumar today.

Subsequently she sent the Chair of IDAG to Nauru, Mr John Hodges.

When the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) on Christmas  Eve announced that the UNHCR would review 22 cases on Nauru as a result of  changed circumstances in particular regions of Afghanistan, Minister Vanstone  effectively said she would think about it.

She should have as I said at the time, immediately returned Mr Hodges to Nauru and  made it clear to the detainees that Australia would respond favourably to the request  by the UNHCR to similarly review cases previously assessed by Australian officials.

Only yesterday has she finally and reluctantly made that clear.

1

2



Finally, despite any number of suggestions that New Zealand might be interested in  taking asylum seekers from Nauru, today it remains clear that the Australian  government has not raised with the New Zealand government that prospect.

This litany of sins is more than enough to condemn Minister Vanstone for her failure  to adequately address the hunger strike issue.

Minister Vanstone must now urgently publicly respond to Minister Clodumar’s letter  and satisfy the Australian community that no stone is being left unturned to ensure the  adequate supply of medical needs to the hunger strikers on Nauru without  compromising medical services to the people of Nauru themselves.



End Release.

Contact: Courtney Hoogen on (02) 6277 4108 or 0414 364 651

Nauru protests  to Australia  I read with concern Senator  Amanda Vanstone’s comments

(4/ 1) that “asylum seekers on  Nauru who refused to eat are not  the responsibility of the Austra-  lian Government.”

standing obliges Australia to  ensure the day-to-day manage-  ment of asylum seeker facilities,  including medical treatment.

Nauru has provided medical  attention to the hunger strikers  for humanitarian reasons. Aus-  tralia has not discussed the  hunger strike with us, let alone  formally seek our assistance.

We have  called on Australia

for the urgent provision of medi-  cal and nursing staff, supplies  and equipment.  Not only are the lives of  hunger strikers at stake, but also  the medical needs of Nauruans,  owing to the pressure on our  health system.

must act now to recognise its  MOU with Nauru as well as its  humanitarian obligation by pro-  viding adequate care and treat-  ment for the asylum seekers.  K. Clodurnar, MP, Minister for Finance,  Republic of Nauru

Our Memorandum of Under-

The Australian Government

Phone: 02 6124 5200

Brief: DPLAUTO

Size:  51.66 sq.cms. Circulation:  193,500

General News   Page 8 Age   Tuesday 6/1/2004

Ref: 10329931

Copyright Agency Limited (CAL) licenced copy

