





The Politics of Signs: Gay and Lesbian issues in

Comparative Perspective.





Assoc. Prof. Carol Johnson

Politics Discipline, University of Adelaide.





Refereed paper presented to the

Australasian Political Studies Association Conference

University of Adelaide

29 September - 1 October 2004

Carol Johnson: The Politics of Signs

Page 2





The Politics of Signs: Gay and Lesbian issues in Comparative  Perspective.

In an article written in the journal Differences, Judith Butler (2002) rather bemusedly

responded to a vituperative French debate, sparked by issues of same-sex

partnership recognition and adoption, in which philosopher Sylviane Agacinski

constructed Butlerite queer theory  as a monstrous  American threat to the French

symbolic order. I say bemusedly, because Butler is concerned that state legitimation

can involve normalising same-sex relationships, for example, by privileging

traditional marriage-type relationships and discouraging other types of sexual

relationships and behaviours. After all, feminists have long noted that marriage can

be seen as having some regulatory components, as being a form of governmentality

(e.g. Brook, 2002).

Those issues of normalisation are ones that will be returned to later. However,

for the moment, this paper focuses on discussing how issues of gay and lesbian

equality and rights are depicted as so threatening in political discourse. It analyses

the ways in which gay and lesbian issues are constructed as broader social signs that

go far beyond the more narrow considerations of policy debates. The paper focuses

on the discourse of politicians, exploring issues ranging from gay and lesbian

marriage to national identity to analyse the diverse meanings attributed to gays and

lesbians in the body politic. Needless to say, this paper’s emphasis on  signs and

meaning is in no way meant to detract from the importance of other work which

focuses on understanding policy ramifications and the need to remove systematic

discrimination (see e.g. Rimmerman et al., 2000; Lahey, 1999; Johnson, 2003). For

Carol Johnson: The Politics of Signs

Page 3

example, it has been estimated that there are 1,049 federal rights that come with

marriage in the U.S., ranging from social security to employment benefits, that are

denied to same-sex couples (Kotluski, 2004: 56-7). However, analysing the symbolic

implications  may help to explain why politicians have sometimes been so electorally

cautious about instituting policy change.  After all, even some parties which have

supported  various gay and lesbian rights, such as the U.S. Democrats, U.K. Labour

and Australian Labor, have so far baulked at supporting same-sex marriage.



Politicians and the meaning of marriage.

For, it is not just French philosophers who can see issues such as adoption or gay

marriage as threats to the symbolic order, but also many politicians. Indeed, it is

striking how many politicians state that their opposition to same-sex marriage or gay

parenting is based on a concern about meaning. Their concerns are often very similar

despite very different national, constitutional, federal, institutional and legislative

contexts. For example, in countries such as the U.K. or U.S. marriage confers major

benefits and entitlements not allowed to heterosexual de facto couples (unlike in

Australia).

The concern with meaning can also cross political boundaries. Bill Clinton

argued that he could not accept the term marriage being used for same-sex unions

because:



marriage in our culture and to me has a certain connotation, meaning for me,

that has not gotten me to where I could accept that, because I think it's basically

a union for the purpose of, among other things, having children and -- so that's

Carol Johnson: The Politics of Signs

Page 4

why I've never supported the term of marriage (Clinton, 1999). [Emphasis

added]



George W. Bush emphasised the importance of meaning even more strongly when

proposing his constitutional amendment against same-sex marriage. He suggested

that the challenges same-sex marriage posed to  the meaning of marriage threatened

the very foundations of western civilisation itself:



After more than two centuries of American jurisprudence, and millennia of

human experience, a few judges and local authorities are presuming to change

the most fundamental institution of civilization. Their actions have created

confusion on an issue that requires clarity….Activist courts have left the people

with one recourse.  If we are to prevent the meaning of marriage from being

changed forever, our nation must enact a constitutional amendment to protect

marriage in America…. (George W. Bush, 2004). [Emphasis added]



Bush’s statements seem mild compared with some other U.S. politicians’ views on

how the fundamental meaning of marriage will be demeaned by same-sex marriages.

So, New Jersey Republican State Senator Gerald Cardinale argues that: ‘You can be

very fond of another person of the same sex, but it’s not a marriage, and we should

not demean marriage by recognizing them. Look, there are people who are very fond

of their dogs…but that’s not a marriage either’ (cited in The Advocate, 15 April 2002:

10).

Carol Johnson: The Politics of Signs

Page 5

It is not just U.S. politicians who emphasise meaning when opposing same-sex

marriage. Australia’s socially conservative Prime Minister, John Howard, sees

changing the meaning of marriage as threatening the survival of the species:





Well, this is not in any way an attack on gay people…. it’s just a strong

statement in support of the central role of marriage in our society. Traditional

marriage is one of the bedrock institutions of our society and I don’t want

anything to occur that further weakens it. Marriage, as we understand it in our

society, is about children, having children, raising them, providing for the

survival of the species and I think if the same status is given in our society to

gay unions as are given to traditional marriage we will weaken that bedrock

institution (John Howard, 2003) [Emphasis added].



Note that the repeated association of same-sex marriage/relationships with

undermining ‘the family’  suggests that same-sex relationships have come to

symbolise an overwhelming threat to traditional gender relations, parenting and

mainstream conceptions of everyday life (see further Butler, 2002: 29).

The Australian media is also quite clear that Howard is emphasising the

meaning of marriage. So, Australia’s national daily echoes George W. Bush when it

argues that  elected representatives, rather than judges, should determine the

meaning of marriage.



The community still has the idea that marriage, by the very meaning of the

word, can only refer to unions between men and women. And the Government

Carol Johnson: The Politics of Signs

Page 6

wants to ensure this is the way it stays, at least until there is a community

consensus for change. Without this legislation, social engineers on the bench

and at the bar would likely soon find some contrivance under international law

that would bind Australia to acknowledge same sex marriages and adoption

rights. (Editorial, The Weekend Australian, 29-30 May 2004) [Emphasis added].



Nor are such concerns about meaning confined to the U.S. and Australia. British

Shadow Home Secretary, Oliver Letwin appears concerned that the Church should

determine the meaning of marriage. He writes that: ‘I am reluctant to consider

extending marriage to apply to gay relationships, based on the idea that the words of

the Church of England marriage service actually mean something’ (cited in Gay

Times, July 2003: 79) [Emphasis added].

So, politicians themselves are emphasising that the issue of gay marriage is

partly an issue of meaning. In an uncertain, confusing and threatening world,

homosexuality is being depicted as both the enemy within (undermining nations,

civilisation, the survival of the species, traditional gender relations) and the enemy

outside (foreign recognition of same-sex marriages will be imposed on the nation by

traitorous judges).  The very bedrock institutions of society; the very nature of

everyday family life, are depicted as being under threat.

Failing to recognise the importance of the symbolic threat can lead to policy

defeats. So, Steven Seidman suggests that Clinton lost his battle over gays serving in

the military, and resorted to the dubious compromise of ‘don’t ask, don’t tell’,

because he’d underestimated the symbolic importance of the issue.



Carol Johnson: The Politics of Signs

Page 7

It was perhaps a mistake on Clinton’s part to approach the issue of gays in the

military as merely a question of rights. As Congress, the military brass, and the

American public weighed in, it was apparent that the battle around gays in the

military had become part of a symbolic national drama ….  opponents may

have also understood in a way that Clinton and some gay activists did not that

incorporating gays into the military would signal the beginning of the end of

the historical association of national identity and heterosexuality. (Seidman,

2002: 181).



One could add that the broader gendered symbolic order was also at issue given that

allowing gays to serve in the military would threaten the particular forms of

masculinity normalised in U.S. military life.

In fact, politicians are quite explicit in their arguments that issues regarding

sexuality involve both symbolic and policy aspects. So, Australian Prime Minister

Howard argues for a combination of both policy and symbolic support for

(heterosexual) family life:



On the one hand you don’t want a government running a ‘nanny state’ telling

you how to behave, heaven forbid. On the other hand you don’t want a

government that is utterly disinterested either in providing the symbols of

commitment to family life or indeed the practical policy measures that help

people achieve more satisfactory outcomes in their families and in their

personal relationships (Howard, 1999).



Carol Johnson: The Politics of Signs

Page 8

As we’ll see below, the symbolic importance of marriage and families has a long

history in western thought. It is particularly important in a time of change and

uncertainty.



Heterosexuality and the symbolic political order.

Queer theory has long pointed out the simultaneous pervasiveness and potential

fragility of heteronormative discourse. Arguably, the politicians’ concern with

meaning is yet another example of what Eve Sedgwick has termed ‘a chronic

endemic crisis of homo/heterosexual definition’ in western culture (Sedgwick, 1994:

1).  In this case, the vexed binary distinction between heterosexual and homosexual

desire is being policed by anointing heterosexual desire as the only one worthy of the

accolade of marriage, thereby reaffirming the significance of different genders,

privileging the desire between them, and denying that same-sex love can be just as

deep as different-sex love.

In short, politicians are desperately trying to legislatively fix meaning in

response to what Sasha Roseneil has argued is a widespread and significant

‘destabilization of the hetero/homosexual binary’ extending through popular culture

to patterns of intimacy in peoples’ everyday lives (Roseneil, 2002: 33). It is an attempt

to reassert the importance of marriage in a period when ‘there can be few families

which do not include at least some members who diverge from traditional,

normative heterorelational practice, whether as divorcees, unmarried mothers and

fathers, singles, lesbians, gay men or bisexuals’ (Roseneil, 2002: 34). In such times,

defending the heterosexuality of marriage becomes the final symbolic border to be

Carol Johnson: The Politics of Signs

Page 9

held in a desperate attempt to hold back social change and reassert certainty in both

the body politic and everyday life.

The need to reassert certainty is particularly important for many heterosexuals

because marriage is seen as a sign of personal success and a crucial aspect of one’s

own identity. In such views, marriage is the apogee of heterosexual achievement. It is

seen as a public sign that one has made the correct moral choices and been rewarded

by an ostensibly satisfying and fulfilling personal life as long-term sexual partner,

mother or father. So, same-sex marriage effectively devalues an important status

symbol. If even deviants can be married, how can marriage still be a symbol of

heterosexual success?  Personal status and identity, as well as heterosexual privilege,

are under threat.

All of these issues are very important in explaining both the importance of

heterosexual marriage as a sign and the pressure on politicians to defend the

‘meaning’ of marriage. However, same-sex marriage also raises some issues specific

to the political sphere, in the narrow sense of institutional politics. There is a long

history of the formal political symbolic order being constructed in heterosexual

terms. Politicians may well be unaware of the exact lineage of their arguments.

However, feminist theorists have long pointed out that the western citizen tended to

be constructed in traditional liberal theory as a (property-owning, white) male head

of household with women, whether wives or daughters,  subsumed under their

authority and denied rights such as voting. In other words, the citizen was

constructed as a married man (Okin, 1979; Coole,  1988; Brown,  1995).

Although many feminists don’t draw attention to this fact, the male citizen,

and his adult female dependant, are also thereby being constructed as having an at

Carol Johnson: The Politics of Signs

Page 10

least predominantly heterosexual identity. In other words, issues of the

subordination of same-sex relationships are just as crucial here as issues of the

subordination of women and neither should be privileged over the other. Although

political theorists such as Carole Pateman don’t address the heteronormative aspect,

they have also argued that marriage played a particularly important role in the

construction of (male) citizenship and the political order.  Indeed, Pateman argues

that the marriage contract underlay the symbolic social contract of traditional liberal

political theory; the founding myth via which it was argued that free men gave up

certain individual rights to a political sovereign in order to ensure their collective

security (Pateman, 1988). Heterosexual marriage has therefore long been a potent

political symbol in western political thought.

Various commentators (e.g. Phelan, 2001: Richardson, 2000: Bell and Binnie,

2000) have analysed the ways in which the citizen has been constructed in

heterosexual terms, involving what could be termed  ‘hegemonic heterosexuality’

(Richardson, 2000: 257) or ‘heteronormative citizenship’ (Johnson, 2002, 2003).

Historically, much government policy simply assumed that the citizen was

heterosexual in areas ranging from taxation benefits to adoption, medical

guardianship, funerals, pensions and superannuation and thereby excluded same-

sex couples from entitlements and legal recognition. The citizen was constructed as

heterosexual, just as traditionally the citizen had been constructed as white, male and

property-owning.1



Notes.

1   For  an  analysis  of  the  role  of  class  and  race,  as  well  as  sexuality,  in  the  politicization  of  marriage,  see

Smith (2001).

Carol Johnson: The Politics of Signs

Page 11

Additionally, heterosexuality was also constructed as an essential private value

underlying the public sphere. As Valerie Lehr has explained, although the liberal

individual’s decisions are meant to be private, it is assumed that mature adults will

privilege the values of  heterosexual marriage and monogamy (Lehr, 1999: 133). Now

that those values are seen to be under threat, the defeat of homosexuality is seen as

central to maintaining the moral values underlying the public sphere, particularly

given the failure by many U.S. politicians to argue for a clear separation between

church and state (Jakobsen and Pellgrini, 2003: xiii-xv). As  Jennifer Terry has pointed

out, in the U.S. ‘right-wing Christian fundamentalists have declared that

homosexuality is to the 1990s what abortion was to the 1980s: the enemy in a battle of

moral cleansing to determine the future of the world’ (Terry, 1999: 392). Bush’s

references to defending civilisation reflect such beliefs. Bush’s call for a constitutional

amendment to ban gay marriage also draws on an influential U.S. belief that the

constitution is itself a rhetorical symbol standing ‘for a larger moral consensus about

proper public and private behaviour’ (Levin, 1997: 34).

So Davina Kotluski is correct when she tells gay and lesbian Americans:

‘Remember this: Marriage is not just a word. It’s a word embedded in a whole

cultural system that we are daily asked to participate in, while being excluded from

(Kotluski, 2004: 29).’ It is also a cultural system that is deeply implicated in the

political symbolic order, including both public and private constructions of citizen

identity. As Australian gay activist Rodney Croome points out, the symbolism of

marriage is important precisely because ‘to have the right to marry is to be

considered a full citizen, is to be considered a full member of the community, is to be

considered human.’ (Sydney Morning Herald, 5-6 June 2004).

Carol Johnson: The Politics of Signs

Page 12



Homosexuality as a sign of the stranger.

Homosexuals have therefore long been constructed as, to use Phelan’s term ‘sexual

strangers’  in the body politic. Phelan is here drawing on Bauman’s conception of the

‘stranger’, characterising gays and lesbians as passport citizens nonetheless

marginalised as an ‘other’ in public life (Phelan, 2001: 4).  So in President Bush’s

world-view, same-sex marriage is a threat to civilisation. In Prime Minister Howard’s

view it is a threat to the survival of the species. The status of  gays and lesbians as a

symbolic stranger is so strong that homophobic discourses often draw on

xenophobic, racist and ethno-centric discourses. Anna Marie Smith has argued that

homophobic discourse during the Thatcher years in Britain ‘drew extensively upon

already normalized racist metaphors around disease, foreign invasions, unassimiable

“other” cultures, dangerous criminals, subversive intellectuals, excessive

permissiveness and so on (Smith, 1994: 22).’  Similarly, xenophobia underlies the

Australian editorial’s fear of Australian judges recognising international same-sex

marriages. It also underlies Sylviane Agacinski’s construction of Butlerite queer

theory as an American foreign ‘other’.

Politicians’ discourse can therefore play upon popular fears.  In extreme right

discourses, same-sex marriages have been depicted as a threat to border security. As

Davina Kotluski  notes:



The Concerned Women for America recently warned that same-sex marriage

‘poses a new threat to U.S. border security.’ The organization called a legally

Carol Johnson: The Politics of Signs

Page 13

married Canadian same-sex couple trying to enter the U.S. as a married couple

the ‘latest pair of domestic terrorists’ (Cited in Kotluski, 2004: 103).



Here homosexuals are once again depicted as a foreign threat, presumably

equivalent to Islamist terorrists and illegal aliens. Similarly, Rainbow Labor activists

within the Australian Labor Party expressed their concern that the Howard

government was attempting to turn gay marriage into another ‘Tampa’; the ship

carrying asylum-seekers that the Howard government barred and used as a

successful border protection, wedge issue in the 2001 election (Mills, 2004). George

W. Bush may also have been evoking ‘Clash of Civilisations’ discourse in his

reference to the threats gay marriage posed to civilisation. After all, homosexuals can

also be constructed as the threat within that will bring foreign enemies upon us. Jerry

Falwell, the prominent member of the American religious right,  argued that

September 11th was due the wrath of God at America’s debauched moral standards,

including the prevalence of homosexuality (Burack, 2003: 330, 345). The similarities

between Christian Right discourses about homosexuality and previous discourses

about the threat of communism, also both an enemy from within and without, have

been noted by a number of commentators (Herman,  1998: 17, 50, 96).

Precisely because gays and lesbians can be a sign of the ‘other’, homosexuality

can also be used to signal positions on broader socially conservative issues such as

race and ethnicity where it is no longer so acceptable to explicitly articulate

discriminatory attitudes and measures. As Brian Fone points out: ‘In modern

Western society, where racism has disappeared, anti-Semitism is condemned, and

misogyny has lost its legitimacy, homophobia remains, perhaps the last acceptable

Carol Johnson: The Politics of Signs

Page 14

prejudice’ (Fone, 2000: 3). Fone may well be being over-optimistic regarding the

unacceptability of the other forms of prejudice. Nonetheless, homophobia can

operate as a different form of dog-whistle politics, in which a politician makes an

audible sound that explicitly advocates one form of discrimination, but that audible

sound also has additional silent meanings. So, a socially conservative position on

homosexuality can also signify a general socially conservative position that electors

read as extending to other issues that it may be riskier for politicians to articulate

explicitly, such as support for traditional gender roles, racism or ethno-centrism.

As Carl Stychin has pointed out, homosexuality is an extremely malleable

concept that can be used to signify very different things in different nations:



homosexuality has been associated with communism, fascism, bourgeois

capitalism, colonialism, the west and north, the east and south,

environmentalism, Europe, and North America. In the project of nation

building, homosexuality is a ready discursive tool that can be conflated with

any enemy of the state, in the process becoming the enemy within (Stychin,

1998: 194).



The signification of homosexuality as the ‘stranger’ can be mobilised by diverse

cultures. In some Asian or African political discourse, homosexuality can represent

Western colonial influences. For example, long-serving ex-Malaysian Prime Minister

Dr Mahathir claimed that western influences were undermining traditional

Malaysian values since  ‘western films idolise sex, violence, murders and wars. Now

Carol Johnson: The Politics of Signs

Page 15

they permit  homosexual practices and accept religious leaders with openly gay

lifestyles’ (cited in Hacker, 2003). As Baden Offord explains, for Mahathir:



Homosexuality is always conflated with perceived moral evils, and, moreover,

it is sometimes conflated with democratic rights….Mahathir’s claim is a type of

inverse ‘orientalism’ where the play of the postcolonial power is to describe

homosexuality as a Western social trait which was brought to Asian cultures by

imperialism. ….Asian leaders like Lee Kuan Yew and Dr Mahathir thus use

homosexuality as a discourse of cultural and geographical difference. … that

can be deployed to maintain a kind of cultural purity (Offord, 2003: 45).



However, homosexuality is also malleable enough to be used as positive sign  and it

is to a discussion of those diverse discourses that we will now turn. For the desperate

attempts by politicians to fix meaning is precisely an acknowledgement that

traditionally heteronormative signs are now being contested.





Gay and Lesbian Equality as a Positive Sign.

While Dr Mahathir used homosexuality to signify undesirable western influences,

assassinated Dutch politician, Pim Fortuyn, used it to signify desirable ones. Fortuyn

endorsed a common far right agenda that sees Islam as a threat to western

civilisation and  culture (see Betz, 2002). He cited his own experiences as a

homosexual to argue that Dutch values were inclusive and tolerant and to oppose

immigration from Islamic countries which, he claimed, had fundamentalist,

Carol Johnson: The Politics of Signs

Page 16

homophobic values  (Fortuyn, 2001;  The Guardian, 7 May 2002). Some conservative

U.S. gays have lauded Fortuyn’s views (Bronski, 2002). However, his positive use of

homosexuality is unusual given that the Far Right generally depicts homosexuality

as threatening the family, birth-rates, and national survival (Mudde, 1999:188).

Fortuyn’s arguments not only neglect the complexity of Islamic attitudes towards

homosexuality (see  e.g. Wafer, 1997; Lunsing 2003), they overlook the fact that

western Christian fundamentalists have been uniting with Islamic (and Jewish and

Hindu) fundamentalists to try to defeat gay rights initiatives in bodies such as the

United Nations (Buss, 2004: 258). Nonetheless, Fortuyn’s views provide an example

of the exceptionally diverse ways in which homosexuality can be mobilised as a

positive sign.

Tolerance of homosexuality can also be constructed as an indicator of economic

progress and success. Economist Richard Florida’s  ‘Gay Index’  asserts that there is a

strong relationship between the percentage of gays in a city and that city’s success in

the new creative economy. It is not that gays are somehow brighter or more likely to

be members of Florida’s ‘Creative Class’ workers whose creativity ‘is now the

decisive source of competitive advantage …. in virtually every industry, from

automobiles to fashion, food products, and information technology itself (Florida,

2003: 5).’ Rather, the percentage of gays is a sign indicating an ‘open and tolerant’

city in which such workers will feel more at home (Florida, 2003: 258).  Florida’s

argument has been taken up by the Singapore government, previously known for its

repressive attitude towards homosexuality (Chua, 2003; Financial Times, 11 July 2003).

Prime Minister Goh has announced a relaxation of attitudes towards homosexuals in

the public service. He also announced that Singapore would be encouraging

Carol Johnson: The Politics of Signs

Page 17

(implicitly gay-friendly) ‘bohemian enclaves’ in  order to foster Singapore’s ‘Creative

Economy’ (Time Magazine Asia, 7 July 2003).2

Fortuyn’s and Florida’s arguments are more unusual versions of a relatively

common argument that depicts increasing gay and lesbian equality as a sign of

progress. This is particularly the case in Canada, which arguably has some of the best

anti-discriminatory policies on same-sex issues in the western world. So, in

Francophone Quebec in 1977 ‘the amendment of human rights law to include sexual

orientation became one of many sites for a new nationalist founding myth - one

based on inclusion, openness, and a modernist discourse of progress’ (Stychin, 1998:

91). This narrative of progress was evoked more recently for Canada as a whole

when former Prime Minister Chretien announced that the federal government would

accept same-sex marriage: ‘There is evolution in society and according to the

interpretation of the courts, they concluded these unions should be legal in Canada’

(cited in Washington Post Foreign Service, 22 June 2003).  Support for legal recognition

of same-sex relationships and for gay marriage are frequently cited  as a feature of

Canadian national identity which distinguishes them from their conservative near

neighbour, the United States  (Washington Post Foreign Service, 22 June 2003; New York

Times, 2 December 2003).

Similarly, Australian Opposition Leader Mark Latham has depicted issues of

gay and lesbian equality as a sign of Australian social inclusion, despite his electoral

caution over some issues such as same-sex marriage (The Australian, 2 June 2004). For

example, he argues that ‘the Sydney Gay and Lesbian Mardi Gras… is a celebration

of the inclusive nature of the Australian people’ (Latham, 2004c: 7). In a key speech



2   My thanks to Terence Lee for drawing my attention to this example.

Carol Johnson: The Politics of Signs

Page 18

on national identity,  Latham argued that improving the position of same-sex couples

was part of the process of progressively extending traditional conceptions of

Australian egalitarianism by ‘widening the mateship circle’ (Latham, 2004a). Senator

Penny Wong, the first (and so far only) Australian Labor parliamentarian to come

‘out’  while in elected office, argued against Prime Minister Howard’s attempts to

ban adoption by gay parents on the grounds that since ‘we accept now in Australia

that we don’t discriminate against people on the basis of their race or their class’, so

one shouldn’t discriminate against people on the grounds of their sexuality. She also

likened the government’s bans on gay marriage to 1960’s U.S. bans on interracial

marriage  (The Australian, 2 June 2004; see further Gerstmann, 2004: 78-84, 201).

The British Labour government has also incorporated issues of gay and lesbian

equality into wider discourses of modernity, progress and  social inclusion (Stychin,

2003: 25-47). Gays and Lesbian issues have become a symbol of the government’s

‘commitment to increased equality and social justice’. (Queen of England, 2003).  Gay

and lesbian rights are depicted as part of the unfinished business of modern

democracy, as indeed they are as forms of discrimination against particular groups of

citizens are progressively removed. In such discourse, gays and lesbians are no

longer seen as symbolising deviance but are rather depicted as potentially being in

loving and caring relationships (although civil partnerships are constructed as an

alternative to same-sex marriage). Jacqui Smith, the British Deputy Minister for

Women and Equality states that:



Today there are thousands of same-sex couples living in stable and committed

relationships. These relationships span many years with couples looking after

Carol Johnson: The Politics of Signs

Page 19

each other, caring for their loved ones and actively participating in society; in

fact, living in exactly the same way as any other family (Smith, 2003: Foreword).



Such arguments are very significant given that, as Senator Cardinale’s references

comparing same-sex partner’s affection to being fond of one’s dog reveal,  moral

right discourse normally denies empathy by denying that gays and lesbians can be in

relationships just as loving as heterosexual ones. By contrast, Smith explicitly

constructs gays and lesbians as objects of empathy, explaining the human

consequences of non-recognition of same-sex relationships:



Many [same-sex partners] have been refused a hospital visit to see their

seriously ill partner, or have been refused their rightful place at their partner’s

funeral…. Couples who have supported each other financially throughout their

working lives often have no way of gaining pension rights. Grieving partners

can find themselves unable to stay in their shared home or to inherit the

possessions they have shared for years when one partner dies suddenly

without leaving a will. In so many areas, as far as the law is concerned, same-

sex relationships simply do not exist. That is not acceptable (Smith, 2003:

Foreword).



Admittedly, gays and lesbians are still constructed as an ‘other’ that one should feel

sympathy with — not as oneself:  ‘They are our families, our friends, our colleagues

and our neighbours. Yet the law rarely recognises their relationship’ (Smith, 2003:

Foreword) [emphasis added]. Yet, ‘we’ are still being asked to empathise with ‘them’

Carol Johnson: The Politics of Signs

Page 20

in a way that depicts gays and lesbians as a friendly and understandable ‘other’

rather than as a  foreign and threatening stranger.

A similar view of same-sex relationships as caring has been provided by the

leader of the Australian Labor Party, Mark Latham, who also constructs support for

gay and lesbian rights as a sign of secularism.



I’m  not a religious person. I’m agnostic….I don’t think love in relationships is

defined on religious grounds. As a general proposition, the basic ingredient of a

good, successful relationship is love and care. Whether it is a same sex

relationship or different sex relationship — I don’t draw a distinction. (Sydney

Morning Herald, 6-7 December 2003).



So gays and lesbians are increasingly incorporated into conceptions of caring, loving

relationships and conceptions of social inclusion, economic progress and national

identity. In a diverse range of political discourses, gay and lesbian rights have

become a sign of social progress and of completing social justice agendas in which

sexuality has been added to previous agendas of gender and race.



Contestation of signs or normalisation.

The previous analysis has shown what contested signs gay and lesbian issues are

across many cultures —  including a fundamental threat on one side, unfinished

business of social inclusion and progress on the other. In fact, the discourses of

unfinished business and increasing social justice illustrate precisely why some social

Carol Johnson: The Politics of Signs

Page 21

conservatives are so determined to draw a line in the sand over gay and lesbian

issues — ‘Thus far and no further’.

There are also limits to how far the socially inclusive discourse goes. Carl

Stychin points out that, despite the many advances in New Labour discourse, while

gays and lesbians are frequently constructed as loved members of (heterosexual)

families, queer family forms are more rarely acknowledged (Stychin, 2003: 33-4). It is

also a regulatory discourse, with disciplinary aspects. New Labour discourse seeks to

foster a new version (and image) of the good homosexual; one who is a good Third

Way citizen with both rights and responsibilities (Stychin, 2003: 25-89), and those

responsibilities include being employed, productive and supporting one’s partner

financially when required. It is also a normalising discourse. In debates over issues

such as same-sex marriage and civil partnerships, homosexuality is being

‘channelled into relationships that are about romantic love; part of a process of

normalisation.’ Stychin cites Michael Warner’s fear that homosexual relations might

be reconstructed by the dominant culture into a form of  ‘banalised respectability’

and  Katherine O’Donovan’s  fear of  ‘a kind of uniform monotony to our fates’

(Stychin, 2003: 37).

Or as Butler puts it, in the piece cited at the beginning of this paper: ‘What

would it mean to exclude, from the field of potential legitimation those who are

outside of marriage, those who live nonmonogamously, those who live alone, those

who are in whatever arrangements they are in that are not the marriage form?’

(Butler, 2002: 27), Indeed, Butler fears that ‘options outside of marriage are becoming

foreclosed as unthinkable, and…the terms of thinkability are enforced by the narrow

debates over who and what will be included in the norm’ (Butler, 2002: 18). In such

Carol Johnson: The Politics of Signs

Page 22

respects marriage can operate as a form of (Foucauldian) governmentality,

encouraging  some forms of sexual activity and relationships and discouraging

others. Furthermore, the debate over same-sex relationships still privileges forms of

sexual relationships as a keystone of citizenship entitlements and risks denying

benefits to people whose significant caring relationships are mediated through

friendships rather than through sexual or  familial relations (see further Roseneil and

Budegon, 2004).

It is here that the disadvantages of being a sign in somebody else’s discourse

can come to the fore as particular forms of  relationships, and particular ways of

relating within those relationships, are being encouraged by government. A practical

example illustrates the dilemmas here. Welfare state benefits were originally

constructed around a conception of the male wage-earner head of household in

which one partner, the female, would be wholly or partly financially dependent

(Pateman,  1996). Today, citizens in state-recognised sexual partnerships can still find

their benefits substantially reduced or cut altogether as the couple’s, rather than

individual’s, income is assessed.3 Same-sex partners could find their financial

independence, and relations of equality, threatened as a result. Butler’s concerns

about normalisation therefore have both a practical and symbolic foundation.



3   This  is  particularly  the  case  in  countries  where  welfare/pension  benefits  are  heavily  means-tested  as  in

Australia. However, even in the U.K.  ‘married and unmarried heterosexual couples co-habiting are entitled to

Â£84.65 a week while two single people living together would get Â£53.95 each, a total of Â£107.90….If they have

responsibility  for  a  child  they  would  receive  Â£179.90  a  week,  including  child  benefits  compared  with  just

Â£120.65 for a married or unmarried heterosexual couple.’ (Cited in Gay Times Feb 2003,  72).

Carol Johnson: The Politics of Signs

Page 23

However, despite such practical forms of normalisation, the detailed analysis of

homophobic symbolism in this paper suggests that Butler and others may be over-

emphasising just how normalising an issue same-sex marriage, or gays and lesbians

being incorporated into conceptions of the family, is. For there is another side to

Warner’s fear of ‘banalised respectability’ and O’Donovan’s  fear of  ‘a kind of

uniform monotony to our fates’.  Banality and monotony can sometimes be far more

destabilising to conventional signs than more radical challenges.

A good example of this was provided in Australia in the lead-up to the 2004

election. Playschool is one of the most long-running and respected children’s

television programmes. In June 2004, the programme (re-)aired a 30 second segment

depicting a (real) family having an outing at an amusement park. In the voice-over,  a

child, Brenna says ‘My mums are taking me and my friend Merryn to an amusement

park’ (The Australian, 10 June 2004).  The two women are then shown waving to the

children while they take various amusement park rides. That was all that was

necessary to spark outrage by politicians. The Children’s Minister, Health Minister,

Deputy Prime Minister and Communications Minister lined up to denounce the

programme for showing inappropriate content for children (The Australian, 4 June

2004). Despite being on an official visit to Washington at the time (discussing issues

such as the War in Iraq, torture allegations and Australian detainees in Guantanamao

Bay) Prime Minister Howard joined in. He called the programme ‘foolish’ and

particularly objected to ‘that sort of issue’ being injected ‘as though it were a

perfectly regular situation into a children’s program’ (The Australian, 7 June 2004).

Even Mark Latham, the Labor leader who claims to  see no difference between

heterosexual and gay and lesbian relationships, eventually joined in, saying that

Carol Johnson: The Politics of Signs

Page 24

while he was happy for his children to learn about the diversity of Australian life, he

preferred that parents be able to instruct children themselves (Latham, 2004b).

The reference to ‘a perfectly regular situation’ is an indication of just how

troubling queered banality and everyday fates can be. In this context, the Australian

Broadcasting Corporation’s defence that it was merely depicting the real diversity of

families in Australian society (The Australian, 4 June 2004) or the Mums’ defence that,

in the words of The Australian newspaper, ‘in their world, two mums and a sperm-

donor gay father make them a perfectly normal, nuclear family’ (The Australian, 5-6

June 2004) were precisely an articulation of why the Health Minister found the

programme so ‘shocking’ (The Australian, 4 June 2004). Because there is another side

to the issue of normalisation. It is the issue raised by Senator Boswell in the

Australian Senate when he complained that attempts to remove so-called

discrimination against gays and lesbians were in fact attempts to ‘normalise’ same-

sex relationships and thereby, he claimed,  encourage others to choose the same

'lifestyle'  (Senate Hansard, 29 August 2001, 26925-7). Normalisation can work both

ways, both restricting possibilities for alternative forms of sexual relationships and

shifting the meanings of everyday conventional concepts like love, motherhood and

family.

Social conservatives undoubtedly do find the very idea of same-sex marriage

and gay parenting  deeply threatening to the symbolic order. There is a sense in

which reforms, however incomplete they are and whatever reservations we may

have about their downsides, do challenge the conservative heteronormative

symbolic, political  order. Consequently, the analysis in this paper is somewhat less

pessimistic than Butler’s and, even more than Carl Stychin’s (2003: 31, 41-47),

Carol Johnson: The Politics of Signs

Page 25

emphasises the profound ambiguity of what is occurring. A contestation of signs is

taking place, not just between socially conservative and more inclusive discourses

but also within discourses of normalisation themselves. In the process, it is not just

institutions such as marriage that are being redefined but the very meaning of

citizenship itself.



References.

Arneil, B. (1999) Politics and Feminism.  Oxford: Blackwell.

Bell, D. and J. Binnie  (2000) The Sexual Citizen: Queer Politics and Beyond.

Cambridge: Polity.

Betz, H-G. (2002) ‘Xenophobia, Identity Politics and Exclusionary Populism in

Western Europe,’ in L. Panitch and C. Leys eds, Fighting Identities: Race,

Religion and Ethno-Nationalism. London: Merlin Press.

Brook, H. (2002) ‘Rethinking the Politics of Marriage’, Feminist Theory 1 (3): 45-

66

Bronski, M. (2002) ‘Rally ‘Round the Fag: The Sorry Fate of Queer Politics Since

September 11’, Boston Phoenix, 20-27 June 2002,

www.bostonphoenix.c…tories/multipage/documents/02319782.htm

Brown, W. (1995) States of Injury: Power and Freedom in Late Modernity. Princeton:

Princeton University Press.

Burack, C. (2003)‘Getting What ‘We’ Deserve: Terrorism, Tolerance, Sexuality,

and the Christian Right.’ New Political Science 25 (3): 329-349.

Bush,  G.  W.   2004.  ‘President  George  W.  Bush,  President  Called  for

Constitutional Amendment Protecting Marriage’, 24 February 2004.

Carol Johnson: The Politics of Signs

26

www.whitehouse.gov/news/releases/2004/02/20040224-2.html

Buss,  D.  E.  (2004)  ‘Finding  the  Homosexual  in  Women’s  Rights:  The

Christian Right in International Politics’, International Feminist Journal of

Politics, 6 (2): 257-284.

Butler, J. (2002) ‘Is Kinship Always Already Heterosexual’, Differences, 13 (1):

14-34.

Chua  N.  H.  (2003)‘It’s  not  about  gay  rights  -  it’s  survival’,  The  Straits  Times

Interactive,  9  July  2003

http://straitstimes.asia1.com.sg/columnist/0,1886,84-198784-,00.html

Clinton  B.  (1999)  ‘Interview  of  the  President  by  Larry  King,  for  Larry

King  Live’,   The  Cabinet  Room  ,  December  22,  1999.  Transcript  in

possession of author.

Coole D. (1988) Women In Political Theory: From Ancient Misogyny to Contemporary

Feminism. Brighton: Wheatsheaf.

Florida, R. (2003) The Rise of the Creative Class North Melbourne: Pluto.

Fone, B. (2000) Homophobia, A History. New York: Henry Holt and Company.

Fortuyn, P. (2001) ‘De dreiging van de Islam’, 19-9-2001, www.pim-fortuyn.nl

Gerstmann,  E.  (2004).  Same-Sex  Marriage  and  the  Constitution.  Cambridge:

Cambridge University Press.

Hacker, P. 2003 ‘Malaysian Leader Attacks gays and Western “Homo” Media

in National TV Speech’, Posted 3 September 2003,

www.365gy.com/NewsContent/09030malaysia.htm

Carol Johnson: The Politics of Signs

27

Herman, D. (1998) The AntiGay Agenda: Orthodox Vision and the Christian Right.

Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.

Howard, J. (1999) ‘Response to the “To Have and To Hold” Report’, 23 June

1999

www.pm.gov.au/news/speeches/1989/have%5Fhold%5F23%5F07.htm

.

Howard,  J.  (2003)  Doorstop  Interview,  Darwin  5  August  2003

www.pm.gov.au/news/interviews/Interview406.html

Jakobsen,  J.  R.  and  A.  Pellegrini  (2003)  Love  the  Sin:  Sexual  Regulation  and  the

Limits of Religious Tolerance Boston: Beacon Press.

Johnson,  C.  (2002)  ‘Heteronormative  Citizenship  and  the  Politics  of  Passing’,

Sexualities, 5 (3): 316-336.

Johnson,  C.  (2003)  ‘Heteronormative  Citizenship:  The  Howard  Government’s

Views on Gay and Lesbian Issues’,  Australian Journal of Political Science, 38

(1):45-62.

Kotluski,  D.  (2004)  Why  you  should  Give  a  Damn  About  Gay  Marriage.  Los

Angeles: Advocate Books.

Lahey, K. A. (1999) Are We Persons Yet? Law and Sexuality in Canada. Toronto:

University of Toronto Press.

Latham, M. (2004a) ’A big country: Australia’s national identity’, ALP News

Statements, 20 April 2004.

www.alp.org.au/print.htm?link=media/0404/20007275.html

Carol Johnson: The Politics of Signs

28

Latham,  M.  (2004b)  ALP  News  Statement,  Monday  7  June  2004.

www.alp.org,au/print.html?link=/media/0604/20007666.html

Latham,  M.  (2004c)  ‘Messages  of  Support’,  Sydney  Gay  and  Lesbian  Mardi

Gras 2004, Official Season Guide

Lehr,  V.  (1999)  Queer  Family  Values:  Debunking  the  Nuclear  Family  Myth.

Philadelphia:  Temple University Press.

Levin,  D.  (1997)  ‘The  Constitution  as  Rhetorical  Symbol  in  Western  Anti-Gay

Rights  Initiatives,  the  Case  of  Idaho,’  in  S.  L.  Witt  and  S.  McCorkle  (eds),

Anti-Gay Rights: Assessing Voter Intentions. Amherst: Praeger.

Lunsing,  W.  (2003)  ‘Islam  Versus  Homosexuality?  Some  Reflections  on  the

Assassination of Pim Fortuyn’ in Anthropology Today, 19 (2): 19-21.

Mills,  D.  (2004).  ‘Labor  backs  off  registration  scheme’,  Sydney  Star  Observer,

www.ssonet.com.au/showarticle.asp?ArticleID=2867.

Mudde, C. (1999) ‘The single-issue party thesis: extreme right parties and the

immigration issue’, West European Politics, 22 (3): 183-197.

Offord,  B.  (2003)   Homosexual  Rights  as  Human  Rights:  Activism  in  Indonesia,

Singapore and Australia. Bern: Peter Lang.

Okin,  S.  M.  (1979)  Women  in  Western  Political  Thought.   Princeton:  Princeton

University Press.

Pateman, C.  (1988) The Sexual Contract. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.

Pateman C. (1996) Democratization and Citizenship in the 1990s: The Legacy of T.H.

Marshall.  Vilhelm  Aubert  Memorial  Lecture  1996.  Oslo:  University  of  Oslo

Institute for Social Research and Department of Sociology.

Carol Johnson: The Politics of Signs

29

Phelan, S. (2001) Sexual Strangers: Gays, Lesbians and Dilemmas of Citizenship.

Philadelphia: Temple University Press.

Queen  of  England,  (2003).  ‘The  Queen’s  Speech’  www.number-

10.gov.uk/print/page4897.asp

Richardson, D. (2000). ‘Claiming Citizenship? Sexuality, Citizenship and

Lesbian/Feminist Theory.’ Sexualities 3 (2): 255-272.

Rimmerman,  C.  et  al,  (1999)  The  Politics  of  Gay  Rights.  Chicago  and  London:

University of Chicago Press.

Roseneil,  S.  (2002)  ‘The  Heterosexual/Homosexual  Binary:  Past,  Present  and

Future,’ in D. Richardson and S. Seidman (eds), Handbook of Lesbian and

Gay Studies. London: Sage.

Roseneil,  S.  and  S.  Budgeon,  (2004)  ‘Cultures  of  Intimacy  and  Care  Beyond

‘the Family’: Personal Life and Social Change in the Early 21st Century,

Current Sociology,  52 (2): 135-159.

Sedgwick, E. K. (1994) Epistemology of the Closet. London: Penguin.

Seidman, S. (2002) Beyond the Closet: The Transformation of Gay and Lesbian Life

New York: Routledge.

Smith, A. M. (1994) New Right Discourse on Race and Sexuality Britain,

1968-1990 Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Smith,  A.  M.  (2001)  ‘The  Politicization  of  Marriage  in  Contemporary

American  Public  Policy:  The  Defense  of  Marriage  Act  and  the  Personal

Reponsibility Act’, Citizenship Studies, 5 (3): 303-320.

Carol Johnson: The Politics of Signs

30

Smith,  J.  MP  (2003)   Minister  of  State  for  Industry  and  the  Regions  and

Deputy Minister for Women and Equality ‘Foreword’, Civil Partnership: A

Framework for the Legal Recognition of Same-Sex Couples, June 2003. United

Kingdom: Women and Equality Unit DTI Publications.

Stychin, C, F. A Nation by Rights: National Cultures, Sexual Identity Politics and

the Discourse of Rights. Philadelphia: Temple University Press.

Stychin,  C.  F.,  (2003)  Governing  Sexuality:  The  Changing  Politics  of  Citizenship

and Law Reform.  Oxford and Portland, Oregon: 2003.

Terry,  J.  (1999)  An  American  Obsession:  Science,  Medicine  and  Homosexuality  in

Modern Society. Chicago, University of Chicago Press.

Wafer, J. (1997) ‘Muhummad and Male Homosexuality’, in S. O. Murray and W.

Roscoe, Islamic  Homosexualities:  Culture,  History  and  Literature.  New  York

and London: New York University Press.

