





FEDERAL LABOR LEADER  MARK LATHAM

TRANSCRIPT OF DOORSTOP WOODSIDE ENERGY LTD, KARRATHA

THURSDAY, 15 APRIL 2004

Subjects:  IRAQ, TELSTRA, COAST GUARD

LATHAM:   I am here with Geoff Gallop looking at development projects here  in Western Australia. It is my first chance to get out north of Perth and look at these  important development projects. I am very committed to a Federal Labor Government  playing a role that assists. We have got positive plans to increase health and education  investments, and we will be wanting to work with the State Government hand-in-glove to  ensure that if extra health and education services are needed in places like Karratha,  Dampier and Port Hedland - to maximise the quality of life and maximise the support for  the local work force - then we will be doing that in collaboration with the State  colleagues. So that is a real opportunity to play a constructive role to ensure that the work  force can develop its skills, so we can maximise the number of people in the towns who  have jobs and we can minimise the issues that come from the fly-in, fly-out approach. We  want to develop regional centres. Their servicing - health and education, the schools, the  hospital systems, TAFE and other learning opportunities are absolutely vital. So I think  there is a real opportunity there for Federal-State Labor cooperative to get that right. We  have had a good discussion with Geoff about the infrastructure needs. We have some  proposals that I can take back to the Shadow Cabinet to look at infrastructure funding and  other forms of support to make sure that these development projects continue to grow and  prosper in the future, and we ensure we are maximising all of the economic development  opportunities for Western Australia. We have made a good start on the tour, and I look  forward to seeing the other projects as the day unfolds.

JOURNALIST: When you were told (inaudible) that it was concerned about a drop in  petroleum production in Australia and also the importance of expanding the gas  exploration and gas production, what could a Federal Labor Government do in those  areas?



LATHAM:  Well, we will be releasing our resources policy later in the year. We  will be looking at ways of working with the industry to maximise its potential. Our initial  commitment is to ensure there is always a good social infrastructure - this is not just an

economic exercise; workers need a good place to live, a place to develop their skills and  raise their families. So the social infrastructure is a big priority and I am sure, through our

investments in education and health, we can work effectively with the State Government  to get that right.

JOURNALIST:  What is Labor’s position on the  (inaudible) gas project?

LATHAM:  Well, this is where we have had a good discussion about the  infrastructure funding possibilities for the future. So we will have a look at the  possibilities there. And we are going to do that in a considered way through the proper  Shadow Cabinet processes and talk about that further into the year.



JOURNALIST:  Local commentators say that a Navy patrol boat to protect the local  infrastructure from terrorist (inaudible)  what can you say about getting a permanent  Navy boat on patrol out in this area?

LATHAM:  Labor has a strong commitment to establish a Coast Guard. We  believe that Australia, with the world’s longest coast line, needs a Coast Guard, and part  of the fleet will be stationed out of Broome. That obviously frees up Navy resources that  can be used for the sort of activity you have mentioned. So having a dedicated maritime  policing capacity is very important. That frees up Navy from some of the roles that they  have played in the north of Australia, and we think that a Coast Guard is an important  addition to our national security infrastructure. It can help with all the protection that is  needed for our essential infrastructure.

JOURNALIST:   There has been a big shift from (inaudible) to Australian Workplace  Agreements. Is Labor going to scrap those Australian Workplace Agreements?

LATHAM:   Yes, we are. They are just two per cent of the labour market  arrangements in Australia. They have mainly been used around the country to get under  the award system. They tend not to have very family-friendly arrangements so we won’t  be proceeding with that system but we are committed to enterprise bargaining and  flexibility in the labour market. That was the trend we established when last in  Government and we are supportive of collective arrangements in the workplace and the  maximum flexibility that comes out of those.  JOURNALIST:   (inaudible)  on a new form of individual agreements?

LATHAM:   Well, there are other forms under the law. But we will be abolishing  the AWAs at the federal level and throwing our weight behind the enterprise bargaining  flexibility that we believe is important to produce productive and cooperative workplaces.

JOURNALIST:   Have the unions expressed concern to you about that prospect?

LATHAM:   Not directly, on this trip, no but they have had a few things in the  newspaper. But our policy has been well-established. We had it at the last federal election  and we carry it forward to the next.

JOURNALIST:   Back to security of the coastline. Is the Howard Government taking  it seriously (inaudible) having a boat arrive within a couple of kilometres of Port  Hedland, and we have all of this massive infrastructure up here, and no Navy base  (inaudible) Tindal or Perth. I mean, what is a federal Labor Government going to do  make the place safer?

LATHAM:   Well, you need to do more in building up our infrastructure, and that  is the important addition a coastguard can make - that, if you have a dedicated Coast  Guard looking after the maritime policing role, for illegal migration, for the gun  smugglers, the drug runners and the like, it obviously frees up Navy resources for the  defence of Australia and some of the activities that are needed to secure us from the  threat of terrorism.

JOURNALIST:  Do we have a big hole in this part of the world?

LATHAM:   We have a big hole in that it is almost bizarre that the world’s largest  island continent, with 37,000 kilometres of coast line, does not have a Coast Guard. That  is a big hole. We are going to fill that hole with a dedicated service, with part of the fleet

based out of Broome, and that obviously provides some good protection on the north-west coast of the country and will be relevant to this particular region.

JOURNALIST:   We have been told there is (inaudible) report (inaudible) would you  like to see that report released?

LATHAM:   Yes, we want to see a full examination of all of the issues that have  been raised in recent times about the integrity and quality of our intelligence services.  Nothing matters more to Australia’s future than getting national security right. We  recognise that the war on terror is an intelligence war, and Australia just cannot afford to  have these matters swept under the carpet. We need to have a thorough investigation. The  Prime Minister said yesterday that it was open to the Flood inquiry to look at these  matters. He should be referring them to the Flood inquiry for investigation, and give that  inquiry the proper royal commission powers it needs and extra resources to do the job  properly. The Australian people need a guarantee that our intelligence services will be top  quality; that they are not just going to be giving advice that the Government wants to  hear. The advice will be based on the facts and the best national interests. These are very  important matters. One of the issues referred to in the letter from Lieutenant Colonel  Collins is the intelligence advice warnings for the Bali bombing. That is a critical concern  for the Australian people. They have the right to know: was there an intelligence failing  in relation to that tragedy? They should have all of that information examined by an  inquiry with royal commission powers and the resources and capacity to do it effectively  in the national interest.

JOURNALIST:   Are you concerned [inaudible] on what Toohey has said?

LATHAM:   No, I wasn’t aware of that but a first report, a second report and now  a third. It just demonstrates a need to get all these matters before an inquiry with royal

commission powers to establish the facts. Let’s not have an engagement with secret  reports, let’s actually have an inquiry that leads to improvements in our intelligence  services, to get it right for the benefit of the Australian people.



Every time we hear of a new secret report it just confirms the need to have a thorough  inquiry with the proper powers. Every time we look at that long list of matters that were  raised by Lieutenant Colonel Collins, it just raises the obvious point that we need a  thorough investigation that establishes the facts and gives the Australian people the  improvements we need in the intelligence services for the future.

JOURNALIST:   Are you concerned about [inaudible] effect on Telstra?

LATHAM:   Labor recognises, and we have argued for some time, that Telstra  needs to get back to its core service - its core role - which is the provision of good  telecommunication services for the Australian people. We were worried when we heard  reports that it wanted to become a mega-media company. Taking over John Fairfax; we  don’t see that as the proper function for Telstra in the future. We actually want them to  provide a good telecommunications service, the broadband, the mobile service, all the  things that are needed to make sure that the Australian people have got those services  available to them. So we want the Board to get back to the core business of Telstra and if  the resignation of Mr Mansfield helps in that regard, well, that is a positive thing and we  want the board to head in that direction.

JOURNALIST:   Should Ziggy go too?

LATHAM:   Well that is a matter for the Board to determine, our main interest is  in getting the core services right. And if the Board is going to focus on that under new  leadership in the future, that is a welcome development and if that happens in the

management level of the company that is also very welcome.

JOURNALIST:   Do you think you are right about privatisation?

LATHAM:   Well that has always been ruled out by the Labor Party. We believe  in majority public ownership of Telstra. Getting back to the core business - good  telecommunication services, the broadband, the mobile, the telephony services that are  needed right around the country. So let us get that right, let’s get the basics right at  Telstra and not go down some of the follies we have heard about in recent times.

JOURNALIST:   So it is fair to say that you are not sad that Mansfield has gone?

LATHAM:   Well, we are not focusing on the individual so much as the big  policy issue which is getting the core service right. And if that is the future direction the  Board takes under new leadership, the future direction management takes, no matter the  leadership, we think it is the service that matters for the Australian people rather than  focusing on the individuals.

JOURNALIST:   Mr Latham, both parties in US politics have signalled their ongoing  commitment to Iraq, do you think or do you disagree with the Prime Minister’s  statements that Labor’s policies are becoming increasingly isolated in the world’s view?

LATHAM:   It was interesting to hear the Prime Minister talk about the  international view on Iraq. In fact, it is Mr Howard who is isolated. He is one of the very  few politicians in the world who is saying that the policies in Iraq have been a success.  Most people have recognised around the world that they have been a failure. And that is  the criticism that I have continually made of the Government here. The policies in Iraq  have failed because they have increased the level of risk in this country. The policy has  failed because it said the job was to find weapons of mass destruction that didn’t exist.  The policy failed because they said they had to get rid of Saddam to liberate the Shiites.  Now the Shiites in part are involved in the uprising in Iraq and the policy is bogged down  in the management of ethnic, religious and nationalistic tensions in Iraq which are not in  Australia’s national interests.

And I was interested to hear what Mr Howard had to say about Senator Kerry yesterday.  Well let’s actually hear what Senator Kerry said last night, overnight Australian time, in  response to the statements by President Bush. He described President Bush’s policies in  Iraq as a failure. And he said this, ‘We need to internationalise the effort and put an end  to the American occupation’. Let me just repeat that, ‘put an end to the American  occupation’ in Iraq.  ‘We need to open up the reconstruction of Iraq to other countries.  ‘We need a real transfer of political power to the United Nations’. So let’s not have this  hogwash from Mr Howard that Senator Kerry has the same policies as President Bush: he  hasn’t. He has a very different strategy for American policy in Iraq. If you look at the  facts of the matter that should be recognised, the reality of it is that Mr Howard is the one  who is isolated because he continues the fantasy that the policy in Iraq has been a  success, and it has actually been a failure.

Most countries around the world are looking to change policy and to find solutions in  Iraq instead of just repeating the mistakes of the last 12 months. I mean, it is incredible -  for 12 months after they said the war was over we have seen the nature of the problems in  Iraq, and the military occupation has not been a success. Now, a sensible politician would

recognise that. But Mr Howard’s approach is to go in harder, to get further bogged down  and repeat the mistakes of the past. It is incredible.

JOURNALIST:   If the UN or NATO did take over, as Senator Kerry suggests, would  you be prepared to reconsider Labor’s position?

LATHAM:   Well, Labor has said we will be positive about a UN resolution and a  UN role and we would be providing humanitarian, economic and civilian aid. But our  judgment, along with the judgment  (inaudible) with Australia’s defence and military  commitments at the moment, in the Pacific and Timor - in the defence of Australia - we  just have not got the military capacity to join in with UN peacekeepers. But it is certainly  our expectation, and this is the point that Senator Kerry has made, that in the future you  are going to have a bigger role for the UN and NATO, that is a real possibility, and a

relatively diminished role for the United States. Given the fact the military occupation of  Iraq has become more the problem than the solution then that approach actually heads in  the right direction and it is one that Mr Howard should be recognising.

JOURNALIST:   (inaudible)

LATHAM:   Well, let’s again have a look at what Mr Armitage had to say. This is  what Mr Armitage had to say: “I personally take offence at the idea of Australia being a  deputy sheriff.” Well, hear, hear to that. I take offence at the idea of Australia being  described as a deputy sheriff. So, with Mr Armitage, his beef is not with me; his beef is  with the Prime Minister who endorsed the idea of Australia being a deputy sheriff. Now,  I say anyone who truly loves this country, anyone who is truly proud of Australia and  anyone who truly believes in our potential as a nation would never describe us as a  deputy sheriff - never. We are not deputy to anyone. My point is that we believe  passionately in the Labor Party and the American alliance, but an equal partnership not a  deputy. It seems to me that Mr Armitage is actually making a heavy criticism of Mr  Howard who is the one who put the nonsense of the deputy sheriff on the agenda in the  first place.

JOURNALIST:   It has come out in The Australian - it is reported as a criticism of  you and your take on the (inaudible)

LATHAM:   Well, I don’t write the headlines down at The Australian newspaper  but I read the quotes and this is what Mr Armitage actually said: “I personally take  offence at the idea of Australia being a deputy sheriff.” Ask yourself the question: who

put that concept on the agenda? Mr John Howard. It was not the Labor Party. I take  personal offence at the idea of Australia being a deputy sheriff so I am in harmony with  Mr Armitage and I am very glad to hear that.

JOURNALIST:   Mr Armitage also said the (inaudible) US Australian alliance had a  lot to learn.

LATHAM:   Well, I will tell you what we have to learn: Australia is not a deputy  sheriff. That is the point: Australia is not a deputy sheriff and if you truly love and  believe in this country you would not run us down by describing us as anyone’s deputy.

We have to have an equal partnership with our allies. That is how it works effectively for  the future. That is how it has worked in the past under Labor administrations and that is  way of our approach.

JOURNALIST:   (inaudible)

LATHAM:   We have looked at this issue in some detail but we have not got to  the final announcement. We will be having a look at what they do in the budget and  making the response thereafter. There are some things that can be done and our resource  spokesperson - Joel Fitzgibbon - will be talking about them in greater detail next month,  once we have seen the Government’s ideas and we can make a response.



JOURNALIST:   Can I ask you about a New South Wales/Queensland issue - the  Tugun bypass is causing a bit of row there -

LATHAM:   That is a fair way from Karratha!

JOURNALIST:   It is indeed. If you were the Prime Minister would you be prepared  to intervene in the row between New South Wales and Queensland over that bypass.

LATHAM:   Well, as you can tell, being here with Geoff Gallop today, I believe  in cooperative federalism and working constructively with all of the state colleagues.  There is a bit of argy-bargy there with New South Wales and Queensland. In  Government, we would want to sit down with Peter Beattie and Bob Carr and their roads  ministers and see if we can sort it out in a good cooperative Labor way. We have State of  Origin battles in the footy, you see, between Queensland and New South Wales; we don’t  want them on road routing; we want a cooperative approach and that is what I will be  hoping to achieve in the future.

JOURNALIST:  Where do you stand on (inaudible) policy (inaudible) will you come  up with a time frame before (inaudible) Prime Minister (inaudible)

LATHAM:   Well, I think you need to look at this case-by-case. I think the  philosophy in broad terms is sound but you don’t want it to be a dogmatic approach  applied across-the-board. You have to look at the projects one-by-one and see if you can

get the best public interest outcome accordingly. I wouldn’t say that it is a one size fits all  approach that we take. We want to look at the merits of these projects case-by-case and  make the judgment thereafter.

JOURNALIST:  Can I get your comments on the death of an Italian hostage in Iraq  today?

LATHAM:   I was not aware of that. But obviously, the carnage, the deaths, the  tragedy in Iraq is all a terrible human cost and a terribly sad thing to have happened. That  is why everyone has to work as hard as they can to find lasting solutions and a lasting  peace in that country and that is always going to be the Labor objective.









[ends]







