







Bauman, Wasted Lives and the Eclipse of the Political





Melanie Beacroft



University of Canberra









Refereed paper presented to the

Australasian Political Studies Association Conference

University of Adelaide

29 September - 1 October 2004

































Melanie Beacroft: Bauman, Wasted Lives and the Eclipse of the Political

Page 2

In the modern world, political tradition faces a variety of new challenges. Forces of

globalisation, consumerism and postmodernism have broken the bonds between us and

made us into individualised individuals, multiple units of self-identification that have

more interest in consumption than citizenship (Bauman 2001). In this climate, social

theory has emerged as a new and very real threat to the space reserved by political

theory. In recent history we have seen a colonisation of political theory by social theory

(Walsh 2002b) and there has been a shift away from the political towards the social

(Arendt 1958). This has had important implications for our understanding of the divide

between public and private, freedom, and the human condition. The rise of mass society

where ‘various social groups have suffered…absorption into one society’ (Arendt 1958,

41) and the complete recession of the public realm have resulted in once private

concerns becoming public issues. In the age of the social, the new politically empty

quasi-public realm is complemented by individualised private lives filled with a search

for identity through consumption.



In this context, the work of sociologist Zygmunt Bauman is highly influential. This

paper examines Bauman’s 2004 work Wasted Lives and undertakes a comprehensive

analysis and comparison in light of the political theory of Hannah Arendt. With regard

to Bauman’s other works and the field of sociology more generally, this paper explores

the extent to which Bauman addresses concerns about the merging of political and social

theory and argues that the social understanding of a ‘wasted life’ is very different from

the already established political understanding. While Wasted Lives is situated in the

contemporary phenomena of globalisation and consumerism, Bauman’s discussion of

human waste, while perhaps offering a social theory, ignores the political

understanding of the potential of human life and its capacity for freedom and

immortality as theorised by Arendt. With this in mind, this paper assesses the

implications of Bauman’s work for the future of political theory and advocates an

understanding of the full significance of a wasted political life.





Melanie Beacroft: Bauman, Wasted Lives and the Eclipse of the Political

Page 3



Bauman on Wasted Lives



Bauman’s Wasted Lives (2004) aims primarily to produce a social theory about the

production and disposal of human waste in order to examine human inclusion and

exclusion. In order to do this, Bauman introduces the concept of waste by examining the

form of waste (and waste disposal) that is most familiar to us - rubbish. To live in the

modern world means to produce vast amounts of rubbish as we throw out the old to

make room for the newer and better models and appliances we want in our homes and

offices. As a consequence, rubbish disposal is an issue of utmost importance and

Bauman believes that ‘rubbish collectors are the unsung heroes of modernity’ (2004, 28).

By extrapolating this example of modern consumption and waste to apply to the human

dimension, Bauman implies that modernisation and consumption not only produce

material waste, but also human waste. Wasted humans are the excess, the superfluous

and redundant who no longer fit into society or who for one reason or another are not

allowed to stay. Material waste implies something that no longer has a use or purpose,

has a lack of distinction from other waste, and once designated waste it is of little

consequence. Similarly, human waste is of little or no use to modern society and must be

dealt with accordingly.



The production of waste itself is not a problem for Bauman, since waste has always been

a necessary (and yet unspoken) component of production. Drawing another comparison

with the material world, he states that ‘two kinds of trucks leave factory yards daily -

one kind of truck proceeds to the warehouses and department stores, the other to the

rubbish tips’ (2004, 27). What matters in this example is that we value the first truck and

do not mention the second because it is nothing - waste implies nothingness or at least

something of no value. In the same way that material waste is a by-product of

production, human waste is the by-product of modernisation and wasted lives are the

‘collateral casualties of progress’ (2004,15). For Bauman, what has become a major global

concern are the methods of human waste disposal available in the modern world. Prior to

Melanie Beacroft: Bauman, Wasted Lives and the Eclipse of the Political

Page 4

the global stranglehold of modernisation, waste disposal for developed countries was a

simple matter of relocation. In other words, our waste could be ‘dumped’ in other

‘premodern’ countries which were the ‘natural destinations for the export of “redundant

humans” and obvious, ready-made dumping sites for the human waste of

modernisation’ (2004, 5-6). But now Bauman argues that ‘the world is full’ (2004, 4) and

there are no more empty lands in which we can dump our waste. What this means

essentially is that the world is faced with ‘an acute crisis of the human waste disposal

industry’ (2004, 6).



Bauman identifies two main categories of human waste. Firstly there are the redundant

who no longer have a source of labour or work. Bauman classifies ours as a society that

‘cast[s] employment as a key - the key - to the resolution of the issues of,

simultaneously, socially acceptable personal identity, secure social position, individual

and collective survival, social order and systemic reproduction’ (2004,11). In this way,

work is seen as the sole purpose of life and individuals have worth only as producers.

The redundant are distinct from the unemployed as ‘unemployment’ suggests a

temporary ailment for which the simple cure is employment. On the other hand,

redundancy ‘whispers permanence and hints at the ordinariness of the condition’ (2004,

11). There is no cure for being made redundant, ‘the others do not need you, they can do

as well, and better, without you’ (2004, 12) and having nothing to offer, the redundant

become human waste. While the unemployed can be recycled back into active

employment, the ‘destination of the redundant is the waste yard’ (2004, 12).



The second group identified by Bauman as human waste are refugees. These are people

who have been excluded from their own societies and have become excess population,

and therefore human waste, as by-products of globalisation. For Bauman, refugee

human waste presents a particular problem because it is a new source of insecurity and

fear. We are each individually anxious about the ease with which we ourselves could

become collateral casualties and be turned into waste, and ‘immigrants embody -

visibly, tangibly, in the flesh - the inarticulate yet hurtful and painful presentiment of

Melanie Beacroft: Bauman, Wasted Lives and the Eclipse of the Political

Page 5

their own disposability’ (2004, 56). It is this notion of disposability that deepens our

sense of vulnerability and fear, as we do not want to see our own faces amongst those

relegated to the trash heap. In addition to this, we are plagued by a new global fear of

terrorism. We have a new focus on personal safety and refugees remind us that our

security is tenuous. They threaten the outside/inside divide that is meant to protect ‘us’

from the very real threat of ‘them’ and blur the once very clear distinction that defined

just who ‘them’ and ‘us’ were. Refugee human waste makes us vulnerable and insecure

and this insecurity characterises life in the modern age.



This insecurity leads to Bauman’s concern with inclusion and exclusion. Human waste

must be excluded because it is the unspoken and ‘dark and shameful secret of all

production’ (2004, 27), and its removal becomes the ‘activity of separation’ (2004, 28). In

reference to the two forms of human waste, Bauman further classifies redundant human

waste as ‘insiders’ (2004, 80). While we move to separate and exclude this waste from

mainstream society, we must devise new methods for its disposal as the fullness of the

planet means that the old method of ‘dumping’ is no longer viable. Instead we must

ensure that the waste is ‘sealed off in tightly closed containers’ (2004, 85) within society.

These can be in the form of ‘new ghettos’ (2004, 81) which not only exclude human

waste but group it together and ensure that dependence on public housing and welfare

keeps them at arms length and reduces the possibility of recycling; or prisons which

offer a ‘final, definitive disposal’ (2004, 86) and represent a shift from social state

inclusion to criminal exclusion and no chance of recycling. On the other hand, refugees

are ‘outsiders’ (2004, 80) and in fact reverse the flow of waste disposal. Not only are we

producing our own waste, but we must deal with a new influx of waste from

somewhere else. Refugees are in the peculiar situation of not only being unwanted, but

their loss of identity makes them ‘stateless, placeless, [and] functionless’ (2004, 76) and

this lack of both distinction and worth earmarks them as immediate candidates for

waste. Waste disposal becomes of primary concern and for refugees the detention camp

is the final act of separation and exclusion since once inside they can be forgotten.



Melanie Beacroft: Bauman, Wasted Lives and the Eclipse of the Political

Page 6

For Bauman, Wasted Lives highlights the fact that ‘liquid modernity is a civilization of

excess, redundancy, waste and waste disposal’ (2004, 97). However, in contradiction to

the idea that waste is useless, human waste does perform one vital task. It provides us

with a scapegoat for our individual insecurities and offers an ‘easy target for unloading

anxieties prompted by the widespread fears of social redundancy’ (2004, 63). However,

while our current preoccupation with human waste alleviates our anxiety, it is also

responsible for its creation. As humans, Bauman believes that we ‘live ahead of the

present’ (2004, 114), and as such we are always after something better, something newer

and more improved that can attain the status of perfection. But perfection implies the

end of the journey, as once we have it there is ‘nothing left to transgress and transcend’

(2004, 114). Paradoxically, this ‘dream of stillness’ (2004, 115) can only be achieved

through rapid change. It is this change that creates uncertainty. It also represents a shift

from material consumption to human consumption. In the modern globalised world,

humans have become the new consumables on the production line of society, and can be

deemed waste or otherwise, facing either exclusion or inclusion at society’s own

discretion, therefore ensuring that insecurity and fear become core features of modern

life.



Bauman on Politics



Bauman’s In Search of Politics (1999) attempts to characterise politics from a social

perspective by examining public space, agency, and providing a vision for the future of

political endeavour. He begins with a discussion of modern liberty where the individual

freedoms that we take for granted in our everyday lives are undermined by a sense that

collectively we can do nothing to change the things that concern us. Bauman asks how

we can live with such a contradiction (1999, 2) and argues that ‘individual liberty can be

only a product of collective work’ (1999, 7). While we live in a world that increasingly

moves towards privatising the means to assuring individual liberty through

individualisation and consumerism, we must find ways of transforming private concern

into public action. Bauman concludes that this contradiction surrounding liberty is a

consequence of the divide between public and private and our lack of ability to

Melanie Beacroft: Bauman, Wasted Lives and the Eclipse of the Political

Page 7

‘translate private worries into public issues and, conversely, to discern and pinpoint

public issues in private troubles’ (1999, 2). He believes that this has occurred because

‘the bridges built between private and public life are dismantled or were never built to

start with’ (1999, 2). What is needed is not to build these bridges or even to ensure that

the public/private divide is maintained, but instead Bauman advocates the construction

of the agora, ‘the space neither private nor public, but more exactly private and public at

the same time’ (1999, 3). This implies a merging of the two once distinct realms into a

hybrid space ‘where private problems meet in a meaningful way’ (1999, 3).



For Bauman, the construction of the agora is of utmost importance, but its

conceptualisation is fraught with difficulty. While he identifies the divide between

public and private as ancient in origin and relating to the original Greek understanding

of politics (1999, 87), he incorrectly assumes that the agora is able to bridge the divide.

The distinct nature of the public and private realms was theorised by Arendt (1958) such

that the private encompasses all things pertaining to survival and necessity (wants and

needs); and the public relates to the political realm of freedom actualised through

speech and action. Further to this, Arendt argued that both realms are necessary for

human life - one cannot exist without the other, nor can a human survive in one realm

alone. In political terms the public realm is of utmost importance because it allows

individuals to create a common world through appearance (Arendt 1958, 50) and a

space where our individual ideas can compete to be seen and heard through speech and

persuasion. Similarly, Castoriadis argues that ‘the emergence of a public space means

that a political domain is created which “belongs to all”’ (1992, 112), which echoes

Arendt’s assertion that the public realm allows us all to be free and equal but still able to

retain individual differences (1958, 41). In other words, the public realm exists not only

as the realm of the political but also as an extension to, and augmentation of human life

itself. This understanding of the political is distinct in contemporary political theory,

and as such, Cavarero argues that since Arendtian politics is founded on plural

interactions between humans and thus boundless and unpredictable, it is capable of

expressing human uniqueness and ‘a space for reciprocal self-evaluation’ (2004, 63).

Melanie Beacroft: Bauman, Wasted Lives and the Eclipse of the Political

Page 8



By contrast, Arendt highlights the modern birth of a third realm, the social, which is

neither public nor private. In fact, Arendt argues that the social is like the private realm

escalated from an individual to a national scale, ‘the nation-wide administration of

housekeeping’ (1958, 28). Far from enhancing public life, the social realm has actually

reversed the roles of the public and private and forced matters that were once a private

concern into issues of public significance. The rise of mass society has meant that as

individuals we are forced to conform to some notion of the ‘common good’ where only

one opinion can flourish and where difference has been made a private concern to be

pursued by individuals (Arendt 1958, 41). In these terms, the very constructions of social

and political are incompatible. While the political embraces difference, freedom and

public appearance, the social is based on conformity, the rise of necessity and the lack of

anything distinctly political. For Benhabib, Arendt’s discussion of the ‘rise of the social’

sheds light on ‘the institutional differentiation of modern societies into the narrowly

political realm on one hand and the economic market and the family on the other’ (1992,

74). In this way, the rise of the social and the subsequent demise of the public realm, is

symptomatic of the demise of the political more generally, and the wider trend to limit

political theory to governance and public policy, ensuring that the contemporary public

realm remains confined to a very ‘restricted, impersonal sphere of administration’

(Arendt 1958, 60).



Bauman’s construction of the agora merges the once distinct public and private realms

and fuses them into one all-assuming whole that attempts to explain the emergence of

the social, constructing it to be both public and private. Bauman believes that this agora

has social significance and through its ability to act as ‘translator’ between public and

private is able to provide solutions to the current inadequacies of individual liberty.

However this understanding of the social is in direct contradiction to Arendt’s political

understanding of the social as neither public nor private. In the Arendtian sense, the

social precludes action and rather than providing a means for individuals to gather

together, mass society makes individuals lose the ability to relate to one another and

Melanie Beacroft: Bauman, Wasted Lives and the Eclipse of the Political

Page 9

represents the demise of the common world. This has important consequences for the

political, as reconstructing the private as a new form of ‘empty’ public, in fact denies the

political altogether, as the public realm can only exist as both a function of, and in

opposition to, the private realm. But for Bauman, making the private public is a simple

fact of life. Beilharz captures Bauman’s sentiment that “we show our humanity not in

claims to the sublime, or the final, but in the care with which we attend to the routines

of everyday life and to each other” (Beilharz 2001, 15). This statement highlights

Bauman’s elevation of the necessities of everyday life over (political) freedom and serves

to reinforce Arendt’s notion that the social limits us to a restricted existence of

unfreedom and work, denying us the chance to reach our full potential and ultimately

claim immortality.



Bauman’s reliance on the agora as a solution for social problems is symptomatic of the

larger problem of understanding the human condition in economic and market-based

terms. Benhabib demonstrates that this presented a particular problem for Arendt who

saw that ‘the occluding of the political by the social and the transformation of the public

space of politics [leads] into a pseudospace of interaction in which individuals no longer

“act” but “merely behave” as economic producers, consumers and urban city dwellers’

(1992, 75). In actuality, Bauman’s agora existed in ancient Greece ‘not [as] a meeting

place of citizens, but a market place where craftsmen could show and exchange their

products’ (Arendt 1958, 160). The construction of the agora as a means to secure

collective freedom is therefore a thinly disguised way to secure consumer freedom,

rather than the more broad based freedoms offered by the political. The agora, as the

market place, and the symbolism attached to it, entrenches the idea that ours is a

consumer-product driven society where a human’s worth is determined solely by its

ability to consume. This follows Bauman’s 1988 arguments that modern freedom can be

best understood as freedom to consume and that as such, consumer behaviour is well

placed to describe modern life. Bauman’s 1999 shift to the agora further develops the

idea that the stranglehold of consumerism and subsequent market-based

understandings of the human condition can provide some explanation for the rise of

Melanie Beacroft: Bauman, Wasted Lives and the Eclipse of the Political

Page 10

individual insecurity and isolation. While Bauman believes that the agora can assist in

translating private concerns into public issues, in reality it is merely a vehicle to ensure

that private concerns about consumption and production take the place of any

meaningful public action.



Interestingly, Bauman does not identify this discussion of public and private as being of

political concern. Instead, his explicit understanding of politics is limited to a discussion

of state institutions of governance and their use of political power for the protection of

security and individual liberty. For Bauman, politics is synonymous with the state and

the political describes a narrow field associated with models of state governance.

Everything else can be best understood in terms of the social. However, Arendt has

already clearly demonstrated that politics operates on a much grander scale than mere

administration and encompasses not only speech and action, but beauty and

immortality. While traditional political theory places a specific emphasis on the state,

justice and liberty, Arendtian political theory forges a space where we can demonstrate

courage and display our uniqueness to others, demonstrating ‘who’ we are (as opposed

to ‘what’) and a means in which to explore the infinite nature of our own humanity. In

this way, Arendt’s ‘elaboration of the dignity of the political…provides a landmark

contribution unsurpassed by many contemporary political theories’ (Walsh 2002a, 2).

Further to this, Kristeva argues that the originality of the Arendtian concept of political

action lies in the fact that ‘she sees it as an actualisation - of a who that is hypothetical,

dangerous, and dependent on hope rather than an improbable claim for its existence’

(2001, 55).



Bauman’s misunderstanding (and misrepresentation) of the political as a narrow sphere

of state administration has wide reaching consequences for his later work in Wasted

Lives. While Wasted Lives is based upon inherently political concerns such as freedom,

language, relationships between individuals, reality, and immortality, Bauman does not

engage with the political nature of his arguments and attempts to disguise them as

social theory. Utilising his 1999 framework that reduces the sphere of the political,

Melanie Beacroft: Bauman, Wasted Lives and the Eclipse of the Political

Page 11

Wasted Lives again limits Bauman’s concern with politics to a minor discussion of state

based power and institutions. This is centred on the political use of human waste as

scapegoats for the growing anxiety felt in society. Politics is only of relevance in that

state power can be used as a tool for both waste control and disposal by determining the

criteria for inclusion and exclusion and by enforcing a border that attempts control

refugee migration and therefore stem the tide of uncertainty. In this way, Bauman does

not address the significance of a wasted political life and neglects the specific political

understanding of human waste which offers insight into freedom, humanity and the

construction of a common world.



This limiting of the political and the shift to the agora where private concerns are of

public significance are Bauman’s attempt to define the spread of the social. However, his

conceptualisation of the social is very different to the one already provided by the

political theory of Arendt. What Bauman’s work is successful in doing, is highlighting

the existence and supremacy of mass society and therefore entrenching the values of

individualisation and conformity. In Wasted Lives, his discussion of waste as lacking

distinction and purpose and human waste being faceless, nameless individuals stripped

of identity, shows that we have become isolated in our multiple singularities and able to

be classified as only waste or useful product. Far from embracing difference, the

production line of modernisation has forced us to become carbon copies of sameness

afraid of being made redundant and forced into some form of waste disposal. While

trying to provide solutions to the dilemma of collective freedom and security, Bauman

does not acknowledge that the freedom guaranteed by the public realm cannot be

replaced by the gathering together of a group of unrelated individuals in mass society.

For Arendt, mass society means that individuals are all ‘imprisoned in the subjectivity

of their own singular experience, which does not cease to be singular if the same

experience is multiplied innumerable times’ (1958, 58). From this political perspective,

Bauman’s collectivity does not ensure freedom, nor abate modern insecurity and fear.

Rather it ensures that isolation and singularity become defining characteristics of the

modern age. The lives to which Bauman refers are empty and two-dimensional and are

Melanie Beacroft: Bauman, Wasted Lives and the Eclipse of the Political

Page 12

devoid of meaning outside the realms of consumption and work. On top of this, his so-called solution offers little hope in the reduction of fear and insecurity and a shaky

foundation on which to establish meaning in contemporary individual life.



Implications for Political Theory



Bauman’s work in Wasted Lives follows on from his more recent attempts to colonise

political theory (2002 & 2003). In a post-political age, sociologists believe that social

theory has the tools necessary to understand the complexities of human life and they

utilise a conceptual hierarchy where social theory is positioned at the top and political

theory is buried somewhere below (Walsh 2002b, 10). This means that political theory

becomes almost a subset of social theory and consequently appears as a sociological

derivative. However, what Bauman does not address is that his concerns with

public/private, beauty, freedom, immortality and language are concerns that are

political in nature. The space for these ideas has long been held by political theorists

such as Arendt, however Bauman presents his ideas as though he is doing so for the first

time. Not only this, but he discards the established political understandings and

reworks them into ‘new’ social theory where their meaning and significance is obscured

to the point where their original intention is lost. In some ways, it is as though he has

placed Arendt’s work into a huge conceptual blender and returned something that

although contains all the original elements, is very different in taste and texture and

bears little resemblance to its parent form. As such, Wasted Lives is largely a sociological

re-rendering of political theory. This complements the work of Beck (1997) who claims

that this new hybrid theory can be best described as ‘sub-politics’ - a sociological

reinvention of politics and public life that is distinct from political theory as a whole.



Bauman’s latest attempt to understand the circumstances surrounding the modern

human condition sees him compare the human world to the material world. By

classifying people as either waste or useful product, Bauman identifies our worth in

material terms and firmly establishes consumerism as the single most influential factor

Melanie Beacroft: Bauman, Wasted Lives and the Eclipse of the Political

Page 13

in human lives. The reoccurring theme in Bauman’s work is individualisation and its

resulting insecurity, and Wasted Lives is situated in the context of the global threat of

terrorism and a heightened state of fear. His discussion of the relational aspects of life

including inclusion and exclusion, wanted and unwanted, outside and inside, shows us

the polarised nature of human existence but offers little in the way of a solution or even

an explanation for the new forms of uncertainty that Bauman has identified as growing

in magnitude. For Bauman, freedom is a multi-edged sword, but in the traditional

(political) sense, it is clear that his wasted lives are lacking it. In Bauman’s modernised

world, while individuals face freedom of unprecedented proportions, they are

simultaneously constrained by greater forces such as globalisation and consumerism

that can turn them into waste at a moments notice. However, Bauman’s watered down

version of freedom as freedom to consume, has particular relevance for those that are

human product and therefore able to consume copious amounts of material goods.

Conversely, human waste are ‘flawed consumers’ (2004, 39) and do not have the means

to exercise this consumer freedom. In Bauman’s world, humans are both consumers and

consumables and we are powerless to choose to which group we belong. In this sense,

Bauman’s assertion that ‘freedom has come to mean above all freedom of choice’ (1998,

121) becomes insignificant as mass society makes the ability to make decisions

pertaining to individual life almost impossible. While individually we do not want to be

waste, nor do we want to become powerless, identityless singular entities certain only of

the uncertainty that surrounds us, the rise of the social and more specifically the

stranglehold of mass society has meant that we face no other alternative. As we move

from the political to the social, not only are we privatised and individualised, but we

become increasingly isolated and insecure. For Arendt, the individual deprived of

political rights ‘to whom public and official life manifests itself in the guise of necessity,

acquires a new and increased interest in his private life and his personal fate…[and]

loses his rightful place in society and his natural connection with his fellow-men’ (1951,

141).



Melanie Beacroft: Bauman, Wasted Lives and the Eclipse of the Political

Page 14

On the other hand, a political understanding of the nature of the human condition offers

us a chance to expand the bounds of our humanity. The political allows us to create a

common world and facilitates the construction of reality by our appearance in the public

realm where our individual ideas can compete to be seen and heard through speech and

persuasion. While the social advocates sameness and conformity, the political embraces

difference and assures us freedom and equality and a chance to demonstrate who we

are and what we believe. In this way, the political allows us to ‘go naked’ and ‘in this

nakedness, stripped of all masks’ assigned by society, people can find freedom and

‘create that public space between themselves where freedom [can] appear’ (Arendt 1961,

4). Rather than Bauman’s version of nakedness that strips us of dignity (2004, 77),

Arendt’s understanding allows us to become fully human and provides ‘a space against

the fleetingness of human life that [can] be protected and reserved for a permanence for

mortal men’ (Walsh 2002a, 8).



While there still exists much internal disagreement over exactly what political theory is

and should be (White & Moon 2004), generally it offers us an understanding of human

dignity, the public/private realms and a chance to create beauty, become immortal and

live lives that ‘transcend the life-span of mortal men’ (Arendt 1958, 55). For Germino,

political theory “affirms the possibility of transcending the sphere of immediate

practical concerns and ‘viewing’ man’s societal existence from a critical perspective”

(1967, 7). Further to this, political theory has an important role in creating and

maintaining identity, both on a collective and individual level, as it provides a means of

orienting and reconciling us to our way of life (Moon 2004, 22). However, the concurrent

theorising of the complexity of human life by other disciplines such as social theory,

economics and psychology, combine to challenge political theory to extend beyond

traditional barriers and forge new ways of conceptualising human existence. In view of

this, Bauman’s work has important implications for both political and social theory as it

challenges the foundations of both disciplines, blurring their distinction and neglecting

their specificities. What we see then is the emergence of a new hybrid ‘socio-political

theory’ which is neither social nor political. Not only are the political elements of

Melanie Beacroft: Bauman, Wasted Lives and the Eclipse of the Political

Page 15

freedom through speech and action denied in Bauman’s work, but the creation of his

agora is in contradiction to the construction of the social as elucidated by Arendt. In

political terms, the social exists as neither the public nor the private, but for Bauman it is

both. Political theory (distinct from the blanket term politics) is uniquely positioned to

examine and explain the human condition through its understanding of the divide

between public and private. However, for Bauman, the public is ignored at the expense

of the private and necessity through work and consumption reign supreme. What

Bauman does not say is that his understanding reduces the sphere of human potential to

a two-dimensional existence of consumption and waste. In contrast to the political

understanding of the human capacity for politics and the ultimate goal of immortality,

the lives in Bauman’s work are indeed very much wasted because they are politically

empty.

References



Arendt, H. 1951. The Origins of Totalitarianism. New York: Harcourt

Arendt, H. 1958. The Human Condition. Chicago: University of Chicago Press

Arendt, H. 1961. Between Past and Future: Six Exercises in Political Thought. London:

Faber and Faber

Bauman, Z. 1988. Freedom. Milton Keynes: Open University Press

Bauman, Z. 1998. Globalisation: The Human Consequences. Cambridge: Polity Press

Bauman, Z. 1999. In Search of Politics. Cambridge: Polity Press

Bauman, Z. 2001. The Individualized Society. Cambridge: Polity Press

Bauman, Z. 2002. Society Under Siege. Cambridge: Polity Press

Bauman, Z. 2003. Liquid Love. Cambridge: Polity Press

Bauman, Z. 2004. Wasted Lives. Cambridge: Polity Press

Beilharz, P. 2001. (ed) The Bauman Reader. USA: Blackwell Publishers

Beck, U. 1997. The Reinvention of Politics: Rethinking Modernity in the Global Social Order.

Cambridge: Polity Press

Melanie Beacroft: Bauman, Wasted Lives and the Eclipse of the Political

Page 16

Benhabib, S. 1992. 'Models of Public Space: Hannah Arendt, the Liberal Tradition, and

Jurgen Habermas' in Calhoun, C. (ed) Habermas and the Public Sphere. Cambridge:

MIT Press

Cavarero, A. 2004. 'Politicizing Theory' in White, S. K. & Moon, J. D (eds) What is

Political Theory? London: Sage Publications

Castoriadis, C. 1992. Philosophy, Politics, Autonomy: Essays in Political Philosophy. Oxford:

Oxford University Press

Germino, D. 1967 Beyond Ideology: The Revival of Political Theory. New York: Harper and

Row

Moon, J. D. 2004 'The Current State of Political Theory: Pluralism and Reconciliation' in

White, S. K. & Moon, J. D. (eds) What is Political Theory? London: Sage Publications

Walsh, M. 2002a. Arendt and the political: From freedom to power. Paper presented at the

Australasian Political Studies Association Conference, Canberra

Walsh, M. 2002b. Individualisation, the Public Realm and Sub-Politics: Implications for

Political Theory. Paper presented to the Australasian Political Studies Association

conference, Canberra

White, S. and J. Moon. 2004. What is Political Theory? London: Sage Publications



