

MEDIA RELEASE MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS ALEXANDER DOWNER

FA166            7  December  2004





VISIT TO INDONESIA



I visited Indonesia on 5-7 December as co-host of the Australia-Indonesia hosted  Interfaith  Dialogue, held in Jogjakarta.  During my visit I have had excellent bilateral meetings with HE  President Dr Bambang Yudhoyono, the Coordinating Minister for Political, Legal and  Security Affairs, HE Adm (ret) Widodo, the Minister for Foreign Affairs, HE Dr Hassan  Wirajuda, the Minister for Defence, HE Prof Dr Juwono Sudarsono, the Minister for Justice  and Human Rights, HE Dr Hamid Awaluddin, the Chairman of the House of Representatives  (DPR) HE Mr Agung Laksono and National Policy Chief, HE General Da’I Bachtiar.

My visit follows very productive meetings between Prime Minister John Howard and  President Bambang Yudhoyono at the recent APEC Leaders’ Meeting in Santiago and at the  ASEAN-Australia-New Zealand Summit in Vientiane, where we launched negotiations for an  ASEAN-ANZ Free Trade Agreement.

During my visit I discussed a broad range of issues with my Indonesian Ministerial  colleagues. I was delighted by the positive reception I received and by the warmth and  substance of our exchanges. There is a clear sense of renewed commitment on the part of the  new Indonesian Government to the bilateral relationship.

Building on our already significant Counter-Terrorism cooperation was a key focus of my  discussions with senior Ministers and National Police Chief Da’I Bachtiar.  I thanked the  Indonesian Government for their swift and effective response to the Australian Embassy  bombing and the additional security they have undertaken to provide for the expatriate  community in Jakarta. I strongly encouraged Indonesia to exhaust all legal avenues to ensure  that the perpetrators of the Bali bombing serve their sentences. It is vital that terrorists are  brought to justice.

On the economic front, I heard first hand from Indonesian Ministers about their plans to  improve Indonesia’s investment climate and accelerate economic development.  Australia will  continue to provide significant assistance for Indonesia’s economic reform efforts, especially  in the areas of tax, audit and debt management.  I have assured the Indonesian Government  that we will support strong Australian participation at their forthcoming Infrastructure Summit  to be held in January 2005.

In addressing the Indonesia-Australia Business Council (IABC) on 7 January, I underlined the  key role that the private sector has to play in fostering dynamic commercial links between us.

After a highly successful visit I am looking forward to hosting the Australia-Indonesia  Ministerial Forum (AIMF) in Australia in the first half of 2005.



Media inquiries:  Chris Kenny (Ministerial)  0419 206 890        DFAT Media Liaison 02 6261 1555



Media releases and speeches are available from DFAT via the internet.      http://www.dfat.gov.au/

