Reflections On Mental Health Post Parliamentary Tabling Of ‘A

Last Resort?’

Speech by Dr Sev Ozdowski, Human Rights Commissioner at the Health  & Wellbeing Of Refugees & Asylum Seekers Conference , University Of  Melbourne , 15 November 2004



1. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

Firstly I would like to acknowledge the traditional custodians of the land on which we stand and by so  doing remind ourselves that Australia ’s cultural traditions stretch back many thousands of years. The  acknowledgement also expresses our aspiration for a just and inclusive Australia for all.

Thank you Professor Margo Prior for your kind words of introduction and thank you to Jackie Bornstein  for organising and inviting me to participate in this Conference. Fellow speakers, ladies and gentlemen,  all.

2. INTRODUCTION

Many of you present here today would be only too familiar with the kind of mental problems faced by  asylum seekers who have been in long-term immigration detention. Many public accounts have been  aired, with the most recent being Dr Simon Lockwood on “Lateline”. But I thought it would be useful to  set the scene by giving you a step-by-step account from one of the case studies in “A last resort?”

Because the Yousefi family has chosen to publicly identify itself and permit in-depth media coverage of  their situation, with the most recent being an excellent article by Elizabeth Colman, in The Australian of  27 September, I have chosen their case because I think this adds to our capacity to gain better  understanding. As Arnold Zable just told us “The Humanizing Power of Story”.

This family consists of a father (Parvis), mother (Mehrnoosh), and a son (Manucheher) who was born on  17 July 1990.

20 April 2001   Family arrive at Ashmore Islands. Transferred to Woomera.

August 2001   Mother and son accommodated in the Woomera RHP.

May 2002   FAYS are notified regarding this family after the father attempted to hang himself twice and the son  threatened to self-harm. The assessment notes that the son was: ‘exhibiting clear signs of severe  stress: his sleep-talking, nightmares and now sleep-walking indicate deep-seated trauma. The current  stressors of detention and his parents' depression are clearly causing [the child] extreme distress … his  mental health will only deteriorate further without sensitive and effective long-term intervention ’.

ACM psychiatric nurse notes that the boy's: 'mental health and behaviours have deteriorated since his  father has been depressed and suicidal. He has attempted to assume the role of head of the household  in his father's absence'.

There then ensued approximately 20 recommendations from mental health professionals saying that he  should be released from detention with his family. Some said that removal from detention was a matter  of urgency.

For instance, in February 2003 a psychiatrist examining the boy wrote the following: ‘When I asked if  there was anything I could do to help him, he told me that I could bring a razor or knife so that he could  cut himself more effectively than with the plastic knives that are available. ’

Finally, this child, with his family, were removed, into the Adelaide community, in mid-June 2004, after  they won a Refugee Review Tribunal case and were declared to be refugees. But as was revealed in  Elizabeth Colman ’s article, the family ’s mental health is terrible; Parvis has now created his own little  prison in a rented apartment in Adelaide, where he daily takes, 5mg of the anti-psychotic Olanzapine,  20mg of the anti-obsessional Fluoxetine and up to three tablets daily of the tranquiliser Diazapam. The  13 year old son, now 13, takes a daily anti-psychotic, Neulactil.

3. LONG TERM IMMIGRATION DETENTION IS BAD FOR MENTAL

HEALTH

Clearly the Yousefi family represent the magnification of all that can and did go wrong with the system. I  am not suggesting that all asylum seekers suffer from this degree of mental illness. We know however  that many do suffer. Certainly more than the number the Minister for Immigration quoted in answer to a  “Question on Notice” some years ago: ‘two ’.

We do not really know the numbers, especially when one considers depression. But I think we can  Vfairly surmise that a lot of detainees will suffer mental problems, either from their experience prior to  arrival in Australia or because of long-term immigration detention, or a combination of both.

Many of you present here today would have heard me state, in many speeches, that I have come to the  considered view that Australia ’s immigration detention centres have become de facto mental institutions  - but without the appropriate capability.

And nothing that I saw in my September 2004 visit to Baxter has caused me to alter that opinion.

4. CHANGE THE LAW

It is for this reason that my report “A last resort?” called for a change in the law, mandating immigration  detention. With such a high percentage of asylum seekers ultimately gaining visas and access to the  Australian community, it makes no sense to create additional mental health stresses, above those  brought to Australia by those seeking asylum, to load onto an already under-resourced Australian  mental health network.

5. MENTAL HEALTH COMMUNITY CONSULTATIONS

Over the last two months I have been conducting, jointly with the Mental Health Council of Australia,  consultations on mental health issues. It is some 11 years since the Human Rights Commission  published the Burdekin report on mental health.

The story that is unfolding is not a pretty one. The people consulted make two main points.

One, that there is increasing evidence that widespread use of common drugs such as cannabis,  amphetamines, alcohol and ecstasy is contributing to an increased rate of mental illness among young  people as well as making those young people more severely disturbed when they finally do present for  care.

And two, that in treatment of mental illness, it is the state government services that are failing in the  delivery of proper care. It is often a tragic tale of medical neglect and community indifference. Those  with a mental illness are still being blamed for being sick.

I listened to many, many first hand accounts of where alcohol and drugs were linked to schizophrenia  and depression. Stories about violent behaviour, suicide attempts and endless bouts of hospitalisation  or even imprisonment.

It makes young people “thrash around on the wings of madness” - to use Jo Buchanan ’s words, while  the authorities seem unable to stem the tide.

You see, there are almost no services available to deal with both drug addiction and mental illness.  Medical policy dictates that drug addiction be treated first, before the mental illness is tackled. And vice  versa. Suicide rates in teenagers and young adults remain historically high. We were told a great many  stories of preventable suicides of young people. Two will suffice for the moment:

A Central Coast teenager was admitted to a psychiatric unit because of attempted suicide. He was  prescribed valium and released next day with no follow up. He died hours later after throwing himself in  front of a moving train. The coroner found that he was inadequately assessed and discharged too early,  because of staff anxiety over a perennial shortage of beds in the unit.

In Canberra we were told about a young man with a history of depression, and openly suicidal, who  jumped from a sixth floor balcony only two days after being refused admission to the psychiatric unit  following a second suicide attempt.

The most frequently mentioned gap in mental health services was the absence of early intervention

services for young people. In all States I received reports of children and young people being admitted  to inappropriate adult facilities.

6. CALL TO ARMS

Now I ’m pleased to say that since ‘A last resort? ’ was tabled in Parliament, many of the children who  were the subject of that inquiry have been released into the community. However, as we are well aware,  the laws mandating compulsory immigration detention remain. We must encourage the government to  change those laws. And secondly in treatment of mental illness, it is the State government services that  are failing in the delivery of proper care. Here I would like to acknowledge the Howard government for  making a commitment in the election campaign of $110m towards improved mental health care, the first  time mental health has attracted a stand-alone election commitment. But back at the ‘coal-face ’, it is still  a tragic tale of medical neglect and community indifference in regard to mental health:

? No early intervention;

? Lack of sufficient ‘acute care ’ beds when required;

? Lack of sufficient resourcing of community care sector;

? Too many preventable deaths.

7. CONCLUSION

Those with a mental illness are still being blamed for being sick. The time for ‘reviews ’ and buck-passing  has surely passed. Now is the time for all the stakeholders in the mental health domain, to join with the  Federal government in reprioritising their health budgets and take greater account of the needs of the  mentally ill.

Furthermore with regard to community-based asylum seekers and mental health, while I acknowledge  that TPV holders are eligible for torture and trauma counselling, the arbitrary imposition of 12 sessions is  a matter for concern; there needs to be scope for individualised assessment and provision of more  sessions if necessary.

Secondly, while mental health services around Australia are already struggling to adequately cope with  local demand, the Commonwealth will have to be prepared to further assist community-based asylum  seekers with special mental health services.

When one considers that TPV holders are likely to face additional obstacles in regards to:

? Language difficulties;

? Cultural inhibitions and

? Even (dare I say) prejudice;

The reasons for additional Commonwealth input become even more obvious.



