M E D I A  R E L E A S E

Stephen Smith MP  Shadow Minister for Immigration  Member for Perth



22/04          14  May  2004





15 MORE REASONS TO END THE PACIFIC SOLUTION

While Labor welcomes the decision to grant refugee status to 15 Afghan asylum seekers  on Nauru on the basis of changed circumstances in Afghanistan, the decision underlines  the need for the Howard Government to end the costly ‘Pacific Solution’.

In the meantime, the Howard Government must reveal how it will deal with the  remaining Afghans on Nauru.

As well, the Government needs to indicate what is the status of the Iraqi detainees on  Nauru.  The Government recently announced it would recommence the assessment of  Iraqi Temporary Protection Visa holders given the ongoing difficulties in Iraq.

Labor has repeatedly said that the Howard Government should put an end to the ‘Pacific  Solution’.

Labor will respond positively to whatever transitional arrangements the Government  sensibly wants to put in place to effect this.  Transitional measures include where further  processing might occur.  This could be, for example, at Christmas Island or on the  mainland on a transitional basis.

Transitional measures also include what to do with failed asylum seekers in respect of  whom it is not yet safe to return to their country of origin.  This could, for example,  include a move to Christmas Island, mainland Australia on a transitional basis pending  further developments in the country of origin, or a third party nation state.

I note that Minister Vanstone has indicated today that most of the 15 Afghan refugees  will be resettled in Australia.  Nearly 400 of the asylum seekers originally placed on  Nauru and Manus Island have now been resettled in Australia.

I also note Minister Vanstone today saying, “Australia has made it clear all along that it  will take its fair share of refugees needing resettlement from the offshore processing  centres and this announcement confirms the Australian Government’s commitment to  that”.



This is a far cry from the mantra of the Howard Government seeking re-election in 2001  that not one of these people would set foot on Australian soil.



Contact: Courtney Hoogen on (02) 6277 4108 or 0414 364 651

