Senator Amanda Vanstone  MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AND INDIGENOUS AFFAIRS

Media Centre

Arrivals in Australia from Nauru

VPS 114/2004

A group of 16 people comprising 11 adults and five children from the Offshore Processing Centre (OPC) in Nauru will arrive in Australia this evening.

Minister for Immigration, Senator Amanda Vanstone, said the 16 people arriving this evening comprised three groups. Firstly there are seven Afghans, the last  of the reassessed Afghan caseload on Nauru to be resettled to Australia: Secondly there are five other refugees and: Thirdly, an Iraqi family granted temporary  humanitarian visas to allow one family member to undergo medical treatment.

'All of these 16 people will fill a place under Australia's generous Refugee and Humanitarian Program, on which the Government will spend $2 billion over the  next four years,' Senator Vanstone said.

The Minister said the arrival tonight of the seven Afghan refugees would complete the resettlement of all Afghan asylum-seekers, reassessed by Australia in  light of updated information from the UNHCR about changed circumstances in parts of Afghanistan.

'A total of 146 people were determined by Australia to be in need of refugee protection,' Senator Vanstone said.

The Minister said the five other refugees comprised three men and two women. Four are from Iraq and one is stateless.

'The circumstances of these five people warranted further examination following examination by UNHCR. They were recently re-interviewed and were found to  be refugees,' Senator Vanstone said.

'All of the refugees arriving this evening have been granted secondary movement visas, a category of temporary protection visa.

'These visas are available to people who have abandoned or by-passed effective protection in a country of first asylum and travelled to another country to seek a  preferred migration option.'

The Minister said the third group arriving tonight was an Iraqi family of four.

'This family, although assessed as not being in need of refugee protection, have been granted temporary humanitarian visas to allow one family member to  receive medical attention,' the Minister said.

3 August 2004

URL: http://www.minister.immi.gov.au /media_releases/media04/v04114.htm

