



MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS  HON ALEXANDER DOWNER, MP

TRANSCRIPTION: PROOF COPY E & OE

DATE:  February  12  2004

TITLE:   Doorstop, Parliament House

Downer: I’m just delighted to see off the first group of senior public servants to assist  the Papua New Guinea Government with the process of economic reform and improving the  overall level of governance there.  This is a very important part of the Australian  Government’s attempts to try to ensure that the countries of the Pacific have better economic  opportunities and better social opportunities.  It’s a more activist approach.  But I think it will  be successful.  I’m optimistic about it.  And as I was saying to the public servants who are  going, there’s a lot of support for this in Papua New Guinea.  There’s a lot of support in the  bureaucracy there and amongst the Ministers.  And the opposition that there is - is pretty thin  on the ground.  There’s some.  But the opposition is fairly thin.  So this is a big and a difficult  job, and so we’re starting off today putting it into practice.

Journalist:  Minister  what’s  the legal situation with these people and with the police going  over later?

Downer: These people will be covered by the existing treaty on development  cooperation.  And some police we hope will be deployed very soon into Bougainville under  the existing legal arrangements for deployments in Bougainville.  Our Bougainville Peace  Monitoring Team for example, was deployed under an existing legal framework, a framework  which continues.  We do still want not just the treaty but the enabling legislation for the  treaty, not so much to deploy the police but for the police to be able to go into operational  activities.  And there’s no resistance in Papua New Guinea to that, there is a problem with the  timetable the Parliament - it may sit in March and if the Parliament sits in March we hope  that legislation will go through the Parliament in March.  Otherwise if it doesn’t sit in March  it probably won’t sit until June, in which case we’ll be able to deploy a lot of the police, but  they won’t be able to begin operational work until after June.  That doesn’t constitute very  much of a delay but it does constitute a delay compared to our original plans.

Journalist: Did these delays force you to revise those original plans in terms of numbers?

Downer: No, not really, no.  The speed of the deployment of the police will be a little  slower than it would have otherwise been because the people who go there as advisers can go  anyway, the people going and working in police headquarters, those sorts of jobs - they can  go under the development cooperation treaty.  But police on the ground doing operational  work won’t be able to begin that work.  So where we might have deployed them from  April/May - we probably won’t be able to do that until July, assuming the Parliament doesn’t  sit in March.  And I don’t know whether it will or not.  I spoke to the Papua New Guinea  Foreign Minister last week, and the Internal Security Minister about this.  They said that they  were hopeful that the Parliament would sit in March.  But we’ll just have to wait and see.

Inquiries:  (02) 6277 7500





Journalist: How’s their arrival expected to be received by PNG?

Downer: Well I think it will be received well.  My impression is that overwhelmingly  there’s a lot of support for this, and what we call enhanced cooperation program, in Papua  New Guinea.  There are some elements in the political system that oppose it, they see it as  neo-colonial and they’re critical of the Papua New Guinea Government jointly making these  arrangements with the Australian Government.  But they’re a very small minority.  And well,  it’s part of a robust democracy that you get differences of view on any manner of subjects.

Journalist:  Minister  on  WMD.  Is your mind open to calls for an independent inquiry after  this report…?

Downer: We’ll have a look and see what the committee recommends, when the  committee’s report is made public.  I don’t want to be disingenuous about this.  The chairman  of the committee, consistent with the terms of the Intelligence Services Act, sent me a copy of  the report for my agencies to clear.  In my case for DFAT and ASIS to clear.  And that work  has pretty much been done.  But I mean they have sent me a copy of the report.  But we’ll  wait and see when the report is published.  I don’t want to say anything to anybody about  what’s actually in the report.  But we’ll look at the recommendations and the Cabinet will  make a decision on what to do with those recommendations.

Journalist: An independent inquiry is a broad description isn’t it? It could be a …?

Downer: Well let’s just see what they recommend, because your questions are  reasonable questions, but they’re leading questions.  That’s what makes them reasonable from  your point of view I suppose.  They’re reasonable questions but I don’t want to hint at or  suggest what the committee might recommend.

Journalist: Is it more likely than unlikely there will be an independent inquiry?

Downer: Well I think the government will look at the committee’s report and will take  very seriously recommendations made by the committee.  I think, bearing in mind this is a  cross-party committee, and there are fairly serious players on the committee from both sides  of politics, I think we should take the work of the committee seriously.  That’s not to say that  when the report is published I’m going to come out and say I agree with everything in the  report.  I’m not going to say whether I will or I won’t now.

Journalist:  …tempted?

Downer: It’s tempting but it’s disrespectful and it’s contemptuous of the committee and  the parliamentary processes to say anything about it.  But I think it has to be taken very  seriously because one of the things  - parliamentary committees don’t get a lot of coverage in  the media because often they work very hard at trying to achieve a consensus and a negotiated  outcome.  And it involves compromises and so on.  But obviously in this particular case  you’ll have to wait and see whether they achieve that or whether there’s a minority dissenting  report.

Inquiries:  (02) 6277 7500



Inquiries:  (02) 6277 7500

Journalist: Just speaking in the hypothetical though, how would a government overcome  the issue of independence in an inquiry given that whoever chaired it would have to have  security clearances and would therefore be part of the club?



Downer: I think again, let’s wait and see what the committee actually recommends  before we comment too much on that.  I think as time goes on it’s perfectly obvious the  Government didn’t, to use that British expression, sex up intelligence or put a spin on  intelligence on Iraq and weapons of mass destruction.  And the more that comes out over  time, the more that’s clear.  But secondly, having said that, there’s an element, particularly  elements of the Australian Labor Party, some people in the media, who it doesn’t matter what  the Government does - they were opposed to the war to overthrow the regime of Saddam  Hussein.  And our answer to those people is always the same - well you can make that  argument and we’ll make the argument back to you that we think the world is a much better  and a much safer place without Saddam Hussein’s regime.  And I tell you who agrees with us  - the people of Iraq.  And that’s not an unimportant point.  But there will be some people who  will never be satisfied.  Lord Hutton - I know a bit about Lord Hutton.  He’s a very reputable,  independent, completely apolitical retired judge.  A very distinguished jurist.  And then, not  so much in Australia but internationally, there are people who are out there lambasting Lord  Hutton and his report and saying it’s an outrage and he wasn’t independent.  You don’t get  this in Australia but some journalists in the UK supporting the BBC and ‘fancy criticising the  BBC’, all that sort of thing.  Thank goodness our ABC has set higher standards than that.  Albeit slightly higher.



Journalist: ..had the opportunity to look at the report without giving too much..?

Downer: It’s been passed to me by David Jull.  And I think to the Defence Minister and  to the Prime Minister, consistent with the Act.

Journalist:  ..have you taken anything out or?

Downer: No, no.  It’s not for me to do that.  It’s not for me to change it or make  recommendations.  I will neither be changing it myself nor making any recommendations for  changes.  It’s for the intelligence agencies.  If you look at the Act, the Intelligence Services  Act, you’ll see why it’s referred and the sorts of things the intelligence agencies would  respond with.  It’s a question of - look there’s nothing wrong with intelligence being made  public, as long as it doesn’t a) compromise your sources and b) it doesn’t undermine your  intelligence relationships with other countries.  And so they obviously have to look at the  intelligence that’s published there from that point of view.



Journalist: On the situation of the officials going to PNG, have you asked them to look  into the situation with this fellow on Manus Island, the one asylum seeker?

Downer: No that’s not a matter - I think he’s a Palestinian from recollection, but they’re  not going to do that.  That’s not their job.

Journalist:  But  isn’t  he being held by PNG?

Downer: Yes, that’s right.  That’s a matter you can raise with the Papua New Guinea  Government.    ENDS……………………………………………………………..February 12 2004

